*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 69965 ***

  HORRORS OF VACCINATION
  EXPOSED AND
  ILLUSTRATED

  PETITION TO THE PRESIDENT TO
  ABOLISH COMPULSORY VACCINATION
  IN ARMY AND NAVY

  BY
  CHAS. M. HIGGINS


  PUBLISHED BY
  CHAS. M. HIGGINS
  BROOKLYN, N.Y.
  1920




  Copyright, 1920, by
  CHAS. M. HIGGINS

  _Published April, 1920_


  THE DE VINNE PRESS
  NEW YORK




DEDICATION


THIS EARNEST EFFORT FOR THE RECOGNITION AND ENFORCEMENT OF OUR BASIC
AMERICAN PRINCIPLE OF “UNALIENABLE” PERSONAL RIGHTS, THE ESTABLISHMENT
OF MEDICAL FREEDOM AND THE ABOLISHMENT OF ALL MEDICAL COMPULSION, IS
DEDICATED TO OUR UNPRECEDENTED PRESIDENT, WOODROW WILSON, WHOSE NAME
WILL SURELY BE PLACED IN THE HIGHEST NICHES OF AMERICAN HISTORY, AS ONE
OF OUR GREATEST EXPONENTS OF IDEAL AND PRACTICAL AMERICANISM, FOR OUR
OWN COUNTRY AND THE WORLD.




[Illustration: PLATE 1

WISDOM AND LAW

“EVERY LAW NOT BASED ON WISDOM IS A MENACE TO THE STATE”]




WISDOM AND LAW

“EVERY LAW NOT BASED ON WISDOM IS A MENACE TO THE STATE”

    From the Statue of Wisdom and Law, at entrance to Appellate
    Court, Twenty-fifth Street and Madison Avenue, New York
    City. Statue and motto by F. W. Ruckstull, Sculptor. See
    Frontispiece, Plate 1


A SCULPTURED REBUKE TO COMPULSORY VACCINATION

    Compulsory Vaccination is an instance of a law which inflicts
    actual disease and possible death on the human body and
    propagates and disseminates deadly infections widely upon
    animals and mankind. This is surely a glaring instance of a law
    which is not based on Wisdom or Sanity and is a Menace to the
    Health and Security of Humanity and the State.

    “This amazing act is the homicidal insanity of a whole
    profession. This is blood assassination.”

  Dr. James J. Garth Wilkinson, 1876.

    “It is unwise for the physician to force the operation upon
    those who are unwilling, or to give assurances of absolute
    harmlessness.”

  Dr. Osler’s “Modern Medicine,” 1913, Vol. I, page 848.

    “Vaccination is not always a harmless procedure; it must be
    looked upon as the production of an acute infectious disease.”

  Dr. Milton J. Rosenau, 1914.

    “Against the body of a healthy man Parliament has no right of
    assault whatever, under pretence of the public health.”

  Professor F. W. Newman, of Oxford.

    “Vaccination is a delusion, its penal enforcement a crime.”

  Professor Alfred Russel Wallace, in “The Wonderful Century,” 1899.






PUBLIC CHALLENGE TO HEALTH DEPARTMENTS

DEATHS FROM VACCINATION DENIED AND CONCEALED

MORE DEATHS FROM VACCINATION THAN FROM SMALLPOX


IN order that there shall be no misunderstanding about the serious
charge which I bring against vaccination, as being now actually more
dangerous to public health and human life than natural smallpox,
and the equally serious charge which I make against vaccinating
doctors--who now control our Departments of Health and Vital
Statistics--of denying and concealing these facts from the people,
I now issue this special challenge to the Departments of Health of
the City and State of New York, which cover a population of eleven
millions, and with whose records I am more familiar, that I will
undertake to prove from their death certificates and vital records,
now concealed and withheld from the public, that there have been more
deaths from vaccination than from smallpox _in every year_ for the past
fifteen years in the City and State of New York. If they deny the truth
of these charges I further solemnly challenge them to open their now
concealed records to public examination and I will prove the truth of
my charges from these records. Will they now dare to deny these charges
or will they dare to refuse to open their heretofore hermetically
concealed records to give the full medical and statistical truth to the
people on these most important points?

  CHAS. M. HIGGINS.

  Brooklyn, New York,
  September 17, 1919.




FOREWORDS FOR MEDICAL FREEDOM

AND

KEYNOTES OF AMERICAN RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES IN MEDICAL MATTERS


KEYNOTE NO. 1: INALIENABLE RIGHTS OF THE PEOPLE.

    All men are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable
    rights, among which are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of
    Happiness. _Declaration of Independence, 1776, more properly
    called Declaration of Rights._


KEYNOTE NO. 2: RESERVED RIGHTS AND POWERS RETAINED AND POSSESSED BY THE
PEOPLE.

    “The enumeration in the Constitution of certain rights shall
    not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by
    the people.” “The powers not delegated to the United States
    by the Constitution nor prohibited by it to the States, are
    reserved to the States respectively or to the people.” _U. S.
    Constitution, Articles IX and X, 1789._


KEYNOTE NO. 3: SOVEREIGN RIGHTS OF THE PEOPLE.

    Under our Basic Charters, just quoted, the sovereign right and
    power rests in the People, and the Government has no rights or
    powers, whatever, except as conferred by the People. QUESTION:
    Where have our State or National Governments obtained the
    right to force any medical remedy or operation upon citizens
    against their will and consent? Where have these governments
    obtained the right or power to force an infectious and deadly
    disease upon the human body in defiance of the will and the
    right of the citizen? Have the people ever given up their
    most sacred essential and unalienable right to the sanctity
    and security of their own bodies and to their free choice and
    right of selection in the medical treatment of their bodies?
    This is surely one of the great “unalienable,” “reserved” and
    “retained” rights which the people have never given up to any
    government, and which the Legislature or police power has no
    right to invade. _C. M. H._


KEYNOTE NO. 4: PREËMINENT RIGHTS OF THE INDIVIDUAL DECLARED BY U. S.
SUPREME COURT.

    “There is, of course, a sphere within which the individual may
    assert the supremacy of his own will, and rightfully dispute
    the authority of any human government, especially of any free
    government existing under a written constitution, to interfere
    with the exercise of that will.” _U. S. Supreme Court in
    Vaccination case of Jacobson, 1904._ Note: This decision also
    held that vaccination could not be legally forced upon any
    persons who could show that it was dangerous to their health or
    life.


KEYNOTE NO. 5: COMPULSORY VACCINATION IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL.

    “It may be conceded that the Legislature has no constitutional
    right to compel any person to submit to vaccination.” _Judge
    Woodward, of New York Appellate Court, in Viemeister case in
    1903._

    “If the Commissioner of Health had the power to imprison an
    individual for refusing to submit to vaccination, I see no
    reason why he should not also imprison one for refusing to
    swallow a dose. But the Legislature has conferred no such power
    upon him, if, indeed, it has the power to do the like.” _Judge
    Gaynor in Supreme Court, Brooklyn, N. Y., 1894, case of Smith
    vs. Emery._ This decision was fully sustained by the Court of
    Appeals.


KEYNOTE NO. 6: MEDICAL COMPULSION AND DOMINATION JUDICIALLY REBUKED AND
MEDICAL FREEDOM ASSERTED BY NEW YORK COURT OF APPEALS.

    “I concur in Judge Chase’s construction of the statute. But I
    would go farther. I deny the power of the Legislature to make
    it a crime to treat disease by prayer.” _Decision of Chief
    Justice Willard Bartlett, of New York Court of Appeals, in
    “Christian Science” case of Willis Vernon Cole, 1917._


KEYNOTE NO. 7: GOVERNMENT HAS NO RIGHT TO FORCE A MEDICAL DISEASE OR
OPERATION UPON THE PEOPLE.

    From these decisions it would seem to be obvious that it cannot
    be made a crime to refuse a medical operation to which the
    patient does not consent or approve, and which is dangerous
    to health or life, and that this is the “sphere,” as stated
    by the U. S. Supreme Court, “within which the individual may
    assert the supremacy of his own will and rightfully dispute
    the authority of any human government ... to interfere with
    the exercise of that will.” And, furthermore, this “sphere,”
    surely means the “Unalienable rights” of the people asserted
    in the Declaration and the “reserved” rights and powers
    retained by the people as expressed in Articles IX and X of the
    Constitution. _C. M. H._


KEYNOTE NO. 8: THE JEFFERSONIAN OATH OF RATIONAL AMERICAN LIBERTY.

    “I have sworn upon the altar of God, eternal hostility against
    every form of tyranny over the mind of man.” _Thomas Jefferson,
    Author of Declaration of Independence, to Benjamin Rush, Signer
    of the Declaration._


KEYNOTE NO. 9: MEDICAL FREEDOM IS AN INALIENABLE AMERICAN RIGHT.

    The right of the individual to select any preferred system
    of medical treatment, whether with or without prayer and
    faith, with or without drugs and medicines, or with or without
    vaccines or serums, and the right to accept or refuse any
    medical remedy or operation, is surely a clear inherent and
    reserved right, under our basic American Charters of Rights
    and Liberties, and cannot be legally or morally denied, but
    must be respected, defended and enforced by all Governments.
    Indeed, our first and Basic Charter--The Declaration of
    Rights--clearly and emphatically asserts that the essential
    purpose of Government is to secure these inalienable rights
    of the individual. Jefferson taught that Liberty, in all
    essential needs, is not a “privilege” granted by Government,
    but an inherent right possessed by all men, and naturally or
    divinely conferred upon them; hence the chief function of all
    Governments is to secure and enforce these human rights, not
    to invade or violate them to satisfy medical dogmas or other
    oppressive, dangerous, and illegal theories. _C. M. H._


KEYNOTE NO. 10: CONCLUSION: ABOLISH FORCED VACCINATION.

    All Compulsory Vaccination should be abolished as being illegal
    and unconstitutional and more dangerous to public health and
    human life than natural disease, and therefore a medical
    outrage and crime upon the people.

    The Declaration of Rights distinctly asserts that: “Whenever
    any form of government becomes destructive of these ends, it is
    the right of the people to alter or to abolish it.”

    The “ends” here referred to are the natural “unalienable” and
    “reserved” rights of the people, which are grossly violated
    by Compulsory Vaccination, and it is therefore the moral,
    legal and constitutional right of the people to demand the
    abolishment of this medical evil of compulsory disease which
    obviously violates their most sacred and essential personal
    rights, viz.: Sanctity of Body, Medical Liberty and Choice,
    Health and Life.


TEXT OF PROPOSED LAW TO ABOLISH COMPULSORY VACCINATION.

“No form of vaccination or inoculation shall be compulsory on any
person or be made a condition for the exercise of any right, privilege,
or duty, of any person.”




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE
  Statue and Motto of Wisdom and Law. A sculptured rebuke to
  Compulsory Vaccination                                  _Frontispiece_

  Dedication to President Wilson                                     iii

  Public Challenge to Health Departments. Deaths from Vaccination
  greater than deaths from Smallpox. Now denied and
  concealed by Doctors and Health Officers                            vi

  Prelude:--Forewords for Medical Freedom and Keynotes of
  American Rights and Liberties in Medical Matters                   vii

  Introduction                                                     xxiii

  Horrors of Vaccination Exposed and Illustrated                       1

  Petition to the President, Commander-in-chief of Army and
  Navy, to abolish Compulsory Vaccination and pardon all men
  condemned by court-martial for refusing vaccination                  3

  Death of George Washington from Medical Malpractice in 1799
  a warning against Modern Malpractice                                 5

  Compulsory Vaccination greatest malpractice of to-day, kills
  many persons                                                         6

  Vaccination most dangerous and repulsive remedy ever devised,
  is a form of blood poisoning with an inflicted disease and is
  often more deadly than natural disease                               7

  Compulsory vaccination as a condition for Public Schooling, or
  admission to Army and Navy, medically and legally wrong
  and should be abolished                                             11

  Doctors of Various Schools of Medicine should be represented
  on all medical and health boards                                    11

  Imprisonment for refusing vaccination in Army and Navy condemned
  as “cruel and unusual punishment” forbidden by
  Constitution                                                        12

  Military obedience to bad law commended. The great example
  of Socrates cited                                                   15

  The President quoted in asserting the rights and dignities of soldiers
  and condemning military despotism and “Medical Hoggery”             17

  Compulsory vaccination not necessary and not effective for
  health of armies or populations. Examples cited. Failure of
  vaccination in U. S. Army                                           18

  Vaccination not compulsory in English Army                          19

  Medical authorities admit dangers of vaccination and condemn
  compulsion. Sanitation superior to vaccination. The sanitary
  unvaccinated City of Leicester, England, cited                   20-22

  Deaths from vaccination greater than deaths from smallpox.
  Statistics given                                                    23

  Great epidemics of deadly disease in animals and man caused by
  vaccination                                                         25

  Grave nature of recent epidemic of Influenza and Pneumonia and
  possible relation of vaccination thereto                            26

  Vaccine factories a possible and proved source of epidemics and
  should be investigated by Congress and the Government               30

  Epidemics and high death-rates in the Army probably caused
  by wholesale and repeated vaccinations. Death-rate of Army
  from disease much greater than that of civil population             31

  Wonderful work of the Army and Navy Departments in the late
  war gratefully acknowledged and commended                           34

  Compulsory vaccination condemned as un-American and a violation
  of our great American Charters of Rights and Liberties,
  the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution                35

  The Declaration and Constitution carefully analyzed as to the
  unalienable American right of Medical Freedom                       35

  The Declaration further analyzed and commended as a complete
  creed of essential Americanism in one paragraph and a brief
  code of Basic Ethics, Civic Religion and Democratic Government,
  which should be emblazoned on all public places and
  buildings as the basis of Americanism                               37

  Plato’s Golden Rule and the Declaration of Rights compared          41

  Unalienable Rights Analyzed and Defined. Medical Freedom
  an unalienable American Right                                    42-45

  Compulsory vaccination condemned by our Courts as unconstitutional.
  Decisions cited                                                     45

  The Supreme Court of the U. S. on the preëminent rights of the
  individual                                                          47

  Unalienable rights of the individual _versus_ rights of majorities.
  False idea of the supremacy of majorities scored                    50

  Medical Freedom and Alimentary Freedom equally unalienable
  rights of the People and necessary for Life, Liberty and Happiness  51

  Medical Freedom equally necessary as Religious Freedom              52

  Medical Despotism of to-day worse than the old religious despotism
  of the past. The medical fanaticism of to-day, “Let us
  spread disease so that health may abound,” scored and compared
  to the old religious heresy, “Let us sin so that grace may
  abound”                                                             52

  Awful record of Japan in vaccination and smallpox and in
  epidemic disease spread by vaccination. Japanese virus causes
  epidemics of Cattle Plague in the United States in man and
  animals                                                          53-55

  Medical Freedom necessary for Medical Progress, Medical Truth
  and Human Safety                                                    56

  Medical Domination and Compulsion most dangerous power in
  body politic and must be suppressed                                 60

  The gigantic medical and vaccine interests supporting compulsory
  vaccination a menace to public right and safety and
  should be curbed                                                    61

  Deaths and disasters from vaccination are frequently denied and
  concealed by vaccinating doctors now controlling our Departments
  of Health and Vital Statistics                                      63

  Able laymen, or sanitary engineers, and life insurance statisticians,
  having no interest or bias to conceal medical mistakes or
  disasters, should be placed at the head of all our Departments
  of Health and Vital Statistics with great advantage to public
  right and medical truth                                          63-64

  Proposed National Board of Health controlled by doctors of one
  dominant school of medicine condemned                               64

  Medical Ethics of different schools compared and criticized. The
  “beam” _versus_ the “mote.” The Medical Pharisee exposed
  and condemned                                                       65

  Propagation and infliction of disease a medical crime               68

  Removal of the great ethical disgrace of the medical
  profession--compulsory medicine and inflicted disease               68

  Recapitulation. Reforms suggested                                   69

  Conclusion. The President’s words condemning unjust, arbitrary
  and coercive forces in the body politic                             70

  In Memoriam. Life sketch of John Pitcairn, late President of
  the Anti-Vaccination League of America                              73

  Pictorial Supplement Exposing and Illustrating Horrors of
  Vaccination                                                         77

  How vaccine virus is made and how cattle and mankind are diseased
  and killed by it                                                    79

  What vaccination truly is and how pus infection, lockjaw and
  other diseases work together in vaccination with fatal effect       82

  The typical normal vaccination sore or pustule, a form of blood
  poisoning or septicemic infection, pure and simple                  83

  Abnormal and dangerous forms of vaccination illustrated          84-85

  Fatal form of “Generalized Vaccination” in a baby girl where
  the eruption spreads all over the body, like confluent smallpox,
  and quickly kills                                                   87

  Severe type of vaccination in a little child where the inflammation
  and eruption extend from the sore over part of the body
  and endanger life by general infection                              88

  How vaccinating doctors deny and conceal, and falsely excuse,
  frequent deaths from vaccination                                    89

  Dangerous nature of Vaccine Virus. Various diseases found in
  or caused by it                                                     90

  Epidemic cattle plagues, known as “Foot and Mouth Disease,”
  caused by vaccination in animals and mankind in 1902 and
  1908, with great destruction of cattle and injury to mankind    92-101

  Photographs of cattle suffering from Foot and Mouth Disease,
  caused by vaccination in epidemic of 1902                        93-95

  The shocking “Vaccine Holocaust”! A funeral pile of hundreds
  of cattle burned to destroy infection caused by vaccine
  virus in epidemic of 1902                                           97

  Map of the second epidemic of this disease in 1908, caused by
  manufacture of vaccine virus in the U. S. from “seed virus”
  derived from Japan                                                  98

  Great loss and damage caused by these vaccine epidemics to the
  government and people of the U. S. A big price to pay for
  vaccination                                                        102

  Epidemics of smallpox probably caused by vaccination and Foot
  and Mouth Disease. Foot and Mouth Disease probably a
  form of Variola or Mongrel Smallpox                                102

  Cattle plagues of Foot and Mouth Disease very common in much
  vaccinated countries like Germany and Japan and probably
  caused by vaccine infection same as in the U. S.                   103

  How lockjaw is caused by vaccination and how this truth is
  denied and concealed by vaccinators                                104

  Lockjaw may be caused by vaccination whether germs are in
  the virus or not. False arguments in defense of vaccination
  exposed and shattered                                              105

  “Assassination of the Blood” by forced vaccination must be
  stopped                                                            106

  Positive proof that vaccination and lockjaw are more “risky” and
  deadly than natural smallpox. Convincing statistical figures
  given                                                              107

  Horror of horrors! Proof that cattle plague, or Foot and Mouth
  Disease, in horrible form is caused in mankind by vaccination.
  Medical ignorance on this point rebuked                            108

  Horrible case of a woman killed by Foot and Mouth Disease, or
  Virulent Cowpox, caused by vaccination. Photograph taken
  before death shows awful vaccinal eruptions                        110

  Bad case of the same disease in a vaccinated man. Photograph
  of eruption at its height proves positive relation to vaccination  112

  Proof that “Foot and Mouth Disease,” Virulent Cowpox, “Pemphigus,”
  and “Generalized Vaccination” are identical and are
  different names for, and forms of, the same typical disease    111-116

  Case of same typical disease in a vaccinated school boy, being
  one of several of similar kind caused by vaccination               117

  Another case of same typical disease caused by vaccination, reported
  in U. S. Naval records                                             122

  An English case of the same typical disease in a vaccinated baby,
  giving cumulative proof of the responsibility of vaccination for
  this fearful and fatal disease                                     123

  Most important medical fact now exposed here. Identity of
  Virulent Vaccination with “Foot and Mouth Disease”! Called
  also “Pemphigus,” “Generalized Vaccination,” or “Virulent
  Cowpox,” but all common forms and variations of the same
  typical vaccinal disease or Mongrel Smallpox                       125

  Vaccination is “doctored” smallpox, assumes many forms and is
  often worse than natural smallpox                                  127

  Proof that vaccination causes Mongrel Smallpox and Foot and
  Mouth disease and that the nature of the vaccinal eruptions
  demonstrates this relation and causation                           129

  An Indictment against Bovine Vaccination                           130

  How one strain of Vaccine Virus originated from a Smallpox
  Tramp and an infected cow! Shocking letter from a Manufacturer
  of Virus to a Doctor                                               131

  The disputed or unknown origin and nature of modern Vaccine
  Virus emphasized. Letter from Parke, Davis & Co., one of
  the largest makers of Virus in the U. S.                           133

  How an English sailor lost his arm from vaccination                133

  Case of an English soldier killed by typhoid vaccination           134

  Sickness and death from vaccination in the U. S. Army              136

  Important medical fact proved. Relation of vaccination to the
  two chief causes of death in the U. S. Army, Pneumonia and
  Meningitis                                                         139

  Dr. Osler’s latest medical work quoted, showing that vaccination
  is an exciting cause of other diseases, especially tuberculosis
  and syphilis                                                       141

  The slaughter of the innocents illustrated. Cartoon from _Harper’s
  Weekly_ showing the “savage rite” of vaccination in
  action. “The medicine man performs his savage rites” on
  little children                                                    143

  Some leaves from Mr. Loyster’s Memorial Pamphlet entitled
  “Vaccination Results in New York State in 1914,” showing
  the death of his own son and about thirty other children from
  vaccination in 1914, while only three deaths from smallpox
  occurred in the whole State for the same year                      145

  Portraits of eleven school children killed by vaccination in New
  York State in 1914                                             149-159

  Vaccination as the exciting cause of death from lockjaw, septicemia,
  meningitis, and infantile paralysis, shown in several
  cases in Mr. Loyster’s pamphlet                                149-160

  A cry for help! Harrowing personal letters from victims of vaccination
  and from parents of outraged school children. Mutilation
  and death, caused by compulsory vaccination, denounced
  and reform demanded. Many fatal cases cited                        163

  Proposed law to compensate parents for children deformed, disabled
  or killed by compulsory vaccination forced on them by
  an unwise and evil law                                             169

  Shocking and common medical mendacity on the alleged harmlessness
  of vaccination                                                     169

  The “Philippine Falsehood” scored. Alleged “millions” vaccinated
  without any injury or death shown to be false and
  absurd                                                             170

  Shocking falsehoods from our health departments as to the
  necessity, efficacy and harmlessness of vaccination. Flagrant
  example from the New York State Department of Health
  exposed                                                            173

  Some absurd falsehoods exposed from an American Encyclopædia       175

  Some serious errors and bias exposed in the last edition of the
  _Britannica_ as to the alleged harmlessness of vaccination         177

  The errors of Dr. M. J. Rosenau, a high medical authority, on
  the relative harmlessness of vaccination                           180

  Vaccination proved to be highly dangerous and frequently deadly
  and often causes more annual deaths than smallpox              178-183

  Dr. Jenner’s great basic falsehoods. The original mendacities of
  vaccination exposed                                                184

  Original claim of life protection from one vaccination long abandoned
  for very short periods of protection and frequent re-vaccination   187

  Dr. Olesen’s rule of limited protection of six months to a year
  and necessity of yearly re-vaccination                             188

  Multiple or repeated re-vaccinations are more dangerous as a
  cumulative blood infection than the risk from natural
  smallpox                                                       190-191

  The Chicago “Vaccination Creed” of repeated and multiple vaccinations
  explained and condemned as more dangerous than
  natural smallpox                                                   189

  The false glory of Jenner and the disgrace of the medical profession
  in the shamefully false claims on which vaccination has
  been forced upon the people since its origin                       191

  What protects us from smallpox in modern times? Is it vaccination
  or something else? A false claim exploded. Superior
  power of sanitation, isolation and hygiene in preventing
  smallpox and other diseases demonstrated                           192

  The unsanitary conditions of Jenner’s day exposed. Power of
  sanitation to extinguish smallpox admitted by Jenner’s chief
  assistant in 1815                                                  195

  Further proof from the English Minister of Health that sanitation
  prevents smallpox more than vaccination. Poorly
  vaccinated London more healthy than much-vaccinated
  Berlin                                                             198

  Limited and voluntary vaccination only, suggested and approved.
  Forced vaccination of school children condemned
  and its absurdity and needlessness proved                          200

  Absurdity of compulsory vaccination of children of school age,
  who have the highest natural immunity and vitality, and
  lowest death-rate of any part of the population, and have least
  need of vaccination                                                201

  Proof that vaccination is a poor protection from disease.
  Flagrant and frequent failure to protect from smallpox or
  typhoid fever. Many typical instances of these failures, at
  home and abroad, shown                                             202

  Failure of vaccination in the last greatest epidemic in England
  and New York City in 1902                                      204-205

  Failure of vaccination in Germany in 1908, 1909 and 1910           205

  The well vaccinated battle-ship _Ohio_ and the unvaccinated City
  of Niagara Falls, N. Y., compared as a test for the merits of
  vaccination in the epidemic of 1913 and 1914                       206

  The flagrant failure of typhoid vaccination in the U. S. Army in
  France and in home camps officially admitted                   207-211

  Summing up. The case proved in seven cardinal points               211

  Conclusion. Great danger of vaccination to health and life
  proved, which fact, when it once enters the public conscience,
  will soon result in the abolition of all compulsory vaccination
  as being an infliction of deadly disease and a gross violation
  of the most sacred rights of the people to Medical Freedom,
  Health and Life                                                    212




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


  FIGURE      PAGE

  1. The vaccinated calf, showing how vaccine virus is made
  and how cattle and mankind are diseased by it                       79

  2. A vaccinated arm showing the ripe, normal vaccination
  sore or pustule as a distinct form of “Purulent Infection”          83

  3. A bad case of vaccination showing an ulcerating sore             84

  4. Multiple vaccinations spread from the arm to the face by
  scratching with the fingers, showing highly infectious
  nature of vaccination                                               85

  5. Photograph of a little child killed by “Generalized Vaccination,”
  where the vaccinal eruption spreads all over the
  body like confluent smallpox                                        87

  6. A severe form of vaccination in a little child, where the
  inflammation and eruption spreads from the sore over
  part of the body and endangers life by blood poisoning
  or general septicemia                                               88

  7. A cow suffering from “Foot and Mouth Disease” or Virulent
  Cowpox, in the epidemic of that disease, caused by
  vaccine virus in New England in 1902                                93

  8. View of a pair of oxen suffering from the same disease
  in said epidemic caused by vaccination                              94

  8½. Eruptions of foot and mouth disease on udder and teats
  of cow                                                              95

  9. The Vaccine Holocaust: photograph of funeral pile of
  slaughtered cattle infected by Foot and Mouth Disease
  caused by vaccination in said epidemic of 1902 and shown
  ready to be burned to destroy the infection, at great loss to
  the government and people of the United States                      96

  10. Map of the second epidemic of Foot and Mouth Disease in
  1908, caused by vaccination which originated from vaccine
  factories in Michigan and Pennsylvania and spread to
  several States                                                      98

  11. A Vaccination Horror: photograph of a woman victim suffering
  with a virulent form of Cowpox or Foot and Mouth
  Disease, in the epidemic of 1902, caused by vaccination and
  resulting in death                                                 110

  12. Photograph of a man suffering with a severe form of the
  same disease in the said epidemic of 1902, caused by vaccination,
  but resulting in recovery after nine successive
  eruptions                                                          112

  13. Photograph of a vaccinated school boy suffering with a
  milder form of cattle disease, “Pemphigus,” or virulent
  Cowpox, caused by vaccination in 1914, resulting in recovery
  after years of suffering                                           118

  14 and 15. Photographs of an English sailor who lost his arm
  from vaccination                                                   133

  16. Photograph of an English soldier killed by Typhoid Vaccination 135

  17. Cartoon from _Harper’s Weekly_. The “savage rite” of
  vaccination shown in action. “The medicine man performs
  his savage rites” on little children                               143

  CASES

  1 to 27. Photographs of eleven children killed by vaccination
  in New York State in 1914. Taken from memorial pamphlet
  by Mr. James A. Loyster                                        149-159

  PLATE

  1. Statute of Wisdom and Law from New York Appellate
  Court, with motto: “Every Law Not Based on Wisdom is a
  Menace to the State,” a rebuke to the compulsory vaccination
  law                                                     _Frontispiece_

  2. In Memoriam. Portrait of John Pitcairn, late President of
  The Anti-Vaccination League of America and leading businessman
  of Philadelphia                                                     72




INTRODUCTION


THIS little book on the Horrors of Compulsory Vaccination, its medical
barbarism, and its moral and legal atrocity as a gross violation of
Basic Personal and Broad American Rights, is dedicated and addressed to
our esteemed President, Woodrow Wilson, for several decisive reasons:

    FIRST: Because I believe him to be the most potent personality
    in public office to-day and our greatest present representative
    and exponent of Fundamental American Principles and Basic Human
    Rights, and as being now recognized as a world-wide exponent of
    these principles both at home and abroad.

    SECOND: Because the President is Commander-in-Chief of the
    Army and Navy and is thus invested with supreme commanding and
    pardoning power, through which he can bring about an immediate
    reform in the evil practice of compulsory vaccination by
    pardoning, at his discretion, all men in the Army or Navy now
    unjustly condemned by Court Martial for refusing vaccination,
    and by abolishing all compulsion and making all vaccination
    free and voluntary, as it now is in the English Army.

    THIRD: Because the President is our highest civilian officer
    and represents in his person and office one of our most
    important American principles, the supremacy of the civil
    over the military power. It therefore seemed to me most fit
    and proper to appeal to our chief civilian officer on any
    great question which concerns the most fundamental civil
    rights of the citizen or involves any great abuse of military
    power, as is the case with this evil practice of compulsory
    vaccination. And I think it will be readily admitted that
    _medical militarism_, such as the arbitrary medical compulsion
    which forces and inflicts disease upon the human body, under
    the fallacy of medical necessity and the pressure of military
    law, is surely one of the most dangerous and oppressive forms
    of extreme militarism that can be conceived and is not in
    accordance with the spirit of American Institutions, and should
    be suppressed. While, therefore, I, as a student of this
    subject, may earnestly and persistently write and urge, and
    demonstrate the truth on this subject, and prove by undeniable
    fact, exhibit, and argument the dangerous nature of compulsory
    vaccination and the shocking falsehoods on which it is based
    as to its alleged efficacy, necessity and harmlessness, yet I
    have not the least power or discretion to remove this evil;
    whereas the power of the President in this matter is plenary,
    instant and complete, so that in almost the twinkling of an eye
    he can abolish this evil in the Army and Navy with one word
    from his lips or one wave of his hand. And if this evil is once
    abolished in the Army and Navy, its abolishment everywhere else
    throughout the land is sure to follow, with great advantage
    to human right and much improvement in public health, as has
    resulted wherever this medical malpractice of inoculation
    with inflicted disease has been reduced or abolished, with a
    corresponding increase in sanitation and hygiene.

For these good reasons, I have therefore thought it most
proper and advisable to make this appeal to our highest civilian
official and our Chief Military Commander, who is so potently equipped
to give the immediate relief and establish the reform herein asked
for, viz., the full Medical Freedom to accept or refuse vaccination
as each individual sees fit, which is a basic and inherent American
right; and I therefore now submit the numerous and conclusive facts
and demonstrations in these pages for the special consideration of
the President and the general attention of the People and their
Representatives in our National and State Legislatures, and as a full
justification of the reform prayed for.

In conclusion, I might say that I first began this work as a simple
Letter of Petition to the President to abolish forced vaccination in
the Army and Navy, with a brief outline of reasons for this reform,
which letter was commenced before the President sailed for Europe to
attend the World Peace Conference. But the importance and scope of the
subject grew as I worked on it, and I concluded to expand the letter
into a full illustration and demonstration of the Horrors of Compulsory
Vaccination, its failures, falsehoods, futilities and fatalities, which
would be so thorough and convincing that it could not be disregarded.
This enlarged work has required nearly twelve months to complete and
make ready for the consideration of the President after his return from
the Peace Conference, and its publication has been much delayed by
several unavoidable conditions, including the recent great strike in
the printing trades.

I might further state in conclusion that I have spent a lifetime and a
fortune in the study and investigation of this subject and in efforts
for the repeal of all unwise laws for forcing vaccination upon the
people, which repeal is now being agitated and is progressing all over
the civilized world. And as I probably shall not be able to work many
more years in this great cause of Medical Freedom, and as this may be
my last contribution to the cause, I have concluded to make the case
against Compulsory Vaccination so full and complete in this Exposure
that there can be no question of its medical malpractice and its
dangerous, deadly and illegal nature.

For these reasons I have also thought it my duty to give to the public
the benefit of my studies of a lifetime and the accumulation of the
many shocking facts, proofs and exhibits which I have been collecting
for years, and which, as now massed in the Petition and its Illustrated
Supplement, can, I think, leave no doubt in the mind of any reasonable
man or woman--not professionally interested in vaccination--that all
Compulsory Vaccination should be immediately abolished, and that its
continuation, with these proofs against it, would be a most gross
medical blunder and malpractice and a grave violation of the basic
American principle of Inherent Individual Rights, in being a serious
menace to human health and life, a frequent cause of wide-spread
epidemics and demonstrably more fatal in many instances than natural
disease itself, and therefore a shocking violation of all true medical
ethics and a disgrace alike to modern medicine and modern legislation
which should no longer tolerate the practice.

  CHAS. M. HIGGINS.

  Dated at 271 Ninth St., Brooklyn, N. Y.,
  December 1, 1919.




HORRORS OF VACCINATION EXPOSED AND ILLUSTRATED




PETITION TO THE PRESIDENT TO ABOLISH COMPULSORY VACCINATION IN ARMY AND
NAVY


SUBJECT, IN BRIEF: Request to the President as Commander-in-Chief
to abolish Compulsory Vaccination in Army and Navy, to make all
vaccination voluntary as it now is in the English Army, and to pardon
all men condemned by Court Martial for refusing coercive vaccination.

Compulsory vaccination is a serious danger to health and life, a grave
medical malpractice and a gross violation of medical ethics, and of
the American principles of Inherent Natural Rights guaranteed in the
Declaration and the Constitution, and should be abolished. Dangers and
Fatalities of vaccination exposed and illustrated.




PETITION TO THE PRESIDENT

[Illustration]


  PETITION,
  _from_ CHAS. M. HIGGINS
  _of Brooklyn, N. Y.
  a citizen of the United States_

  TO
  THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
  _Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy
  Washington, D. C._

  Mr. President:

American History, as you well know, tells us that our first President,
the illustrious George Washington, died in 1799 as the result of a
medical malpractice common at that time, viz., the barbarous and
dangerous practice of indiscriminate bleeding to cure disease. While
suffering from an attack of acute sore throat or laryngitis, the
patient was so weakened by the great loss of vital fluid in repeated
bleeding operations that he was not able to endure this loss and
overcome also the effects of the disease. Our great Washington thus
gave up his glorious life--glorious in the establishment of American
Liberty and the principles of Inalienable Natural Rights of the
Individual as a basis for all Government--on the altar of medical
barbarism and malpractice.


HISTORIC WARNING IN THE DEATH OF OUR FIRST PRESIDENT FROM MEDICAL
MALPRACTICE

Let us now take this warning from the medical barbarism of the past,
even over such a long interval of time, as a fit warning against the
medical malpractices and barbarisms of to-day, which are even more
irrational and dangerous to human right and safety, health and life
than the malpractice of the past which destroyed the life of our first
President.


COMPULSORY VACCINATION THE GREAT MEDICAL MALPRACTICE OF TO-DAY WHICH
KILLS MANY WHERE BLEEDING KILLED ONE

Now the most barbarous and dangerous medical practice of to-day is the
gross evil of compulsory vaccination, which is doubtless the greatest
violation of common sense, medical propriety and the unalienable
natural rights of the individual guaranteed in our basic American
Charters, that any dogmatic, presumptuous profession or class of
men has ever been guilty of. And it is to this serious violation of
American principle forced on our soldiers and sailors by medical
dogmatism that I now wish to ask your most careful attention as one
having the supreme commanding and pardoning power in Army and Navy,
with the earnest prayer that in the exercise of that exalted wisdom and
power possessed by your great American Office and Personality, which
has now made itself felt around the whole world, that this medical
barbarism of compulsory disease may be abolished in our Army and Navy,
and that all men condemned by Court Martial for refusing the infliction
on their bodies of compulsory disease shall be fully pardoned and
restored to their proper and honorable status as loyal American
soldiers and sailors. And I now wish to present to you in the following
pages an abundant array of facts and evidence which prove, I think,
beyond doubt, the great evil and danger of vaccination, its fatality,
and futility, and clearly justify the rational reform suggested for the
abolishment of all forced or compulsory vaccination.


THE MODERN MEDICAL BARBARISM POISONS THE BLOOD IN THE BODY INSTEAD OF
DRAINING THE BLOOD OUT OF THE BODY

In this medical malpractice of to-day the doctors do not open the
veins and drain out the life blood of the patient, ostensibly to cure
his disease, as in the mistaken past, but they now keep this blood in
the body and inject into it directly or indirectly various more or
less virulent diseases, blood poisons, or disease germs, cultures or
products, either living or dead, with the idea of curing or preventing
some natural disease. These practices are called, respectively,
“vaccination” and “serum treatment.” In vaccination an actual living or
dead disease germ, or virus, is injected into the blood, lymph, skin or
muscle; whereas, in serum or antitoxin treatment a disease product or
culture is so injected.


VACCINATION THE MOST DANGEROUS AND REPULSIVE SYSTEM OF MEDICATION EVER
DEVISED

Now, whatever merits or demerits this system of disease inoculation
may have, either in preventing or curing or immunizing against natural
disease, I will not here say and do not need to here discuss, except to
state that such curative or preventive power has been much exaggerated
and is very limited and uncertain. But whatever these merits or
demerits may be, it is obvious on fundamental principles of medical and
civic ethics, that such a dangerous and repugnant practice of disease
inoculation and blood poisoning should not be made compulsory on any
person for any excuse whatever. It must be here remembered that it was
admitted that the old smallpox inoculation had a certain preventive
power and yet it was finally condemned and abandoned for reasons of
its great danger as causing more disease and death than it prevented.
Disregarding, therefore, the question of preventive merits or demerits,
I think I can now say with perfect truth and soberness, and without
fear of refutation, that this modern system of compulsory vaccination
is the most violent and dangerous and most immoral or unethical system
of medication that has ever been devised by a most honorable yet most
presumptuous profession which has been proved guilty of the most
gigantic medical mistakes in its past history of the centuries, one
of which--indiscriminate bleeding--as we have already seen, killed
our first President and many other victims of that period. To this
gigantic and abandoned mistake we might now add the two horrible
practices of smallpox inoculation and arm-to-arm vaccination, both of
which were once used and approved by the highest medical authority
as safe and infallible preventives of natural disease, yet both were
finally abandoned as great medical mistakes and were prohibited by
penal law as most risky methods of propagating and extending disease
and more dangerous to human health and life than the natural disease
itself.


VACCINATION IS BLOOD POISONING WITH INFLICTED DISEASE AND IS OFTEN MORE
FATAL THAN NATURAL DISEASE

For these former medical mistakes there is now substituted the modern
medical mistake of compulsory bovine and serum vaccinations of various
kinds and multiple repetitions which are in many instances as dangerous
to human health and life as the former prohibited malpractices, or
more so, and will, doubtless, in due time, be publicly condemned and
abandoned as equal mistakes, like their predecessors.

Indeed, this modern vaccine system of medicine is so violent and
dangerous that it has been frequently known to kill in from ten to
fifteen minutes, after injection of the serum, by what is known as
“serum sickness,” which is a kind of rapid blood and nerve poisoning
affecting vital nerve centers, to which some persons are very
susceptible.[1] This is, of course, a more violent, rapid and fatal
action than occurs in the most virulent and deadly natural diseases and
is comparable only to a stroke of lightning or shock of electricity or
to the violent action of the most virulent chemical, mineral, animal,
or vegetable poisons known in toxicology. In other fatal cases, where
the poisoning action is slower, death finally occurs from lockjaw,
paralysis, meningitis, or pneumonia, which are frequent results of
vaccination. And these fatal results of vaccination are commonly
denied and concealed in death certificates by recording the terminal
disease of lockjaw, paralysis, meningitis, or pneumonia only as the
sole and original cause of death without any record of the inflicted
disease--vaccination--as the primary or contributory cause of the
death. This evil practice is, of course, a gross falsification of
our vital statistics, and is now a frequent offense by some of our
vaccinating doctors, as I can legally prove by documentary evidence
when required.

In some death certificates, however, the vaccination is more or less
clearly and honestly acknowledged as the cause of death, direct or
indirect. I have now in hand a recent New York death certificate which
records the death of a little child one year old in three days after
vaccination from vaccinal septicemia, or blood poisoning, due to the
vaccinal infection.


EVERY VACCINATION SORE IS AN INFECTING ABSCESS AND EVERY ACT OF
VACCINATION IS A BLOOD INFECTION CAPABLE OF CAUSING SERIOUS DISEASE OR
DEATH AT ANY TIME

And let me here say that every vaccination sore is simply a septicemic
abscess and focus of infection, more or less dangerous, and is possibly
capable of infecting the whole system at any time with fatal effect;
and, furthermore, every act of ordinary cowpox vaccination is, of
course, an act of septicemic infection or blood poisoning, _per se_,
and pure and simple, and frequently kills in this way in the longer or
shorter time of a few days, which is, of course, quicker than the worst
forms of natural smallpox ever kill. See Figs. 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, pages
83 to 88. On this point see also the “Manual of Causes of Death,” by
U. S. Census Bureau, page 56, No. 20, and the corresponding Manual of
the Registrar General of England, in which vaccination is recorded as a
form of septicemia and a serious cause of death.

As further convincing evidence on this head, I have a Brooklyn death
certificate showing the death of a woman hospital nurse six months
after vaccination, from multiple abscesses which broke out all over the
body in successive crops and continued for six months notwithstanding
the most skillful medical efforts for cure, and finally resulted in
death from general vaccinal septicemia. See Figs. 11, 12 and 13, which
show other cases of this kind.

I have an English certificate showing the death of a man from the same
cause, multiple abscesses, resulting from vaccination and continuing
for seven years, and finally ending in death from this cause.

I have also another English certificate which shows the death of a
little infant from vaccinal septicemia in thirty-four hours after
vaccination! Of course the worst form of smallpox was never known to
kill in such short time.

These shocking facts thus clearly show that an inflicted disease may be
far worse and more fatal than a naturally acquired disease, and that
vaccination may kill with surprising swiftness in a few days, hours,
or minutes, quicker than the most fatal natural diseases or the most
virulent poisons, or may continue a most horrible blood infection with
internal or external eruptions through an agony of months or years and
finally end in death from this infection.

I have also some recent American death certificates which show the
deaths of five little children of primary school age, all killed in
one week in September, 1915, from vaccination resulting in lockjaw
and septicemia. I have now in hand a memorial pamphlet written by an
aggrieved father, a very intelligent man, an editor and manufacturer,
Mr. James A. Loyster, of Cazenovia, New York, which shows the death of
his own son and about thirty other children from vaccination in New
York State in 1914. This child slaughter was the result of a general
vaccination raid made upon the school children of the State in that
year; and this pamphlet gives convincing proof that about thirty, and
probable proof that about twice that number, were killed by vaccine
infection, _while only three persons died from smallpox in the whole
State for the same year_! See pages 145 to 163, which give several
pages of this pamphlet in full.


COMPULSORY VACCINATION AS A CONDITION FOR PUBLIC SCHOOLING OR
FOR SERVICE IN ARMY AND NAVY IS MEDICALLY BARBAROUS AND LEGALLY
UNCONSTITUTIONAL, AND SHOULD BE ABOLISHED

These deadly vaccinations above cited were almost all performed on
school children to satisfy an evil law which has been originated and
sustained by a powerful but mistaken part or sect of the medical
profession--the vaccine sect--by which law vaccination is forced
upon children of school age as a condition for admission to school,
thus making the infliction of a dangerous disease on the tender body
of the child a condition for the exercise of that most essential,
unquestionable, and inalienable right of the child to _Education_!
Such invasion of natural right to life, health, and education is
surely the clearest violation of those great American principles of
inherent natural rights so distinctly set forth in the Declaration and
Constitution which all Governments must respect and defend, as I will
show later on.


ABOLISH ALL COMPULSORY VACCINATION IN ARMY AND NAVY AND APPOINT DOCTORS
OF VARIOUS SCHOOLS ON ALL MEDICAL AND HEALTH BOARDS

In the same way this dogmatic and dominant part or sect of the
medical profession, organized in powerful medical societies and now
controlling important public offices, has forced the dangerous practice
of general compulsory vaccination upon our Army and Navy, and this
practice is, I believe, largely the result of having only one school of
medicine--the vaccine school--represented on our Medical Boards and in
our Departments of Health and Vital Statistics. To thus have only one
school of medicine represented on our Medical Boards of Army and Navy
is, I submit, as great a mistake, as unjust, absurd, and un-American,
as it would be to have only one school of Religion represented in our
Army and Navy chaplains. For, surely, medical tolerance and freedom is
as important for national welfare as religious tolerance and freedom.
And to this particular point, Mr. President, I would, therefore, now
like to ask your first and most careful attention, with the suggestion
and hope that, as supreme commander of both arms of the service, you
will not only find it just, wise, and proper to abolish all compulsory
vaccination in Army and Navy and leave vaccination entirely voluntary
with each man, as it now is in the English Army, but that you will also
abolish all arrogant monopoly or control of medical practice in Army
and Navy by any one school of medicine, and will adopt the reform in
the future of having various schools of medicine properly and justly
represented on our Medical Boards, from which reform, I believe, a
great improvement in medical practice and in public right, health, and
comfort is sure to result.


CRUEL AND UNUSUAL, EXCESSIVE AND UNREASONABLE PUNISHMENTS ARE
UNCONSTITUTIONAL. MORAL AND MEDICAL MONSTROSITY OF LONG TERMS OF
IMPRISONMENT FOR REFUSING VACCINATION

At this point I would like to call your careful attention to a news
item which appeared in the _New York Times_ of May 2, 1918, as follows:

  “_Refused Vaccination, Got Fifteen Years._

    “Camp Dodge, Iowa, May 1.--Elmer N. Olson, of Goodrich, Minn.,
    a soldier in training here, refused to submit to vaccination.
    He was tried by general court-martial and sentenced to fifteen
    years in the disciplinary barracks at Fort Leavenworth.”

This is only one of many similar items which have appeared in the press
for the last two years, showing that it has been a practice in the
army to try soldiers by court-martial for refusing to be vaccinated
against free will and consent; and to degrade them from honorable
military service merely for this refusal, and condemn them to long
terms of imprisonment such as are given only to dangerous and felonious
criminals under the criminal law,--and it is shown in this item that
the extraordinary punishment of fifteen years’ imprisonment was thus
inflicted for the sole offense of refusing compulsory vaccination! It
may be that in some cases other offenses besides mere refusal to be
vaccinated were involved, but I understand from several news items that
only the act of refusal to submit to forced vaccination was involved in
many such condemnations.

In answer to a special request for information on this point, I have
been informed by the office of the Judge Advocate General, in a
letter dated January 14, 1919, that there was only one instance of
court-martial for refusing to be vaccinated in the years 1917 and
1918, that this was held to be a violation of the 96th Article of War,
and that the offender in this case was sentenced to be “_Dishonorably
discharged from the service, to forfeit all pay and allowances due or
to become due, and to be confined at hard labor at such place as the
convening authority may direct for twenty-five years_.”

Now I respectfully submit, Mr. President, that whether there were
one or many cases of this kind, they were clearly cases of “cruel
and unusual” and excessive and unreasonable punishment and also an
“unreasonable search and seizure of the person,” condemned in the
Constitution in Articles IV and VIII of the Amendments, as follows:

    ARTICLE IV. “The right of the people to be secure in their
    persons ... against unreasonable searches and seizures shall
    not be violated.”

    ARTICLE VIII. “Excessive bail shall not be required, nor
    excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments
    inflicted.”

I therefore think it is perfectly obvious that to thus degrade a loyal
and honorable soldier and condemn him like a felonious criminal to the
long term of fifteen or twenty-five years’ imprisonment, merely for the
act of refusing to have a dangerous medical operation and an inflicted
disease forced upon his body against his will and consent, is clearly
an “unreasonable seizure” of the person and a “cruel and unusual” and
excessive and unreasonable punishment prohibited in the Constitution;
and I think that no further argument is necessary to prove this point.
Surely to inflict such drastic punishments as above shown--not for any
really criminal, immoral, or perfidious act--not for anything that
really affects the purely military duties, qualities, or services of
any loyal, honorable and healthy soldier--but simply for opposing a
dangerous medical dogma and defending his body against an inflicted
disease and a dangerous medical operation which frequently sickens and
unfits the soldier for a long time afterwards for military service and
sometimes actually kills--as already clearly proved--surely, I say,
such a punishment is not only legally unconstitutional, but is morally
barbarous in both a true military and true medical sense, and should
be abolished in both Army and Navy for the several reasons herein
submitted.


HARSH MILITARY PUNISHMENTS CONDEMNED BY AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION

In the _New York Tribune_ of January 4, 1919, the President of the
American Bar Association, at a meeting in New York City on January
3d, condemned harsh and unjust judgments of military courts-martial,
and stated that “_our military laws and our systems of administering
military justice are unworthy of the name of law or justice_.” He
also said that our army was still following rules copied from England
in 1774, but which were abandoned long ago as better suited “_to
the armies of feudal times than to the citizen armies of a modern
republic_.” He also condemned “the outrageous punishments meted out
by our courts-martial for comparatively slight breaches of military
discipline.” And he further stated that “Punishments are not only
grossly harsh, as compared with the penalties imposed for like offences
by our criminal courts, but they also differ so widely that we find
the same offence punished in one court-martial by twenty-five years
in the penitentiary and in another by six months in disciplinary
barracks.” ... “The accused soldier has no real legal protection.” ...
“The maintenance of military discipline does not require this harsh
and arbitrary procedure. The French army is a model of discipline, but
an accused soldier has the protection of the law thrown around him
at every stage of his trial. That a soldier in our army should have
less legal protection challenges the attention of the lawyers of the
country. The American people never will stand for Prussian methods even
in disciplining the Army.”


MILITARY OBEDIENCE TO BAD LAW. THE HIGH EXAMPLE OF SOCRATES COMMENDED

Lest some false interpreter should suggest that in here condemning
compulsory vaccination in the Army and Navy and urging its abolishment
I am attempting “_to incite insubordination, disloyalty, or mutiny,
or refusal of duty, in the military or naval forces of the United
States_,” as expressed in the Overman Law, I would now call careful
attention to the obvious fact that urging the abolition of a bad law,
or petitioning government “for a redress of grievances,” is not urging
_disobedience_ to any law, is not inciting mutiny or refusal of duty
or disloyalty to the United States, but is a clear constitutional
right under Article I of the first amendment, which right, it is there
stated, cannot be abridged or denied.

If any loyal soldiers, opposed to forced vaccination, should ask my
advice whether they should accept or refuse it, I would advise them
to protest against compulsion and ask for its abolition, but I would
not advise them to deliberately disobey any legal military rule. And
I would further say here that I believe that any soldier who might
be injured or killed as a result of any vaccination, to which he was
forced to submit by any military law, would suffer and die in the
service of his country with just as much honor as if he had died on the
battle-field; or with as much honor as in the case of Socrates, the
great Grecian soldier and philosopher, who died in obedience to bad law
and unjust judgment.

I would further advise all conscientious objectors to forced
vaccination to consider the teaching of some strict moralists, that it
is better to obey all laws, however bad, than to disobey any of them,
and that this _obedience_ and _sacrifice_ is the first duty of the
soldier and citizen. And it is also taught that this obedience to bad
law, after full and due protest against it, is the best way to bring
about its repeal in due time.

This seems to have been the teaching of the great Socrates--the pagan
Christ, 399 B.C.--and was the chief lesson of his tragic death. Knowing
that he was unjustly and falsely condemned and that his judges acted
wrongly, yet within the forms of law, he refused to escape this false
and unjust judgment, although he could easily have done so with the
help of powerful friends who urged this upon him. Yet he nobly accepted
the judgment of law and drank the cup of poison to which he was legally
but wrongly sentenced, and thus gave up his life to vindicate what he
believed was the sacred duty of the citizen to obey all laws, just or
unjust, and the still more sacred duty of the lawmaker and the judge,
that all laws and judgments should be absolutely just and true and
faithful to all rights of the citizen. If, therefore, it be the first
duty of the citizen and soldier to obey all law, good or bad, what a
much greater duty is laid upon the lawmaker, the law enforcer, the
Judge, and, we might also say, the Commander-in-Chief, that all law
and all judgments be absolutely right, just and true, and in no way
destructive to the rights of the citizen or soldier who has to obey
these laws, good or bad! This was the grand lesson intended by Socrates
in the sacrifice of his life as a protest and indictment against bad
law and unjust judgment, and we may here, properly, apply this great
Socratic lesson, which has morally thundered down “the corridors of
time” for the past twenty-four centuries, to all the evil laws for
compulsory vaccination which now exist and which should be immediately
repealed and replaced by just and equitable rules for voluntary
vaccination only as proved by the many reasons already given.--“Every
law not based on wisdom is a menace to the State.” See page v.


VOICE OF THE COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF TO OUR SOLDIERS, “YOU HAVE COMMANDERS,
BUT YOU HAVE NO MASTERS.” RIGHTS AND DIGNITIES OF SOLDIERS ASSERTED.
MILITARY AND MEDICAL DESPOTISM CONDEMNED

At this point, Mr. President, I want to remind you of the rich American
thought you expressed in your address to the American soldiers on the
battle-field in France, at Chaumont, on Christmas Day, 1918. You were
reported to have there said:

    “... this is not a war in which the soldiers of the free
    nations have obeyed masters. You have commanders, but you have
    no masters. Your very commanders represent you in representing
    the nation of which you constitute so distinguished a part.”

Now, the true American thought in this quotation, as I take it, is
that, as American soldiers and citizens, they are free men and members
of a free state, with American rights and dignities that cannot be
invaded, and are not “slaves,” “chattels,” or “subjects” to any one,
and, therefore, are not to be treated by any form of military despotism
or arbitrary medical dictation, as slaves, hogs, or cattle might be
so treated. And as the hog or cattle doctor might properly force any
medicine down the throat of the helpless beast without being required
to say “by your leave” to his humble patient, or might perform on the
body of the helpless animal any operation that he or the owner might
decide upon, yet I think that neither of us would admit that any man
calling himself a human doctor could, with any decency, propriety,
or legality, follow this crude but necessary code of ethics of the
animal doctor on the human subject by attempting to perform any medical
service on the human body by any intimidation or force or without
full approval and consent of the patient. Yet what have we seen? We
have seen men, calling themselves doctors, claiming the right to
force dangerous medical operations on school children and soldiers
without their free will and consent, and with some form of barbarous
intimidation or coercion, as they might do with dangerous beasts. We
have seen loyal soldiers, conscientiously objecting to unnecessary
and dangerous operations on their bodies against their approval or
consent, who were tried by court-martial and condemned to imprisonment
at _hard labor for twenty-five years_! And this outrageous sentence was
inflicted for nothing more than for asserting one of the most obvious
and unalienable rights of every American--the right to the medical
sanctity of his own body, the right to medical freedom, choice, and
consent in any medical treatment of that body!

Is it not time, therefore, Mr. President, that this clear American
principle expressed in your address just quoted should now be applied
in this matter, and that this _Medical Hoggery_ of compulsory
vaccination should be abolished in our Army and Navy? And is it not
time also that the members of that “Divine” profession of Human
Healing, in all its schools and sects, should now take action at the
earliest possible day to purge their great profession from the deep
disgrace of this _Medical Hoggery_, which they have originated and too
long practiced, and which is involved in all forms of dictatorial and
compulsory medicine on the human subject?

Of course, in anything I say here I make no reflection on the
veterinary doctors whose work, in its own sphere, I regard just as
honorable as the work of any other doctors in their sphere.


COMPULSORY VACCINATION NOT NECESSARY AND NOT EFFECTIVE FOR THE HEALTH
OF ARMIES OR POPULATIONS. FAILURE OF VACCINATION IN U. S. ARMY
OFFICIALLY ADMITTED

There is another strong consideration which I think should move you,
Mr. President, toward abolishing this evil of compulsory vaccination
with “cruel and unusual” punishment, and that is: That this compulsion
and punishment is not really necessary for any military purpose or
efficiency, as is proved by several facts in the past and present
practice and experience of our own and other armies, for example:
_First_: In the Russian-Japanese war the Japanese adopted for almost
the first time the modern, effective system of general military
sanitation and hygiene, but used no typhoid vaccination, and yet the
army suffered very little from typhoid fever. _Second_: Per contra,
in the Gallipoli expedition in the recent war the English soldiers
were generally inoculated with typhoid vaccines, but at the same
time the most unsanitary conditions prevailed in camp and field,
and the result was a great loss from typhoid and other fevers among
the vaccinated. _Third_: In the U. S. Army in France in 1918, in
several camps where sanitation and hygiene were grossly neglected,
typhoid vaccination proved to be little or no protection, and it has
been officially admitted to be a great failure, as typhoid epidemics
prevailed extensively in said camps with a high death-rate among the
well vaccinated men. See official report on this subject from the
Chief Surgeon of the A. E. F. in U. S. Public Health Reports of March
28, 1919, entitled, “Typhoid Vaccination no Substitute for Sanitary
Precautions.” See also page 207 in the annexed Supplement. _Fourth_:
Vaccination is now voluntary in the English Army, and it is estimated
that from five to ten per cent. of the Army is unvaccinated. _Fifth_:
There is no court-martial or punishment for refusing vaccination in
the English Army, as is shown by a recent inquiry in the English
Parliament, reported as follows:

    “Official Parliamentary Debates, April 23, 1918, Column 833.

    “Mr. Chancellor asked the Under-Secretary for War, Mr.
    Macpherson:

    “_Question A._ Whether refusal of vaccination by any soldier
    is a military crime. _Answer A._ Refusal by a soldier to be
    vaccinated is not an offence punishable under the Army Act.

    “_Question B._ Whether any officer is authorized to inflict
    punishment of any kind for such refusal. _Answer B._ No officer
    is authorized to inflict punishment for such refusal.

    “_Question C._ Whether the fact of a man who joined when
    vaccination was compulsory, having assented reluctantly then,
    alters his legal position now that vaccination is no longer
    subject to legal compulsion in the Army. _Answer C._ Soldiers
    voluntarily enlisted who, at the time of their enlistment,
    agreed in their attestation papers to be vaccinated, cannot be
    punished under the Army Act for refusing to be vaccinated.”

Now, in these facts I think it is distinctly proved that
compulsory vaccination is neither necessary nor surely effective as a
protective remedy, but is of doubtful value as a preventive, and is not
necessary where efficient sanitation and hygiene are used, as is now
the practice in modern armies; and, hence, vaccination should not be
forced on any soldier or sailor under penalty of drastic punishments
for refusal, but should be left to the free and voluntary assent of
each man, as it now is in the English Army. Furthermore, it is believed
that, instead of forcing wholesale compulsory disease upon the Army,
with the vain idea of increasing health, equal effort and expense
devoted to true sanitation and hygiene would surely produce better
results, as emphatically proved by recent critical experience in our
own Army, as just cited. See also page 210.


MEDICAL AND OTHER AUTHORITIES ADMIT DANGERS OF VACCINATION AND CONDEMN
COMPULSION

Surely the example of the English Army, as above given, is a good
enough precedent and authority to justify abolishing all compulsion
and penalties and making all vaccination voluntary in our American
Army and Navy, but if any other authorities are required for this
reform, I might cite for a second example the advice from one of the
highest medical authorities of to-day, viz., Osler’s “Modern Medicine,”
new edition, 1913, Volume I, page 848, which admits the dangers of
vaccination and condemns compulsion in these words:

    “With the greatest care, however, certain risks are present
    and so it is unwise for the physician to force the operation
    upon those who are unwilling, or to give assurances of absolute
    harmlessness.”

I will now ask your attention to a third authority against
compulsion, which is of the highest significance and force, viz., the
great English Commission on Vaccination appointed by Queen Victoria
in 1889, which sat for about seven years, made a most exhaustive
examination of the subject, and rendered its voluminous reports in
1896. This Commission was composed of five of the leading doctors and
eight of the leading laymen of England, and their majority and minority
reports differed on the merits of vaccination, but both admitted its
dangers and both agreed in advising the repeal or modification of the
English compulsory law, which, however, did not apply to adults, but
only to infants under one year, which form the most susceptible part
of the population. After this recommendation a law was passed, now in
force, called the “conscientious clause,” whereby parents can exempt
their children from vaccination by filing a statement of conscientious
objection; and under this law vaccination has so greatly declined in
England that to-day it is estimated that over sixty per cent. of the
children born are unvaccinated, and yet, contrary to the contentions of
the vaccinators, smallpox has not increased, but has greatly declined,
corresponding to the decline in vaccination and to the increase in
general sanitation and hygiene, as England is now one of the most
sanitary countries in the world. This beneficial effect on public
health resulting from repealing compulsion and making vaccination
voluntary has been so positive that the English Minister of Health,
Hon. John Burns, made this significant public declaration in the House
of Commons on April 12, 1911, viz.: “Just in proportion as, in recent
years, exemptions [from vaccination] have gone up from four per cent.
to thirty per cent., so deaths from smallpox have declined.”

I will now add a fourth and last example in which I think you will
find a full justification for suppressing all compulsory vaccination
as both evil and unnecessary, and this is the advice of one of the
latest English books on “The Vaccination Question” by Dr. Millard,
London, 1914. Dr. Millard, although a strong pro-vaccinist, has been
for the past ten years the health officer of the unvaccinated city of
Leicester, which has a population of about 300,000, and for the last
thirty years has relied on sanitation and hygiene without vaccination
to protect and improve the public health, and this is the gist of what
Dr. Millard says of the success of this method:

    “The two crucial and outstanding facts which I wish to lay
    stress upon, are:

    “(_a_) The unexpected and remarkable experience of the town
    of Leicester, which for thirty years has abandoned infantile
    vaccination, yet has shown an enormous decline in smallpox
    mortality.

    “(_b_) The fact that, although infantile vaccination is falling
    more and more into disuse throughout the whole country, yet
    smallpox, contrary to all pro-vaccinist expectation and
    prophecy, continues to decline and has almost disappeared.

    ... “The striking facts that in Leicester, without infantile
    vaccination, the decline has been greater than in most places,
    and that throughout the country smallpox has continued to
    decrease in spite of the falling off in vaccination, should
    surely be sufficient grounds for legitimate doubt.

    ... “If it can be shown that ‘sanitation,’ thoroughly carried
    out, is alone sufficient for the effective control of smallpox
    in this country (as in Leicester), why inflict upon the
    community universal vaccination with all its inseparable
    drawbacks? Moreover, what justification can there be any longer
    for compulsion?

    “It cannot be denied that vaccination causes, in the aggregate,
    very considerable injury to health, most of it only temporary,
    but some permanent.... We must never forget that vaccination
    is an evil. Vaccinia is just as much a disease as smallpox,
    though a less serious one, and all diseases must be regarded as
    evil and to be avoided, if possible. There is not the slightest
    evidence that vaccination, apart from its effect in preventing
    smallpox, is of the least value or anything but detrimental
    to the human race.... During the last decade the deaths from
    vaccinia have several times outnumbered those from smallpox,
    whilst if we have regard to the amount of ill health caused by
    the two diseases (and putting aside for the moment the question
    of the alleged effect of vaccination in lessening smallpox) it
    looks as if vaccinia were becoming, so far as the community is
    concerned, the more serious disease of the two.”


DEATHS FROM VACCINATION GREATER THAN DEATHS FROM SMALLPOX. SHOCKING
DENIAL AND CONCEALMENT OF VACCINATION DEATHS BY OUR DEPARTMENTS OF
HEALTH AND VITAL STATISTICS

It will be seen from the last quotation that Dr. Millard is one of
those honest doctors who are not afraid to tell the truth about
vaccination, its great dangers and frequent fatalities, the evils and
barbarities of compulsion, the superior value of sanitation, and the
stinging fact that the inflicted disease, vaccinia, frequently causes
more deaths per year than the natural disease, smallpox! To confirm
these startling facts I will now quote a few figures, during the period
to which Dr. Millard refers, from the record of the Registrar General
of England which, as you know, is one of the highest statistical
authorities in the world.

Data from Reports of Registrar General of England showing deaths from
vaccination compared with deaths from smallpox:

                _Total Deaths_     _Total Deaths_
  _Year_         _from Smallpox_   _from Vaccination_

  1906               21               29
  1907               10               12
  1908               12               13

  Total Deaths from Smallpox for six years, 1905 to 1910        199
  Total Deaths from Vaccination for six years, 1905 to 1910      99
  Deaths from Smallpox in said period under 5 years old          26
  Deaths from Vaccination in said period under 5 years old       98

From these remarkable figures we will see that for the six years from
1905 to 1910, in England and Wales, the total deaths from vaccination
for all ages were about half the total deaths from smallpox, but that
in the same period the total deaths from vaccination, in the child
ages of five years and under, were nearly _four times_ the deaths from
smallpox in the same age group!

The report of the English Registrar General for the three years, 1911,
1912, and 1913, tell a similar story of vaccinal fatality, as follows:

  Total Deaths from Smallpox for all ages for
            three years, 1911 to 1913                               42
  Total Deaths from Vaccination for all ages in said three years    31
  Deaths from Smallpox in children under 5 years                     8
  Deaths from Vaccination in children of same age                   30

Here it will be noted that for the three years stated the total deaths
from vaccination are three-quarters of the total deaths from smallpox,
whereas the deaths from vaccination in children five years old and
under are over three times more than the deaths from smallpox in the
same age group! I have not examined the Reports later than 1913, having
confined myself to the decade to which Dr. Millard refers.

This awful record of fatal vaccinations thus speaks very clearly
for itself and forms a strong indictment of the whole barbarous and
dangerous system of compulsory vaccination, whether for child or adult,
and must condemn the evil practice in every rational mind.

It can be further proved that an equal or greater fatality from
vaccination, as compared with the English records, occurs in our own
country and in our own State of New York, but these fatalities are
denied and concealed in our death certificates and yearly reports by
our vaccinating doctors and health officials of city and State, as I
have repeatedly and publicly charged, and have challenged these doctors
and officials to deny or disprove this charge if they can, and I now
hereby renew this public challenge on this most serious point. See
challenge on page vi.

For further data on this point, see my pamphlets, “The Crime
Against the School Child,” “Open Your Eyes,” “Serious Warning,” and
“Vaccination and Lockjaw.”


GREAT EPIDEMICS OF DEADLY DISEASE, IN ANIMALS AND MANKIND, CAUSED BY
VACCINATION

Now, not only is vaccination very dangerous to health and life in many
individual cases and frequently causes more deaths every year than
smallpox, particularly in little children, as already clearly proved,
but another shocking fact is that vaccination has been proved to be the
cause of several great epidemics of deadly disease among mankind and
domestic animals, and has probably also been the cause of many other
serious epidemics whose origin has not yet been proved.

This shocking fact of vaccine epidemics in recent times is readily
proved by current medical works, by Government Reports, and by
notorious public facts occurring within the last few years, as I will
now show.

I may first refer on this point to one of the strongest pro-vaccination
works now published, viz., “Acute Contagious Diseases,” by Drs. Welch
and Schamberg, Lea Brothers & Co., Philadelphia, 1905. On page 65, in
this work, the following serious admission is made:

    “Several appalling epidemics of septicemia after vaccination
    are on record; one occurred in the United States, one in
    Germany, and one in France.”

These epidemics are shown to have caused many deaths in children and
adults, the fatal effect being very rapid, the deaths occurring in one
or a few days after vaccination.

On page 74, in the same work, this clear admission of an epidemic of
that most awful and fatal disease, lockjaw, caused by vaccination, is
made as follows:

    “In October, November, and December, 1901, there was a small
    epidemic of tetanus after vaccination in Camden, Philadelphia,
    and to a certain extent in near-by towns.

    “Camden had eleven cases, and Philadelphia even more than this
    number.”

It is to be here noted, however, that, bad as this last admission is,
the pro-vaccinators did not give the public the whole truth in this
last statement, but which I will now add here, viz., that in these
epidemics the deaths from the lockjaw infection in the vaccination
wounds exceeded by manifold the deaths from smallpox in the same
time and locality! Here is another great proof of the medical and
statistical truth to which I have repeatedly called attention, viz.,
that vaccination is frequently a much more dangerous and fatal disease
than natural smallpox, and, therefore, obviously, for this reason
alone, should not be forced on any person against free will and consent.


VACCINATION BOTH A THEORETICAL AND A PROVED CAUSE OF EPIDEMICS

In a previous letter to the Secretary of War, dated October 14, 1918,
and published in the _Washington Herald_ of November 20, 1918, I have
pointed out the dangerous nature of vaccination, particularly during
epidemics, and the hygienic importance of suspending all vaccination
during our recent epidemic of influenza and pneumonia, and the further
desirability of making all vaccination strictly free and voluntary. I
also then called attention to the probability that the repeated and
multiple vaccinations of millions of men, in this country and Europe,
with various septicemic infections for the last two years, may have had
some relation to this epidemic, which seems to have been more severe
among the vaccinated men in the military camps and hospitals than among
the rest of the population. And I would now like to repeat here some
of the important facts which I have stated in said letter as to both
the probable and the proved relation of vaccination to many deadly
epidemics.


GRAVE NATURE OF RECENT EPIDEMIC OF INFLUENZA AND PNEUMONIA, AND
POSSIBLE RELATION OF VACCINATION THERETO

From the rapidity, severity, and mortality of this disease, it would
seem not to be a true influenza, as heretofore known, and as its worst
cases are characterized by a rapid and fatal ending, with a few days’
sickness, in malignant or septic pneumonia, with abscesses in the
lungs, it seems more related to the very fatal “_Pneumonic Plague_”
which raged in Manchuria after the Japanese war. This suspicion is
strengthened by the fact that the chief germ found in the fatal
cases is the “streptococcus,” which is found in the worst forms of
“blood poisoning” or “septicemia,” and also in vaccination. Now,
the act of ordinary vaccination, as already proved, is, in itself,
an act of blood poisoning, pure and simple, and it is so classed in
medical and statistical works as a form of “septicemia,” and one
disease germ commonly found, with many others, in vaccine virus is the
streptococcus, which is the chief germ found in all bad pus infections
and abscess formations. Therefore, as the act of vaccination is simply
the impregnation of the body and blood with a pus infection identical
with “septicemia” or “pyæmia,” and as this infecting process has been
repeated at wholesale in the bodies of thousands and tens of thousands
of men closely massed in camps, should it be any wonder if an epidemic
of some sort of “septicemia” should crop out at some time under such
conditions?

In leading medical and statistical works, both influenza and pneumonia
and typhoid fever and vaccination are all classed as different forms of
“septicemia,” and while I do not, of course, know, and do not say, that
the recent epidemic of influenza and pneumonia was actually caused by
vaccination, yet I repeat that when the body and blood of millions of
men all over this country and Europe are deliberately impregnated with
various septic diseases, or septicemic infections, can any reasonable
person, whether doctor or layman, be surprised if such world-wide,
and million times repeated, acts of septicemic infection should be
ultimately proved to have some causative or conditional relation to the
recent world-wide epidemic of septicemic disease? Is it physically or
medically possible to go on sowing and spreading some known and unknown
septic diseases at wholesale, within human bodies, without reaping
some big harvest of deadly septic diseases as a necessary consequence?
In the words of Scripture, can we keep on “sowing” the “winds” of
infection without ultimately “reaping” the “whirlwind” of epidemics?

It has been suggested that this epidemic originated in the
multi-vaccinated and diseased or impoverished German army and has
traveled one-quarter round the earth from that focus of infection.

It has also been suggested that this epidemic originated from a
regiment of coolies or native Hindoo troops brought from India to
France who were infected with a severe disease like Pneumonic Plague,
and from them this disease spread to the other soldiers in camp and
field and thence over the world.

It has been further suggested that this disease should not be called a
true influenza or pneumonia at all, but is essentially a most virulent
form of general septicemia, and that it originated from the frightfully
infected soil of the battle-fields, which, in addition to the ordinary
deadly soil infections, contains virulent septicemic and cadaveric
infections from the great mass of buried and unburied bodies. And as
the soldiers in camp and field were already impregnated with several
septicemic infections in the multiple vaccinations of five or six kinds
to which they have been almost universally subjected, their systems
thus became “sensitized” or highly susceptible to further infection,
particularly to what was evidently a new and very severe type of soil
and cadaveric infection. This theory seems to fit the present known
facts and would explain the probable origin of this very severe type of
virulent septicemic plague, which shows itself in this mysterious and
deadly epidemic with its mortality of thirty to sixty per cent., which
we have been improperly regarding as ordinary influenza and pneumonia.

In my letter to the Secretary of War I proved that there was a distinct
medical and logical relation between influenza and vaccination, and
that many serious diseases, including smallpox and cowpox, commence
like influenza and may be mistaken for it,[2] but I do not need to go
into proof of that point here, but can now say that this point further
strengthens the suspicions stated that the recent epidemic of influenza
and septicemia or septic pneumonia may have had some causative relation
to the extensive wholesale and repeated vaccinations in the military
camps throughout the world, and would indicate, according to another
theory, that this vaccine infection had escaped from and overflowed its
usual bounds and was running wild as a world-wide epidemic infection;
and hence the positive and compelling reasons for checking this
overflowing infection by suspending all vaccination while this epidemic
and infecting condition exists, and making all vaccination voluntary
instead of compulsory as heretofore.


EPIDEMICS ACTUALLY CAUSED BY VACCINATION

That the hypothetical condition suggested in the preceding paragraph,
viz., that the wholesale and world-wide vaccine infection going on
for the past few years had possibly escaped from its usual bounds and
has been overflowing and running wild and thus causing epidemics in
mankind, or animals,--that this, I say, may be no mere hypothesis or
theory, but rather a hard fact, is proved by the frightful epidemics of
“foot and mouth disease” in the United States in 1902, 1908, and 1914,
some of which originated from two of the largest vaccine factories in
this country, one in Philadelphia and the other in Detroit, and were
widely distributed to cattle and mankind in several of our States. See
reports of U. S. Bureau of Animal Industry, 1902 and 1908. Also Year
Book of U. S. Department of Agriculture, 1914, page 20. See also page
96 in Supplement.

It is clearly shown in these reports that vaccine infection was the
direct cause of these epidemics in 1902 and 1908; but the cause of the
epidemic of 1914 and 1915 is not so clearly proven, although there
is a strong suspicion that it was caused by vaccine infection, like
the two others, and, as a matter of fact, it originated in the same
State--Michigan--where the epidemic of 1908 originated and where one of
the largest vaccine factories in the country is located. See page 98 in
Supplement.

These vaccine epidemics caused the destruction of hundreds of thousands
of cattle and other domestic animals in over a score of States, at a
loss of many millions of dollars to the Government and people of this
country. See page 102. Surely, Mr. President, any medical operation
so inherently dangerous and capable of inflicting such injury on
animals or man should not be forced on any person against conscientious
objection or without free will and consent and should not be required
by our enlightened democratic Government in our Army or Navy in any
form except purely voluntary, like all other medical remedies and
operations.

There is an attempt made in some of the official reports to deny that
these epidemics of “foot and mouth disease” caused by vaccination could
be or were transmitted to mankind in virus and were limited to domestic
animals, but this I believe to be a grave mistake, as I have the most
convincing evidence that this disease was so transmitted to many human
victims, both child and adult, with most awful effects in 1902 and
1908, and is frequently transmitted to mankind in vaccine virus. See
Supplement, page 111.


VACCINE FACTORIES A POSSIBLE AND PROVED SOURCE OF EPIDEMICS AND SHOULD
BE INVESTIGATED BY CONGRESS AND THE GOVERNMENT

This foot and mouth disease is a horrible eruptive fever, a kind of
“cowpox,” or something like a mongrel smallpox and diphtheria combined,
or also like a very bad chickenpox, with successive crops of vesicles,
blisters or blotches, something like cold sores, large and small,
breaking out all over the body, but chiefly on the hoofs, or hands and
feet, lips and nostrils, also inside the mouth and throat as is common
in smallpox. Sometimes these blotches become confluent and pustular and
continue for months, but, usually, the eruption ends in a few weeks
in recovery or death. In the worst cases, with internal eruptions and
pus infection, affecting vital nerve centers, the end comes in a few
days by the victim choking to death from paralysis of the heart and
breathing organs like what happens in infant paralysis, rabies and
lockjaw. For effects on cattle and mankind, see Figs. 7, 8, 9, 11, 12
and 13 in Supplement.

Now here we see that at least two and probably three great epidemics
of fatal disease have originated from vaccine factories and this
raises the serious question as to how far other epidemics, or even the
recent epidemic of influenza, and pneumonia, may have originated from
some vaccine factory or from some of their products extensively or
carelessly used. Surely the places where dangerous infectious diseases
are constantly propagated on a gigantic scale, and disseminated
therefrom into the bodies of millions of animals and mankind, should be
the very possible or probable source of epidemic disease. Obviously,
therefore, this entire subject of the present extensive _manufacture
and distribution of diseases_ or _disease cultures_ or _products_
and its relation to epidemics and public health should be thoroughly
investigated by Congress and the Government at an early date. To
show you what a gigantic and dangerous medical interest this vaccine
manufacture has become, it may be sufficient to state that there are
now about 100 concerns licensed by the U. S. Government to manufacture
vaccines and serums for _animal and human uses_. This is one of the
great medical interests supporting compulsory vaccination, which is a
grave medical malpractice, and should be abolished wherever it exists
and replaced by wholly voluntary vaccination as already shown.


EPIDEMICS AND HIGH DEATH RATES IN THE ARMY PROBABLY CAUSED BY WHOLESALE
AND REPEATED VACCINATIONS. DEATH RATE OF ARMY FROM DISEASE MUCH GREATER
THAN THAT OF CIVIL POPULATION

After careful study of this subject for years I firmly believe that,
with the excellent sanitary and hygienic conditions now used in our
Army, the dangerous system of disease inoculations, whereby the blood
of every man is impregnated with multiple and repeated vaccinations
of several diseases, such as smallpox, typhoid, paratyphoid, etc., is
a system, to say the least, that is neither necessary nor ultimately
useful for army health. And it is probable that this system produces
far more disease than it prevents. For example: For one death which
naturally occurs in the whole population from smallpox or typhoid
fever, ten to one hundred deaths occur from the far more frequent and
fatal diseases of tuberculosis, measles, pneumonia and meningitis. And
let us here ask, what is the use of having soldiers forced to submit
to a whole series of disease infections, if these infections, at best,
give immunity only for a little while from such diseases as smallpox
and typhoid and make the system more susceptible to the far worse
diseases of measles, pneumonia and meningitis, which actually seems to
be the possible effects of vaccination from the recurring epidemics of
these dangerous diseases in our heavily vaccinated camps?

As a matter of fact, my studies of deaths from vaccination for many
years past show that meningitis and pneumonia are some of the most
frequent complications; and these two diseases seem to have a certain
relation to vaccination and seem to be very fatal where vaccination
precedes them, and thus acts in what is called a “double” or “mixed
infection,” which is known to be very dangerous to health and life.
See Osler’s “Modern Medicine,” 1913, Vol. I, pages 32 and 33. See also
Osler’s “Principles and Practice of Medicine,” 8th edition, 1918, page
330, on the “Influence of Vaccination on Other Diseases.” See also
pages 135 and 139 in the Supplement.

Another most significant fact in this connection is the high death-rate
from disease in the Army, as compared with the civil population, which
I will now consider.

On page 18 in the Report of the Secretary of War for 1918 the death
rate of the Army in the United States from disease for the year ending
August 30, 1918, is given as 6.4; that is, about 6½ deaths for every
thousand men in the Army. The age-groups composing the Army are, of
course, on the general average, between twenty and forty, inclusive. In
the same Report it is admitted that the male civilian death-rate for
the same ages as in the Army (twenty to forty) was about 4.7, which
is a difference of 1.7 or nearly 2 per 1000 in favor of the civil
population or civilian males! This civil death-rate is thus, actually
and relatively, much lower than the army death-rate, and this fact is
very significant as positively indicating some serious cause at work to
lower greatly the vitality and resistance and increase the death-rate
in the army! Now what is that cause?

The figures 6.4 per thousand for the Army and 4.7 per thousand for the
civil population of the same ages is a great _actual_ difference, but,
of course, means, _relatively_, a much greater total difference against
the Army because the army population is made up of “hand-picked”
men selected for their nearly perfect health and physique and the
absence of all serious constitutional diseases such as tuberculosis
and others, which are all excluded from the army group. On the other
hand, the civil population of the same age group of twenty to forty
includes the healthy and diseased, and particularly those afflicted
with tuberculosis, which constitute a big fraction, and which disease
is most prevalent and fatal in this very age group of twenty to forty!
Yet this civil population, containing all the diseased at the most
fatal adult ages, has a much lower death-rate than the “hand-picked”
physically perfect army group! Now what is the cause of this much
higher death-rate in men of the most physically perfect class, and who
are now treated with the best sanitary and hygienic living conditions,
and where the death-rate should be the lowest? What is the cause of
this difference if it is not that extraordinary medical practice,
or malpractice, which deliberately impregnates the bodies of these
exceptionally healthy and “hand-picked” men with a whole series of the
worst type of disease infections known--that is, septicemic infections,
like the typhoids and the variolas, etc.? And should anyone wonder,
therefore, if the death lists of the army should show plainly in the
blood poisoning diseases of pneumonia, meningitis, etc., which are
known to follow frequently after vaccination? See pages 139 to 142
for a convincing proof of this point. Surely no person of ordinary
sense--not even an extreme vaccinator--can presume to seriously tell
us that impregnating the human body and blood with several disease
cultures and infections is a purely healthy practice _per se_. And
surely no person of ordinary sense can come to any other conclusion
except this: that such operations must be dangerous and unhealthy _per
se_.

In all this contention, Mr. President, there is, surely, something
which is very important, which should be most carefully considered
and fully investigated by the Commander-in-Chief, by Congress and the
Departments, at an early day.


WONDERFUL WORK OF THE WAR AND NAVY DEPARTMENTS GRATEFULLY ACKNOWLEDGED

Before closing I must here express to you, as Commander-in-Chief,
my full appreciation of the wonderful work done by the War and Navy
Departments and by the officers of the Army and Navy in raising,
encamping, training and equipping our great Army and Navy and putting
them into the fighting field so quickly and so potently, with the
result of immediately turning the tide of warfare against the brutal
enemy, for which majestic result these Departments, and the officers of
the Army and Navy, most fully deserve, as they undoubtedly have, the
unstinted thanks and congratulations of our whole citizenry, civil and
military, man and woman.

No army or navy in field, camp or ship has ever been taken better
care of in a general sanitary, hygienic and medical sense than our
Army and Navy in this gruelling war. The able and liberal way in
which the physical, moral, mental, religious and recreational needs
of the men have been covered by various bodies, military, medical,
civic, and religious, has been the wonder of all our citizens who
have visited our camps. And to this was undoubtedly due the cheerful
and high spirits, the wonderful morale and fighting power which
made themselves instantly felt on the battle-fields of Europe and
so quickly brought the barbarous enemy to his knees in the glorious
climax of Victory and Peace which we are now enjoying, and which we
all firmly hope and believe will soon be followed by a Permanent and
International Peace coextensive with the civilized world, for which
great end, Mr. President, you have been working so ably, energetically
and devotedly. And I feel sure that your master efforts with our own
people and with our victorious Allies will soon bring about that League
of Nations for the government of the world based on the eternal
principles of reciprocal right and justice and the basic principles of
American Institutions--Equality, Consent of the Governed, and Rational
Liberty--for all persons in their inherent natural rights.

I, therefore, regret that I have had any criticism to make on this
glorious record of our Army and Navy, but this criticism really
concerns only a part of the medical profession in the Army and Navy,
and one of its medical dogmas, and does not reflect on the rank and
file of the military and naval forces of our country, a majority of
which does not, I believe, approve this dangerous medical practice, or
malpractice, of compulsory vaccination which has been forced by medical
dogmatism on the Army and Navy, and which, I believe, clearly violates
fundamental American principles and also stultifies our proud claim
that this is a government of “Liberty and Justice for all.”


COMPULSORY VACCINATION CONDEMNED AS UN-AMERICAN

In compulsory vaccination there is obviously neither “liberty” nor
“justice” and it is utterly opposed to the fundamental American
principle of inherent human right to medical liberty and choice, and to
sanctity of body, and it therefore fits properly only with some code of
Prussianism--from which it has been in fact copied.

I would, therefore, now like to show by appeal to our great basic
American Documents of Rights and Liberties that all forms of medical
compulsion and dictation and compulsory vaccination are illegal and
unconstitutional and also violate all true civic and medical ethics.


THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE, OUR BASIC CHARTER OF AMERICAN RIGHTS,
CONDEMNS ALL VIOLATIONS OF INHERENT NATURAL RIGHTS

The Declaration of Independence is, I believe, the greatest ethical
and political document ever penned by human hand or human wisdom--the
greatest document of Human Rights and Liberties, Basic Ethics, Civic
Religion and Democratic Government ever written--and all expressed in
its one essential paragraph, as follows:

    “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are
    created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with
    certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty
    and the pursuit of Happiness. That to secure these rights,
    Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just
    powers from the consent of the governed,--That whenever any
    Form of Government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the
    Right of the People to alter or to abolish it.”

We have been accustomed to call this great document a “Declaration of
Independence,” but it should more properly be called a “Declaration
of Rights” because “Independence,” or self-government, is only one of
the several “unalienable” rights declared in this great charter. It
is in fact our great “Bill of Rights,” being our first Charter and
Declaration of those essential, natural, inherent and ineffaceable
rights of mankind, which all governments must respect, defend and
enforce, and which cannot be ignored or invaded by any authority,
organization or government whatever. It is indeed our American “Magna
Charta” of fundamental rights and our first or _Pre-Constitution_
preceding our formal Constitution, and, of course, equal to it as a
basis for all law and government, and particularly expressing what
may be termed our _Pre-Constitutional Rights_--that is, those rights
which always existed by “Natural” and “Divine” endowment before any
human laws, charters or constitutions were ever written; and it, of
course, antedates, and therefore takes precedence even over our State
and National laws and Constitutions, which, to be valid, must be
based on the _fundamental_ principles of _inherent human and natural
rights_ which are _naturally and divinely_ and equally conferred upon
all mankind. It must be remembered at this point that the official
title of this great document is “The Unanimous Declaration of the
Thirteen United States of America,” which shows that it is the official
statement or code of the foundation governing principles of the New
Nation issued by its first Congress and has, therefore, the full effect
of a “Constitution,” “Pre-Constitution” or “Bill of Rights.”


THE CODE AND BASIS OF AMERICANISM

This great primary Code of Rights, which is adapted for the just
and beneficent rule of mankind in all their relations, has not been
half well enough understood or appreciated by our American people
heretofore, and it has been usually looked upon as chiefly a political
document, whereas, it is essentially much more than that, being in
fact a great code of basic ethics and civic religion, in addition to a
code of democratic government, with a wide scope and character, which
fits it equally to individual, national, or international relations;
and this makes it truly our American Bible and Creed and our basis for
a great American and Universal “Religion” both ethical and political,
which can and should be now adopted by the “League of Nations” as
a standard code or basis for the moral and political government of
mankind the world over, and should be taught in all our schools as the
basis of Americanism.

It is time, therefore, that Americans clearly understood and
appreciated the full ethical, legal and political scope and sense of
this wonderful code of one paragraph, and it is time also that this
great and simple _Code of Essential Americanism_ was plainly emblazoned
on our public walls, spaces and monuments like the inscription
“Holiness to the Lord” displayed on the forefront of the high priests,
as directed in Exodus, Chapter 28, so that all our people can get fully
acquainted and inspired with the broad and simple principles of Right
and Justice in this sublime Code of Americanism.

This great paragraph of basic Americanism should, therefore, be
conspicuously posted on every public building, school, and church in
the land, over the Judge’s bench in every Court, over the rostrum
in every Legislature and over the desk of every public officer, and
particularly over the desk of every public doctor, Medical Board and
Board of Health in the land, which have been heretofore some of the
worst violators of this code of unalienable human rights in their
various barbarous practices of medical domination, dictation and
compulsion, and forced infliction of disease.

Now I do not intend, in this article, to show just how the Declaration
of Independence can be seriously considered as a clear and sure
basis for rational ethics and civic religion for the legal and moral
government of mankind, in all relations, having reserved that important
subject for full treatment in a separate article, but I do intend to
show here how the evil of compulsory vaccination and all other forms
of compulsory medicine are gross violations of the Declaration and its
principles of basic Americanism and inherent human rights so clearly
defined therein.


THE FIVE ARTICLES OF THE DECLARATION OF RIGHTS, JULY 4, 1776

    FIRST: All men are created equal.

    SECOND: All men are endowed by their Creator with certain
    unalienable rights, among which are life, liberty, and the
    pursuit of happiness.

    THIRD: Governments are instituted among men to secure these
    unalienable rights.

    FOURTH: Governments derive their just powers from the consent
    of the governed.

    FIFTH: Whenever any form of government becomes destructive
    of these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or to
    abolish it.

Let us now take up the first article of the Declaration--“_All men are
created equal_”--and see what it means, and what it does not mean.
It surely does not mean that all men are created equal in worldly
possessions or natural advantages, in physical strength, personal
beauty, moral sense or mental power, as it is notorious that mankind
differ unavoidably and universally in all these conditions. But it
clearly does mean that all men are created equal in a moral, legal and
governmental sense, equal as members of society or citizens of the
State, no matter how much they may differ in inherent or acquired
advantages. It means that one man shall count no more than any other
man before the law or in the State by reason of worldly possessions or
personal advantages, but that each man shall count alike and equal, no
matter how rich or poor, strong or weak, smart or dull, handsome or
plain he may be. It means also that the “Creator” has not arbitrarily
picked out any particular person, group, family, or race, as His
special favorites, to rule or lord it over any other person or mass
of persons; and, particularly, that the Creator has not specially
“ordained” any favorite person to rule over any part of mankind without
their selection and consent. It does mean that the Creator has no
“favorites,” but that all men are “equal” before Him, and, hence,
that barbarous and oppressive fallacy of “Divine-Right-Monarchism”
is emphatically repudiated in this first Article. It means that all
“one-man-rule” or “one-race-rule,” and all vile Germanism of the
“Gott-Mit-Uns” or “Germans-Over-All” type, is flatly condemned. But,
per contra, this Article does plainly mean that the Creator has
divinely ordained each and every human individual to be an equal
“sovereign” in his own right and that all government depends on the
selection and consent of these individual and equal sovereigns who are
“endowed” with the “divine right” of collectively forming their own
government and selecting their own rulers, instead of having a rule and
a ruler forced on them by alleged “divine” command, and without their
selection or consent. In other words, this Article obviously means,
pure and simple, “_government of the people, by the people, for the
people_.”

Now if each individual American is divinely ordained as an equalized
sovereign in his own right--and this is surely a grand distinction of
the American Institution and the American citizen--he obviously has
a sovereign right to his own body and all his natural possessions;
and the most sacred and essential of these rights and possessions is,
obviously, the right to his own physical body, the sanctity of his own
person, and the right to decide how it shall be treated or taken care
of in health or disease; and if he has not this sacred and sovereign
right to his own body he has practically no right at all and might
as well be wiped out and would be better dead. Therefore, if any
doctor or other person claims the right to possess the body of any
man, to experiment or operate upon it, to medicate, cut, inoculate, or
treat his body as he might see fit, without the free choice, consent
or approval of that man, it is obvious that the man is no longer a
sovereign or the owner of his own body, but is a mere “slave” or
domestic animal and that the doctor really owns his body and is his
“master” as much as if he were a pig or dog; so that, therefore, all
“equality” and “sovereignty” of the individual is destroyed by this
medical “hoggery” and we have not a “_government of the people, by
the people, for the people_,” but a government of the doctors, by
the doctors, for the doctors,--which in fact we now have to a very
dangerous extent. And, indeed, medical organization, compulsion,
dictation and domination have now got to such a stage that it is one of
the most dangerous powers in our body politic and must be curbed, as I
will show later on.

It therefore follows that all compulsory or dictatorial medicine is
an absolute violation of the first or basic principle of Americanism
as expressed in our great Declaration of Rights, and our first or
Pre-Constitution, and therefore must be abolished if we would be true
to basic human right and fundamental American principles.

We will now take up the second Article of the Declaration and study its
meaning. This Article, with a slight variation of the official words,
is as follows:

    “All men are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable
    rights, among which are life, liberty, and the pursuit of
    happiness.”

Now the great keynote-words in this clause, “_unalienable rights_,”
mean “inseparable rights,” rights which the citizen cannot be separated
from, rights which cannot be removed or taken away from the people or
denied or invaded by any government or power whatever, but which all
governments must respect and defend.

This second article from the Declaration of Rights is, I think, the
wisest, most important and significant statement in a political, legal
and moral sense that was ever written by human hand or human mind,
because it is the essence of the essential paragraph of the Declaration
and clearly expresses the basis of Democratic Government, Rational
Ethics, and Civic Religion, in one simple clause or sentence! This
basis is simply the inherent and “unalienable” rights of our fellow men
necessary for human life, liberty and happiness, which are naturally
or divinely conferred upon all men, equally, and cannot be ignored or
violated by individuals or governments. And it is obvious that the
honest and general recognition of these rights will at once establish
true justice and righteousness among men and nations, and the disregard
and violation of these rights is now, and ever has been, the cause of
all wrongdoing, war, and other evils between men and nations the world
over.

This simple and potent statement of basic human rights is therefore
equal in ethical and legal force to the bulk of the Decalogue itself
and to the Golden Rule of Humanity, Honesty and Justice in its three
best versions from the world’s greatest moral teachers, Confucius,
Plato and Christ; so that in this simple sentence from the essential
paragraph of our first great national document we have a code of
Democratic Government and of Human Ethics in one sentence, which, as
before suggested, should be taught in all our schools as the basis of
Americanism.


THE GOLDEN RULE AND THE DECLARATION OF RIGHTS COMPARED

It may be worth while to consider here for a moment what is perhaps
the best version of the “Golden Rule,” viz., the version of Plato in
Plato’s Laws, Book XI, Prof. Jowett’s translation, which is in these
words, dated about 360 B.C.:

    “Thou shalt not touch that which is mine, if thou canst help,
    or remove the least thing which belongs to me without my
    consent: and may I, being of sound mind, do to others as I
    would that they should do to me.”

This is surely a most righteous ethical code, clear, broad
and simple, and in moral and logical effect it is nearer like our
American Declaration of Rights than any other formula, particularly as
regards the recognition of the sacred personal rights of the individual
which is equivalent to the principle of “unalienable rights” in the
Declaration. The phrase, “Thou shalt not touch that which is mine or
remove the least thing which belongs to me without my consent,” is
certainly a most righteous rule of human honesty, sanctity, justice
and security which surely condemns everything like compulsory medicine
which touches and violates the body with inflicted disease, without
consent of the patient, and removes and destroys the most sacred
possession of the individual, viz., bodily sanctity, health and life.


UNALIENABLE RIGHTS ANALYZED AND DEFINED

It will be noted that the significant words of the second article of
the Declaration state that “all men” are endowed by their Creator with
_“certain” “unalienable rights,” among which are “life,” “liberty”
and the “pursuit of happiness.”_ By the word “certain” is, therefore,
clearly meant _various_, _many_ or _several_ rights, most of which are
left unspecified or not categorically stated except where it refers
to the chief or general rights of “life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness.” And it is obvious that by these expressions are clearly
meant all essential natural or “unalienable” rights which are necessary
to life, safety, liberty and happiness of the individual and which do
not interfere with, invade or endanger the life, liberty or happiness
of any other individual. The right to “life” of course stands first,
and is stated first, because without life we have nothing; and the
right to “liberty” is stated second, because without reasonable liberty
life itself would be useless, and without ample liberty to pursue our
ideas of happiness in our own ways, without infringing on the liberty
or happiness of others, the right to nominal liberty might itself be
useless and meaningless.

Let me now remind you, Mr. President, at this point, that all the
reform we ask for in this whole matter is the very important and
essential right of Medical Freedom, viz., the free right of every
person to accept or reject any medical operation whatever as the
citizen or patient sees fit, which is obviously an “unalienable right,”
and, as I will soon show, is as clearly covered in the Constitution
by direct implication as the right to religious freedom is covered by
specific guarantee. And of the two it is obvious that the right to
medical freedom is even more important than the right to religious
freedom, and that medical compulsion is to-day a far more dangerous
evil than religious compulsion ever was.

Medical compulsion is therefore not only immoral, illegal and
unconstitutional, but is also contrary to all true medical ethics,
which call for the absolute medical freedom and right of the patient to
decide what operation is or is not to be performed on his own body and
blood; and, if any doctor, or any government behind the doctor, has any
sovereign right whatever to force any medication or operation on any
patient, however humble, against his will, consent or desire, will some
one please tell us where the doctor, or the government, got this right
morally, medically or legally?


ALL POWER COMES FROM THE PEOPLE TO THE GOVERNMENT--NOT VICE VERSA

Every true American and Democrat knows, that according to our immortal
Declaration of Rights and our great Constitution our Government has
no rights or powers whatever except what the People have given to it
and that the source of all power is in the People and comes _from the
People to the Government_, and not vice versa, as in the Monarchic
systems which we have been fighting in the Great War. Under our
democratic system, government does not give any rights to the people,
as in monarchic systems, but the people are endowed originally and
inherently with all necessary or unalienable rights for life, liberty
and happiness, and their government exists simply or chiefly for the
purpose of protecting and enforcing these rights, not for granting or
denying rights which exist unalienably in the people themselves.

It will therefore be found that our wonderful Constitution, as well as
the Declaration, covers these fundamental points most distinctly as
to inherent, unalienable rights _retained by_ and _dwelling_ in the
people, where it states in Articles IX and X as follows:

    “The enumeration in the constitution of certain rights, shall
    not be construed to deny or disparage others _retained by the
    people_.”

    “The powers not delegated to the United States by the
    Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are
    _reserved_ to the States respectively, or _to the people_.”

Here we plainly see that the Constitution, as well as the
Declaration which preceded it, show that the People have a whole series
of “certain” “unalienable” “reserved” and “retained” rights, and that
these several rights, both specified and unspecified, are divinely
conferred and naturally inherent and cannot be invaded or taken away
by any government, but must be respected, defended and enforced by
all governments, and that governments exist for the chief purpose of
defending and enforcing these rights.

Now we might ask just here: Where and when have the People ever given
up their most sacred, obvious and essential right to their choice of
medical treatment and to the freedom and sanctity of their own bodies
and abandoned their bodies to the doctors to seize when they see fit to
inject with disease as in vaccination, to experiment on as they might
wish or to operate or medicate as they might choose, without any regard
to the free will, consent or desire of the patient?

As government therefore derives its “just powers” only from the
“consent of the governed,” so it is obvious that doctors can derive
their “just powers” to operate only from the _consent of the patient_;
and surely the unanswerable question in the preceding paragraph shows
clearly the utter barbarity and illegality of all medical compulsion
not only in a basic moral, constitutional and legal sense but also from
the basis of true medical ethics, which surely no true medical doctor
can attempt to deny for one moment.


MEDICAL FREEDOM AN UNALIENABLE RIGHT

In conclusion, it therefore follows that the right to Medical Freedom
is the clearest and most essential of the “unalienable” “retained” and
“reserved” rights possessed by the People under the Declaration and
the Constitution; and as these rights cannot be legally invaded or
denied by any Government, it follows, therefore, that all compulsory
vaccination is clearly un-American, illegal, unconstitutional, and
medically barbarous and unworthy of a place on any American, military,
medical, or legislative Code, and should be absolutely abolished as fit
only for some Code of Prussianism--from which, as before said, it has
been, in fact, copied.


COMPULSORY VACCINATION CONDEMNED BY OUR COURTS AS UNCONSTITUTIONAL

In illustration of the principles stated in preceding paragraphs, I
might here cite a few decisions from our higher courts showing the
outrageous illegal and unconstitutional nature of all forcible or
compulsory vaccination.

Judge Bartlett, of the New York Supreme Court, in the case of Walters
in 1894, decided that:

    “To vaccinate a person against his will, without legal
    authority so to do, would be an assault.”

Judge Gaynor, of the same Court, in the case of Smith against Health
Commissioner Emery of Brooklyn in 1894, gave the following important
decision which was afterwards fully sustained by the New York Court of
Appeals:

    “If the Commissioner [of Health] had the power to imprison an
    individual for refusing to submit to vaccination, I see no
    reason why he should not also imprison one for refusing to
    swallow a dose. But the Legislature has conferred no such power
    upon him, if, indeed, it has the power to do the like.... If
    the Legislature desired to make vaccination compulsory it would
    have so enacted. Whether it be within its power to do so, and
    if so, by what means it may enforce such an enactment, are not
    for discussion here.”

Judge Woodward, of the New York Appellate Court, in the Viemeister case
in 1903, declared that:

    “It may be conceded that the Legislature has no constitutional
    right to compel any person to submit to vaccination.”

The Supreme Court of the State of Massachusetts, in the case of
Jacobson in 1904, said:

    “If a person should deem it important that vaccination should
    not be performed in his case and the authorities should
    think otherwise, _it is not in their power to vaccinate him
    by force_, and the worst that could happen to him under the
    statute would be the payment of the penalty of five dollars.”

Judge Fitts, of the Supreme Court in Columbia County, New York, in the
case of Bollinger in February, 1909, charged the jury as follows:

    “I charge you, gentlemen of the jury, that the courts of this
    State in construing the authority and power so conferred upon
    local health officers who are the executive members of the
    board or the local boards, have held that there is no warrant
    or authority in law for the compulsory vaccination of any
    individual.”

At the second trial of this case in February, 1910, Judge LeBœuf
charged the jury in these words:

    “Now, I have charged you that this assault which is claimed to
    have existed here, due to the forcible vaccination, if it was
    a forcible vaccination, that is, if it was against this man’s
    will, is one which you must consider. And the reason of that is
    this: This man, in the eyes of the law, just as you and I and
    all of us in this court-room, has the right to be let alone.
    We all have the right to the freedom of our persons and that
    freedom of our persons may not be unlawfully invaded. That is a
    great right. It is one of the most important rights we have.”


THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES ON THE PREËMINENT RIGHTS OF THE
INDIVIDUAL

In conclusion on this most vital point, let me call your special
attention, Mr. President, to a most significant and important decision
of the U. S. Supreme Court in the vaccination case of Jacobson _v._
Massachusetts, rendered in 1905, on appeal from the Supreme Court of
Massachusetts. In this long and interesting decision, one of its most
clear and conclusive paragraphs emphatically declares the preëminent
rights of the individual in certain spheres, as follows:

    “There is, of course, a sphere within which the individual may
    assert the supremacy of his own will and rightfully dispute
    the authority of any human government, especially of any free
    government existing under a written constitution, to interfere
    with the exercise of that will.”

Now, what is this “sphere” within which this highest court
in our land tells us so clearly and emphatically that “_the individual
may assert the supremacy of his own will and rightfully dispute the
authority of any human government, especially of any free government,
existing under a written constitution, to interfere with the exercise
of that will_”?

The context both before and after this paragraph shows clearly that
this “sphere” of individual right and freedom exists wherever any
unalienable or inherent natural right secured by our constitution is
invaded or violated, or where any act or practice forced upon the
individual is potentially or actually dangerous to the health or life
of that individual, such as I have shown every act of vaccination to
be, in its very nature being an act of septicemic infection or blood
poisoning pure and simple, which sometimes causes wide-spread epidemics
and frequently causes serious injuries and many deaths, even more
deaths than smallpox itself, as has been demonstrated beyond question.

Surely, therefore, there is no individual or personal right more
inherent and natural and more sacred and obvious or more surely
guaranteed in Declaration and Constitution than the right to medical
freedom of the body, the right to health and life and the right of
the individual to select and decide freely for himself the medical
treatment of his own body, and the right to guard it against any
medical treatment or operation which in his own judgment and conscience
may be unnecessary or undesirable or may involve great risk or
suffering to himself or may seriously endanger his health or life.
This right is, I think, so obvious, so fundamental and necessary and
so unquestionable under the letter and spirit of our basic laws and
constitution, and by the decisions of our courts as well as by all
common sense, logic and ethics, that I do not think another word of
argument is necessary to establish this right in the conscientious
conviction of every rational mind.


DECISION OF U. S. SUPREME COURT FURTHER ANALYZED

In further consideration of the meaning and significance of this
important decision of the U. S. Supreme Court it may be now explained
that the law of Massachusetts here considered was a Statute passed by
the Legislature requiring the vaccination of all persons, child or
adult, under penalty of fine of $5 for refusing vaccination. This law
made an exception for children or minors in delicate health or such
physical condition as would be injured by vaccination, but made no such
exception for adults like the defendant Jacobson.

The Supreme Court of the State of Massachusetts in its decision, from
which this appeal was taken, had already decided, as I have shown,
that the State could not enforce actual compulsory vaccination upon any
person, but could only enforce the fine of $5 if vaccination was not
voluntarily adopted.

The U. S. Supreme Court concluded its decision in these words:

    “We now decide only that the statute covers the present case,
    and that nothing clearly appears that would justify this Court
    in holding it to be unconstitutional and inoperative in its
    application to the plaintiff in error.”

From this conclusion Justices Brewer and Peckham dissented, thus
evidently holding that the law of Massachusetts, which inflicts a
fine of $5 for refusing vaccination, was unconstitutional, whereas
the majority of the Court seem to hold that this State law, which can
enforce the fine but cannot compel the vaccination, was legal and
constitutional, but that nevertheless this fine could not be enforced
against any persons who could show that vaccination was dangerous to
their health and life, and that the Courts would interfere to prevent
its enforcement in all such cases and thus protect the constitutional
rights of the individual within that “sphere” of preëminent individual
right as already quoted.

Now it seems that the defendant Jacobson did not properly plead that
vaccination was dangerous to health and life, in his own case, or offer
to prove this, in his own case, and hence the decision was technically
given against him, but really, in principle, for him; which decision,
as we have shown, was rendered by a divided Court with two judges
dissenting who evidently held that compulsory vaccination by fine, as
called for in the law of Massachusetts, was unconstitutional.

We therefore believe that this decision, when properly applied, will
invalidate all forms of coercive vaccination, whether by inflicted
fine, or by denial of some civic right, such as public education,
whenever the prosecuted case is properly tried on the correct legal
pleas and issues and carried up through our highest Courts on the
principles laid down in this great decision and outlined in this
analysis.


UNALIENABLE RIGHTS OF THE INDIVIDUAL _VERSUS_ RIGHTS OF MAJORITIES.
FALSE IDEA OF THE SUPREMACY OF MAJORITIES SCORED

We often hear it stated that this is a government essentially of
majorities and that any majority can legally and properly force its
opinion or will upon any minority, no matter how objectionable to the
minority this law or will of the majority might be; and that it is the
clear right of the majority thus to oppress itself upon the minority
and the loyal duty of the minority to yield to this oppression, however
odious.

This rank idea of the supremacy of majorities is, I believe, a great
legal and moral and cowardly mistake and a gross misconception of
our Democratic American Government, because it entirely loses sight
of the great basic principle of _inherent_ and _unalienable human
rights_ which seems to have been first, or best, expressed in our
immortal Declaration of Rights. Therefore, under this basic principle
of “unalienable” right, no majorities, however powerful, can legally
or morally invade or set aside any of the “unalienable” or inseparable
rights of the People, as this is obviously the clear significance and
meaning of the terms “unalienable rights,” as I have already shown.
Hence this fundamental American principle of “unalienable rights” calls
in trumpet tones from the lines of the Declaration and Constitution and
gives this warning to all majorities, however powerful: “Thus far shalt
thou go but no farther, and here must thy power be stayed”--that is,
stayed at the approach to every sacred inherent and unalienable right
of the individual necessary to the life, liberty, health and happiness
of the individual.

We have often heard the phrase quoted, “This is a government of laws
and not of men,” which is only another way of stating what I am here
contending for, viz., that this Government of Americanism is not based
essentially on mere numbers or majorities of “men,” but chiefly on
naturally or divinely ordained _principles_ or “laws” of eternal human
right and justice, and, more particularly and essentially, on the great
basic American law or principle of “Unalienable Rights” of the People,
which is the great American “Sanctuary” of Liberty and Right that no
majority or minority can invade or profane.

Majorities can, of course, properly prevail over minorities in
all matters that are purely selective or elective or which can be
determined only by preponderating vote, but cannot prevail over any
defined or established inherent, unalienable or constitutional right of
the individual, and it has often been well said that Constitutions are
made especially to protect minorities, and not majorities, who already
have the preponderant political and legislative power in their hands
and do not need such protection.


MEDICAL FREEDOM AND ALIMENTARY FREEDOM ARE EQUALLY UNALIENABLE RIGHTS
OF THE PEOPLE AND NECESSARY FOR HUMAN LIFE, LIBERTY AND HAPPINESS

We have already seen how compulsory medicine is a gross violation of
the American principle of Unalienable Rights and need say nothing
further on that point here; but, as the exposure and condemnation of
one evil may show us the way to suppress another and similar evil,
so it may be excusable for us to digress here for a moment from our
main subject and call attention to the fact that the same moral, legal
and logical principles against Compulsory Medicine apply equally
to that latest dangerous invasion of the unalienable rights of the
people involved in the extraordinary scheme of National Prohibition or
Compulsory Abstinence in certain foods and drinks recently forced upon
the people by what is alleged to be a majority of the voters of this
country. Now, I do not believe that any majority of our voters have
ever approved either compulsory medicine or compulsory abstinence, but,
on the contrary, that these errors have been forced upon the people by
audacious, well organized and arrogant minorities who have temporarily
gotten control of political and legislative power and have deceived the
public mind with the alleged necessity, utility and righteousness of
these oppressive errors. But even if it can be shown that a majority
of our voters approve either of these errors, such alleged majorities
would be morally and legally unjustified in overriding any inherent
right of the people under our basic American doctrine and law of
Unalienable Rights.

I intend to treat, in a separate article, this important subject of
Alimentary Freedom, in certain fermented foods and drinks, as an
unalienable right of the people, established by world-wide and age-long
usage and by the highest civic, moral, legal and religious sanctions,
and need give no further attention to that special subject here.[3]


MEDICAL DESPOTISM WORSE THAN RELIGIOUS DESPOTISM. THE OLD RELIGIOUS
HERESY, “LET US SIN THAT GRACE MAY ABOUND,” COMPARED WITH THE MODERN
VACCINATION FANATICISM, “LET US FORCE AND SPREAD DISEASE UPON THE
PEOPLE SO THAT HEALTH MAY ABOUND!”

In the past centuries, before our great American Institutions of
Civil and Religious Liberty were established, it was the Doctors of
Divinity who were wholly responsible for inventing and maintaining that
great evil of Compulsory Religion, where one type of religion or one
conception of Deity was forced on the whole population under penalty of
torture, disfigurement, mutilation, or death; and these misguided men
seem to have actually had the absurd and diabolical idea--incredible to
us to-day--that by this mutilation and murder they could increase the
sum total of morality in the whole community!

In a similar way, our modern doctors of medicine and our medical
societies are wholly responsible for inventing and enforcing the
horrible medical scheme of compulsory disease, and with a similar logic
that, by thus forcing these vaccine operations and diseases on the
whole population, they can greatly increase the sum total of health in
the whole community!

This dogma of compulsory disease is, of course, just as false and evil
as the dogma of compulsory religion; but, of the two evils, compulsory
disease is far more dangerous to human right and safety, health and
life, and it would probably not be difficult to prove that where
one person was mutilated or murdered by compulsory religion in the
barbarous past, ten are now injured or killed by the modern medical
barbarism of compulsory disease.

There was an old sect of heretics about the time of the Reformation
which seemed to have a poor idea of the value of personal virtue and
good works in salvation as compared with mere dogma, “grace,” and
“faith,” and whose motto seemed to be: “The more sin, the more grace,”
or “Let us sin that grace may abound.” Now, this seems to be very
similar to the doctrine of the coercive vaccinators of to-day, which
appears to be simply and literally this: “The more disease we inflict,
the more health we create,” or “Let us inflict and spread disease
widely upon the people so that health may correspondingly abound.”

A striking example of the evil effects of this dangerous vaccine
doctrine in recent times is found in the case of Japan, whose awful
record in vaccination and smallpox and in epidemic disease transmitted
by vaccine virus is exposed in the next paragraphs.


AWFUL RECORD OF JAPAN IN VACCINATION AND SMALLPOX AND IN EPIDEMIC
DISEASE CAUSED BY VACCINE VIRUS, AS GIVEN IN U. S. GOVERNMENT REPORTS

Japan has been perhaps the most extensively vaccinated country in
recent times, with most rigid compulsory laws, copied from Germany,
which require re-vaccination at different periods of infant and adult
life. Now vaccination, as I have already shown, is simply one of
the varied forms of smallpox, being an artificially propagated or
cultivated form of the disease involving human smallpox and cowpox
combined, and is often more dangerous and deadly than the natural
disease. This being the fact, what therefore should we expect to
result from the dangerous practice of impregnating the blood of a
whole population with repeated inoculations of the virus of human
smallpox and cow disease? Should we logically expect anything else but
that epidemics of smallpox and cow disease should break out in due
time in such a generally vaccinated and infected population, and that
vaccine or cow disease should be extended to other populations wherever
the virus made from human and cow diseases should be carried and used?

This logical expectation is what seems to have actually happened in the
case of much-vaccinated Japan, and instead of being made immune from
smallpox epidemics by general vaccination and re-vaccination--which is
one of the positive claims made by vaccinators--Japan, on the contrary,
seems to have suffered from the worst epidemics of smallpox known in
modern times, not only worse than in poorly vaccinated countries like
England and the United States, but worse than experienced in old times
before the days of vaccination!

This conclusion seems to be fully proved from the U. S. Public Health
Reports for September 2, 1910, which give this frightful record of
smallpox epidemics in Japan for several years past. The population of
Japan at that time, 1910, was about 48 millions, and the high waves
in the epidemics in the preceding ten years were as follows: In 1898
there were 149,012 smallpox cases with 40,971 deaths, mortality 27½ per
cent.; in 1905 there were 10,704 cases with 3,388 deaths, mortality
31½ per cent., and in 1908 there were 18,075 cases with 5,835 deaths,
mortality 32½ per cent.

These figures, considering the vaccinal conditions existing in Japan,
under most rigid compulsory laws, are surely terribly significant, to
say the least, and fully shatter the fallacious vaccine doctrine that
vaccination is the only effective remedy against smallpox and that
it always lowers the mortality in epidemics! Per contra, here we see
from these official U. S. Health Reports that in this much-vaccinated
population there was not only a series of severe epidemics with a very
high mortality, but a constantly ascending mortality from 27½ per cent.
in 1898 to 31½ per cent. in 1905 and 32½ per cent. in 1908! Whereas
the usual mortality given by good authorities in old times before
the days of vaccination was only 15 to 20 per cent.! See “History of
Smallpox” by Dr. James Moore, Jenner’s chief assistant, London, 1815,
page 243.

Now I believe that there is no country in modern times, whether
vaccinated or unvaccinated, which has shown worse epidemics of smallpox
than much-vaccinated Japan, as above shown from official data, whereas
the epidemics within the same period in the poorly vaccinated countries
of England and the United States have been small in comparison.
Surely, therefore, our “Yankees of the Orient” seem to have copied
some of our antique medical barbarisms even more fully than they have
copied our real modern improvements. And, surely, poorly vaccinated
England is much better off with less vaccination and more sanitation
when its Minister of Health, Hon. John Burns, can publicly declare in
Parliament on April 12, 1911, that, “Just in proportion as, in recent
years, exemptions from vaccination have gone up from 4 per cent. to 30
per cent., so deaths from smallpox have declined.” This also is the
experience of Leicester, the sanitary English city, unvaccinated for
the past 30 years, as previously shown at page 22; and such, I believe,
will be the result wherever that irrational system of inflicting
disease to produce health is abandoned and the rational system of
sanitation and hygiene is adopted in its place.


JAPANESE VIRUS CAUSES EPIDEMICS OF CATTLE PLAGUE IN MANKIND AND ANIMALS

Not only, therefore, has general compulsory vaccination failed to
protect Japan from some of the worst smallpox epidemics known in modern
or olden times, as just shown, but, what is perhaps still more damning,
it is proved by U. S. Government Reports, quoted on pages 95 and 99,
that Japanese vaccination was the source of the deadly epidemics of
Cattle Plague, known as “Foot and Mouth Disease,” which afflicted
both animals and mankind in the United States in 1902 and 1908, this
dangerous infection being imported in vaccine virus from Japan and
used by two of the largest makers of virus in the United States. See
Year Book, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, 1914, page 21. See also page
99 in Supplement. These epidemics raged in several of our States, as
previously shown, and caused the slaughter of hundreds of thousands of
animals, an unknown amount of human mortality, and a loss of millions
of dollars to the Government and people of this country. Surely such
awful results from Japanese vaccination are a shocking mockery and a
stinging rebuke to all vaccination as an alleged “health” remedy and
call loudly for the abolishment of all compulsory vaccination as a most
dangerous public evil and a flagrant violation of vital human rights to
Medical Freedom, Sanity and Safety.


MEDICAL FREEDOM NECESSARY FOR MEDICAL PROGRESS, MEDICAL TRUTH AND HUMAN
SAFETY

As we now enjoy the great Democratic Institution of a Free Church in a
Free State, with all church control of government and all compulsory or
forced religion prohibited, so, in the near future, we must bring about
an equally important reform for human welfare in preventing all medical
control of our departments of government, in securing true medical
freedom and prohibiting all compulsory medicine as effectually as all
compulsory religion and church control of government is now prohibited.
And as full freedom for all religious sects, in religious matters,
has surely brought about an undoubted advance in religious progress
and in true religion and morality throughout the world, so it is sure
that full medical freedom will bring about a similar increase in true
medical progress and efficiency throughout the world.

Now in this most important reform of Medical Freedom I want to say at
this point that I hold no brief for any school of medicine or religion,
but what I contend for, as an American citizen, is something broader,
more inclusive, more American, and more important for public right,
health and safety than any one religious or medical doctrine, and
that is a full Medical Freedom for all the people to adopt any honest
or sincere doctrine or system of medicine which they may prefer,
and a free public field for the exercise of this doctrine or system
without any harassment or oppression from any other system of medicine
which may falsely and foolishly think itself specially ordained to
control the whole field of medicine. And just as we now enjoy a full
constitutional guarantee for Religious Freedom, which prevents any one
sect from infringing on the conscientious liberty of another, so we
must have a full Medical Freedom with an equal guarantee which will
give all honest or reasonable medical doctrines free scope and prevent
any medical doctrine or practice whatever from being forced on any
person against free will and consent, and which will recognize the
full right of the individual to adopt any preferred system of medical
treatment, whether with or without prayer and faith, with or without
drugs and medicines, or with or without vaccines or serums.

This broad medical freedom for all systems of medicine is absolutely
necessary for true medical progress itself, for only by testing
these different medical theories and practices side by side freely
in every-day experience and on a wide scale can the real truth and
virtue of any particular doctrine or practice be determined. A great
modern doctor uttered a most important truth on this head when he said
that “He is the best doctor who knows the uselessness and dangers of
the greatest number of remedies.” And the best way of finding out the
uselessness, danger or virtue of any remedies is to try them carefully
and freely side by side. And this free use and disuse of alleged
remedies side by side in contrast or competition will ultimately sift
out and condemn whatever is really evil or useless more effectually
and justly than any drastic compulsion or dogmatic suppression could
possibly do, thus making the best and surest contribution to true
medical progress, safety and efficiency.

On the same principle, if all compulsory vaccination is abolished and
each person left free to adopt or refuse vaccination, as he sees
fit--which is his positive legal right--a true test of the virtue and
safety or uselessness and danger of general vaccination will soon be
arrived at. And if it can be shown in such a large and free test that
the unvaccinated part of the population or the unvaccinated part of
the Army and Navy is no more liable, on the average, to catch smallpox
or typhoid fever than the vaccinated part, and is entirely free from
the grave dangers of vaccination itself, surely a great lesson in
medical sanity and progress will be learned. As a matter of fact, this
test has already proved in the case of the U. S. Army in France that
typhoid vaccination is useless as a preventive where sanitation is
grossly neglected. See pages 207 and 210. It has also proved in the
case of poorly vaccinated but sanitary England and particularly in the
unvaccinated and very sanitary City of Leicester, as compared with much
vaccinated Japan, Germany and Berlin, that good sanitation, isolation
and hygiene without vaccination give the best result in reducing and
preventing smallpox in the population and also in greatly reducing the
general death-rate and infant death-rate as compared to the same rates
in the heavily vaccinated communities named. On this point see one of
the latest medical works on this subject by a pro-vaccinator, “The
Vaccination Question,” by Dr. Millard, London, 1914.

Now, as medical freedom is absolutely necessary for true medical
progress, as just shown, so it is equally necessary for medical truth
and human safety. At this point I am sure it will be readily admitted
that even if an alleged medical remedy were absolutely effective and
sure, and absolutely safe, harmless, and beneficial, it would not
be ethically or legally proper to force it upon any patient against
free will and consent. But when an alleged remedy is very uncertain,
doubtful or irregular in its action, or very dangerous and frequently
fatal in its effects, such as vaccination has been proved to be, surely
the forcing of such a doubtful and dangerous remedy on any person under
pretense of its necessity and harmlessness is not only unethical but it
is a question whether this is not also a gross act of sheer criminal
malpractice.

When, therefore, any doctor forces such a doubtful and dangerous remedy
as vaccination upon any patient under the pretense that it is necessary
for public health and is perfectly safe and harmless, the doctor is
obviously under a most vicious moral and professional bias and interest
to conceal, deny or falsify any unfavorable facts that may arise in
the case, such as the failure of the alleged remedy or its injurious
or possibly fatal effects on the patient, which bias and falsification
is of course the greatest enemy to medical truth, safety and progress.
And it is obvious that this concealment and denial of the injurious or
fatal effects of medical remedies forced on the people by doctors is
not only against true public policy but is a gross violation of true
medical ethics and a crime upon the people in the falsification of this
most important point of vital statistics, viz., the nature and effects
of alleged medical remedies on human health and life, which facts
should surely be fully disclosed to the public, not only for the sake
of medical truth and progress but for the greater reason of human right
and safety.

And it must be here remembered that our vaccinating doctors and our
dominant vaccinating medical sect have now such full control of our
death certificates, our departments of health and vital statistics
that they can deny or conceal the effect of their medical operations
with the greatest ease and safety, which is obviously a very sinister
fact, against the most vital interest of the people, in public health,
medical truth and safety and accurate vital statistics, and this evil
surely calls for an immediate reform.

On the other hand, where medical practice is perfectly free and
voluntary, the practitioner has no bias or interest whatever to make
false claims of alleged efficiency or to conceal facts as to failures,
dangers and fatalities, so that it is therefore obvious that for
both medical truth and progress and human right and safety, Medical
Freedom is an absolute public necessity, and that, per contra, Medical
Compulsion is a most dangerous public evil which must be abolished as
completely as the less dangerous evil of religious compulsion has been
abolished.


MEDICAL DOMINATION AND COMPULSION MOST DANGEROUS POWER IN BODY POLITIC
AND MUST BE SUPPRESSED

The most dangerous power in the body politic of the past age was formed
by the organized intolerant and oppressive Doctors of Divinity, who had
a great State Church and political organization behind them through
which they dominated and coerced the people and by which they were
enabled legally to force upon them the horrible, but now obsolete, evil
of compulsory religion, as well illustrated in some of our early New
England Colonies and in many other places throughout the Old and New
Worlds, during the past centuries. And so, in a similar way, it is the
Doctors of Medicine and the Medical Societies of one great dominating
school or sect, the vaccine sect, which form the most dangerous
power in the body politic to-day, and are almost wholly responsible
for originating and forcing upon the people the barbarous evil of
compulsory medicine and compulsory disease, in violation of the most
fundamental, inherent, natural, and constitutional rights of the people.

President Lincoln--who was one of our greatest Americans--has told
us that no man, however good, is fit to govern another man without
the latter’s consent, and I think it will be generally admitted, as a
sound Democratic and American doctrine, that no one class or profession
of men--not even the great clerical or medical profession--is quite
perfect enough to be trusted with exclusive, unlimited or dangerous
power over our fellow men. Nevertheless it is a fact that the medical
profession, as now organized and possessed of political and official
power, and in control of some of our most important departments of
government, such as Public Health, Vital Statistics and Medical
Legislation, has already a most dangerous power over the people,
perhaps more dangerous and unlimited than any other class of men, and
this dangerous power must be curbed as soon and as much as possible in
the interest of true Medical Freedom and Progress and public right and
safety.

My late esteemed friend and neighbor, the illustrious Judge Gaynor,
New York’s greatest mayor, uttered one of his best sayings, which we
may well note and apply here, when he said: “Beware of the men or the
class who are too anxious to exert power.” And this warning we can
now apply most pertinently to our dominating medical societies and
vaccine companies, which together form a most gigantic medical interest
which is the chief influence that has forced compulsory medicine and
inflicted disease upon the people and controls our Departments of
Health, and which should be fully investigated by the Executive and
Legislative Departments of our State and National governments, which
should adopt some radical reforms to curb this dangerous medical power
and safeguard the rights of the people, as suggested in the next
paragraph.


THE GIGANTIC MEDICAL AND VACCINE INTEREST SUPPORTING COMPULSORY
VACCINATION A MENACE TO PUBLIC RIGHT AND SAFETY WHICH SHOULD BE CURBED

The latest official reports show that there are now _ninety-nine_
concerns licensed by the U. S. Government to manufacture vaccines and
serums for both human and animal uses! These ninety-nine concerns have
a capitalization of about fifty millions or more. One of the largest of
these manufacturers, located in Detroit, has a capital of ten millions,
while another large concern located in Philadelphia has a capital of
two millions.

The two great epidemics of Foot and Mouth Disease, or virulent cowpox,
in this country in 1902 and 1908 were caused by the vaccine virus of
two of these ninety-nine vaccine manufacturers; and these epidemics
resulted in great mortality to animals and mankind, as already shown,
with a loss of millions of dollars to the Government and people of the
United States; but no recompense has ever yet been made, so far as I
know, to the Government or People by these vaccine companies for this
great damage, and I ask your particular attention, Mr. President, to
this important point.

Now, to give a list of all the medical societies in the United States
and their membership figures would take too much space here, as their
names and numbers are “legion”; but I can give some figures which will
include the chief National Society and the chief State societies in the
leading State of New York, as follows:

  American Medical Association                43,000 members
  Medical Society, State of N. Y.              8,000    ”
  Associated Physicians of Long Island           503    ”
  Brooklyn Medical Association                   200    ”
  Medical Society of Kings County                950    ”
  Harlem Medical Association                     400    ”
  Medical Association, Greater City of N. Y.     750    ”
  Medical Society of County of N. Y.           2,709    ”
  N. Y. Academy of Medicine                    1,400    ”

This table, while including only a partial list of medical
societies in the United States, comprises some of the largest and most
influential societies of the dominant or allopathic school, active in
the national field and in our own local field of New York State. Now
each State in the Union has a similar group of local or State societies
and these several State societies combined with the big National
societies and with the _ninety-nine vaccine companies_ form, obviously,
a most gigantic medical, political and commercial interest behind the
medical evil of compulsory vaccination. Of course, a great many doctors
of this dominant school are advanced and progressive enough to oppose
all compulsory vaccination; but doctors of this type unfortunately
seem to be a minority, at present, in the dominant vaccine school
of medicine. On the other hand, a large majority in almost all of
the other schools of medicine are strongly opposed to vaccination,
particularly to all forms of compulsion.

A glance at this list of medical societies already given, with its
startling membership figures, combined with the _ninety-nine vaccine
companies_, must convince any thoughtful man of the dangerous size and
organization of these medical and vaccine interests, which obviously
have more or less of a joint interest to force their vaccine operations
and products upon the people as much as possible by compulsory laws,
and otherwise, and whose joint profits are obviously in direct
proportion to this use.

Now, no other profession has anything like the large and well organized
membership and corresponding political power and influence of the
medical profession in the body politic. Indeed, few, if any, trade or
business organizations can compare with the medical profession in this
respect, and this medical power is further greatly increased beyond
that of any other profession, trade or business in being in practical
control of our most important Departments of Public Health and Vital
Statistics all over the country, so that in advocating and practising
the dangerous barbarism of compulsory medicine this medical power can
easily deny and conceal the actual effects of this dangerous medication
on human health and life in our vital statistics. This is surely too
much power and a power too dangerous to be left in the hands of one
class or profession of men, and it would surely be an act of public
wisdom to take this control of our Departments of Health and Vital
Statistics out of the hands of this one medical class and entrust it
to doctors of various schools or to some other professions, such as
sanitary engineers, expert lay statisticians, life insurance actuaries,
or even to able laymen, who would have no professional bias or interest
to deny or conceal any medical mistakes or disasters, but who would
honestly give to the public the true record, not only of deaths
from natural diseases, but--what is even more important for public
information, public health, and medical progress--the true record of
disease and death from all _artificial or inflicted diseases_ and
medical operations in general.


REFORMED SYSTEM LONG USED IN ENGLAND

As a matter of fact, the reformed system here suggested has long been
in use in England, where the Minister of Health and the Registrar
General have been both eminent laymen, and not doctors, but with
honest doctors under them, and where the record for sanitation and
public health is one of the highest and the death-rate one of the
lowest in the world, while vaccination is constantly declining. Under
this system the English vital statistics are also known to be the
most full and reliable in the world, and deaths from vaccination
and other medical practices are not denied and concealed, as in our
doctor-controlled Departments, but are reported honestly and regularly
every year, showing in many years a greater mortality from vaccination
than from smallpox.

This medical and statistical reform should be immediately adopted in
this country to abolish the dangerous medical domination and monopoly
which now controls our Departments and which has long been an abuse
of public power by one medical sect, a great enemy to Medical Truth,
Freedom and Progress and an arbitrary power in our body politic which
should be no longer tolerated under our American institutions.[4]


PROPOSED NATIONAL BOARD OF PUBLIC HEALTH, CONTROLLED BY ONE SCHOOL OF
DOCTORS, CONDEMNED

A typical instance of the dangerous tendency of the medical profession
to extend its power over the people is shown in the recent scheme of
the proposed National Department of Public Health, to be composed
chiefly of doctors of one sect, with a head doctor having a seat in the
President’s Cabinet.

Now, a National Department of Public Health, properly organized and
conducted, may be a very good thing for the public welfare, but such
a Department should by no means be controlled by doctors of one
dominating sect or by the big vaccine interests in alliance with it,
but all schools of medicine should be properly and fairly represented
in such a Department, and its head member, having a seat in the
Cabinet, should be an able and eminent layman and not a medical
doctor, so that the head of the Department would thus represent the
interests of the whole people and not chiefly the professional ideas
and interests of one school of medicine.


MEDICAL ETHICS OF THE VACCINE AND OTHER SCHOOLS COMPARED AND
CRITICIZED. THE “BEAM” _VERSUS_ THE “MOTE”

What would be thought of the “medical ethics” of an imaginary or
hypothetical doctor who might invent some medical remedy and then have
laws passed to force this alleged remedy upon his patients against free
will and consent, but to his own profit, and who might at the same
time get control of the Departments of Health and Vital Statistics so
that he could safely and successfully deny and conceal the failures,
dangers and fatalities of his alleged remedy or invention? Could there
be conceived a medical policy or practice of greater professional
effrontery, impudence and wicked presumption than this? Could there
be a medical practice of greater danger to human right and safety and
more shocking and destructive to all true medical ethics and progress?
Could there be any practice more violative of the inalienable rights of
the American citizen? And yet this hypothetical picture illustrates,
substantially, the medical policy which the people now suffer from in
every community oppressed with the evil of compulsory vaccination,
and which would be greatly aggravated if we were to have a National
Department of Health controlled by vaccinating doctors.

We have heard a good deal from the medical societies as to the evils
of the “Quack” doctor, the “Patent Medicine” man and the Christian
Scientist, who are severely frowned upon by the regular doctor and
pro-vaccinator; but these men, much abused by their alleged superiors,
have never been guilty of anything so violative of true medical
ethics and of public right and safety as the practice of forcing
medical remedies and operations upon their patients against free will
and consent, or the practice of representing remedies as absolutely
necessary and perfectly safe and harmless which are in fact not
necessary and are highly dangerous, and not only frequently kill the
patient but actually cause great epidemics of fatal diseases in animals
and mankind, such as the deadly epidemics of foot and mouth disease in
1902 and 1908, already described, which were caused by inoculations
with the vaccine virus from two of the biggest vaccine factories in the
United States.

Now I have never heard that any “Quacks” or “Patent Medicine” doctors
or Christian Scientists or any other school of medicine, good, bad or
indifferent, have ever been guilty of any damage to health and life
comparable to this awful record of the vaccine school, which school
seems to arrogate to itself such superiority and dominance over its
fellow men. So far as the average “patent” medicines are concerned,
they may be said to be of three classes: First, harmless or agreeable
mixtures having no actual effect on disease, good or bad, except in
the fancy or faith of the patient. Second, mixtures of ordinary drugs
substantially such as the regular doctors prescribe. Third, at the
worst, nothing worse than mixtures of medicated “booze” or doctored
“dope.” Per contra, I never heard of any “Patent” or “Quack” medicine
which was an actual _blood poison_ or the actual virus of some
dangerous or deadly infection capable of infecting the patient with
some fatal disease and of killing him in a few minutes, hours, days or
weeks, as frequently happens with different forms of vaccination, as I
have already demonstrated beyond doubt in these pages.

To this dangerously dominating vaccine sect of medicine, which sees the
faults of other men but not its own great errors, we may therefore now
apply the crushing words of Christ in His great parable of the beam and
the mote, as follows:

    “And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother’s eye,
    but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?”

    “Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye;
    and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy
    brother’s eye.”

Yes, Mr. President, if this powerfully organized and dominating sect of
medicine, which now has such a dangerous power in our body politic,
will cast out the blinding “beams” of compulsory medicine, inflicted
disease and medical falsification out of its mental eyes it may then
be able to see clearly to cast out the relatively harmless medical
“motes” out of the eyes of our fellow men. But I am afraid that we
cannot rely on this Profession to correct its own great faults unaided,
or that, like the old Pharisee, it will ever remove from its own eyes
the blinding beams of medical self-righteousness, infallibility,
domination, compulsion and falsification. It will undoubtedly require
the logical common sense and moral sense of the laity to bring about
this medical reform, as few creeds, professions or parties ever reform
themselves from within, but generally by moral and logical force from
without. Left to itself, the Profession would undoubtedly acknowledge
and correct its present great errors of Bovine Vaccination, compulsion
and falsification in due time, but this reform would probably not
occur voluntarily for a century yet!--that is, in about one hundred
years after we were all dead. Indeed, the record of History seems to
show that it usually requires about a century for this most dogmatic
and infallibilistic sect of medicine to correct any of its gigantic
mistakes. For instance: The awful mistake of smallpox inoculation
was continued for over a century, endorsed by the highest medical
authorities as the only way to prevent smallpox, and yet it was finally
abandoned and prohibited by public opinion and penal law as being one
of the most dangerous and effective ways to propagate and multiply
smallpox. And it was not till after this gigantic medical mistake
was prohibited that natural smallpox began to seriously decline.
In the same way the vile medical scheme of arm-to-arm vaccination
continued for over half a century under the endorsement of a large
part of the medical profession as a safe substitute for inoculation,
and as perfectly harmless and effective, and yet it was ultimately
condemned and abandoned as one of the vilest schemes ever devised for
transmitting the most dangerous human and animal diseases from one
person to another! Now I believe that the present medical evil of
Compulsory Bovine Vaccination is worse than any of the former mistakes
as involving the extensive diseasing of two classes of animals, cattle
and mankind, and causing epidemics of the most dangerous diseases in
mankind and domestic animals which were not known under the former
evil schemes of inoculation and arm-to-arm vaccination! We must not,
therefore, now wait for a century more to allow the bovine vaccinators
and compulsory doctors voluntarily to abandon and correct what is
perhaps the greatest medical mistake in history, but we must bring
about this reform at once, in our own day, by a proper exertion of
the common sense and the moral sense of the laity in enacting new
laws which will prohibit all medical compulsion and all propagated
and inflicted disease, and which will also remove all vaccinating
doctors from the head and control of our Departments of Health and
Vital Statistics and put in their places able laymen, or men of neutral
professions, who will do justice to all medical sects and schools and
protect and enforce the legal rights of the people to _Medical Freedom_
and _Safety_ and to _Medical and Statistical Truth_.


PROPAGATION AND INFLICTION OF DISEASE A MEDICAL CRIME

The extensive propagation and coercive infliction of a dangerous
disease, under the false pretense that it is necessary for public
good and is safe and harmless, is obviously in the nature of a gross
medical malpractice and public crime which is against public policy and
public health and should be abolished by Penal Law, just as Smallpox
Inoculation was abolished nearly a century ago.


REMOVAL OF THE GREAT ETHICAL DISGRACE OF THE MEDICAL PROFESSION

I have not the least doubt that the best doctors in all our present
schools of medicine, including the allopathic, will hail the broad
reform of Medical Freedom which I am here urging and which they will
readily see will be a great benefit to Humanity and to the whole
“Divine” Profession of Healing and will be the removal from it of
something which the verdict of History will undoubtedly record
as having been the greatest Ethical Disgrace on the whole Medical
Profession. And as the abolishment of compulsory religion removed
a great disgrace from the Clerical Profession in the past, so the
abolishment of compulsory medicine will remove a great disgrace from
the Medical Profession of to-day. And the doctors will doubtless, in
due time, regret that they were ever guilty of such a barbarism, as
much as modern Churchmen now regret the similar barbarous mistake of
their predecessors.


RECAPITULATION

It is, therefore, to this great medical reform, Mr. President, that I
now ask your careful attention and forceful help, so far as may lie
within your power or may commend itself to your conscientious judgment;
and I now briefly recapitulate the essential points in this much needed
reform, as follows:

    FIRST: The abolishment of all compulsory vaccination in the
    Army and Navy, leaving vaccination free and voluntary with each
    man, as it now is in the English Army.

    SECOND: The full pardon of all men condemned by Court-Martial
    for refusing compulsory vaccination.

    THIRD: The thorough investigation of the propagation and
    distribution of inflicted diseases by vaccine factories and
    vaccinating doctors, and the effect of this dangerous practice
    on the health and life of animals and mankind and its possible
    or actual relation to great human and animal epidemics,
    including epidemic Influenza and Pneumonia.

    FOURTH: To determine carefully the number of cases of sickness
    and death caused annually, directly or indirectly, by
    vaccinations of different kinds in the Army and Navy and in the
    civil population.

    FIFTH: To have all deaths caused by vaccination or other
    medical operations reported truly every year by all Medical
    Boards and Boards of Health, and to have heavy penalties
    enacted for all wilful denials or concealments of such deaths
    in death certificates or other vital records and statistics.

    SIXTH: To have various schools of medicine represented on all
    Medical Boards and Boards of Health in order to prevent medical
    monopoly by any one school of medicine and to establish Medical
    Freedom for all schools, with greater benefit to the public
    service, thus promoting true medical progress and efficiency.

    SEVENTH: To have able laymen or sanitary engineers or life
    insurance statisticians at the head of all Departments of
    Health and Vital Statistics, with honest doctors under them,
    like the good system long in use in England.


CONCLUSION

In your Message to Congress, August 8, 1919, Mr. President, you
expressed a very strong and interesting thought in condemnation of all
unjust, arbitrary and coercive forces in the body politic, and the
necessity of suppressing them in the interest of human welfare. This
thought applies most aptly in the present case against the evils of
dominating, arbitrary and coercive Medicalism, and I am therefore very
glad to quote it here as my closing sentence, where, it seems to me, it
has the force of a whole chapter in the space of one small paragraph.

    “The world has just destroyed the arbitrary force of a military
    Junta. It will live under no other. All that is arbitrary and
    coercive is in the discard. Those who seek to employ it will
    only prepare their own destruction.”

  Respectfully submitted,

  CHAS. M. HIGGINS.

  Dated at 271 Ninth Street,
  Brooklyn, N. Y.,
  U. S. Constitution Day,
  September 17, 1919.


MEMBER OF THE FOLLOWING NATIONAL ASSOCIATIONS:

  American Association for Advancement of Science.
  American Child Hygiene Association.
  National Tuberculosis Association.
  American Red Cross (Life Member).
  American Medical Liberty League, Chicago.
  Medical Liberty League, Boston.
  Anti-Vaccination League of America, Philadelphia.
  National Anti-Vaccination League, London.
  American Civic Association.
  National Security League.
  Navy League of U. S.
  Aerial League of America.
  American Rights League.
  League of Free Nations Association.
  American Historical Society.
  National Geographic Society.
  National Municipal League.
  National Association of Manufacturers.
  Constitutional Liberty League, Philadelphia.
  National Agricultural Society.
  National Consumers’ League.
  Vigilance League, New York.
  Public School Protective League.
  Constitutional League of America.

[Illustration: In Memoriam

JOHN PITCAIRN

Late President of The Anti-Vaccination League of America. Born in
Scotland, January 10, 1841. Died at Bryn Athyn, Pennsylvania, July 22,
1916.]




LIFE SKETCH OF JOHN PITCAIRN

BY A PHILADELPHIA FRIEND


John Pitcairn, who became President of The Anti-Vaccination League of
America when it was organized in Philadelphia, on October 21, 1908,
was one of America’s foremost men of affairs. He was born on January
10, 1841, at Johnstone near Paisley in Scotland. In 1846 his parents
removed to the United States and settled in Allegheny City, now a part
of Pittsburgh; and there he received an elementary education in the
public schools. At the age of fourteen he began his business career
in the office of the Superintendent of the Pennsylvania Railroad, at
Altoona. In subsequent years he became Assistant to the Superintendent
of the Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne & Chicago Railroad, and Assistant to
the Superintendent of the Philadelphia Division of the Pennsylvania
Railroad. On February 22, 1861, he had charge of the train that
conveyed Abraham Lincoln from Harrisburg to Philadelphia, on the way
to the Presidential inaugural at Washington; and when the Confederates
invaded Pennsylvania before the Battle of Antietam he and his brother,
Robert Pitcairn, were sent by Colonel Thomas A. Scott, then Assistant
Secretary of War, to Chambersburg, to take charge of the train service
for the Government. He afterward became Assistant Superintendent of
the Middle Division of the Pennsylvania Railroad and Superintendent of
the Middle Division of the Philadelphia & Erie Railroad. He built the
Imperial Refinery at Oil City; and while associated with H. L. Taylor
& Company, then the largest producers of oil in America, was engaged
in the production, refining and pipe line transportation of oil. He
was also a member of the firm of Vandergrift, Pitcairn & Company, and,
with Mr. Vandergrift, built and controlled the first pipe line for the
utilization of natural gas for manufacturing purposes and controlled
the Natural Gas Company, Limited. In 1883, Mr. Pitcairn, in association
with Captain John B. Ford and others, organized the Pittsburgh Plate
Glass Company, of the Board of Directors of which he was the Chairman
until 1897, when he purchased the interests of the Fords and became
the President of the Company; this office he resigned in 1905, again
becoming Chairman of the Board. The capital was originally $600,000;
this was increased at various times until it reached $2,750,000; later
it became $10,000,000 and finally, $22,750,000, all representing
real values. Mr. Pitcairn was also President of the C. H. Wheeler
Manufacturing Company, the Loyal Hanna Coal and Coke Company, and the
Pittsburgh Valve and Fittings Company, and a Director of the Central
National Bank of Philadelphia, the Columbia Chemical Company, the
Michigan Chemical Company, the Natural Gas Company of West Virginia,
and the Owosso Sugar Company. In these important business connections
and in many other fields of successful enterprise, he remained
unremittingly active until the autumn of 1915, when he suffered an
attack of pneumonia, from the after effects of which he died, at his
residence, “Cairnwood,” Bryn Athyn, Pa., on July 22, 1916.

During the last ten years of his life, Mr. Pitcairn was to a great
extent the guiding spirit of the anti-vaccination movement in America.
It would be impossible to chronicle his activities in its behalf
without writing a voluminous history. In 1908 Mr. Pitcairn made
possible by his liberality a National Anti-Vaccination Conference,
which held its sessions in Griffith Hall, Philadelphia, on October
19, 20 and 21 of that year, and which led to the organization of The
Anti-Vaccination League of America. To _The Ladies’ Home Journal_ for
May, 1910, he contributed an article on “The Fallacy of Vaccination,”
which has reached several million readers. On December 1, 1911, he
was appointed by Governor Tener a member of the Pennsylvania State
Vaccination Commission, and in this capacity on March 12, 1913,
he rendered his report, which is a clear, scholarly and readable
contribution to the literature of anti-vaccination.

Mr. Pitcairn’s personal attributes were the natural products of his
Scotch ancestry, his vigorous constitution, and his training in the
school of experience, matured by close association with many of
the most eminent minds of his time, extensive travels, and broad
culture. He had an innate love of freedom, and hatred of injustice and
oppression; and these high qualities of his character were enlivened by
a keen sense of humor and deepened by positive religious convictions.
As a practical man, his faculties of perception were clear, his
deductions were accurate, his judgment of values was correct, and he
was constant in the pursuit of his purposes. But above all, he was
a man of independence in thought, of moral courage in action, and
magnetic and winning in his personality, so that it has been well said
of him, as Sir Walter Scott said of Roderick,

  “_One blast upon his bugle horn
  Were worth a thousand men._”

The office of The Anti-Vaccination League of America is at 1420
Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, Pa. Mr. Porter F. Cope, Secretary; Mr.
C. Oscar Beasley, Vice-President.

The office of The National Anti-Vaccination League, London, is at
25 Denison House, Vauxhall Bridge Road, London, S. W. Miss L. Loat,
Secretary.




  PETITION TO THE PRESIDENT
  TO ABOLISH COMPULSORY
  VACCINATION

  PICTORIAL SUPPLEMENT
  EXPOSING AND ILLUSTRATING HORRORS
  OF VACCINATION

  _By_ CHAS. M. HIGGINS
  BROOKLYN, N. Y.
  1920




PICTORIAL SUPPLEMENT


TO THE PRESIDENT:

This Illustrated Supplement is also specially addressed to the
President, to illustrate and demonstrate the numerous facts stated
in the preceding Petition and thus make the exposure of the Horrors,
Falsehoods and Fatalities of Vaccination so complete and demonstrative
that there can be no doubt that Public Right demands the immediate
abolishment of all Compulsory Vaccination, wherever it exists, as a
dangerous medical malpractice violating fundamental human rights.




PICTORIAL SUPPLEMENT




HORRORS OF VACCINATION EXPOSED AND ILLUSTRATED


HOW VACCINE VIRUS IS MADE AND HOW CATTLE AND MANKIND ARE DISEASED AND
KILLED BY IT

[Illustration: FIG. 1. How cattle are diseased and tortured and Vaccine
Virus produced.]

By referring to the cut on this page it will be seen that the living
calf or heifer is first bound down on a movable tilting table, and its
belly is shaved and on the clean, tender skin of a most tender part
one or two hundred cuts or scratches are then made, as shown, and into
these cuts or scratches is rubbed some “seed virus,” obtained directly
or indirectly from human smallpox, and other known or unknown human or
animal infections. But just what infections this “seed virus” contains
it seems impossible to find out, and it seems also that even the virus
makers themselves either do not know definitely what they are using
and making, or will not state. But they certainly should be compelled
by law to disclose fully the exact nature and origin of their viruses,
and to publish the same clearly and openly, and should also be rigidly
bonded to the State and the National Government for all damages to
animals or mankind caused by any disasters from their dangerous methods
and products.

We can all now imagine, however, looking at the picture, Fig. 1, what
must be the tortures and suffering of the vaccinated heifer with one
or two hundred festering wounds on its belly, when we recall the great
suffering often caused to a child with a single wound on its arm, and
we can also imagine what must be the effect on the entire system of the
heifer itself--the future milk giver--in being thus saturated by the
septic poison from these multiple wounds, pustules or ulcers, and what
may be the permanent constitutional effect on the animal in developing
or fixing in it, perhaps for life, some of our most dangerous diseases,
such as tuberculosis, to which the bovine species is most subject,
and which it has been demonstrated is chiefly transmitted to man
through the milk of the cow. See 25th Report of U. S. Bureau of Animal
Industry, 1908, page 109. Whatever the effects on the system of the
heifer may be, it must be obvious, however, that to be thus saturated
by the virus of most dangerous diseases in hundreds of wounds over a
large part of its body certainly cannot be good, and it is obviously
a most barbarous and revolting kind of medical art, to say the least,
which thinks it must resort to such a wholesale method of diseasing
domestic animals first and mankind afterwards with the idea of
promoting general health; and how any one can conceive anything more
barbarous or revolting and dangerous than this method, we fail to see.

Now after the calf has been inoculated as described, it is removed
from the table and allowed to stand on its feet in its stall securely
tied, and carefully fed and tended and allowed to remain thus for
about a week, with its one or two hundred festering wounds gradually
filling up with ulcerative or suppurative disease matter. At this
stage the calf is now again strapped on the table for the collection
of this accumulated disease matter. This fresh disease matter usually
contains the germs of many diseases known and unknown, including human
smallpox and cowpox or “vaccinia” and sometimes other germs even much
more dangerous and fatal than smallpox. This dangerous complex disease
matter is now squeezed and scraped out (imagine the torture of the
heifer as its one or two hundred wounds are successively scraped out!)
and this horrible material is then mixed with glycerine in order to
dilute it and make it go farther and more profitably, and also to kill
many dangerous germs which the complex virus is known to contain, and
to some of which, glycerine, in a certain percentage, is fatal, but
is not fatal to the germ of smallpox or vaccinia which it is aimed
to preserve in more or less virile condition. In addition to this
mixing with glycerine the virus is also subjected to a number of other
processes and tests, to endeavor to free it from all the dangerous and
fatal disease germs which it is known or is likely to contain, except
the smallpox germ, which is dangerous enough in itself. But it seems to
be impossible always to free the virus from such “foreign” germs, or to
guarantee that it will not produce at any time some dangerous or fatal
result when inoculated into the body of child or adult in the operation
of vaccination, as is proved by the two great epidemics of foot and
mouth disease in cattle, in 1902 and 1908, and the many human deaths
occurring after vaccinations reported every year throughout the country.

After the virus has been taken from the vaccinated calves, it has been
the custom, in some cases, to free the diseased calves and let them
mix with healthy herds, and in other cases the vaccinated calves have
been butchered and their carcasses sold for human food! Either of
these methods of disposal of the diseased calves is obviously highly
dangerous to animal and human health and life, but whether these
dangerous practices are still used by any vaccine manufacturers or by
any of our Health Departments having vaccine stables and laboratories
we do not know; but this point should be carefully investigated by the
Government and these dangerous practices suppressed wherever they still
exist.


WHAT VACCINATION REALLY IS AND HOW PUS INFECTION, LOCKJAW, AND OTHER
DISEASES WORK TOGETHER IN VACCINATION WITH FATAL EFFECTS

Every act of cowpox vaccination consists simply in making a wound,
scratch or puncture on the human body and then rubbing or injecting
into this wound a living or virulent disease virus of a more or less
complex nature, usually containing the actual virus of human smallpox
combined with animal cowpox and always the virus of pus infection or
septicemia in one or more of its many forms. Dr. M. J. Rosenau, one of
the best authorities in the country on vaccine virus, in his recent
work “Preventive Medicine and Hygiene” (1914), says on pages 6 and 7:
“Vaccine Virus always contains bacteria. There is no such thing as
aseptic virus. Staphylococci, streptococci, members of the hemorrhagic
septicemic group, and, in a few instances, tetanus spores and the gas
bacillus have been found in vaccine virus.”

In Bulletin 12 of the U. S. Hygienic Laboratory, issued 1903, on
“Impurities in Vaccine Virus,” Dr. Rosenau tells us that “Vaccinia is
a specific disease, the cause of which _has not been determined_. We
are therefore _working somewhat in the dark_. We are _compelled_ to
vaccinate our patients with a virus containing micro-organisms other
than those causing vaccinia.”

Listen to these most significant admissions by one of the highest
authorities on vaccine virus in the country--_working in the dark with
an undetermined disease_! _Compelled_ to vaccinate the people with
a virus containing many different disease germs other than the one
intended, which in itself is even yet _undetermined_ and in the _dark_!

Does this look much like known, safe, certain and scientific medicine,
or is it merely only dangerous experiment and guesswork with deadly
infections on the human body?

To show that vaccination is authoritatively recognized as essentially
equivalent to Pyæmia and Septicemia, I can cite the reports of the
Registrar General of England, which is the highest statistical
authority in the English-speaking world, which acknowledge many
vaccination deaths every year, and these deaths are now classified
under a subhead of Pyæmia-Septicemia which is numbered 20 in the
International List of Causes of Death, and the deaths under this
general head are divided and classified as follows: Pyæmia, No. 20A;
Septicemia, No. 20B; Vaccinia, No. 20C. Under this latter subhead, more
deaths of children are recorded from vaccination almost every year than
from smallpox itself! See pages 23-24. See also “Causes of Death,”
issued by U. S. Census Bureau, 1913, page 56, No. 20, where vaccination
is classed as a form of Purulent Infection and Septicemia.

[Illustration:

    FIG. 2. Vaccination on the ninth day, showing a normal,
    ordinary or mild type. Note here that both the central sore or
    vaccine pustule and the surrounding inflammation or “areola”
    present, even in this mild or ordinary form, clearly a case of
    septicemic or pus infection or blood poisoning pure and simple.
]

In Fig. 2 annexed I now give a photograph of an ordinary “successful”
or normal vaccination on the ninth day after inoculation, showing
the fully developed or pustular stage of a “mild” or “safe” type of
vaccination from which no serious harm or “complication” is supposed
to result. It will be noted, however, that even this normal form of
vaccination is a perfectly typical case of pus infection, septicemia
or blood poisoning on a small or mild scale. The vaccination wound on
the arm, as will be seen, takes the typical form of a large irregular
pustule or small abscess about one inch in diameter, more or less,
with a depressed center and raised margin like a smallpox pustule, and
this pustule is full and tense with a collection of pus or suppurative
disease matter which, of course, always contains the germs of pus
infection, inflammation and suppuration in one or more varieties
which usually include, as Dr. Rosenau has stated, the two most common
and dangerous pus germs, known as the “staphylococcus” and the
“streptococcus.” You will also note that around the big pustule there
is a diffuse rash or inflammation known as the “areola” which goes
more or less deep in the flesh and extends more or less over the arm
according to the severity of the case, and is similar to or identical
with Erysipelas. The extent and severity of both the pustule and the
rash vary more or less in every case, but in strong and healthy persons
not very susceptible to the vaccine poison the pustule and areola
usually show no greater extent or severity than that seen in Fig. 2. I
will here state that this Fig. 2, as well as the following Figs. 3, 4
and 6, are all taken by permission from “Acute Contagious Diseases,” by
Drs. Welch and Schamberg of Philadelphia, published by Lea Brothers in
1905, which is a high authority on pro-vaccination, and one of the most
complete works on smallpox and vaccination published.

[Illustration: FIG. 3. Vaccinal Ulcer.]

In Fig. 3 is shown a bad case of vaccination which takes the form of
a spreading ulcer, showing a severe pus infection, being the exact
condition required for lockjaw to develop if its germ is already within
the body of the vaccinated person or if it gets into the wound in any
way whatever from the surroundings of the person or from the vaccine
virus itself. See on this point my special pamphlet “Vaccination and
Lockjaw”; see also page 104 in this Supplement.

[Illustration: FIG. 4. Multiple Vaccinations spread by finger-nails.]

Fig. 4 gives the picture of a nurse having several vaccine pustules
on the face caused by being scratched by a freshly vaccinated child,
showing the virulently infectious nature of vaccination as being
a septicemic or pus infection, pure and simple, which is not only
highly dangerous in itself but in which the terrible lockjaw and other
diseases find essential culture conditions for their deadly work when
acting as double or “mixed infections.”

[Illustration:

    FIG. 5. Photograph of a little English baby two months old,
    taken after death, killed by vaccination in thirty-six days.
    This is a very severe and frequent form of fatal vaccination
    known as “Generalized Vaccinia,” where the vaccine sore spreads
    all over the body in a series of big confluent pustules very
    like confluent smallpox, being thus clearly an aggravated case
    of pus infection and septicemia.
]

Sometimes the vaccination sore spreads all over the body like a bad
case of confluent smallpox, as shown in Fig. 5, which shows the case
of a little English baby two months old who was killed, according to
death certificate, in thirty-six days after vaccination by this form
of general eruption which is known as “Generalized Vaccinia.” I have
obtained this photograph from the parents of the child through my
London Office, with the death certificate, and have been informed that
the eruption on the covered parts of the body was even worse and more
confluent than that on the exposed face and arm. The name of the child
was Mona Stevenson, daughter of William Stevenson of Burnley, England,
and the date of death was August 4, 1908.

[Illustration:

    FIG. 6. Vaccination on the tenth day, showing a severe type
    of infection in a little child. Note wide-spread inflammation
    over the arm at the “areola” around the vaccine pustule and the
    bad eruption on the face which sometimes spreads all over the
    body. This is, of course, a clear case of pus infection and
    septicemia in which lockjaw, meningitis, pneumonia, or other
    diseases may find their essential conditions for producing
    their deadly work in killing the child as a direct or indirect
    result of the vaccination and the double infection caused by it.
]

In Fig. 6, also taken from the work of Drs. Welch and Schamberg, is
shown the photograph of a vaccinated boy, illustrating a severe form of
vaccination which is very common in susceptible children. In this case
the pustule is not much different from Fig. 2, but the areola is very
severe and like erysipelas and has spread over a large part of the arm
and up to the shoulder, indicating a severe infection of the system
with a more extensive and serious blood poisoning which is further
aggravated by a bad rash of pimples which has broken out upon the face
and about the mouth like the first form of the eruption in smallpox.
This eruption may be in the form of papules, vesicles or pustules, or
may go through the three forms successively, as in smallpox, or abort
at any of these stages; and these eruptions, either of the pimples
or the areola, may sometimes extend over a large part of or even over
the entire body and quickly kill the child by general blood poisoning
and exhaustion. Where the external or skin eruptions are not very
bad, however, the child usually recovers, with or without permanent
constitutional injury. The worst cases of vaccinal infection are
not, however, those which have external skin eruptions but in which
there is little or no indication externally of purulent infection,
except possibly at the sore itself, and in which the suppuration or
infection extends _inwardly_ and attacks one or more of the internal
organs and kills by general internal suppuration known as “Pyæmia” or
“Septicemia,” which may show itself by serious suppurations in lungs,
bronchi, pleura, heart, brain or spine, or in the digestive or other
organs. Thus by its very extensiveness this blood poisoning may give
to the falsifying vaccinator ample and plausible excuse to make a
false and deceptive report on the death of the vaccinated child and
to deny and conceal the primary responsibility of vaccination for the
infection and death by reporting in death certificate or autopsy that
the child died from one or other of the terminal diseases or results
of the vaccine infection, such as “Pneumonia,” “Broncho-Pneumonia,”
“Pleurisy,” “Meningitis” or “Endocarditis,” or even perhaps by some
form of intestinal inflammation and obstruction which, with a whole
series of other complications, may of course also result from the
vaccinal septicemia in its general riot of infection throughout the
whole system. And any one of these several consequent or terminal
diseases can be plausibly set down by the falsifying vaccinist as the
true and only cause of death, without any mention whatever of the
original cause in the primary infection of the vaccination, which
will thus be completely ignored and brazenly denied and concealed.
Such a death certificate or autopsy report concealing and denying the
original infection of vaccination is, sad to say, very common, and is,
of course, just about as true and honest and acceptable as if some
murderer should report on his own homicidal act that the bullet which
he shot into the victim’s body did not really kill the victim, but
that it was purely the stoppage of the man’s defective heart that
actually killed him! Or, to give another example, that it was the fatal
infection of lockjaw which the careless victim himself, or his careless
nurse, allowed to get into the harmless bullet wound, that was really
responsible for the death and not the innocent bullet that was fired
into the victim’s body!


DISEASES FOUND IN OR CAUSED BY VACCINE VIRUS

The diseases which have been found or proved to exist in vaccine virus
are as follows:

FIRST: Tetanus or Lockjaw, one of the most deadly and rapid in its
action. For instances of Lockjaw germs in vaccine virus, see Journal
Medical Research, Boston, Mass., May, 1902. See also page 105 in this
Supplement, which shows how vaccination can cause Lockjaw, whether the
germs are in the virus or not.

SECOND: Different forms of the germs of “Sepsis” which produce the
dangerous and often fatal festering sores, abscesses and ulcers of
different kinds. See Bulletin 12, U. S. Hygienic Laboratory, 1903.

THIRD: Actinomycosis or “Lumpy Jaw.” This produces a terrible festering
tumor in the bones or tissues of the head, brain, or spine, something
like the effects of either Cancer, Tuberculosis, or Meningitis, and may
be confounded therewith; and its germs have often been found in vaccine
virus. See Journal Medical Research, Boston, Mass., January, 1904.

FOURTH: Infantile Paralysis. There is strong evidence that this
mysterious and most fatal disease may also sometimes be caused by
vaccination, as a direct or indirect result. See pages 145 to 162
herein taken from Mr. Loyster’s Pamphlet. See also page 13 in the
English translation of a German work on Paralysis by Dr. Oskar Vulpius
(Wm. Wood & Co., New York, 1912), which admits that vaccination is one
of the causes of Infantile Paralysis.

FIFTH AND SIXTH: Tuberculosis and Cancer. There has been a strong
conviction growing for some years past among close students of
vaccination, both within and without the medical profession, that
the practice of wide-spread inoculation of the population with known
and unknown ulcerative diseases or pus infections such as found in
vaccine virus is probably responsible for the great increase in two of
the worst and most fatal ulcerative diseases of modern times, viz.,
Tuberculosis and Cancer. The former causes about fourteen thousand
deaths every year in New York State, and the latter about eight
thousand deaths, regularly and steadily every year, compared to which
the few annual deaths from smallpox are a mere bagatelle or like a
microscopic flea-bite on the mortality lists.

There has long been supposed to be some relation between Cancer and
vaccination, because the same microbial germ or form has been found
in the virus or lesions of both diseases, and also in smallpox and
syphilis, known as “vaccine bodies.” See the Report of the N. Y.
State Cancer Laboratory for 1902 and 1903, pages 10 and 78. Another
reason for this supposed relationship is that these two of our most
terrible and fatal diseases seem to have increased steadily since
the introduction of inoculation and vaccination and are now common
in countries which are most vaccinated, such as Japan and Germany. I
will give a striking example of this fact here, in one instance which
will suffice for the present, viz.: In Japan, which is one of the most
extensively vaccinated countries in the world, there is one of the
highest death-rates from Tuberculosis known, whereas in our own State
of Utah, where all compulsory vaccination is prohibited by a State
law, there is the lowest death-rate from tuberculosis in the United
States! See U. S. Mortality Statistics, 1913, page 28. So important has
this subject been getting for some years past that many investigators
are now studying it and a prominent magazine has been considering the
publication of a series of articles by some eminent doctors to show the
relationship or influence of vaccination on cancer and tuberculosis,
which some of these doctors claim to have already demonstrated.

Compulsory vaccination has been most rigid on the whole population in
Germany and Japan for many years past, and it has long been known that
Germany, like Japan, has had a very high death-rate from tuberculosis,
which has been much increased since the Great War. Count von Brockdorff
Rantzau, head of the German Peace Delegation, acknowledged this grim
fact after receiving a copy of the Peace Treaty at Versailles on May
7, 1919, by saying: “Germany now is _the home_ of tuberculosis.” This
significant fact is reported in the _New York Herald_ of May 8, 1919.

The influence of vaccination in causing, aggravating or increasing
tuberculosis and other diseases is now well recognized by high medical
authorities. For example: In one of the most recent medical works it
is distinctly admitted that vaccination influences or aggravates other
diseases, and that “a quiescent malady may be lighted into activity by
vaccination.” And it is also here stated that this activating effect of
vaccination occurs particularly in syphilis and in tuberculosis, two of
the most common and dangerous diseases of the human race! See Osler’s
“Principles and Practice of Medicine,” 8th Edition, 1918, page 330.
This is, surely, a tremendous admission of the very dangerous effects
of vaccination from one of the latest and highest medical authorities
of to-day, and is sufficient, in itself, to condemn all compulsory
vaccination.

SEVENTH: Foot and Mouth Disease of Cattle. This disease is a form of
“cowpox” and has been frequently transmitted by vaccination to both man
and beast, and, most horrible to say, it is notorious that the great
epidemics of this terrible cow disease in 1902 and 1908 were caused by
the manufacture of vaccine virus, and the last or greatest of these
epidemics, of 1914 and 1915, is believed also to be due to vaccination,
although not yet clearly proved. See Year Book of U. S. Department of
Agriculture for 1914, page 20. See also reports of U. S. Bureau of
Animal Industry for 1902 and 1908. These several epidemics have caused
the slaughter of hundreds of thousands of cattle and other domestic
animals, at a loss of many millions of dollars to the Government and
people of the United States.

[Illustration: FIG. 7. Cow suffering from Foot and Mouth Disease caused
by Vaccination.]

Fig. 7 shows a cow suffering with foot and mouth disease, which is
a kind of virulent cowpox, very infectious and contagious, conveyed
by vaccination, and transmissible to man and beast. Note the badly
ulcerated and dribbling mouth of the cow. Ulcerations also affect
the feet, and eruptions of vesicles break out in successive crops on
different parts of the body, particularly on teats and udder, on lips
and nostrils, and in the mouth and throat. This picture is taken from
the Report of the U. S. Bureau of Animal Industry for 1902, on the bad
epidemic in the New England States in that year, where, in several
instances, this dangerous cow disease was conveyed to human subjects
through vaccination, resulting in horrible eruptions and agonizing
death, as I will show further on at pages 110 and 112.

[Illustration: FIG. 8. Oxen with Foot and Mouth Disease caused by
Vaccination.]

Fig. 8 is taken from the same Report for 1902 previously mentioned and
shows a yoke of oxen suffering with the foot and mouth disease and
ready to be killed and buried to suppress the infection. Note the sore
and gaping mouths of the oxen and their sore and swollen feet. They are
shown standing in the bottom of a deep trench into which they have been
driven and where they will be shot; their bodies will then be covered
with quicklime and finally buried under six feet of earth to destroy
the infection.

[Illustration: FIG. 8½. Udder and teats of a cow affected with Foot and
Mouth Disease. Note characteristic eruptions on teats.]

Fig. 8½ is a view of the hind quarters of a cow suffering with foot and
mouth disease and showing the udder and teats with the characteristic
eruption of this disease. Compare this eruption with the human
eruptions in Figs. 3, 4, 5, 11, 12 and 13. This illustration is taken
from Farmers’ Bulletin No. 666, on the foot and mouth disease, issued
by the U. S. Department of Agriculture, 1915. Fig. 9 shows the awful
“Vaccine Holocaust.” See page 96.

[Illustration: FIG. 9. The Vaccine Holocaust. Look at this picture and
read next page.]

    THE VACCINE HOLOCAUST

    WHOLESALE INFECTION, SLAUGHTER AND SACRIFICE OF CATTLE CAUSED
    BY VACCINATION

    _From Pamphlet “Open Your Eyes” by Chas. M. Higgins--1912_

    The photograph on preceding page is taken from the Report of
    the U. S. Bureau of Animal Industry for 1902 on the great
    epidemic of Cattle Plague, or Foot and Mouth Disease, in
    Massachusetts in 1902, caused by vaccine virus, which cost
    the U. S. Government $130,000 to suppress and caused the
    slaughter of 4316 animals. In this impressive picture you
    will note the bodies of hundreds of cattle resting on a pile
    of fire-wood in a trench on the snow covered ground ready for
    burning to destroy the infection caused by the vaccine virus.
    Look carefully, as the picture is much reduced, and you will
    see a man at the left in the trench setting fire to the pile.
    Note the horns, heads, and hoofs of the cattle bristling from
    all sides of the funeral pile. Soon you will see the smoke of
    sacrifice rise from these victims of vaccination on the altar
    of Medical Barbarism--a Holocaust to the Demon Vaccine!

    In 1908 there was a second epidemic of the same disease which
    raged in several States, Pennsylvania, Michigan, Maryland
    and New York, caused by the vaccine virus used by two of the
    largest manufacturers of vaccine virus in the United States.
    (See Report of the U. S. Bureau of Animal Industry for 1908.)
    In this second epidemic 3636 animals were slaughtered at a cost
    to the U. S. Government of $300,000. In both epidemics there
    occurred outbreaks of similar disease among vaccinated persons
    in the infected States, from which many deaths resulted. What
    do you now think of any medical scheme for the alleged benefit
    of “public health” which is capable of causing such disasters
    to animal and human life as this peculiar and extraordinary
    scheme of bovine vaccination? Do you think, Mr. President, that
    any medical device capable of causing such disasters should
    be made compulsory by law, in our Army or Navy, on our public
    school children or on any one else in any shape or form? And
    do you not think that all compulsion should be now abolished
    and Medical Freedom from inflicted disease established as an
    absolute American and Hygienic Right?

Fig. 10 shows a map of the second epidemic of foot and mouth disease
in 1908, taken from the Report of the U. S. Bureau of Animal Industry
for 1908. The shaded counties in the four States of Michigan, New
York, Pennsylvania and Maryland show where the epidemic of that year
spread and how it originated and travelled. This epidemic was caused
by manufacturers of vaccine virus and originated from the virus
of two large American manufacturers, one in Detroit, the other in
Philadelphia. This strain of virus is said to have come originally from
Japan, the much-vaccinated country, and contained the infection of foot
and mouth disease, and it was used apparently for years without any
knowledge that it carried this dangerous disease, which was probably
conveyed to many vaccinated children and adults in that time with
a horrible eruptive effect in many cases,--how many will never be
known. This infection of the vaccine virus was not known or discovered
until 1908 because the Philadelphia company killed their calves after
getting the virus from them and thus prevented the vaccinated calves
from mixing with and infecting healthy cattle, but confined the
infection to vaccinated human beings. In 1908, however, the Detroit
company got some of this “seed virus” from the Philadelphia company to
“strengthen” their product. The Detroit method was not to finally kill
the vaccinated calves, but to hire unvaccinated calves from farmers or
stock dealers and after they were infected, and the virus taken from
them, to return the calves to the farmers or stockmen, where they thus
mixed with healthy cattle which were afterwards shipped to different
States and thus spread the great plague of foot and mouth disease in
that year, as shown by the official map annexed and by the official
reports cited below.

[Illustration: FIG. 10. Map of Epidemic of 1908 caused by Vaccine
Virus.]


OFFICIAL REPORTS PROVING VACCINATION TO BE THE CAUSE OF FOOT AND MOUTH
DISEASE

For expert proof that vaccination is responsible for epidemics of Foot
and Mouth Disease, see the annual reports of the U. S. Bureau of Animal
Industry, already cited, for 1902 and 1908, and also the Year Book
of the U. S. Department of Agriculture for 1914, page 21. See also
Farmers’ Bulletin No. 666, issued by the Department of Agriculture. See
particularly the first official report on the epidemics of Foot and
Mouth Disease in 1902 and 1908, issued by the U. S. Bureau of Animal
Industry. This first report is not now in print but is on record in the
Bureau and it was first given to the press and released for publication
on May 17, 1909; and from a copy of this report obtained from the said
Bureau, I now give the following extracts which will clearly show that
it was the vaccine virus used by two of our largest manufacturers
of virus in the United States that was responsible for causing the
epidemic of foot and mouth disease in 1908, and was also probably the
cause of the previous epidemic of the same disease in 1902 and 1903.


“COPY OF STATEMENT GIVEN TO THE PRESS BY THE BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY,
U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, RELEASED FOR PUBLICATION, MAY 17, 1909

    “ORIGIN OF THE RECENT OUTBREAK OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE

    “The recent outbreak of foot and mouth disease in Michigan,
    New York, Pennsylvania and Maryland started from calves used
    in the propagation of smallpox vaccine virus which had been
    contaminated with the virus of foot and mouth disease, and the
    contaminated strain of vaccine originally came from a foreign
    country.

    “The main facts regarding the outbreak ... are as follows:
    The H. K. Mulford Company of Glen Olden, Pa., imported
    certain smallpox vaccine virus which was contaminated with
    the infection of foot and mouth disease. In May, 1908, some
    vaccine of this strain was procured by Parke, Davis & Co. of
    Detroit. Calves used by the latter firm in propagating vaccine
    were sent, October 16, to the Detroit stock yards and thence
    on the same day to a farm near Detroit. On October 20, three
    carloads of cattle from points in Michigan reached the Detroit
    stock yards and were put into the pens that had been occupied
    by the vaccine calves four days previously. Some were sold
    for slaughter at Detroit, while the remainder were shipped to
    Buffalo and some were reshipped to Danville and Watsontown,
    Pa., where the disease was first observed some days later. The
    disease spread to various places in Pennsylvania and New York
    and to one locality in Maryland. [See Map, page 98.]

    “Three separate series of experiments were made by Doctors
    Mohler and Rosenau. Young cattle and sheep were inoculated with
    vaccine virus obtained from both firms. Foot and mouth disease
    was produced in experimental animals by the use of vaccine of
    the same strain obtained from both sources, while other strains
    of vaccine tested gave negative results. The disease was also
    transmitted from one animal to another through several series,
    in two instances by natural modes of infection.

    “The investigation also indicates that the outbreaks of foot
    and mouth disease in New England in 1902-3 were probably due
    to contaminated vaccine of Japanese origin from the Mulford
    Company....

    “The fact that the infection was present in the vaccine virus
    of the Mulford Company for so long a period, but was not
    transmitted to outside cattle, was doubtless due to this firm’s
    practice of killing its calves after taking the vaccine virus.
    Parke, Davis & Co., on the other hand, rented their calves and
    placed them again on the market a short time after the vaccine
    material was taken. In this way the disease spread from the
    vaccine stables of Parke, Davis & Co., but not from those of
    the Mulford Company, although it was the vaccine virus from the
    latter establishment that infected the former’s cattle....

    “As soon as the facts regarding the contamination of vaccine
    became known, the licenses of the two firms involved were
    at once suspended, all the suspected vaccine virus on hand
    was destroyed and that upon the market withdrawn, and other
    measures of a radical nature were taken. The report commends
    the intelligent and prompt coöperation of the Mulford Company
    and Parke, Davis & Co. in accomplishing this end. After an
    examination of every strain of vaccine upon the market, it is
    stated that there is now (1909) upon the market no vaccine
    contaminated with the virus of foot and mouth disease.
    Regulations have been formulated with a view to preventing
    hereafter the propagation of contaminated vaccine virus. No
    instance of the transmission of foot and mouth disease to man
    through vaccine virus has been recorded, and it is considered
    doubtful, in view of the tests made, if it is possible to
    reproduce the disease in him by the cutaneous inoculation
    commonly used in the process of vaccination.”


AN OFFICIAL DOUBT DISPROVED

It will be noted that in the official report just quoted there is no
question of the responsibility of vaccine virus for causing the deadly
plague of foot and mouth disease in cattle and other domestic animals
and that two or more extensive and deadly epidemics in animals have
been thus caused by the virus of certain manufacturers, involving
the destruction of thousands of animals and the loss of millions of
dollars to the Government and people of the United States! It will also
be noted, however, that at the end of this report there is a guarded
or tentative statement that no instance of the transmission of foot
and mouth disease to human subjects by vaccination is known or “has
been recorded”; and that there is some doubt that this disease can be
conveyed to man by skin inoculation only, as in vaccination, although
it is clear that it can be and has been surely conveyed to domestic
animals by such inoculation! It is admitted in later reports that the
disease can be conveyed to animals or man by ordinary skin inoculation
or scarification provided some blood is drawn in the operation, which
is, of course, a common occurrence in ordinary vaccination. This rather
doubtful statement as to infection in man by ordinary vaccination I
will therefore prove to be an evident error and will give, further on,
the most convincing proof that foot and mouth disease--or what is in
every way equivalent to and identical with it--is frequently conveyed
to mankind by vaccination, with fatal effect!


A BIG PRICE TO PAY FOR VACCINATION

To suppress the epidemic of 1902, as already shown, 4,316 animals were
slaughtered by the U. S. Government at a cost of $130,000; and in the
epidemic of 1908 the Government slaughtered 3,636 animals at a cost of
$300,000. The last or recent epidemic, which has been the worst of all,
extended from 1914 to 1916, invaded twenty-three States and involved
the destruction of 172,222 animals, chiefly swine, cattle and sheep, in
the order stated. The cost of this destruction amounted to a loss of
over nine millions of dollars, half of which was paid by the National
Government and half by the States! See the report of the Chief of the
U. S. Bureau of Animal Industry for 1916. This is surely a big price
to pay for vaccination, which was most probably the cause of this last
and greatest epidemic, as it was proved to be the cause of the previous
epidemics of 1908 and 1902! And at this point it should be remembered
that this last epidemic of 1914 to 1916 originated in the same State of
Michigan where one of the largest vaccine factories in the country is
located and from which factory the epidemic of 1908 was proved to have
originated!


EPIDEMICS OF SMALLPOX PROBABLY CAUSED BY VACCINATION AND FOOT AND MOUTH
DISEASE

An interesting and significant fact in relation to the epidemic of
1908 is that the lake counties of New York where the foot and mouth
disease prevailed in 1908, as shown on the map in Fig. 10, are the same
counties where the greatest outbreaks of smallpox occurred in 1913 and
1914, and may possibly have had some relation to the previous epidemic
of virulent cowpox or foot and mouth disease in 1908 and to the last
epidemic of this disease in 1914 to 1916. This point seems to be worthy
of careful investigation, to say the least, because I am convinced
that so-called “Foot and Mouth Disease” may be really a virulent form
of “Cowpox” or a mongrel form of smallpox and may sometimes convey
to mankind what may actually be, or be mistaken for, a mild form of
smallpox, such as prevailed in the lake counties of New York in 1914,
including the City of Niagara Falls.


CATTLE EPIDEMICS COMMON IN VACCINATED COUNTRIES

Now these epidemics of foot and mouth disease in cattle seem to be no
uncommon thing, and, what is very significant, they seem to be very
common, severe, and almost constant in countries where vaccination
is very extensive and rigid, such as in Germany and also in Japan,
where German ideas have been copied and where, of course, the cattle
are extensively diseased to produce this vile disease stuff, known
as vaccine virus; and it must be here noted that it was from much
vaccinated Japan that the seed virus came which caused our great
epidemics of 1902 and 1908.

The Report of the U. S. Department of Agriculture for 1908, page 381,
shows that _in one year_, in Germany alone, over _800,000 cattle
and other animals_ were infected by Foot and Mouth Disease. And it
seems probable that this extensive infection of cattle may have come
originally from the general and wide-spread vaccination used in Germany.

Now so far as we know the parties responsible for causing the great
damage in our two great epidemics of foot and mouth disease have as yet
made no legal recompense to the National or State Governments, or to
the private individuals aggrieved, for which damage they would appear
to be clearly liable.

Consider for a moment the audacious recklessness and negligence
in infecting cattle in hundreds of wounds on the body with a most
infectious disease, or combination of diseases, commonly and falsely
represented as harmless, and afterwards turning these dangerously
infected animals loose among healthy herds! But this is only one of
the audacious acts and dangerous results against public right, health,
and safety occurring constantly from the deadly medical barbarism
of compulsory vaccination, which the Government would do well to
investigate and correct immediately. And the best way to begin this
correction is to ABOLISH ALL COMPULSORY VACCINATION.

I will show further on how foot and mouth disease is frequently
conveyed to mankind by vaccination, with awful and fatal effects, but
in the meantime I will first show how deaths from lockjaw are one of
the most common and fatal results of vaccination.


HOW LOCKJAW IS CAUSED BY VACCINATION AND HOW THIS TRUTH IS DENIED AND
CONCEALED BY VACCINATORS

This dreadful and most fatal disease known as “Tetanus” or Lockjaw
is such a common result of vaccination, and the consequential and
responsible relation of vaccination thereto is so shamefully denied and
concealed by vaccinators, that a special chapter seems to be necessary
here to give the real truth on this important point.

In my previous pamphlet “Vaccination and Lockjaw” I have treated
this subject exhaustively and now refer thereto for full facts and
authorities, but I will give an outline of the subject here which will
cover the main facts in the case.

One of the most common and false defences of the vaccinators on this
point is the shameful fallacy and falsehood that if the lockjaw
germs are not found in the virus itself, therefore vaccination with
this virus cannot cause lockjaw in the vaccinated person or be held
responsible for it. This is, substantially, the logic or implication
in one of our latest Government reports on this subject by Dr. J. F.
Anderson, entitled “Post Vaccination Tetanus,” which title means in
plain English, _Lockjaw after Vaccination_, published in the U. S.
Health Reports of July 16, 1915.

In this report the author, who is an expert on vaccines, practically
excuses vaccination for all blame for lockjaw deaths where the lockjaw
germs do not exist, or cannot be proved to exist in the vaccine virus
itself!... After making this half truthful and misleading report
favorable to vaccination, the author, according to the statement of a
Washington newspaper, resigned from the employ of the U. S. Government
at a salary reported as $4,500 per year and entered the employ of one
of the biggest manufacturers of vaccine virus and serums in the country
at the alleged enormous salary of $25,000 per year!

For a more truthful and accurate report showing how lockjaw germs are
widely diffused and how they absolutely depend on a pus infection, like
the vaccination sore, or its equivalent, for their “activation” and
fatal effects, as now explained here, see Studies of Dr. Francis, in
Bulletin No. 95, U. S. Hygienic Laboratory, August, 1914.


LOCKJAW MAY BE CAUSED BY VACCINATION WHETHER THE GERMS ARE IN THE VIRUS
OR NOT

The real truth in this matter is, therefore, that there are at least
four distinct ways in which vaccination can cause death from lockjaw:

_First_: The lockjaw germs may be in the virus itself and be inoculated
directly into the vaccination wound at the moment of vaccination.
And, despite Dr. Anderson’s negative tests, the possibility of this
direct infection can exist at any time, as admitted by some of our
best authorities, already quoted, on account of the many ways in which
the infection can enter the virus, from the vaccinated calf itself and
otherwise, and also because its presence cannot always be proved by
tests, although known to be in the virus. The lockjaw germ normally
dwells in and issues from the digestive organs of domestic animals and
is therefore found in manure and garden soil and on the hide and hair
of animals and hence may be in the body of the vaccinated calf itself
from which the virus is produced!

_Second_: The lockjaw germ, which is widely distributed in some
localities, may exist on the person of the vaccinator or the vaccinated
at the time of vaccination and be then introduced into the wound with
the virus, and the two infections may thus develop together, the pus
infection in the wound being necessary to “activate” the lockjaw germs
as already shown.

_Third_: The lockjaw germ may enter the vaccination wound and grow in
its pus secretion at any time during its suppurating stage by chance
scratching, abrasion or absorption, and thus develop its awful toxin
with fatal effect on the vaccinated victim.

_Fourth_: The lockjaw germ may already exist within the body when the
vaccination is performed, and is known to frequently exist as a natural
tenant or denizen of the healthy human body, in nearly one-quarter of
the human race! This is also the case with several other disease germs.
In such cases the indwelling lockjaw germ will remain entirely inert,
dormant and harmless in the body unless some condition necessary to
its “activation” or growth is presented, such as that of a suppurating
sore, ulcer, abscess or wound, anywhere within or upon the body, the
pus-infected or suppurating vaccination sore being, of course, the
ideal condition for the activation and growth of the fatal lockjaw
infection, as already shown; and this is probably the most common and
dangerous way in which vaccination can cause death from lockjaw and
other diseases, and the greatest care in the preparation of the virus
itself cannot avoid this danger!

It will therefore be seen that in every one of these instances the
vaccination wound or sore itself is the essential cause or condition of
the lockjaw infection, which could not or would not exist without this
condition, or its equivalent, and hence it is nothing but a dastardly
evasion and perversion of medical truth and honesty to try to show
that, because the lockjaw germ is not in the virus at the moment of
vaccination, or that it gets into the wound afterwards through some
natural chance or condition to which the human body is constantly
subjected, therefore the act of vaccination is not responsible for the
resulting death from lockjaw.


“ASSASSINATION OF THE BLOOD” MUST BE STOPPED

It is time, therefore, that this outrageously dishonest medical
quibble as to the exact source of infection in vaccinal lockjaw was
silenced once for all. What difference does it make to the victim
of this terribly fatal disease whether the lockjaw germ was in the
virus itself or in or on the victim’s own body, when in either case
the act of vaccination, _per se_ and _ab initio_, is the cause of
the infection becoming active and fatal in the human body? A logic
which would contend otherwise would free the assassins of Presidents
Garfield and McKinley from the charge of murder because, forsooth,
the fatal septic infection which killed these victims was not on the
murderous bullets when they were fired into their bodies, but entered
the wounds afterwards through their own carelessness! This is exactly
the false and murderous logic that is constantly used by our well-paid
professional apologists for vaccination and by their abject dupes, our
befooled editors, who brazenly or ignorantly use it in defense of this
gross medical malpractice of forcing a most dangerous form of disease
and blood infection on healthy and helpless children and adults, which
a great English doctor, James J. Garth Wilkinson, so truly calls the
“Assassination of the Blood” in the following glowing words, written
many years ago, but which convey a stinging rebuke to men of his own
great profession in this matter to-day: “This is blood assassination,
and like a murderer’s life. The point, however, here is that this
amazing act is the homicidal insanity of a whole profession.” See “On
Human Science, Good and Evil,” Lippincott, Phila., 1876, page 35.


VACCINATION AND LOCKJAW MORE “RISKY” AND DEADLY THAN SMALLPOX

As a matter of cold fact, therefore, these “Assassins of the Blood,”
vaccination and lockjaw, offer a far greater risk and danger to human
health and life than natural smallpox itself, and if we should fear
anything for ourselves or our children it should be vaccination and
lockjaw instead of smallpox, of which we stand in far less danger than
of being struck by lightning, whereas lockjaw is a steady and constant
danger thirty times greater than smallpox, as the following comparative
list of deaths from Smallpox, Lightning and Lockjaw in the State of
New York will readily show. This list is taken from the reports of our
State Department of Health for the seven years from 1910 to 1916, as
follows:

           Smallpox   Lightning    Lockjaw

  1910      7 deaths   16 deaths   94 deaths
  1911      3   ”      30   ”     114   ”
  1912      4   ”      21   ”      97   ”
  1913      1   ”      13   ”     111   ”
  1914      3   ”      33   ”     115   ”
  1915      0   ”      18   ”      90   ”
  1916      3   ”      19   ”      69   ”
           --          --         ---
  Totals   21         150         690

It will be noted that the ordinary danger from smallpox is so actually
and relatively insignificant here that it is regularly six to eight
times less than that of being struck by lightning, and that the danger
from lockjaw of all kinds is so great and constant that it is about
thirty times greater than that from smallpox, whereas vaccinal lockjaw,
which is about ten per cent. of all lockjaw deaths, is at least three
times more dangerous by actual frequency of occurrence than natural
smallpox!


THE HORROR OF HORRORS, CATTLE PLAGUE OR FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE, CAUSED
IN MANKIND BY VACCINATION. MEDICAL IGNORANCE ON THIS POINT SCORED

I have already exposed the deadly epidemics of virulent cowpox or foot
and mouth disease in cattle and domestic animals caused by vaccination.
I now come to expose one of the most shocking results of vaccination
yet disclosed, viz.: the transmission of this horrible cow disease to
the human subject. This disease, as a vaccinal result, in mankind, is
much more common and fatal than has been generally supposed, and every
effort seems to have been made by our vaccinators and health officers
to deny and conceal the facts in this matter from the public, which
is easily accomplished because of the great general ignorance of all
vaccination matters not only by the mass of the people but by the mass
of the medical profession itself. For example, the medical profession
does not seem to be yet aware of the fact that the severe skin and
general disease called “Pemphigus” in man is identical with foot
and mouth disease in cattle, nor do they seem to be generally aware
of the fact that “Pemphigus” is frequently conveyed by “Cowpox” or
vaccination, and they seem to be equally ignorant of the notorious fact
that certain makes of vaccine virus had been infected for years with
foot and mouth disease, and conveyed this disease in epidemic and fatal
form to animals and mankind. Neither do they seem to be aware of the
fact that experience now indicates that Foot and Mouth disease may be
ultimately proved to be only a virulent form of “Cowpox” or a mongrel
form of Smallpox to which ordinary Cowpox or “Vaccinia” may degenerate
at any time like a mild domestic dog suddenly changing, in an attack of
Rabies, to a mad, dangerous, and deadly distributor of disease.

To show that the close relation, if not the identity, of vaccination
with Smallpox and Foot and Mouth Disease is now recognized by
special students of this subject, I may here quote from the speech
of Senator Money of Mississippi in the U. S. Senate, February 25,
1909, as reported in the _Congressional Record_, in the debate on the
Agricultural Appropriation Bill, concerning the epidemic of Foot and
Mouth Disease in 1908, as follows:

    “This is an important question with respect to cattle, but
    it is very much more important to the human beings of this
    country. These vaccine points are the things with which we
    vaccinate the children of this country against smallpox. It has
    been found that it sometimes makes them immune from smallpox,
    but gives them the foot and mouth disease, which is just about
    as bad.

    “The trouble about the matter is that we can not in the United
    States produce vaccine for any length of time, for the reason
    that this is not a pox country. It is not the home of the
    disease. We have to import it from abroad, and consequently
    the vaccine points that are produced upon the spot which is the
    habitat of this particular disease are the only ones that will
    retain the virus in sufficient strength to enable it to render
    the human being vaccinated immune from smallpox. Consequently
    we can not, as has been expected by a great many people, raise
    our own vaccine points, because they lose their power for
    immunity against smallpox. We now run the constant danger that
    has been manifested very unpleasantly in several localities
    of vaccinating children and grown people with these imported
    vaccine points and communicating the foot and mouth disease,
    which is just about as bad as the smallpox.”

We will now show in the following pages and illustrations how Foot and
Mouth Disease is conveyed to mankind in vaccination and that it is not
only as bad as smallpox, as Senator Money has stated, but much worse.

[Illustration: FIG. 11. Horrible Case of Cowpox in a Woman.

    _Epidemic of 1902._ Back view of a woman suffering from Foot
    and Mouth Disease, or Virulent Cowpox, caused by Vaccination.
    Photograph shows final stages of eruption and was taken a
    short while before death. Note large blotches all over body
    caused by several vesicles running together, then breaking and
    excoriating, leaving large raw sores like big scalds or burns.
]

Figs. 11 and 12 show some horrible examples of this deadly cattle
plague conveyed by vaccination to human subjects. Fig. 11 shows the
back view of a woman victim with a very severe and fatal type of this
disease, the photograph being taken a short while before death. I have
also a front view of this case, taken after death, but this is too
horrible for even this chapter of horrors, so that I have decided to
spare the feelings of my readers and not show it here. Fig. 12 is a
photograph giving both front and back views of a man with a very bad,
but less severe, type of the disease, who recovered after several
successive eruptions and about five months of suffering.

[Illustration: FIG. 12. Foot and Mouth Disease in a Vaccinated Man.

    _Epidemic of 1902._ Back and front views of man suffering
    with Foot and Mouth Disease, or Virulent Cowpox, caused by
    Vaccination. Photograph shows early or mid stage of eruptions,
    which first appeared four and a half weeks after vaccination.
    Recovered after nine successive eruptions of this kind in
    five months after vaccination. Note “umbilicated” form of
    eruptions like vaccination sores, proving positive relation to
    Vaccination and Smallpox. Compare with Figs. 2, 4 and 6.
]

There were ten cases of this kind treated at the Boston City Hospital
in January, 1902, by Dr. James S. Howe, who read a report of the cases
before a meeting of the American Dermatological Association in Boston
in September, 1902, which was afterwards published in the Journal of
Cutaneous Diseases for January and June, 1903, from which I quote
below. Dr. Howe exhibited photographs of these cases at the meeting
referred to, which also appeared in said Journal here quoted, copies of
some of which are now shown in Figs. 11 and 12.

These cases and the published report of them are also cited in the
medical work before quoted, “Acute Contagious Diseases,” on page 82
therein, so that there is full medical authority for their citation
here and ample proof of their nature and origin as being due to
vaccination.

Dr. Howe reported that out of the ten cases of this kind treated in
the hospital six were fatal, thus showing the deadly nature of this
vaccinal disease, which greatly exceeds the average or worst types of
smallpox! In Dr. Howe’s report of these cases, at the meeting referred
to, he stated as follows:

    “Early in January of the present year [1902], while the wave
    of vaccination was at its full height [during a smallpox
    epidemic], there were received in the Boston City Hospital for
    treatment, a remarkable series of cases of bullous dermatitis.
    All of these cases appeared in persons recently vaccinated....
    The longest duration of the disease in any one case was sixteen
    weeks, followed by recovery, and the shortest was one week,
    followed by death. The skin lesions began to appear in these
    cases in an average of five weeks after vaccination, sixteen
    weeks having elapsed in one case, the longest, and three weeks
    in one case, the shortest.”

It may be proper to state just here that the “skin lesions” and other
eruptions in these human cases were substantially or identically
the same as in the cattle affected with foot and mouth disease in
the epidemic of 1902 and 1908 previously described, these eruptions
being of the _same kind_ and in the _same locations_; that is, the
eruptions consisted of numerous vesicles of various sizes, from the
size of a pea to that of a dime, half dollar and dollar, and these
vesicles broke out all over the body as shown in Figs. 11 and 12,
but particularly on feet and hands, lips and nostrils and inside the
mouth and throat, and in fact on and in all interior parts of the
body covered by mucous membrane, as well as on the external skin, and
sometimes in internal organs. These vesicles would sometimes change to
pustules or semi-pustules as shown in Fig. 12, and these would spread
and run together into large confluent vesicles or blisters, as shown
in Fig. 11, and these blisters would then rupture, collapse, drain
and excoriate, leaving great raw sores like terrible scalds or burns,
as shown in the big black and gray blotches in Fig. 11, thus causing
great suffering and agony in this most pitiable victim of vaccination.
The victim in Fig. 11 was a woman forty years old, who died ten hours
after admission to the hospital and six weeks after vaccination, and in
whom the eruptions first appeared three weeks after vaccination. Fig.
12 shows the eruptions in their early or mid stage, and Fig. 11 shows
them in their later or final stage. And it must be here understood that
these eruptions appear in successive crops, as in the cattle disease,
one crop disappearing and healing, to be followed by another crop in a
few days, and these ten cases of Dr. Howe had from two or three to nine
successive eruptions before death or recovery! The case shown in Fig.
12 is that of a man twenty-one years old in whom the first eruption
appeared four and a half weeks after vaccination and who had _nine
successive eruptions_ before he finally recovered and was discharged
from the hospital about five months after vaccination!

Dr. Howe gave it as his opinion that the disease in these ten cases
was caused by some infection in the vaccine virus at the time of
vaccination, and a majority of the doctors present at the meeting
seemed to agree with him and gave several instances where similar cases
happened in their own practice, thus showing that this disease is
really a common result of vaccination. One of the doctors then present,
Louis H. Duhring of Philadelphia, an expert on skin diseases, said:

    “We must grant, I think, in the light of the history of these
    cases and what we know of other similar cases, that they are
    the direct or indirect result of vaccination. While we hear a
    good deal, _pro_ and _con_, about vaccination, of its injurious
    results on the part of those who are opposed to it, and of
    its value on the part of those who favor it, I have always
    felt that those who are opposed to vaccination, or, rather,
    those who have brought forward the possible ill effects of
    vaccination, did not in some instances have a fair hearing.
    I, myself, have seen cases at least similar to the ones
    reported by Dr. Howe, as well as others, where the local and
    constitutional manifestations were undoubtedly the result of
    vaccination.”

Dr. Howe seemed to be somewhat mystified by the disease and at a loss
for the best or most proper technical name for it, and on this head he
stated as follows:

    “On the other hand, it might seem more proper to call them,
    perhaps, cases of pemphigus. Quoting Duhring in regard to
    pemphigus, I will refer to the following: ‘The mucous membranes
    of the mouth, pharynx, epiglottis, trachea, bronchi and
    even of the alimentary canal are not infrequently invaded,
    especially in the varieties _malignus_ and _vegetanus_, giving
    rise to various local lesions, mostly whitish patches and
    excoriations. In grave cases there are pain and difficulty in
    breathing and swallowing, diarrhea, exhaustion, collapse, and a
    fatal ending.’ These cases of mine certainly showed all these
    symptoms.”

In answer to this point, Dr. Duhring then said:

    “I think Dr. Howe has acted wisely in selecting the title he
    has and connecting it with vaccination, because it is to that
    point that we wish to call attention, namely, that instances
    of bullous dermatitis, often severe and even running a fatal
    course, do at times follow vaccination. ... That it is closely
    allied to what is known as semi-malignant or malignant
    pemphigus; I think probable, but whether we call it bullous
    dermatitis from vaccination, or pemphigus from vaccination,
    or malignant pemphigus, matters very little at the present
    period.”[5]

I think we can all readily agree with this conclusion of the doctors,
that it does not matter much what we call this horrible disease caused
by vaccination, whether it is “Pemphigus,” “Foot and Mouth Disease” or
“Virulent Cowpox,” all of which seem to be fit and proper names, the
main point being that this deadly infection is frequently contained in
and conveyed by vaccine virus in the operation of vaccination.

The further interesting and surprising fact to be especially noted
here, is that while some doctors seem to be fully aware that
“Pemphigus” is often caused by vaccination, yet they all seem to be
quite ignorant of the fact that the cattle plague known as “Foot and
Mouth Disease” is identical with the disease called “Pemphigus” in man,
and which is known to be frequently conveyed to butchers and others who
handle carcasses of cattle.

The doctors in this discussion were also completely ignorant of the
fact that a most extensive and virulent epidemic of Foot and Mouth
Disease prevailed in New England in that very year, 1902, when these
deadly vaccinations occurred, and that, furthermore, some of the
strains of virus used in that year actually contained the foot and
mouth infection and that this dangerous infection came from Japan and
actually continued for several years, from 1902 to 1908, as before
shown in government reports, thus making a chain of unbreakable facts,
which, I think, proves the guilt of vaccination for these horrible
deadly results beyond any question.

Even if the doctors were inclined to doubt or deny the responsibility
of vaccination for these horrible results, they could not, logically
or truthfully, do so, for the proof of this causation and relation
is written as plainly on the bodies of the pitiable victims as was
the “handwriting on the wall” described in the Bible. And it is now
necessary only to call careful attention to the eruptions shown in Fig.
12 to get a full proof of this point, for it will be noted that the
vesicles or pustules which appear all over the body in Fig. 12 have a
very distinct “umbilicated” form with a depressed center and raised
margin which is characteristic of only two diseases, vaccination and
smallpox, and a clear proof that either of these two closely related
diseases was surely concerned in this eruption, and that this eruption
is therefore essentially a virulent “cowpox” or a mongrel smallpox. On
this point of identity compare Fig. 12 with Figs. 2, 3, 4 and 6, pages
83 to 88.


THE AWFUL CASE OF A VACCINATED SCHOOL BOY INFECTED WITH FOOT AND MOUTH
DISEASE, OR VIRULENT COWPOX, AND IN ERUPTION FOR THREE YEARS!

In the next illustration, Fig. 13, I give another instance of a
vaccination horror very similar to or identical with the horrible cases
just exposed.

The photograph, Fig. 13, shows the case of a vaccinated school boy
eleven years old infected with foot and mouth disease, virulent cowpox
or “pemphigus,” which first appeared a few weeks after vaccination and
continued intermittently, sometimes in very violent form, for three
years! The boy was vaccinated in September, 1914, and this photograph
was made at my request eleven months afterwards, in August, 1915,
during a comparatively mild stage of the eruptions, which were much
worse at other times. These eruptions finally ceased in 1918, after
over three years of great suffering by this child victim, and great
anxiety and expense on the part of his parents, and so far without
any compensation whatever from those responsible for this great evil.
Whoever the Law of Justice should decide to be responsible for such a
humanly-inflicted calamity should certainly be made to pay for it.

[Illustration:

    FIG. 13. School boy Arthur Smith, Jr., eleven years old.
    Vaccinated September, 1914, photographed August, 1915.
    Eruptions similar to foot and mouth disease appeared a few
    weeks after vaccination and continued intermittently for over
    three years! Photograph shows a mild stage of these eruptions,
    which were much worse than this at times. Eruptions ceased in
    1918.
]

I will now let the intelligent father of this afflicted child tell the
full story of this case and the suffering of the boy and his parents,
in the father’s own words as taken from his letters to me on this
matter. In his letter dated August 2, 1915, the father, Mr. Arthur
Smith, of New Windsor, N. Y., states:

    “In reply to your letter of July 29, 1915, in reference to
    the condition of my son from vaccination, I wish to say that,
    although it is eleven months since he was vaccinated, at the
    present time he is in the same condition he was in when the
    account of his sickness was published in the _Newburgh Daily
    News_, March 12, 1915; and although since then we have taken
    him to four different doctors, they have so far failed to do
    him a particle of good; in fact, they are at a perfect loss
    at the present time as to what is the matter with him. The
    greater part of his body from his toes up to the crown of his
    head is covered with sores or blisters which are in a continual
    form of eruption, which form on his body like a small bubble
    which is filled with a water-like substance, and have to be
    lanced to let this water out. This is identically the same kind
    of blister which began to appear in a short time after he was
    vaccinated, and after we called in the physician who vaccinated
    him, Dr. Kingston of Newburgh, he immediately pronounced it a
    case of cowpox. He left a prescription for him but he rapidly
    got worse, so we decided to call in Dr. Barth and he also said
    the boy was suffering from a severe case of cowpox; in fact,
    he said it was the worst case he had ever seen, and he was
    surprised the boy was allowed to get so bad. But I wish to give
    Dr. Barth due credit: he worked hard and faithfully to get the
    best of the disease. It would take him a full hour at times to
    lance all the sores. After bathing him in antiseptic lotion,
    he would cover his body with salve and bandage him all up, and
    it did appear that, after treating him for about three months,
    he had got the best of the disease; in fact, had improved so
    much that Dr. Barth said, in due consideration of the cost we
    were under, that he thought it would be safe to leave him in
    the care of his mother and let him know if he had a relapse.
    But I am sorry to say he did not continue to improve; he began
    to break out bad again and at the present time he is in the
    same condition I have previously stated. It seems to me that,
    inasmuch as the State is so insistent upon the subject of
    vaccination, there should be something done to put upon some
    one the responsibility of the condition in which vaccination
    has placed my boy, as it is a continual drain upon my earnings
    between the doctors and the drug stores.”

On September 19, 1915, the boy’s father wrote me describing his
condition as follows:

    “In the first three or four months after vaccination, in
    which time he was very bad, the blisters would first form
    like vesicles filled with watery fluid, some would get better
    without turning into pustules and other blisters would start
    the same way, fill up with yellow pus and then get better only
    to crop out again in another place. It would be impossible for
    me to say how many successive eruptions he had since being
    vaccinated as he has practically been in a state of eruption on
    one or other part of his body since vaccination (in September,
    1914). For a long time his feet and legs were very bad, also
    his arms. Then his feet and legs would improve and he would
    break out on the head and neck. At the present time (September
    19, 1915), with the exception of a few sores on the ankles,
    his feet and legs are in pretty good condition, but his head
    and neck are very bad; in fact, far worse than when I had
    the photograph taken (August, 1915). This is the third time
    they have appeared on the head in violent form. The arms have
    probably been more affected continually than any other part of
    his body and have been very bad all the time, also the back of
    the hands, but not on the inside of the hands. He has not as
    yet had any sores on the inside of his mouth, but has had them
    on the nostrils and on the chin, and the outside of the mouth,
    and odd ones on other parts of his face. At the present time
    the blisters are about all of the vesicle variety.

    “On the 30th of May, 1915, at the suggestion of Dr. Barth, I
    took the boy up to Albany to see Dr. Curtis, who is a blood
    specialist (Skin Expert in the New York State Department of
    Health), and he asked me a good many questions and looked at
    the boy’s arms, and after due deliberation he said the boy was
    suffering from ‘Pemphigus,’ and he said he had never seen a
    case like it, with the exception of one man of 50 years of age,
    and he said that he died.”

The man here referred to as having died from “Pemphigus” after
vaccination and as being in a condition similar to that which afflicted
this school boy was doubtless Ernest Hoffman, aged fifty-four,
architect of Albany, N. Y., who died in Albany, March 26, 1908, and
whose case I have carefully studied. The copy of the death certificate
in this case, now in my possession, gives the sole and only cause of
death as “_Pemphigus Vulgaris_,” without any mention, as required by
law, of the contributory, coincident, primary or secondary disease of
vaccination, although it is notorious that this man was vaccinated and
was suffering with a strange and serious skin disease, as a vaccinal
complication, before his death, and the case was the subject of
several articles in the local newspapers at the time, as a vaccination
complication, or disaster. And this is a good instance, right here, to
prove my serious charge against vaccinating doctors, that vaccination
disasters are frequently denied and concealed in death certificates,
either through ignorance or intention. And this denial or concealment
in this case is easily proved because a personal investigation, made by
one of my colleagues at the time, secured the information and admission
that the patient, Mr. Hoffman, was actually vaccinated with the Mulford
virus, which was officially reported to have contained the infection of
foot and mouth disease at that time, unknown to our doctors and even
unknown to the makers of the virus itself! And this infected virus was
the alleged cause of the fearful epidemics of foot and mouth disease in
cattle in 1902 and 1908, and the probable cause of the same infection
in human victims, as already clearly shown by the government reports
and other data previously cited. And, furthermore, as the disease
called “Pemphigus” has now been proved to be identical or confusible
with foot and mouth disease, I therefore think that a strong chain of
facts has now been drawn around vaccination as being the real cause and
source of the “Pemphigus” in both the dead architect and the surviving
school boy, and in the other cases cited, and that this chain of proof
is now complete and unbreakable, and most convincing to any reasonable
mind.

For further proof on this point see the Report of the New York State
Department of Health for 1908, pages 280 to 296, where this case of
the Albany architect, and others, are described, and their relation to
vaccination and foot and mouth disease indicated.

The last letter received from the father of the afflicted school boy
is dated December 12, 1918, and closes the description of this case,
which shows a final recovery of the boy, after years of suffering and
with a mutilated or much discolored body, as the result of the many
eruptions:

    “In reply to your letter of December 3, 1918, I wish to say
    that my boy at the present time is in fairly good health, and
    there are no eruptions on his body and with each succeeding
    year the effect seems to be gradually dying away. The summer
    of 1917 he broke out in eruption quite bad, especially on the
    legs, being most severe on the thighs, and also in the summer
    of 1918, but not near so bad as in the preceding summer. He is
    free of any eruption at the present time, but the upper part
    of his body and especially his arms are covered with a large
    amount of brown spots on the skin where the eruptions have
    completely died away, but I think that with each succeeding
    year, as he grows stronger, the effect will entirely disappear,
    with the exception of the brown spots on the skin, which I
    suppose will always remain and for which there can be no
    remedy.”


ANOTHER BAD CASE OF VIRULENT COWPOX FROM U. S. NAVAL RECORDS

To show how really frequent, common and wide-spread these fearful cases
of “pemphigus,” “foot and mouth disease” or virulent cowpox, are, as
a result of vaccination, I can cite another well authenticated case
of this kind, reported in U. S. Naval Records. This case is reported
in the _U. S. Naval Medical Bulletin_ for October, 1911, Vol. 5,
No. 4, on page 482--under the heading of “Acute Pemphigus Following
Vaccination.” This article minutely describes the case of a negro
carpenter, age sixty, employed at one of the U. S. Naval Stations, and
vaccinated there, June 9, 1910. About July 9, 1910, an eruption of
vesicles appeared first on the vaccinated arm and in a few days spread
all over the body. This eruption was exactly similar to that in the
cases already described, viz.: vesicles of various sizes which came out
in successive crops and on the same parts of the body as in the other
cases. And as these vesicles increased they ran together into large
confluent blisters which finally broke and formed denuded scars or raw
sores on the skin like scalds or burns. To show that the action on the
skin and in the mouth and throat was identical with the other cases
here described, I need only quote a few lines from the official article
itself, as follows:

    “The body and extremities in many places resembled a severe
    burn or scald, being covered with large denuded red areas,
    surrounded by blebs of various sizes.... Toward the end of the
    first week several blebs developed in the mouth, one small one
    on the tongue, and one large one on the side of the pharynx.
    The latter when it burst ‘_nearly drowned him_,’ according to
    his wife.”

The patient finally recovered, like the case in Fig. 12, after several
successive eruptions and in about four months after vaccination, or in
October, 1910, and much to the surprise of the doctors, owing to the
severity of the case and the age of the patient.

It may therefore be now noted that this Naval case, together with the
others previously described, show how uniformly distinct and typical
these several cases are, as being undoubtedly examples of the same
specific disease conveyed by vaccination, and are probably nothing more
than a direct degenerated or acute form of the vaccine disease itself
or possibly a mongrel form of smallpox which may develop from ordinary
vaccination at any time. Concerning this most important point I will
have something further to say after describing the last case of this
kind in the next paragraph, which is most suggestive and convincing.


A RECENT ENGLISH CASE OF CATTLE POX IN A BABY AND ITS MOTHER, CAUSED BY
VACCINATION. IDENTITY OF VACCINAL DISEASES PROVED. A MOST SIGNIFICANT
MEDICAL FACT DISCLOSED

A recent vaccination horror in a vaccinated baby and its mother,
exactly similar to the cases already exposed, is reported in a
circular recently issued by the National Anti-Vaccination League of
London. This seems to show a clear and horrible case of cattle plague,
“foot and mouth disease,” “Pemphigus” or virulent “cowpox” caused by
vaccination. And whatever name we may use does not matter much, as
before stated, for it is evident that any one or all of these names are
interchangeable and appropriate for cases of this kind. In fact, from
the many fatal vaccinations of this type occurring in England from time
to time, and usually called “Pemphigus” by the doctors and coroners,
it would seem that the strain of virus used in England has become
permanently tainted with the “foot and mouth disease” or virulent
cowpox, as clearly indicated in this recent English case described below

    “On March 26, 1918, Mrs. Woofinden of Birmingham took the
    vaccinated child to see the doctor, who said he had a very
    good arm. A fortnight after vaccination little white spots
    had developed round the principal vaccination place, and
    she pointed these out to the doctor, who said, ‘That’s
    all right.’... On the following day--sixteen days after
    vaccination--a white spot appeared on the baby’s lip, and
    the same afternoon one showed itself on the ear. The spot on
    the lip got larger. The baby was taken to Dr. Kirby on the
    following Monday, but he was out. Next day he was seen, and
    declared that the trouble was ‘overflow of vaccination.’ The
    child was very cross; its sleep was broken. The vaccination
    marks on the arm had run together and formed a big white
    blister. The doctor said it would be all right in a week. In
    the meantime the mother began to feel very ill; lumps appeared
    under each arm, and she found eventually that she had been
    vaccinated on both breasts from a sore inside the baby’s
    mouth. She suffered intense pain and could no longer nurse the
    baby.... Each day, from the 16th day after vaccination, fresh
    white blisters had developed in various parts of the body,
    turning to a deeper color as they matured, and looking like
    miniature vaccination marks.[6]... Finding Dr. Rowlands away
    from home, Dr. Kirby arranged for the child’s admission to the
    Birmingham Children’s Hospital, where, in just one week, after
    intense suffering, the poor little victim expired. The blisters
    had spread all over the body, covered the inside of the mouth
    and choked up the throat so that the child could not swallow.
    The arm swelled so enormously that it seemed to be joined to
    the body, and the inflammation spread all over the upper part
    till it eventually reached the middle of the chest. The upper
    part of the arm became black and raw-looking. Every care was
    taken at the hospital, and at one time the doctors thought
    they would save the baby’s life, but he got weaker and died
    on April 26th--being four months and a day old. Dr. Jordan,
    at the hospital, certified that death was due to ‘generalized
    vaccinia, followed by pneumonia.’ The case created a great stir
    in the hospital, and one doctor who saw it remarked, ‘So that
    is true cowpox!’”


MOST IMPORTANT MEDICAL FACT EXPOSED HERE. IDENTITY OF FOOT AND MOUTH
DISEASE WITH VACCINATION PROVED

Yes, Mr. President, please take careful note just here that this
is “true cowpox,” as the doctors declared in this last case--the
kind of “true cowpox” that is likely to arise at any time from the
dangerous infecting operation known as vaccination and the complex
infectious material known as vaccine virus, which thus maims or kills
its victims by general blood poisoning and by horrible vesicular and
pustular eruptions inside and outside the body. And at this stage,
Mr. President, I would like to call your special attention to a most
significant medical fact which now stands out clearly in the chain
of vaccination horrors here disclosed, and this fact is that all the
cases occurring in cattle and mankind, herein shown, from the first
epidemic of foot and mouth disease in 1902 to the last isolated case
of the English baby in 1918, are of _identical type_, which cannot be
mistaken, so that the description of one case will describe all--both
in cattle and mankind. Now, surely this identity of type indicates
identity in cause and origin, as we see, for example, that the cattle
and human cases in 1902 are identical with the case of the English
baby in 1918, although separated by a time interval of sixteen years,
and a geographical distance over continent and ocean--from Boston to
Birmingham--of three thousand miles!

Now, the experts of the U. S. Bureau of Animal Industry, who have
studied the epidemics of foot and mouth disease in 1902 and 1908 and
proved that they were caused by the manufacture of vaccine virus, seem
to be of the positive opinion that foot and mouth disease of cattle
is a specific disease distinct from “vaccinia” or “cowpox,” and that
it was due to some mere chance or accidental infection getting into
some strains of vaccine virus that this cattle disease was conveyed to
animals and mankind in said epidemics. This theory may be true, but
I do not think it has yet been proved, and I believe that it is more
probable that the very complex disease known as cowpox or vaccinia
is capable at any time of conveying to animals or man the dangerous
infection known as “foot and mouth disease,” “Pemphigus,” “virulent
cowpox” or “generalized vaccinia,” and that these diseases are not
distinct but are identical and confusible with each other, and that the
several cases herein shown prove this latter theory, as they are all
identical in type although separated by long intervals of time and long
distances of space and all occurring as a direct result of vaccination!
Furthermore, a great many cases like that of the Albany architect in
1908 and the English baby in 1918 have occurred in England in the
past few years and are generally treated as a great mystery by the
vaccinating doctors, although they are, in fact, quite common and their
relation to vaccination obvious, and these cases are usually called
“generalized vaccinia,” “overflow of vaccination” or “Pemphigus” by the
English coroners who have passed on many fatal vaccinations of this
type in the last ten years.

If, therefore, it is still maintained that foot and mouth disease is
distinct from vaccinia, then it seems that this deadly cattle plague
has now become a permanent taint in the different strains of vaccine
virus used in this country and in England! On the other hand, if foot
and mouth disease is not distinct from vaccinia, then it is proved
that the horrible and deadly cases of vaccinal disease herein exposed
are a normal or regular effect of ordinary vaccination, likely to
result at any time therefrom, and to produce epidemics in cattle or
mankind; and this proof, therefore, makes general vaccination obviously
a much more dangerous and deadly disease than natural smallpox! Surely,
Mr. President, this shocking fact calls for immediate attention and the
abolishment of all compulsory vaccination, as being now more dangerous
to human health and life than the natural disease it is designed to
prevent, and this shocking fact can be easily proved by such examples
as already given and by many others now concealed and withheld in
our vital records, as already solemnly charged in my general public
challenge on page vi.


VACCINATION IS DOCTORED SMALLPOX. IT ASSUMES VARIOUS FORMS AND IS OFTEN
WORSE THAN NATURAL SMALLPOX

The doctors apply the terms “generalized vaccinia” to any form of
vaccinal disease where the eruption becomes _general_ over the body, as
in smallpox, instead of being localized and confined to the vaccination
wound. Now, there are two types of this generalized vaccinia--the first
being shown in Fig. 5 and the second in Figs. 11, 12 and 13. In the
first type, the eruption advances to the full pustular stage and the
pustules remain either separate or run together in large confluent
masses, and these scab over with a dry crust or scab, the same as in
confluent smallpox, which it greatly resembles and to which it is
equivalent in nature and deadly result, as is fully shown in Fig.
5. In the other type, the eruption does not advance to the pustular
stage, but continues in the vesicular and half-pustular stage and runs
together into large confluent blisters which do not scab over, but
break and excoriate, leaving large denuded or raw sores on the skin
like scalds or burns, as shown in Figs. 11, 12 and 13. Now, it is
this latter form which is identical with “foot and mouth disease” and
“Pemphigus,” and, if anything, it is more agonizing and deadly than
the other form and is much more severe and fatal than ordinary, natural
smallpox, although, perhaps, not so contagious, as clearly proved by
the many horrible cases in child, adult and domestic animals herein
illustrated.

It should, therefore, be clearly understood at this point that
vaccination as now practiced is really only a form of human smallpox
or “variola” combined with “cowpox” and that the vaccine virus now in
use is produced directly from and originates in the virus of human
smallpox, which is transplanted on the body of the cow and thence
used on the human body, so that it necessarily conveys both human and
cow infections to the human body; whereas the original vaccination of
Jenner was taken from some much disputed or unknown disease in the
horse or cow and thence transferred directly to the human arm, and
thence from arm to arm. This was found to be such a dangerous practice
that it was long ago condemned and abandoned, and the present practice
of combined human and bovine smallpox adopted, which I believe to be
as dangerous as the old arm-to-arm vaccination--if not more so. As
present vaccination is, therefore, a combination of human smallpox
and cow disease, should there be any wonder if it should convey to
the human body, at any time, some mild or deadly form of smallpox, or
some mild or deadly form of cow disease as shown in the several cases
herein illustrated? And it is a serious question here whether these
cases of cow disease and vaccinal disease herein illustrated are not
all really only various forms of that very various disease known as
“variola” or smallpox and all caused by vaccination, which is itself,
essentially, smallpox at base and origin! Indeed, many students of
this subject believe that modern vaccination, which originates from
smallpox virus, is partly responsible for causing modern epidemics of
smallpox, just as the old prohibited inoculation with smallpox virus
was proved to spread the disease and cause epidemics which declined
as soon as this inoculation was abandoned and prohibited by penal
law. In the same way smallpox has declined in every modern sanitary
community where vaccination has been reduced or abandoned, as already
shown on page 22, and this being the fact, the abolishment of all
compulsory vaccination, and the allowance of voluntary vaccination
only, must, surely, to say the least, commend itself to all thoughtful
and reasonable minds as a most wise, safe and conservative sanitary and
hygienic reform!

It should also be understood at this point that investigators have,
so far, failed to discover or isolate the specific germs of smallpox
“vaccinia” and foot and mouth disease, but these germs are all
known to belong to the class of microbes termed “ultra-microscopic”
and “filterable,” that is, so fine and minute that they cannot be
distinguished by the microscope and will pass through the finest
filters without change. This shows that the germ of foot and mouth
disease, whatever it may be, is in the same class with that of smallpox
and vaccinia, and may ultimately prove to be identical or closely
related, as I contend and believe to be the fact.


PROOF THAT VACCINATION CAUSES MONGREL SMALLPOX AND FOOT AND MOUTH
DISEASE AND THAT THE NATURE OF THE VACCINAL ERUPTIONS PROVES THE
IDENTITY OF THESE DISEASES

The nature and location of the eruptions found in natural smallpox and
in “Generalized Vaccination,” “Acute Pemphigus,” “Virulent Cowpox” and
“Foot and Mouth Disease” conclusively prove that these several diseases
are closely related, or identical in their essential nature, and are
probably varieties of the same generic disease.

For example, no disease but smallpox and its relatives has the profuse
vesicular or partly pustular eruptions _on the inside of the mouth
and throat_ combined with vesicular or pustular eruptions, usually
of “umbilicated” form, on the skin of the body and limbs. Now, these
characteristic and combined eruptions are distinctly found in both the
animal and human cases of virulent cowpox or foot and mouth disease
shown herein and all caused by, and originating from, vaccination,
which is, of course, in itself, nothing but a form of smallpox in
substance and origin. These characteristic eruptions are particularly
well shown in the human cases illustrated in Figs. 11, 12 and 13,
also in the case of the negro naval carpenter on page 122, and in the
case of the English baby on page 123, which latter is a particularly
complete, frightful and convincing case of this positive proof against
vaccination. Substantially the same conditions exist also in the many
cases of Foot and Mouth Disease in cattle, illustrated in Figs. 7, 8,
8½ and 9, in all of which cases the same eruptions occur inside the
mouth and throat and on the feet, teats and udder, and sometimes on
other parts of the external skin similar to what occur in the human
subject. For typical eruptions on teats and udder, see Fig. 8½, page
95, taken from _Farmers’ Bulletin_, No. 666, before cited, issued by U.
S. Department of Agriculture.


AN INDICTMENT AGAINST BOVINE VACCINATION

If, therefore, the apologists for vaccination now wish to deny or
excuse its responsibility for causing Mongrel Smallpox or Foot and
Mouth Disease in animals and man, as herein clearly shown, they cannot
do so, as the cases here illustrated surely carry their own proof on
their very faces, as just pointed out, and each case carries the “sign
manual” of this deadly vaccination-pox branded on the body of each
victim, so plain, indelible and convicting that no vaccination apology
can erase it.

I, therefore, believe that the facts now herein disclosed constitute
nothing less than a moral and medical indictment against all Bovine
Vaccination, particularly that evil practice of compulsory vaccination
which would force this dangerous disease of “vaccination-pox” upon
child or adult, soldier or sailor, against free will and consent, and
under the false representation that it is necessary for health and is
perfectly safe and harmless, whereas it is, in fact, highly dangerous
to human and animal life and frequently more dangerous and fatal than
natural smallpox, as fully demonstrated in these pages.


HOW ONE STRAIN OF VACCINE VIRUS ORIGINATED FROM ONE SMALLPOX TRAMP--AND
AN INFECTED COW. SHOCKING LETTER FROM A MANUFACTURER OF VIRUS TO A
DOCTOR

      The ---- Vaccine Farms,

      Dr. ---- & Co., Proprietors.

    The Largest and Most Complete Vaccine Establishment in the
    World. Only Vaccine Awarded a Medal by The World’s Columbian
    Exposition.

      M ---- Pa., Oct. 25, 1906.

      Dr. J. W. Hodge,
      Niagara Falls, N. Y.

      Dear Doctor:

    In response to your inquiry of the 22nd inst., we beg to state
    that Vaccine Virus or its active principle is a subject about
    which very little is definitely known. We are only able to
    arrive at the results obtained from certain conditions.

    It was thought by Dr. ----, the founder of our establishment,
    that he had discovered a case of spontaneous cowpox, and we
    have been using as one of our strains of seed virus, this
    source for nearly twenty years. It later developed, however,
    that the case referred to evidently was inoculated by a tramp
    having smallpox and who slept in the stable....

    We regret our inability to give you more definite information
    on the subject, but trust the above may be of some value to you.

      Very truly yours,
      Dr. ---- & Co.
      By ----------- .,
      Manager.


This letter surely speaks for itself, with shocking force, as to the
vile known and unknown nature of vaccine virus, and needs no further
comment here.


    Biological Department,

    PARKE, DAVIS & COMPANY,

    Home Offices and Laboratories.

    Detroit, Mich., March 27, 1905.

    Mr. Chas. M. Higgins, 271 Ninth St.,

    Brooklyn, N. Y.

    Dear Sir:

    Your communication on the subject of vaccine virus has been
    received and contents noted.

    What you say about the confusion existing in the minds of the
    medical profession as shown by medical text-books regarding
    the origin of vaccine is entirely true. No one seems to know
    positively the exact nature of this product. It would seem
    to us, however, that the theory that cowpox is but modified
    smallpox, is the most tenable one. Particularly does this seem
    true in view of the facts reported by Dr. Monckton Copeman,
    Director of the Government Vaccine work in London, that he had
    been able to take smallpox virus, transmit it to monkeys, from
    monkeys to heifers, and from heifers to man, the resulting
    vaccination on the human subject being identically the same as
    that produced by vaccine as ordinarily prepared. Furthermore it
    was shown that the persons vaccinated with this vaccine, when
    exposed to smallpox, were immune. In other words, the chain of
    evidence seems very complete, that by properly transferring
    the smallpox virus from man to animals of different species it
    became so modified in the transmission that, when applied to
    heifers, it produced typical vaccinia, and was found to fill
    every requirement as a means of protecting against smallpox
    when applied to unimmunized children.

    On theoretical grounds it seems to us that this is a very
    plausible explanation of the origin of vaccinia. During
    Jenner’s time smallpox was very prevalent and nothing could
    be more natural than for persons recovering from smallpox
    to transmit the disease to the udders of cows, producing an
    infection which, on account of the difference in the species of
    the animal, modified the smallpox virus.

    Regretting that we are unable to state more positively the
    exact relation between the two diseases and the origin of the
    seed as used by manufacturers, we remain,

      Very sincerely yours,
      (Signed) PARKE, DAVIS & CO.


THE DISPUTED OR UNKNOWN ORIGIN AND NATURE OF MODERN VACCINE VIRUS
EMPHASIZED. LETTER FROM PARKE, DAVIS & CO., ONE OF THE LARGEST MAKERS
OF VIRUS IN THE U. S.

This letter, like the preceding one, frankly admits the doubt,
ignorance and confusion as to the origin of vaccine virus, and the
practically unknown origin and nature of the seed virus used by
manufacturers, except that it most probably originates in human
smallpox, pure and simple. This letter is given in full on the left and
speaks clearly for itself and is worth reading carefully on this most
important point as it shows the crude, unknown and unscientific basis
of all bovine vaccination which is proved out of the mouths of the
arch-vaccinators themselves. See also page 82.


AN ENGLISH SAILOR LOSES HIS ARM FROM COWPOX VACCINATION

[Illustration: FIG. 14. Before Vaccination]

[Illustration: FIG. 15. After Vaccination]


CASE OF HENRY PLANT

On September 1, 1911, at the age of eighteen years and eight months,
Henry Plant was admitted into the Royal Navy, at Wolverhampton, as a
second-class stoker, and passed a searching medical examination by a
naval doctor at Birmingham. He was sent to Portsmouth, served on the
“Victory” till September 24, and was then drafted to the “Renown.”
Shortly afterwards he was vaccinated in three places, high up on the
left shoulder. On October 19, 1911, he was admitted to the Royal Naval
Hospital, Haslar, suffering from influenza. Severe shooting pains from
the left shoulder to the finger-tips developed, and for sixteen days he
was treated for rheumatism. After sixteen days’ intense suffering an
operation was performed, an abscess was discovered, and from this time
till the arm was amputated on July 9, 1912, the poor fellow suffered
unceasingly. Four Members of Parliament took up the case, and the final
result was a compassionate grant of £50 compensation and the offer of
a situation at Devonport under the Admiralty. Representatives worked
for nearly seven months to secure justice for the young man, and though
the Admiralty have never admitted that the loss of the arm was due to
vaccination, their action in compensating Plant is an admission of
responsibility. The facts in this and the following case are taken from
a circular issued by The National Anti-Vaccination League, London.


DEATH OF AN ENGLISH SOLDIER FROM TYPHOID VACCINATION. A TYPICAL CASE

The _Finchley Press_, for November 13, 1914, contained the following
particulars:


    “MILITARY HONOURS.

    “FUNERAL OF A FINCHLEY DRILL-INSTRUCTOR YESTERDAY.

    “Drill-Instructor Nichols, of 42, Sedgemere Avenue, who was
    well known in Finchley, has passed away at the age of fifty-one
    as the result of _the after effects of inoculation_. A big,
    strong, healthy-looking man, the news will come as a surprise
    to those who knew him.

    “There was a large attendance at St. Marylebone Cemetery at the
    funeral yesterday (Thursday) afternoon, when Mr. Nichols was
    buried with military honours.”

A resident at East Finchley sent the following particulars to the
Anti-Vaccination League of London:

    “Mr. Nichols had been a Territorial for about eight years, and
    as a boy was intended for Sandhurst College, but circumstances
    prevented this. A keen soldier, and particularly clever
    at drilling recruits, he was being kept for Home Service.
    Understanding that inoculation was compulsory for the men, he
    underwent the operation as an example and encouragement.

    [Illustration:

        FIG. 16. Sergeant H. Nichols, of East Finchley, England,
        died on November 4, 1914, from the effects of anti-typhoid
        inoculation.
    ]

    “On Saturday, October 24, he was inoculated a second time on
    the left side of chest. He was taken ill at once and went home
    to bed, complaining of a dreadful beating on the top of his
    brain. On the Monday he reported himself ill and was given
    the half-day off with the others, but passed for duty for the
    Tuesday and Wednesday and sent on an eight-mile march. On the
    Thursday he woke up with severe trembling, later on partial
    paralysis set in with very severe delirium, kidney trouble,
    swollen tongue and many other distressing symptoms. Also
    his heart, which had always been passed as perfectly sound,
    was very bad. Two nurses and his own doctor (a believer in
    inoculation) attended him. On the day of his death, November 4,
    his pulse was 144.

    “Sergeant Nichols was a very strong man, never ill, and looked
    more like forty than fifty years of age. His photograph
    indicates his ‘fitness.’ For some time before his death he
    did sergeant’s work and was known as full platoon sergeant,
    but the papers verifying this only came through, Mrs. Nichols
    understood, just about the time of his death, so that he is
    described as corporal on death certificate, but she says he had
    a sergeant’s funeral and is described as such on the gravestone.

    “Mr. Nichols’ death was a great shock to his friends, some of
    whom saw him two weeks before death, when he was telling them
    how ‘very fit’ he was feeling, and how thoroughly his heart was
    in his work.”

The death certificate in this case gives the cause of death as:

    1. “Anti-Typhoid Vaccination.” 2. “Pneumonia.”


SICKNESS AND DEATH FROM VACCINATIONS IN U. S. ARMY

We cite this fatal English case here out of many others on record
in this country and England because it is so typical and such a
plain example of many cases of sickness and death caused by typhoid
vaccination since its adoption several years ago. How many cases of
illness or death have been truly caused by this and other kinds of
vaccination in the Army and Navy, in recent years, can probably be
accurately determined only by a special committee of investigation
appointed by the Commander-in-Chief or by Congress, and so selected as
to be entirely free of any medical or professional interest or bias.

The office of the Surgeon General of the U. S. Army in answer to
my request for information on this point admits that many cases of
sickness have been caused by smallpox and typhoid vaccination in the
Army in the year 1917, but states that no deaths have been caused by
any form of vaccination in said year 1917, and that the data for the
year 1918 are not yet available. The figures admitted for sickness from
the two forms of vaccination stated seem to be serious and significant
and are now given below in the words of the letter addressed to me from
the Surgeon General’s office, March 15, 1919, as follows:

    “The number of men admitted to sick report during 1917 for
    typhoid vaccination was 10,549, or a rate of 15.54 for each one
    thousand men.

    “For smallpox vaccination the number admitted was 9,059, or a
    rate of 13.35 for each one thousand men.

    “The total number of days lost as the result of typhoid
    vaccination was 28,679 and for smallpox 34,814.”

Now, I think that this shows a rather serious and significant amount
of sickness which can thus incapacitate about fifteen men out of every
thousand for several days, or about one and a half per cent. of the
whole Army! And, surely, where such deliberately inflicted vaccinal
diseases forced on the soldiers cause such an amount of sickness as is
here admitted, they are also likely to cause death in some cases and do
frequently cause death in many cases, as I have already demonstrated
beyond question.

I, therefore, believe that the statement that no deaths have been
caused in the U. S. Army from vaccination in 1917 is possibly not
correct, and that a careful investigation by unbiased investigators
would probably show that many deaths have been so caused directly or
indirectly by the present barbarous system of compulsory vaccination,
or inflicted disease, which admittedly causes so much sickness.
Vaccinating doctors who believe in this barbarism of compulsory disease
and force it upon their helpless patients under the false pleas that
it is actually necessary, perfectly harmless and surely effective,
have obviously an evil professional bias and interest to deny and
conceal the real facts whenever some “complication” or “infection”
caused by the vaccination arises and extends and finally kills the
patient; and in such case the coercive doctor can very easily satisfy
his conscience and compromise “statistics” by recording the death as
due solely to one or more of the “complications” and not at all to the
vaccination, which, as a matter of fact, I know to be a common thing
with vaccinators in civic practice. Indeed, it is admitted in official
reports that a similar careless practice as to false diagnosis and
incorrect report of cause of death exists in some cases in the U. S.
Army where, for example, actual typhoid fever in vaccinated men had
been reported as “Influenza” and where death of vaccinated men from
typhoid was entered as due solely to one of the complications such as
“Peritonitis,” “Broncho-Pneumonia,” etc. See page 207, showing failure
of vaccination in U. S. Army, from Report of the Chief Surgeon of the
A. E. F. in France.

The English example of Sergeant Nichols, above given, well illustrates
the very grave and sudden illness frequently caused by typhoid
vaccination, sometimes resulting in death and usually involving some
form of paralysis, heart failure, meningitis and pneumonia, as in this
Nichols case, where evidently paralysis and pneumonia were the two
chief complicating and terminal diseases which resulted in death. This
fact is very significant here because meningitis and pneumonia are now
two of the chief causes of death in the Army, and there is a strong
chain of evidence showing that these two diseases have a positive
relation to vaccination and are probably caused or aggravated thereby,
and this point is most important in showing the dangerous infecting
nature of vaccination both in itself and in its relation to and
combination with other disease infections, as I will prove in the next
paragraph.


MOST IMPORTANT MEDICAL POINT ESTABLISHED. RELATION OF VACCINATION
TO THE TWO CHIEF CAUSES OF DEATH IN THE ARMY--PNEUMONIA AND
MENINGITIS--PROVED

It is a most interesting and suggestive fact that two of the chief
causes of death in the Army are meningitis and pneumonia, and it is
also most significant that the Army death-rate from these two diseases,
both relatively and absolutely, is much higher than in the civil
population, although the Army is composed of picked men of the highest
physical type and best health, while the civil population contains all
the weaklings and diseased and the average types. On this important
point see the latest Report of the Surgeon General of the United States
Army for 1918, covering the statistics of the year 1917. On pages 44,
236, 285 and 286 in this report it is shown that the chief causes of
death in the Army in 1917 were pneumonia, measles and meningitis in
the order stated, and that pneumonia causes about thirty-two per cent.
of all deaths, measles thirty per cent., meningitis ten per cent. and
scarlet fever about two per cent. As regards the greater frequency of
these diseases in the Army than in the civil population, it is shown at
page 236 that measles is two hundred times more frequent, meningitis
fifteen times more frequent, pneumonia twelve times more frequent,
and scarlet fever ten times more frequent in the Army than in the
civil population! It is, therefore, believed that this extraordinarily
high death-rate in the Army from meningitis and pneumonia, where it
should be the lowest, is due to the extensive repeated and multiple
vaccinations of various kinds now used in the Army, which greatly
exceed the ratio of vaccination in the civil population. This fact,
combined with the closely related fact that meningitis and pneumonia
are regularly and constantly two of the most common complications
in fatal cases of vaccination, furnishes convincing proof of the
possible responsibility of vaccination for being the cause of the
epidemics of meningitis and pneumonia in our excessively vaccinated
Army within the last two years. For example, in many of the cases of
fatal vaccination, which I have investigated, or have on record, for
several years past, I find that pneumonia and meningitis figure as
the chief complicating diseases which have caused death in acting as
a secondary, double, or mixed infection with the primary infection
of the vaccination, and that these two diseases are the most common
complications together with septicemia and lockjaw in all fatal
vaccinations. Indeed, the several fatal vaccinations illustrated
in this chapter of vaccination horrors prove this point clearly,
as most of them show pneumonia or meningitis or both as the fatal
complications. For example, in the case of the Waters boy described
on page 168, it appears from the autopsy and hospital report in my
possession that pneumonia and meningitis were the fatal complications
with the vaccination and are set down in these records as the chief
causes of death.

Likewise, in the case of the English soldier and the English baby on
pages 135 and 123, pneumonia appears as the complicating disease and
the final cause of death in both cases. Furthermore, in Dr. Howe’s six
fatal cases in 1902, described on page 113, one of which is illustrated
in Fig. 11, page 110, it was found that severe lung lesions existed
in four of these cases involving lobar and broncho-pneumonia and
pleurisy. In the eleven cases of fatal vaccination taken from Mr.
Loyster’s pamphlet on pages 145 to 159, meningitis figures as the fatal
complication in three cases, paralysis in three cases and lockjaw in
five cases.

In explanation of these several cases where vaccination has evidently
acted as a primary infection, complicated with the secondary or mixed
infection of some other co-acting disease, it may be stated that the
germs of these very deadly diseases, such as lockjaw, meningitis and
pneumonia, seem to be normally diffused widely in the human body, or
in its surroundings, where they are normally perfectly inert, dormant
and harmless, but are aroused into deadly activity by the dangerous
primary infecting action of vaccination, which, being a pus or
septicemic infection, seems to provide conditions for the growth or
activation of the dormant disease germs which would otherwise remain
perfectly harmless, just as gunpowder remains perfectly inert and
harmless until touched by an igniting spark. And it would, therefore,
seem that vaccination thus evidently acts as an igniter or “activator”
to these dormant indwelling infections and causes the double or
“mixed infection” which finally produces the deadly effect. In fact,
it seems that most deaths are caused by double or mixed infections,
or by several diseases acting in combination or complication, and
that comparatively few deaths are caused by one simple disease acting
alone. And it also seems to be a fact that the vitality of the human
body is usually so great and its natural safeguards so many that it
ordinarily yields only to a complicated attack of several diseases
combined. If this view is correct, and it seems to accord with modern
medical theories and experience, then the folly of the whole scheme
of multiple vaccinations seems to be apparent in the evident fallacy
of expecting to defend the body against natural infections by filling
it with a whole series of inflicted infections which arouse the most
deadly but dormant infections already in the body! Furthermore, many
of these inflicted infections are almost purely experimental and
unknown as to their really final or ultimate effect. In other cases
the infections are known to be more or less dangerous and deadly in
their possibilities, and even at their best have the effect only of
giving immunity for a short while, perhaps for a few months, from such
comparatively minor diseases as smallpox and typhoid fever, while they
make the human body more susceptible to diseases of ten or one hundred
times greater frequency and fatality, such as pneumonia, meningitis,
measles and scarlet fever.

At this point we might again quote from one of the latest medical
works and one of the leading doctors of to-day, viz., from Osler’s
“Principles and Practice of Medicine,” eighth edition, 1918, page 330,
where the point just argued is clearly recognized as to the effect
of vaccination in exciting other diseases and is expressed in these
distinct words:

    “Influence of Vaccination Upon Other Diseases: A quiescent
    malady may be lighted into activity by vaccination. This
    has happened with congenital syphilis, occasionally with
    tuberculosis.”

Now, as regards the extraordinary prevalence of the two other diseases,
scarlet fever and measles, in the Army, it is a rather strange and
suggestive coincidence that these two deadly infantile diseases are
more closely related to smallpox and vaccination than any other known
diseases,--so much so, in fact, that in olden times they were actually
considered as forms of smallpox and were not differentiated therefrom
as in modern times; and they are, of course, very often, to-day,
confounded with smallpox by inexpert doctors before the eruption is
fully developed, or in mild types of smallpox which are often mistaken
for scarlet fever or measles. These facts would therefore seem to
indicate that the excessive smallpox or cowpox vaccinations in the army
may have had some relation to the excessive measles and scarlet fever
as well as to the excessive pneumonia and meningitis; and this point
is worthy of careful consideration, to say the least, and cannot be
consistently or logically ignored by any unbiased student of epidemic
diseases and present-day medical practices.

I therefore submit, Mr. President, that in the many co-related and
convincing facts above stated, there is surely presented a strong chain
of circumstantial evidence showing that the excessive vaccination in
the Army and Navy may be the cause of the excessive death-rate from
meningitis and pneumonia, and in this showing there is surely to be
found the strongest and most compelling reason why all compulsory
vaccination should now be permanently abolished in the Army and Navy,
and only voluntary vaccination permitted hereafter.


THE SLAUGHTER OF THE INNOCENTS ILLUSTRATED. HOW LITTLE CHILDREN ARE
INFECTED AND KILLED BY INFLICTED DISEASE IN THE “SAVAGE RITE” OF
VACCINATION

[Illustration: FIG. 17. The “Savage Rite” of Vaccination illustrated in
action.

    “The Medicine Man performs his Savage Rites.”
      _From Harper’s Weekly, February 24, 1912._
]

This picture, with its expressive title, is taken from an old number of
_Harper’s Weekly_ and shows how vaccination commences in the acts of
wounding and infecting the forced, frightened, suffering and protesting
children. The following pages will show how this medical savagery ends
in the disabling and death of so many of our little children all over
this land from blood poisoning in its many different forms, caused
by or resulting from the vaccination. This slaughter of our precious
children now reaches a most serious and shocking figure every year, far
in excess of deaths from smallpox, and this fact is most persistently
and shamefully denied and concealed by our vaccinating doctors, who,
at present, control our Departments of Health and Vital Statistics.
Surely this medical savagery, proved by so many flagrant and undeniable
examples in the preceding and following pages, cries out to Human
and to Divine Justice for a Radical Medical Reform, which should be
either the Abolishment of All Vaccination or the Abolishment of All
Compulsion.




  SOME LEAVES FROM
  MR. LOYSTER’S PAMPHLET

  “VACCINATION RESULTS IN NEW YORK
  STATE IN 1914”

  SHOWING PHOTOS AND PARTICULARS
  OF MANY CHILDREN
  KILLED BY VACCINATION IN 1914

  _By_ JAMES A. LOYSTER
  CAZENOVIA, N. Y.

  In Memory of his Son
  Lewis Freeborn Loyster

  who Died September 21, 1914
  as a sequence of
  Vaccination

  _Note._ Mr. Loyster’s full pamphlet contains forty pages
  showing fifty-one cases of vaccinal disasters, thirty of which
  were fatal. Only about a third of these fatal cases have been
  selected for illustration here.--C. M. H.


INTRODUCTION

THE object of this pamphlet is to publish the result of a painstaking
inquiry into the effects of vaccination in the State of New York in
1914.

My immediate personal interest in the subject is due to the death of my
only son as a result of vaccination.

I have been a believer in and advocate of vaccination. I was myself
vaccinated in childhood by the arm-to-arm method without ill effects.
It was in accordance with this belief and in an honest effort to
comply with the law that I had my son vaccinated. Even his death did
not entirely shake my faith in the practice, but it led me to make an
investigation of the results of vaccination in New York State in 1914.
Owing to the difficulty of making a canvass in the great cities, no
effort was made to collect statistics in New York and Buffalo, and
but little in Rochester, Syracuse or Albany. My investigations were,
therefore, practically confined to the rural or semi-rural portions of
the State.

The result has been the gathering of such an appalling story of death
and illness as to completely shatter my belief in the wisdom of
enforced vaccination.

It should be understood that I am not a physician. This leaves me free
to write with greater frankness in certain instances than would be
permitted to a doctor by the ethics of his profession.

I desire to be understood as seeking nothing but the common good of
humanity. In the pages that follow I have attempted to write without
bias as far as is humanly possible. Only established facts are
presented; extravagant statements have been avoided; in no single
instance has a quotation been made from an anti-vaccination source. I
have felt that my case is so strong that I could afford to be generous
in my arguments.

The reader is invited to go over the facts as presented and draw his
own conclusions as to the accuracy of the deductions made.

  JAMES A. LOYSTER.

Cazenovia, N. Y., Jan. 5, 1915.

    _Note_. In the group pictures on the following pages the star
    indicates the victim of vaccination.--C. M. H.


CASE No. 1

[Illustration: OLIVE CRAMER]

    OLIVE CRAMER, daughter of Fred Cramer, 22 E. State St.,
    Gloversville, N. Y.

    Age 15.

    Vaccinated July 28 with vaccine “E.”

    Commenced to complain Aug. 24,--27 days from vaccination.

    Died Aug. 27.

    Diagnosis, “Tetanus following Vaccination.”

    This young woman’s health prior to vaccination is reported to
    have been “one hundred per cent. perfect.” She commenced to
    complain Aug. 24, and was stricken with convulsions Aug. 26.
    Death occurred at 11:15 P.M. on Aug. 27. She was conscious
    all the time except the last few hours. Jaws were locked and
    breathing labored. A brother vaccinated with the same tube of
    vaccine was so ill as to require an operation.


CASE No. 2

[Illustration: FREDERICK W. BOHMWETCH]

    FREDERICK W. BOHMWETCH, son of F. J. Bohmwetch, 308 Eighth St.,
    Watkins, N. Y.

    Age 10.

    Vaccinated Aug. 5.

    Commenced to complain Aug. 29,--24 days after vaccination.

    Died Sept. 2.

    Diagnosis, “Tetanus.”

    Complained first of stiff neck and arm. Aug. 30 diagnosed as
    lockjaw. Three thousand units antitoxin administered. Grew
    rapidly worse. Convulsions appeared at 3 A.M., Aug. 31. At 9
    A.M., 10,000 units antitoxin administered; again at 9 P.M. Head
    and back drawn back so that three pillows were necessary under
    small of back. More antitoxin administered Sept. 1. Unconscious
    at noon. Died Sept. 2.


CASE No. 3

[Illustration: REGINALD SIDNEY SUMSION]

    REGINALD SIDNEY SUMSION, only son of Geo. Sumsion,
    Gloversville, N. Y.

    Age 12.

    Vaccinated Aug. 11 with vaccine “E.”

    Died Sept. 11.

    Diagnosis, “Tetanus.”

    This boy was “splendidly healthy.” Never sick except with usual
    children’s diseases, until vaccinated. First complained that
    the back of his neck and jaw were stiff. On the 7th could not
    walk. Convulsions appeared. Antitoxin administered. Removed
    to hospital. Convulsions continued very severe. Chloroform
    administered. Convulsions continued through the 7th and 8th.
    Very weak on afternoon of 9th. Oxygen administered at 6 P.M.
    Died 6:45 A.M., Sept. 11. No abrasion of any kind found on body
    except vaccination wound.


CASE No. 7

[Illustration: FREDERICK STINEFOOT]

    FREDERICK STINEFOOT, only son of William H. Stinefoot, No. 226
    Mullett St., Dunkirk, N. Y.

    Age 10.

    Vaccinated Sept. 22.

    Commenced to complain Oct. 5,--13 days from vaccination.

    Died Oct. 13.

    Diagnosed “Tetanus.”

    This child was in splendid health. The night before he was
    stricken he was feeling especially well. On Monday morning his
    neck was stiff and shoulders all drawn up. Dr. Hallenbeck was
    called but he insisted that the family physician be employed.
    He was out and Dr. Ellis, the health officer, was called.
    The case was diagnosed as tetanus. Convulsions appeared at 6
    o’clock. No serum was available until Tuesday, Oct. 6, about
    10 A.M. A quantity injected intra-spinously. Removed to Brooks
    Hospital, Dunkirk, about 4 P.M. same day and died fifteen
    minutes after admission.


CASE No. 8

[Illustration: JAMES LOUIS MURRAY]

    JAMES LOUIS MURRAY, son of James T. Murray, Glen Cove, L. I.

    Age 6.

    Vaccinated Sept. 15, vaccine “H.”

    Commenced to complain Oct. 3,--18 days from vaccination.

    Died Oct. 10.

    Diagnosed “Tetanus.”

    This child had no prolonged period of unconsciousness. He had
    convulsions and other typical symptoms of tetanus. His health
    is reported good prior to vaccination.


CASE No. 18

[Illustration: EDWARD JOHNSON]

    EDWARD JOHNSON, son of J. Johnson, No. 65 South St.,
    Binghamton, N. Y.

    Age 11 years 7 months.

    Vaccinated Aug. 6, vaccine “E.”

    Commenced to complain Aug. 14,--8 days from vaccination.

    Died Aug. 26.

    First diagnosed “Blood Poison.”

    Subsequent diagnosis “Typhoid Meningitis.”

    Patient had been in perfect health prior to vaccination. He was
    ordered to hospital for an operation to which parents would not
    consent. There were no convulsions. He was unconscious about a
    week. Paralysis of the throat a prominent symptom. Breathing
    much labored.

    Both this case and No. 17 were subjects of sharp controversy
    among doctors and others in the city of Binghamton. There is
    no lack of medical opinion as to vaccination having been the
    primary cause of illness, but this is stoutly denied by other
    physicians. Considered collectively with the similar cases
    herewith reported, it seems that there can be little doubt of
    their being similar to the rest of the vaccination fatalities.


CASE No. 19

    BELLE HINMAN, daughter of Prof. M. C. Hinman, Tully, N. Y.

    Age 7.

    Vaccinated July 25, vaccine “H.”

    Commenced to complain Aug. 7,--12 days from vaccination.

    Died Aug. 10.

    First diagnosis, “Acute Indigestion.”

    Final diagnosis, “Cerebro-spinal Meningitis.”

[Illustration: BELLE HINMAN]

This little girl was also in perfect health and unusually well
developed for age, both physically and mentally. She complained of
feeling ill on Aug. 7 with symptoms indicating a digestive disturbance.
The local physician called it acute indigestion. She soon lapsed
into unconsciousness and never rallied. Expert counsel was called
and case pronounced cerebro-spinal meningitis. A lumbar puncture
disclosed in spinal column a clear fluid under normal pressure.
Cultures were sterile; intra-spinous injection of the Flexner serum
without beneficial effects. Paralysis was extensive, involving the
throat; breathing labored and death due to respiratory insufficiency.
Temperature elevated during entire illness. All symptoms were so
exactly parallel to those of Cases 24 and 25 as to warrant the
suspicion that this, too, was infantile paralysis.


CASE No. 20

[Illustration: JAMES C. CHURCHILL]

    JAMES C. CHURCHILL, son of Carl F. Churchill, Dolgeville, N. Y.

    Age 5 years 9 months.

    Vaccinated about Feb. 12, vaccine “H.”

    Commenced to complain in a few days.

    Died July 23.

    Diagnosed “Cerebro-spinal Meningitis.”

    This boy had good health until he was vaccinated. He commenced
    to complain in a few days and was never well afterwards. He was
    unconscious for 10 days before death. Right side paralyzed.
    Compare with Cases 19, 24, 25.


CASE No. 24

[Illustration: WILBUR DOYLE]

    WILBUR DOYLE, son of Ivan Doyle, New Woodstock, Madison County,
    N. Y.

    Age 8.

    Vaccinated Aug. 28, vaccine “E.”

    Commenced to complain Sept. 9,--11 days from vaccination.

    Died Sept. 14.

    Diagnosis, “Infantile Paralysis.”

    This boy became unconscious Sept. 9. Temperature nearly 106.
    Kidneys involved; necessary to use catheter. Temperature
    dropped to about normal for few hours. General paralysis
    appeared. Throat paralyzed Sept. 13. Could not swallow.
    Temperature again became extremely high, reaching 107.4 rectal
    at 3 A.M. on the 13th. Remained unconscious until death, which
    occurred at 10:35 P.M. Sept. 14.

_Note._ The make of vaccine virus used in the different fatal cases
shown herein is indicated by the Code letters “E” and “H.” E indicates
the virus made by the Mulford Company of Philadelphia, and H the
virus made by Parke Davis & Company of Detroit. These were the two
manufacturers whose virus is officially alleged to have caused the
epidemic of Foot and Mouth Disease in 1908. See page 99.--C. M. H.


CASE No. 25

[Illustration: LEWIS FREEBORN LOYSTER]

    LEWIS FREEBORN LOYSTER, son of James A. Loyster, Cazenovia,
    N. Y.

    Age 11.

    Vaccinated Aug. 29, vaccine “E.”

    Commenced to complain Sept. 10,--11 days from vaccination.

    Died Sept. 21.

    Diagnosed “Infantile Paralysis.”

    This boy was the picture of health. To quote the attending
    physician, he was “a splendid specimen” physically. On the
    night of Sept. 10 he had a bad headache. The next morning
    at six was no better. At ten he was found by his mother
    unconscious. He was very constipated and slightly nauseated.
    Vomited once. Examination of urine showed indican in
    considerable quantities. The initial diagnosis was acute
    indigestion. Blood examined and found normal except for an
    excess of white corpuscles, explained as a natural sequence
    of vaccination. Unconsciousness continued. On Sept. 13 lumbar
    puncture made. Fluid from spinal cord not under pressure;
    perfectly transparent, subject to microscopic and culture
    tests; proved absolutely sterile. Case diagnosed as infantile
    paralysis of the cerebral type. Temperature very high, ranging
    from 104 to 106 rectal. About Sept. 14 throat became paralyzed.
    For five days could not swallow a drop. Food administered
    through rectum; medicine hypodermically. Paralysis of right leg
    and arm appeared about Sept. 17. Lungs filled with thick mucus.
    Respiration labored. Slight cyanosis. Small amount of oxygen
    administered continually after Sept. 16. Death occurred at
    10:10 P.M. on Sept. 21 from paralysis of respiratory muscles.
    Temperature about 107 at death. Microscopic examination of
    spinal cord after death confirmed diagnosis as infantile
    paralysis.


CASE No. 27

[Illustration: RUTH A. MINNICK]

    RUTH A. MINNICK, daughter of S. V. Minnick, R. D. No. 2,
    Carthage, N. Y.

    Age 10½.

    Vaccinated Sept. 22.

    Commenced to complain Oct. 2,--10 days from vaccination.

    Died Oct. 10.

    Diagnosis, “Infantile Paralysis.”

    This little girl’s health was perfect. She and her older
    brother, age 13, were vaccinated on the same day. Both became
    ill, the little girl critically so. She had no convulsions; was
    unconscious four days; her throat was paralyzed. Death occurred
    as stated. The boy was “very sick” with symptoms “much like the
    girl,” but recovered.


CASE No. 28

    HOBART MINNICK, son of S. V. Minnick, R. D. No. 2, Carthage.

    Vaccinated Sept. 22.

    Commenced to complain Oct. 2 (10 days).

    Recovered.

    This boy, age 13, brother of Ruth Minnick, was vaccinated
    from same capsule as sister who died; was very sick with
    symptoms “about like the girl,” but recovered with no serious
    consequences. It appears almost certain that this was what
    may be called an “abortive” or “arrested” case of infantile
    paralysis. The fact that he was vaccinated simultaneously
    with his sister, who died of a transparent case of infantile
    paralysis, is strong presumptive evidence of a common origin
    of the two cases in the vaccine. Cumulative evidence of
    this common origin in the virus, and of the possibility of
    transmitting infantile paralysis by means of the vaccine
    abrasion, is found in a _third case in the same house_, as
    follows:


CASE No. 29

    CHARLES S. MINNICK, son of S. V. Minnick, Carthage, N. Y.

    Age 6.

    Vaccinated Oct. 6.

    Commenced to complain Oct. 16,--10 days from vaccination.

    Recovered.

    Diagnosis, “Vaccination.”

    The first unfavorable symptom was kidney trouble. He was
    _unconscious and helpless for two weeks_. Breathing labored.
    Is recovering slightly crippled. This also seems to be a
    transparent case of infantile paralysis. These three cases in
    the same house, with identical symptoms, following vaccination
    in exactly the same period of time, furnish the most damaging
    evidence against vaccine that has been brought to light in the
    present investigation.


MR. LOYSTER’S ARGUMENT AND PROOF THAT INFANTILE PARALYSIS IS CAUSED BY
VACCINATION

The theory of the possibility of conveying infantile paralysis through
vaccine abrasions as well as the probability of the vaccine having
contained the germs receives startling confirmation in three cases in
the home of S. V. Minnick of Carthage, reported under numbers 27, 28,
and 29. Ruth, 10½, and Hobart, 13, were vaccinated the same day _from
the same tube of virus_. Both became very sick in just ten days from
vaccination. The boy, being older, recovered, after a severe illness,
with symptoms much like the girl. Ruth died after a plain case of
infantile paralysis, which was so reported by her attending physician.
Four days before the little girl’s death, in compliance with the
demand of the school authorities, the little brother, Charles, age 6,
was vaccinated. In precisely 10 days he, also, became very sick, with
symptoms practically identical with the other two children. He was
_unconscious and helpless_ for two weeks, but recovered with a slight
residual paralysis. He was attended by another physician and the only
diagnosis reported is “vaccination.”

Simultaneous cases of infantile paralysis in the same family have
hitherto been so rare as to excite comment. Many physicians with large
practice have never had an instance in their entire practice. Here are
_three_ in one house.

The theory of “subsequent infection” needs extensive “bracing” in this
instance; and then there is Case 19 with onset in 12 days; Case 24,
onset in 11 days; Case 25, onset in 11 days; unquestionably paralysis
cases, with practically identical incubation periods, all contributing
evidence of a common and simultaneous infection. What other possible
common origin except the vaccine virus is it possible to place under
suspicion? It is unthinkable that these children, widely scattered
in different portions of the State, with no history of near-by
paralysis cases, could have each accidentally acquired the germ in the
vaccination wound exactly ten or eleven days from vaccination. Such a
theory presupposes a universal distribution of the poliomyelitis germ
entirely at variance with observation and experience.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Note._ Vaccination is acknowledged to be one of the causes
    of Infantile Paralysis by a recent medical authority on this
    subject, Dr. Oskar Vulpius, in a book published by Wm. Wood &
    Company of New York, 1912.--C. M. H.


MR. LOYSTER’S CONCLUSIONS

It has been the intent of the writer to present facts rather than to
participate in a controversy that is still unsettled after a century
of argument; but as a result of the investigation of over fifty
vaccination disasters and the almost constant study of vaccination
literature for several months, it seems that the following conclusions
are warranted and should be frankly stated:

(1) Vaccination has been the cause, directly or indirectly, of the
death of at least fifty children in New York State in 1914. The record
herewith printed gives only the cases occurring in rural or suburban
districts. Neither the time nor means were at hand to make a canvas of
the cities. While only 27 fatalities are here recorded, some of which
are not clearly proven, it is believed that were the figures from the
cities obtainable, possible errors in the list would be more than
offset and enough reported to swell the total to the number given.

(2) In addition to the deaths an appalling trail of illness has
followed vaccination. It has been entirely beyond the scope of this
publication to print even a partial record of these cases.

(3) The cost in illness and destruction of child life is entirely
out of proportion to the amount of protection against smallpox that
is attained or needed. There were but three deaths from smallpox in
the entire State, including Greater New York, in 1914. In one rural
district twenty miles in diameter, where four children died from
vaccination, there has not been a single case of smallpox within the
memory of any person now living.

(4) Vaccination of children is wrong in principle, is not in harmony
with the trend of the best medical practice and should be abandoned.
It is being more clearly understood every day that many of the serious
ills of later years are directly traceable to the so-called children’s
diseases. Whereas the tendency was once to encourage the having of
such diseases so as to “have them over with,” the tendency now is to
keep the child just as free from them as can be, and postpone them to
as late an age as possible. A normal vaccination is as serious as some
of the diseases of childhood, without taking into further account its
sinister possibilities.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Note._ I have a few hundred copies of Mr. Loyster’s valuable
    pamphlet now in hand, and can furnish full copies, on request,
    for ten cents each to cover cost and postage. The substance of
    the pamphlet is, however, embodied in the preceding pages.--C.
    M. H.


A CRY FOR HELP! HARROWING PERSONAL LETTERS FROM VICTIMS OF VACCINATION.
MEDICAL EVIL OF COMPULSORY DISEASE, CAUSING DEFORMITY AND DEATH IN
SCHOOL CHILDREN AND OTHERS, DENOUNCED AND REFORM DEMANDED

I have received many touching personal letters, during the past few
years, from victims of vaccination and from parents of slaughtered and
deformed children, and I now submit extracts from some of these letters
to show the horrible nature and extent of this evil and the strong
call that is going up all over this country for help to abolish this
evil. And this call must surely appeal to every humanized mind, lay or
medical, and particularly to all such minds in public place or power,
to do what they can for the investigation and legal suppression of this
barbarous medical crime of compulsory disease, which is now required
by an evil doctor-made law as a condition for entrance to our public
schools and for service in the Army and Navy.

    _No. 1._ Having read your article in last night’s paper on the
    dangers of vaccination I want to compliment you on the work of
    enlightening the masses that you and your league are doing.
    Both my brother and I are victims of vaccination, having, as
    children, after such an inoculation developed a severe disease
    of the eyes which has left both my brother’s eyes seriously
    impaired, and has left me with a _scar_ directly in front of
    the pupil of my right eye, obstructing the vision. Enough
    cannot be said to expose the folly of this barbarous practice
    of poisoning healthy human beings.--Mr. M., New York City, May
    5, 1914.

    _No. 2._ After reading your Warning against having children
    vaccinated I thought I would take the liberty to write you. I
    was always against vaccination, but was told my little girl
    could not enter the Public School unless I had her vaccinated,
    so I had our own Doctor come in. Before she was vaccinated
    she was perfectly well, but her arm turned black and she was
    out of her head at times. We were both afraid she would have
    blood poison, poor child suffered so. Her picture will show
    how healthy she was and the good care she got. But a short
    time after her arm got better she got malignant scarlet fever,
    and in twenty-four hours she was gone. I shall always lay it
    to the vaccination. I hope the time will come when the Health
    Board will see the mistake and allow children to go to school
    without having that vile stuff put in their healthy bodies. If
    I had another child I would keep it from school if it had to be
    vaccinated. I sincerely hope others will help you in your good
    work against vaccination.--Mrs. S., Brooklyn, N. Y., May 6,
    1914.

    _No. 3._ I know of a family in Poughkeepsie, three in number,
    who are terrible victims of vaccination, father and son
    cripples, and mother insane from grief. They have lost their
    home owing to the expense of operations caused from effects of
    vaccination.--Mrs. T., Hyde Park, N. Y., Aug. 18, 1914.

    _No. 4._ I have been told by some people that the visiting
    officer would vaccinate against any one’s wishes. I saw a
    few cases vaccinated last school term and they have not been
    able to attend school in one year. One child was so sick they
    had a doctor for four months every day, and is a cripple for
    life. Her head is drawn to one side. Another died of blood
    poison.--Mrs. V. D., Tivoli, N. Y., Aug. 22, 1914.

    _No. 5._ I am in earnest accord with your article in to-day’s
    paper. There are many deaths caused by vaccination and the
    blame placed on something else. For instance, my boy James
    was vaccinated in Chicago some years ago. He was eight years
    of age. A week after the vaccination his feet and limbs began
    to swell and pain him. Then he took so sick that I called in
    Chicago’s most noted physicians and specialists to consult on
    the case. They dosed, anointed, injected and did many things
    trying to counteract the poison, but all to no avail. The
    blessed, innocent little boy suffered the tortures of the
    damned; he wasted away and died in horrible agony. The doctor
    made out his death certificate, giving the case as “heart
    failure.” Now I have another boy eight years of age and I will
    go through hell before I will suffer him to have the matter
    taken from a festering sore of a cow and injected into his
    blood. What course must I pursue to defeat vaccination in this
    case?--Mr. O., New York City, Sept. 5, 1914.

    _No. 6._ I have a little boy eight years old. When he was four
    I found I had to have him vaccinated. I took him to my mother’s
    family doctor. He had been our doctor for forty years and
    always had great faith in him, and he vaccinated my little boy
    who was very strong and healthy. It went into blood poison, his
    little arm was so big and swollen, he got feverish and sick and
    our doctor was there every day for about a month and he was
    not getting any better and finally he told me I had better get
    another doctor, that he could do no more and my boy was getting
    very bad. I went and got a special doctor. He ordered my boy
    taken to a hospital, and there he was, did not know what minute
    they would have to cut his little arm off to save his life and
    so sick did not know what minute he might die. I don’t know
    of any sickness that would be worse than that was. I cannot
    describe it in a letter, and ever since he has not been well,
    he is so thin and pale and gets tired so easy. I know it is all
    on account of that vaccination and now I have two little girls,
    twins two years old. I don’t know what I would do if I had to
    have them vaccinated, which is indeed barbarous. I do not wish
    to see any one vaccinated again and suffer as my little boy
    did, his arm is thinner and weaker than the other one is. I do
    hope something can be done so our little children won’t have to
    be vaccinated.--Mrs. J., Herkimer, N. Y., Sept. 11, 1914.

    _No. 7._ I was made an invalid and helpless for a number of
    years from the effects of vaccination while attending College
    at Boston, Mass. If I can do anything to help you put out this
    practice I will be only too glad to write and give you my
    experience in full. It put me out of teaching and earning my
    living for ten years.--Miss S., Hoosick, N. Y., Sept. 15, 1914.

    _No. 8._ In answer to your kind letter expressing your deep
    sympathy for the loss of my two boys, I thank you, and will
    try and enlighten you the best I can. The virus that was used
    to vaccinate my children was the product of H. K. Mulford Co.
    of Philadelphia. My family doctor and the consulting physician
    diagnosed the case as Tetanus, caused by the virus. The
    children were hurried to the Penna. Hospital at Philadelphia,
    where the hospital physicians made the same statement. Chas.
    and Fred were two very healthy boys, never had a sick day, that
    is, to require the services of a doctor, they were vaccinated
    Sept. 2d, showed no signs of illness. Monday evening, Sept.
    27th, complained of sore throat, Tuesday grew worse, bodies
    began to get rigid. Operated on about 5:30 and given Antitoxin.
    Died 2:35 and 5:25 Wednesday A.M. In talking with a Mr. C. who
    is investigating the matter, he claims that a person who has
    been vaccinated may have smallpox and not show it outwardly, so
    that the preventive is as bad as the disease, and I consider it
    an unnecessary operation forced upon the people.--Mr. H. P.,
    Burlington, N. J., Oct. 7, 1915.

To this last letter the following answer was sent:

    Dear Sir: I thank you very much for your kind letter of
    Oct. 7th, giving me particulars as to the death of your two
    precious little boys from lockjaw caused by vaccination, and I
    hardly know how to express my horror at this misfortune and
    my sympathy with you in what, as you say, was an “entirely
    unnecessary operation forced upon the people”: but I have
    now determined, from a knowledge of a large number of cases
    like yours, which are occurring all over the country, to do
    everything I can for the balance of my life to bring about the
    repeal and prohibition of all compulsory vaccination in every
    shape and form as nothing less than a medical crime on the
    people. Within the last week three children have been killed in
    our own city from this evil.

    I have spent fully twenty-five thousand dollars in the last
    year in a newspaper campaign in our State to enlighten the
    people as to the great falsehoods and fatalities of compulsory
    vaccination and to bring about the repeal of the law, but the
    medical powers in the State, which profit by vaccination, had
    too much influence in the legislature and the law was only
    slightly altered, so as to take compulsory vaccination off the
    country districts and put it stronger on the ten large cities
    in the State where the enforcement of the law will be more
    profitable to the vaccinators. This new law is, however, so bad
    and illegal that I think it can be easily invalidated in our
    courts, and I shall continue to fight it until it is completely
    removed from our statute books as one of the greatest outrages
    on children ever committed by man.

    I believe that a special act should be passed by our
    legislatures to indemnify all parents whose children have been
    killed by these dangerous and unnecessary medical operations
    forced upon the people by an unwise law, and I will endeavor to
    have such an act introduced in our State at the next session of
    our legislature and would suggest that you propose a similar
    law in your own State.

  (Signed) CHAS. M. HIGGINS.
  Brooklyn, N. Y., Oct. 14, 1915.




LETTER FROM AN AGGRIEVED FATHER ON THE DEATH OF HIS LITTLE BOY FROM
VACCINATION

  4913 Church Avenue, Flatbush,
  Brooklyn, N. Y., July 27, 1915.

  Hon. ELIHU ROOT,
  President Constitutional Convention,
  Albany, N. Y.

  Sir:

    On October 16, 1914, I was compelled by the Board of Education
    of New York to have my son, Chester Stanley Waters, vaccinated
    as a condition to enter school.

    The operation was performed by a Board of Health Doctor in
    Public School No. 135, Flatbush, Brooklyn, on that date.

    On November 8, 1914, my son was taken sick with Tetanus, a
    direct result of that compulsory vaccination.

    I called in our family physician, Dr. A. R. Addy, 208 Lenox
    Road, Flatbush, who examined my boy, found a large vaccination
    wound containing a very considerable quantity of pus. Having
    removed this and cauterized the wound, diagnosed the case
    as Tetanus and advised his immediate removal to Kings Co.
    Hospital, which was done.

    He died in Hospital on November 14, 1914, inflicting upon me a
    punishment beyond words to describe.

    A poison of the most vile kind was injected into the pure,
    clean blood of my beautiful, healthy little boy (seven years
    of age), destroying his young life, bringing death to him in a
    most horrible manner.

    I learn you are engaged on an Amendment to the Constitution
    to remove compulsory vaccination as a condition to enter
    school and receive education, and I would most earnestly urge
    you to adopt such an Amendment. My boy was killed by the
    enforced vaccination, killed as a condition for exercising his
    _inalienable right to receive education_.

    I appeal to you, myself, a stricken father, punished beyond
    description, to save other fathers and mothers from such an
    awful fate as has been inflicted upon me.

    Trusting God will guide you and your associates, engaged in
    this work, to see the frightfulness and utter uselessness of
    this abominable law and adopt an Amendment sufficiently strong
    in our State Constitution to wipe it out forever.

    Protect our children!

  Yours very respectfully,
  (Signed) R. C. WATERS.

    _Note._ The Convention failed to adopt any Amendment concerning
    vaccination, and all the Amendments which it did recommend were
    defeated by popular vote at the next election.--C. M. H.


PROPOSED LAW TO COMPENSATE PARENTS FOR INJURY TO OR DEATH OF VACCINATED
CHILDREN

As suggested in a previous page, there should be a special act passed
by every State, which now requires compulsory vaccination in any form,
to indemnify parents or relatives for any injury or death caused by
vaccination forced on children or other victims by such unwise law
as requires the general infliction of a compulsory disease upon the
people. This law has been originated by medical dogmatism and is
continued by medical interest and falsehood, as already shown, and is
of great actual profit to doctors and virus makers, but is truly “A
Menace to the State.” On this point see the Statue of Wisdom and Law
in the frontispiece, with its wise motto which stands as a distinct
rebuke to this evil law which either should be repealed or compensated
by a remedial act passed for the relief of its many victims as here
suggested, for, surely, “Every Law not Based on Wisdom is a Menace to
the State.”


SHOCKING MEDICAL MENDACITY, ON THE ALLEGED HARMLESSNESS OF VACCINATION

I might continue here for hundreds of pages to report “ad nauseam”
shocking instances of vaccination horrors such as already shown.
Indeed, I am not sure but I may have already reached, for the average
reader, the point of “ad nauseam” in the many horrible instances now
exposed. But I believe I could go on in this exposure to the point “ad
infinitum” if all the deadly results of vaccination could be brought to
public light which are now hermetically concealed by our professionally
interested partisans of vaccination who now control our Departments of
Health and Vital Statistics and can conceal their grave mistakes as
they please.

Physically shocking as are the vaccination horrors which I have already
exposed, they are not, morally, so shocking as the awful medical
mendacity or ignorance and presumption which constantly asserts the
perfect harmlessness of vaccination and denies its responsibility for
frequent disastrous effects on human health and life.

I will now give some examples of this gross medical mendacity from
some of the so-called high medical authorities as found in Government
Reports, Health Department Bulletins, leading Encyclopedias and Medical
Books in this country and England which will clearly illustrate my
serious charge and show that, usually, the higher the alleged authority
is, the more false and exaggerated his statements are, and the more
easily refuted, as I will soon prove.


THE PHILIPPINE FALSEHOOD

There is one Government Report on vaccination in the Philippine
Islands, which is often quoted by vaccinators to show the utter
harmlessness of vaccination, which claims that from three to five
millions of vaccinations have been performed on the population of the
Philippines, _without a single injury or death_! Now, this reckless
report might be made correct if slightly amended by the Goddess of
Truth to read as follows: “Three to five millions vaccinated without a
single injury or death”--_which has ever been honestly acknowledged_!
It is, of course, shamefully false on its face to say that three to
five millions of vaccinations were ever inflicted in the Philippines
or anywhere else without any injuries or deaths; and the mind which
can accept such a statement without a big logical and moral squirm
does not understand the real nature of vaccination, the facts of vital
statistics, or the first principles of mere mathematical chances,
proportions and probabilities, as I will now show.

In the first place, a million is such a gigantic number that any person
who has any disrespect for or trifles with it is not fit to discuss
this subject. For example: if a man were to live for a million days he
would have to be about three thousand years old! Whereas the average
life of a man is much less than fifty years or about one-sixtieth of
a million days! Now, if a man were to subject himself for the whole
average lifetime of fifty years, or one-sixtieth of a million days,
to the ordinary, benign, and necessary conditions of breathing air,
drinking water and milk and eating food, he could not possibly do
this without at some time contracting some disease and possible death
from these perfectly normal, necessary, and benign conditions of
breathing, eating and drinking, as most of our diseases and infections
are admittedly contracted through these three benign sources! Yet our
Government-trifler in millions wants us to believe that you could
inflict on the human body--millions of times--not a purely benign
action, but the purely and doubly malign act of vaccination, which
consists in first wounding the body and then injecting into this wound
a virulent septicemic infection, without causing a single injury or
death! In other words, the doubly malign act--wounding and infecting
the human body with a complex pus infection--is utterly harmless and
less injurious than the purely benign acts of breathing, eating and
drinking, which demonstrably cannot be practised for one-sixtieth of a
million days by any human being without a possible serious injury or
death!

Here is surely the “reductio ad absurdum” which shows that such a
reckless statement of the harmlessness of vaccination by the millions
is, of course, a stupid and shameful medical falsehood on its face
and is pretty close to being a medical crime on the people, as any
honest doctor or intelligent layman must know who has given any serious
consideration to this subject, or who has any idea of what vaccination
is, or who knows anything of disease infections, vital statistics and
the laws of mere mathematical chances and probabilities.

Indeed, every competent doctor knows that you could not subject the
human body to a mere pin scratch for a million times without causing
several serious injuries or possible deaths from resulting infections.
And every competent doctor and student of vital statistics knows
also that there are actually more deaths caused every year by mere
pin scratches and trifling cuts, wounds and abrasions, resulting in
lockjaw, septicemia, erysipelas and other infections than from the
dreaded smallpox itself.

Is it not, therefore, rather strange, Mr. President, that vaccination
should be reported as so utterly harmless in the distant Philippines,
where we can not easily get at the records, when we know it is so
deadly in the near-by England and America, where the accessible
records show that it causes, frequently, more deaths than smallpox,
as I have already proved? For example: the great English Commission
on Vaccination found that deaths from vaccination were sometimes as
high as seventy deaths per million vaccinated. This is twice as high
as the mortality from smallpox in the United States, which for five
years, from 1901 to 1905, including our last great epidemic period of
1901 and 1902, averaged only thirty-four deaths per million population!
See U. S. Mortality Statistics for 1907, page 40. The Reports of the
Registrar General of England for 1906, 1907 and 1908 give a death-rate
from infantile vaccination in those years which runs as high as
forty-two deaths per million children vaccinated! Here we see that,
according to some of our highest statistical authorities, vaccination
is not harmless, but is so very harmful that its ratio of mortality per
million vaccinated is sometimes twice as great as the ratio of smallpox
mortality per million population, and including an epidemic period!

We therefore think, Mr. President, that these points and facts make
sufficient answer to, and refutation of, the shocking medical lie that
vaccination is perfectly harmless, and, per contra, prove that general
vaccination is actually more dangerous to public health and human life
to-day than natural smallpox, just as that great medical blunder of a
past century--smallpox inoculation--was proved to be more dangerous
than the natural disease and was finally prohibited by penal law. And I
feel sure that compulsory vaccination will follow the same course and
be legally prohibited for the same reason in the present century.


HEALTH DEPARTMENT FALSEHOODS

As a lifelong student of this subject I have become convinced that the
whole cult and practice of general public vaccination and particularly
all compulsory vaccination, like all great intrenched evils, has
originated in falsehood, has continued in falsehood, and now exists
on both falsehood and concealment, viz.: falsehood as to its absolute
efficiency and certainty in protecting the individual against smallpox;
falsehood as to the necessity of general vaccination to prevent
smallpox epidemics; and gross falsehood as to its perfect safety and
freedom from danger to human health and life.

Now, I do not think that I have ever seen a grosser illustration of
the truth of this charge than can be found in the special article on
Vaccination published in the _Monthly Bulletin_ or _Health News_ for
February, 1914, issued by the New York State Department of Health
at Albany, which contains what I believe to be shocking falsehoods,
fallacies, and exaggerations which even a tyro in the investigation
of this subject could easily refute, as I will now show. All these
fallacies have been issued with an air of gospel truth, to instruct the
public, and to try to justify the extreme efforts of our department
officers and medical doctors to force compulsory vaccination on
every child and adult in this State as not only absolutely necessary
for public health, but as the only known means to prevent smallpox
epidemics, and as being an operation which is wholly beneficial and
entirely safe and harmless to human health and life. I shall now give
examples of the chief and worst of these medical falsehoods and follow
with their refutation, as a duty clearly due to public truth and right.

FIRST FALSEHOOD: This official Bulletin at page 48 tells us concerning
the alleged efficiency and necessity of vaccination as follows:

    “Nothing but vaccination can save from smallpox.... Cleanliness
    and general sanitation exert absolutely no influence upon its
    prevalence.”

This is about as shocking, absurd and false as it can be, and coming
from our highest State health officer is certainly not creditable to
our public health service, but is so obviously absurd and untenable
as to refute itself on its very face. This paragraph tells us, in
effect, that dense human overcrowding, with personal and public filth
spread everywhere, no sanitation or isolation anywhere, and every case
of smallpox left loose and at large to spread by direct contact to
every child and adult and thus infect every one right and left, as in
the old unsanitary times of big and frequent epidemics--all this, our
Health Commissioner coolly tells us, would not make a bit of difference
in the spread of the disease! And, per contra, the prevention of all
these vile unsanitary conditions of barbarous times, with or without
vaccination, would have no effect whatever to reduce the disease!

Now, of course, every person of any common sense or knowledge simply
knows that these propositions are absurdly false on their face, and
that we need pay no further attention to them, except to show by such
horrible examples how foolish and desperate the falsehoods are that
are resorted to by some doctors and health officers to try to force
this dangerous medical evil of compulsory disease on every child and
adult, and that on such falsehoods it is essentially based. Every
unbiased student of this subject knows that efficient sanitation and
hygiene have been the most effectual means for preventing and reducing
all diseases and promoting public health during the last half century
and that, as a matter of fact, no serious reduction of smallpox or
typhoid fever has been effected in modern times except through general
sanitation and hygiene, with or without vaccination.

SECOND FALSEHOOD: The next major fallacy in this State Department
Bulletin relates to the alleged perfect safety of vaccination, as
follows:

    “There is not the slightest risk in the process of vaccination
    when it is carried out with clean virus (now guaranteed by
    Government inspection) and when the vaccination itself is kept
    clean. ‘Sore arms’ come from dirt getting into the vaccination,
    not from the vaccine itself.”

Now, if the man who wrote this falsehood knows anything extensive on
this subject, he must know that what he states here is not true. And he
knows also that the government does not really guarantee any virus, and
that no such thing as “clean” virus is now, or ever was, made or can be
made; that is, no virus without some, or many, dangerous suppurative
disease germs of one kind or another, known or unknown, which will
not be likely, some time or other, in some persons, to bring about
a dangerous infection of the system with possible serious or fatal
injury, and that, as a matter of fact, such infections are occurring
constantly in children and adults from the various existing brands of
“clean,” “inspected,” and “certified” virus now in use. Furthermore, as
to this evil being caused only by “dirt” getting into the wound, this
audacious writer must also know that this dangerous or fatal infection
can and does come into the wound both directly as a “primary” infection
from the virus itself, and as a “secondary” infection from “dirt” in
or about the wound, and he must know very well, if at all competent
to write on this subject for public instruction, that one kind of
infection is about as common and as fatal as the other, and that both
are almost equally chargeable to the operation of vaccination itself,
so that to contend otherwise is merely a cowardly evasion of the truth,
as has been fully proved by the shocking exhibits of vaccination
horrors shown herein.


FALSEHOODS FROM THE ENCYCLOPEDIAS

From the article on Vaccination in one of our leading American books of
reference, the “International Encyclopedia,” published by Dodd, Mead &
Co. in 1904, I take this surprising gem of falsehood, as follows:

    “_There is absolutely no danger of transmitting disease by
    means of bovine virus._”

Please note that the author of this falsehood is not content with
saying merely that there is _no danger_, but _absolutely_ no danger.
And when he was asked for an explanation or “authority” for this
outrageous statement, this is what he answered:

    “You ask for the authority for the statement in the
    International Encyclopedia: ‘There is absolutely no danger of
    transmitting disease by means of bovine virus.’

    “I cannot refer you to an authoritative work on medicine where
    this statement can be found, but it is commonly repeated by
    professors of medicine to students, and was put away in my
    memory as an established fact many years ago.”

The rank stupidity and falsity of the statement first quoted will
be evident when we recite the fact that _the very basic purpose and
function_ of the bovine virus is _to transmit the disease cow-smallpox
from calves to man_, as an alleged preventive of another disease,
natural smallpox, and yet this high medical authority, writing for
the information of the trusting public in one of our leading books
of reference, solemnly tells us that it is absolutely impossible to
transmit any disease by it, and that this doctrine has been preached
to students for years _as an established fact_! If, however, he meant
to say that it is absolutely impossible to transmit any other disease
besides cow-smallpox or “vaccinia,” this statement would, of course,
be equally false. Even of such generally harmless and benign mediums
as _air_, _water_ and _milk_, it could not be sanely or truthfully
said by any one that “_there is absolutely no danger of transmitting
disease_” by them, for we all know that some of the most common and
fatal diseases are often transmitted by these very benign mediums,
air, water and milk. But to make such a reckless statement about a
dangerous complicated _disease culture or virus_, a revolting _extract
of pustules_, is not only grossly _untruthful_, but it is hardly even
_sane_; yet this is a good sample of some of the statements with which
our _high medical authorities_ have misled the trusting public mind.
And speaking of “sanity,” it may provide us with a rather laughable
emotion, at this point in our very grave subject, if I now cite the
fact that at the time this high medical authority made this most false
and absurd statement, as to the utter harmlessness of vaccination, he
actually held the most high and significant office of--“_President of
the New York State Commission on Lunacy_”!


THE ERRORS IN THE BRITANNICA

The article on Vaccination in the Encyclopedia Britannica, in the old
edition preceding the last or current edition, was written by Dr.
Chas. Creighton of London, a well known English doctor who, by long
study, has become an opponent of vaccination, and is the author of
several books exposing its fallacies. When Dr. Creighton first got
the commission to write the article for the Encyclopedia he was a
pro-vaccinist, like many other doctors, but to fit himself to write
a full and impartial article which would give both sides of the
subject he resolved to make a thorough study of it, pro and con. This
study convinced him of the dangerous nature of vaccination to health
and life, its limited or exaggerated value as a protection against
smallpox, and its illogical or unscientific basis as a medical remedy;
and his critical article on this subject, when it first appeared in the
leading Encyclopedia, made a sensation in the medical world and has
been a thorn in the side of pro-vaccinists ever since.

Now, what will impartial students of this subject say when I cite the
fact that the article on Vaccination in the last or current edition
of the Britannica is written, not by a man who is impartial and
professionally disinterested in the subject, as was Dr. Creighton,
and who tried to give both sides of the subject freely, but, on the
contrary, by a man who is actually _a manufacturer or inventor of
vaccine virus_ and has, therefore, necessarily, a professional interest
and bias to conceal the failures and dangers of vaccination as far
as he can? Surely, the editors of the Britannica made a great moral
and logical mistake when they selected any man to write so important
an article on a much disputed subject in this great book of reference
who had any professional or other interest or bias in this subject.
Now, the biased and interested author of this article in the last
edition is none other than Dr. S. Monckton Copeman of London, a strong
pro-vaccinist, who claims to be the original inventor of the so-called
“_glycerinated virus_” now in general use for vaccination. The idea of
adding glycerine to the virus is to kill the many dangerous disease
germs or infections it is known to contain, but to preserve the germ
of smallpox, or “cowpox” intact. This is, of course, an admission that
before the use of glycerinated virus vaccination was very dangerous
and likely to cause many infections in the human body, but since the
adoption of glycerinated virus--Dr. Copeman’s invention--it is now
claimed that vaccination is rendered safe and harmless. This is, of
course, a false claim, as I have already shown, and will further show
in a succeeding paragraph.

Now, this greatly biased and one-sided article of Dr. Copeman--the
maker or inventor of glycerinated virus--in our greatest Encyclopedia,
is surely a good illustration of my charge that the trusting public
mind is constantly misled, whether intentionally or unintentionally
I know not, by some of our highest medical authorities on the
whole subject of vaccination, and particularly as to its alleged
harmlessness. Thus, when Dr. Copeman, who is regarded as one of the
leading authorities on modern vaccination, comes to consider the
dangers of vaccination, he heads his paragraph, “Alleged Injurious
Effects,” thus implying that the injuries are only “alleged” and not
real, and he goes on to argue or imply that--due to his invention--the
dangers and injuries are now trifling or negligible, but tacitly admits
or implies that before his invention of glycerinated virus the dangers
were very serious, whereas, with his invention, vaccination is now
practically safe and harmless.

Now, what must we think of the truth of this claim that vaccination
with glycerinated virus is now safe and harmless, when, at the very
time that its inventor made or implied this claim in the pages of the
Encyclopedia, in the year 1910 or 1911, the vital records of his own
country, in the reports of the Registrar General of England for those
two years, showed that there were eight deaths from vaccination in the
year 1910, and fourteen deaths from vaccination in 1911! And these
fatal vaccinations were, of course, all made with the glycerinated
virus as, practically, no other kind is now used! These vaccination
deaths were all in little children under five years and they exceeded
the deaths from smallpox in the same age class by fourfold in 1910 and
by threefold in 1911! That is, the deaths from vaccination under five
years were eight in 1910 and fourteen in 1911; while the deaths from
smallpox under five years were two in 1910 and five in 1911! The total
deaths from smallpox in all ages were nineteen in 1910 and twenty-three
in 1911.

The four years preceding 1910 show even a worse record for vaccinal
mortality than the record of 1910 and 1911, so that the record of
those two years cannot be claimed as anything special or unusual.
For example, the reports of the Registrar General for 1906, 1907
and 1908 show a total of only six deaths for these three years
from smallpox in the infant ages under five years--the ages most
susceptible to smallpox--while for the same infant ages there is a
total of fifty-three deaths for the same three years from cowpox or
vaccination--nine times more infant deaths from vaccination than from
smallpox! In 1909 there is reported only one infant death from smallpox
and eleven infant deaths from vaccination!

This shocking record of vaccination deaths clearly shows that the
famous glycerinated vaccination of Dr. Copeman, which he virtually
claims to be so safe and harmless, in our greatest book of public
reference, is actually from three to ten times more fatal to children
than natural smallpox, as proved by the vital records of his own
country and by the highest statistical authority in the world! Surely,
Mr. President, in such crushing counter facts as these, my charge
of a shocking deception of the public mind, either intentional or
unintentional, on the merits of vaccination by our highest medical and
literary authorities, is flatly proved.


THE ERRORS OF DR. M. J. ROSENAU, A HIGH MEDICAL AUTHORITY, ON THE
RELATIVE HARMLESSNESS OF VACCINATION

We now come to a different style of medical falsehood on the effects
of vaccination which, while honestly admitting its dangerous nature,
yet tries to minimize the dangers as much as possible and reduce them
to the relatively immaterial. This is a shameful equivocation of the
truth and an absurd contradiction of facts, as I will now prove out
of the mouth of the apologist himself. I now refer to the statements
of Dr. Milton J. Rosenau, who is one of our highest authorities in
this country on vaccination and other special medical subjects. He was
for several years Director of the United States Hygienic Laboratory
at Washington, where he made many investigations into the nature of
vaccine virus, its impurities, dangers, etc., and has made official
reports on different subjects for the said Laboratory and for the
United States Public Health Service. He is now professor of Preventive
Medicine and Hygiene in Harvard University, and is the author of
several books, one of which, “Preventive Medicine and Hygiene,”
published by D. Appleton & Co. in 1914, I will now quote from. In this
book, on page 19, under the head of “Dangers and Complications” of
vaccination, Dr. Rosenau states as follows:

    “However, vaccination is not always a harmless procedure; it
    must be looked upon as the production of an acute infectious
    disease, and, although the disease is always mild and trivial,
    it must not be treated as trifling. The chief danger lies in
    the fact that we have produced an open wound, which is subject
    to the complications of any wound. Even a pin prick or a razor
    scratch may result in death. While the aggregate number of
    deaths resulting from the complications of vaccination may be
    considerable, the aggregate of the individual risk is so small
    as to be disregarded, especially when proper precautions are
    taken.”

Here, surely, are some honest admissions and some queer denials, and
I would now kindly ask you, Mr. President, to re-read this quotation
carefully, and I think you will find it an interesting verbal and
psychological study, showing the typical sophistry and casuistry of
the whole vaccination cult which well illustrates a witty saying of
the late Elbert Hubbard, who was a great student and opponent of
vaccination, viz.: “The great trouble with vaccination is that it
vaccinates the mind.” And he meant by this that the poison which the
vaccinators put into the blood of their victims seems to react morally
on themselves so that it poisons and blinds their minds and renders
them unable to see their own shocking absurdities and mendacities in
their false excuses and defences for the serious evils of vaccination.
The great Gladstone was reported to have said that he was led to
oppose compulsory vaccination not so much by the arguments of the
anti-vaccinists as from the falsehoods of the vaccinators.

You will note that all the medical authorities previously quoted assert
positively that vaccination is perfectly safe and harmless and never
causes any serious injury or death, except what might be due to the
carelessness of the vaccinated persons themselves, which statement I
have proved by overwhelming evidence to be a most outrageous medical
falsehood. Per contra, the last medical authority quoted honestly
admits that vaccination is not always harmless and that it always
consists in inflicting an acute infectious disease on the human body,
but that this inflicted disease practically never does any harm and may
be disregarded. In other words, the policy of this medical authority
and high representative of the vaccination cult, in the statement
quoted, seems to be to honestly admit all he dare, and gracefully deny
all he can! And for this honesty we must give him a layman’s thanks,
for he does really admit a great deal, and where he attempts to deny he
really admits more, as I will soon show.

Now, it is obvious that the infliction of “an acute infectious
disease,” deliberately and extensively, on the human body, is a
vicious and dangerous practice, per se and prima facie, and cannot
be continued indefinitely without serious injuries, as I have already
proved, and hence Dr. Rosenau contradicts himself at the very outset
in his statement or apology for vaccination. In his next phrase he
makes the still more surprising statement that this inflicted disease
is “_always mild and trivial_,” which assertion is undoubtedly a
falsehood! And Dr. Rosenau must know as well as any doctor or layman
in this country that this assertion is false, and per contra that this
inflicted disease--vaccination--is sometimes very severe and fatal and
far worse than natural smallpox itself, and that it often causes more
annual deaths than smallpox, as I have already proved by overwhelming
evidence and by the highest statistical records in the world! I would,
therefore, here respectfully suggest that Dr. Rosenau make some
apology to his readers for this falsehood or mistake, and correct this
statement as soon as possible in the next edition of his book.

To emphasize and dispose of this serious error of Dr. Rosenau I will
now show out of his own mouth how he stultifies and contradicts
himself, and logically admits that vaccination is not “always mild and
trivial,” but is often quite dangerous and fatal. For example, he says:

    “And although the disease is always mild and trivial, yet it
    must not be treated as trifling.”

This phrase, just quoted, is, surely, a rich verbal and logical study
of medical sophistry and equivocation. Vaccination, this medical
champion tells us, is always a “trivial” disease, but it is not a
“trifling” disease. This is morally and logically equivalent to
telling us that vaccination _is trivial_ and it _is not trivial_! In
other words, he asserts in one breath what he denies in the next, or
contradicts himself in successive breaths! This is so, because the
dictionaries show that the two words “trifling” and “trivial” have
exactly the same meaning and are synonymous and identical, so that
“trivial” is defined as “trifling,” and “trifling” is defined as
“trivial.” This, therefore, morally and logically, means a confession
out of his own mouth that the inflicted disease, vaccination, is not
always either trivial or trifling, but is often very dangerous and
deadly, which is, of course, the exact and demonstrable truth, and the
scholarly Dr. Rosenau is the last man who can plead ignorance of this
truth. Indeed, in another paragraph of his contradictory statement,
he absolutely acknowledges this serious danger of vaccination while
apparently trying to conceal or deny it. For example, he makes this
conclusive and crushing admission that:

    “While the aggregate number of deaths resulting from the
    complications of vaccination may be considerable, the aggregate
    of the individual risk is so small as to be disregarded.”

Now, if the aggregate number of deaths from vaccination is
“_considerable_,” then it is clearly proved, out of his own mouth,
that vaccination is not always mild or trivial, but just the opposite,
viz., _frequently very dangerous and deadly_, thus again proving the
case against vaccination out of the mouth of its own defenders! As to
the quibble or sophistry that “_the aggregate of the individual risk is
so small as to be disregarded_,” this is also a fallacy and falsehood,
because this cannot be really true if the aggregate number of deaths
is so “considerable,” and particularly not when we have shown that the
deaths from vaccination frequently exceed the deaths from smallpox, as
this proves that the individual risk from general vaccination is far
greater than from natural smallpox, and, therefore, in the long run,
vaccination is as much to be avoided as smallpox if not more so.

Webster’s Dictionary gives three meanings for “Considerable,” as
follows: “Worthy of consideration”; “notable”; “rather large in amount.”

The Comprehensive Standard Dictionary gives the meaning of
“Considerable” as: “Of noteworthy size, quantity or importance.”

It will therefore be seen that Dr. Rosenau, necessarily and logically,
admits that the deaths and injuries from vaccination are not “trivial”
but “rather large in amount,” and “of noteworthy size, quantity or
importance,” thus proving our case out of the mouth of our opponents.


JENNER’S GREAT FALSEHOODS. THE ORIGINAL MENDACITIES OF VACCINATION
EXPOSED

No chapter on the mendacities of vaccination would be complete without
including the great foundation and monumental falsehoods of Dr. Edward
Jenner, who was the alleged “discoverer” or inventor of “Vaccination,”
by which term is meant the inoculation of cowpox from cow to man and
thence from arm to arm, in distinction from the old direct smallpox
inoculation from human to human; and it may now be interesting and
profitable to devote a few paragraphs to these great falsehoods of the
arch-vaccinator himself.

Jenner’s original claims for vaccination were stated, positively, in
his Petition to Parliament March 17, 1802, asking for a reward for his
alleged “discovery” in these words:

    “That _your petitioner, having discovered_ that a disease which
    occasionally exists in a particular form among cattle, known
    by the name of the cowpox, admits of being inoculated on the
    human frame with the _most perfect ease_ and _safety_, and is
    attended with the singularly beneficial effect of _rendering
    through life_ the person so inoculated _perfectly secure from
    the infection of the smallpox_.”--See “History and Pathology of
    Vaccination,” by Dr. Edgar M. Crookshank, London, 1889, page
    173, Vol. I.

Now, every proposition in the above statement is a shocking falsehood,
as can be easily proved by a few moments’ consideration. In the above
quotation the emphasis is mine but the words are Jenner’s, and I
have emphasized the words to show clearly where the rank and glaring
falsehoods are which make this short statement a very tissue of
falsehoods, as will soon appear.

In the first place, it was a downright falsehood for Jenner to claim
that he had “_discovered_” that a disease known as “cowpox” could be
inoculated on the human frame and that this inoculation would act as
a preventive of smallpox, for it is obvious to every student of the
history of vaccination that Jenner made no such original “discovery,”
but that this “discovery” was made by the milkmaids and dairy farmers
of rural England who had long known and used it, and this “discovery”
was given by them to Jenner, who then falsely claimed it as his own
“discovery” and finally got a reward of thirty thousand pounds from
Parliament for this false claim!

Thus does History show us that vaccination commenced, at its very
outset, with gross falsehood and also in what would be called in our
day a gigantic piece of medical “graft,” and it has been continued on a
similar basis, more or less, ever since.

The second great falsehood in the original claim of Jenner was the
shocking and reckless statement that the cowpox was perfectly harmless
and could be inoculated on the human body with “_perfect safety_,”
which false claim has been kept up ever since by the mendacious
successors of Jenner, as I have already shown. This claim of the
“_perfect safety_” of cowpox was, of course, _perfectly false_, for
not only were some of Jenner’s own experiments and tests on patients
harmful, but his whole scheme of arm-to-arm vaccination was soon proved
to be so dangerous that it was long ago abandoned and prohibited like
its evil predecessor--smallpox inoculation--and, for that reason,
is not used to-day, being replaced by what is known as “Bovine
Vaccination,” which is direct inoculation of so-called “cowpox” from
cattle to man instead of from man to man or arm to arm as used by
Jenner. Now, this modern “Bovine” vaccination I believe to be even more
dangerous than the old Jennerian arm-to-arm type, because it involves
the extensive diseasing of two classes of animals, cattle and mankind,
and has been the cause of deadly epidemics in both classes, as already
proved, which was not known under the old system, and it is also guilty
of now causing more deaths almost every year than natural smallpox
itself, particularly among little children, as I have already proved
beyond question.

The third great falsehood in this tissue of Jennerian mendacity is the
claim that one vaccination rendered the vaccinated person “_perfectly
secure_” “_through life_” from “_the infection of the smallpox_.” This
was, of course, a most reckless and absurd claim on its face, for how
could Jenner, with a few experiments and tests extending over a few
years, declare with any honesty, or with any logical or scientific
warrant, that cowpox inoculation gave _absolute security from smallpox
for life_? This reckless claim was, of course, soon proved to be a
rank falsehood by the wide-spread failure of vaccination to protect
from smallpox as soon as the vaccinated persons were exposed to actual
infection or epidemic conditions where they readily contracted the
disease, as they do to this day notwithstanding their vaccination! A
new apology had therefore to be invented for this wholesale failure
of vaccination soon after its first adoption, and this was made by
abandoning the false claim of unlimited life protection from one
vaccination and substituting the modified claim of a limited protection
for seven years--more or less--and the consequent necessity of frequent
or periodical re-vaccinations to get any continued or reliable
protection from the operation.

Now Jenner’s original false and absurd claim of unlimited or life
protection from one vaccination was probably partly due to his
ignorance of the real nature and history of smallpox and his credulous
adoption of the old fallacy and superstition, in common use, that one
attack of smallpox gave sure immunity for life from a second attack,
which proposition never really had any scientific basis in theory or
fact, as it has been repeatedly proved that smallpox may, and often
does, occur two or three times in the same person, whether vaccinated
or unvaccinated, and that there is no regularity or certainty in the
alleged protection given either by smallpox or vaccination, but that
immunity depends largely on sanitary, hygienic and constitutional
conditions. In fact, some students seem to think that the person who
has once had smallpox is more likely to have it again than one who has
never had the disease! It was, therefore, at this first demonstrated
failure of vaccination to protect from smallpox that Jenner’s chief
assistant, Dr. James Moore, wrote a very interesting little book called
“The History of Small Pox,” London, 1815. The chief purpose of this
book was to apologize for the failure of vaccination to protect from
smallpox, as originally falsely claimed by Jenner, by showing that
even smallpox does not protect with certainty for life or any other
period, but that the same person may have smallpox two or three times
in succession, instances of which are cited all through the book, thus
making the ingenious or crafty plea for vaccination that it cannot be
expected to give any more protection than smallpox gives; and therefore
reliance must not be placed on one vaccination alone for life, but
protection can only be obtained by re-vaccinations repeated at frequent
intervals of a few years!

It will thus be seen that Jenner completely abandoned his false and
reckless claim of _perfect protection_ from smallpox _for life_ by
_one vaccination_, for which he got his big graft or money prize from
the English government; but, please note, he did not make this retreat
or acknowledge his great mistake until after he had pocketed his big
reward of thirty thousand pounds for his shamefully false claim of the
unlimited protection and perfect safety of vaccination!


SHORT DURATION OF VACCINAL PROTECTION AND NECESSITY OF FREQUENT
RE-VACCINATIONS NOW ADMITTED. DANGER FROM SUCH REPEATED VACCINATIONS
GREATER THAN FROM SMALLPOX

We have seen in the preceding chapter how the original false and
reckless claim of Dr. Jenner for _absolute protection for life from
one vaccination_ was soon abandoned when put to the actual test of
smallpox epidemics and that a modified position was then taken in the
necessity of re-vaccination in certain periods of about seven years,
more or less. This limited claim has, however, been also abandoned
in recent years and the term of alleged vaccinal protection has been
getting successively shorter and shorter, until it has now fallen
to the ridiculously short protective period of only six months or a
year for each vaccination or re-vaccination! This seems to be the
present position of our most recent medical authorities and advanced
vaccinators, which is not only a great shrinkage in protective claim
but is very interesting and significant in that it closely approaches,
and admits, the rational position of the anti-vaccinators who have
contended consistently and persistently from the days of Jenner that
vaccination, at the best, gave merely a limited immunity of only a few
months, more or less, and, in some cases, in very susceptible persons,
gave no immunity; and that frequent and repeated vaccinations are more
dangerous as being multiple and cumulative infections of an artificial
or inflicted disease than beneficial as the preventive of a natural
disease.

To show the present position of advanced pro-vaccinators on this point
and their virtual agreement with anti-vaccinators as to the very
limited period of vaccinal protection and the necessity of frequent
repetitions, I will now quote from a recent high medical authority,
viz., Dr. Robert Olesen, of the U. S. Public Health Service, stationed
at Manila in the Philippine Islands, which is supposed to be one of the
greatest fields in the world for practical experience with smallpox and
vaccination.

In an elaborate article by Dr. Olesen printed in the _New York Medical
Record_ of March 4, 1911, he makes these very serious statements as to
the necessity of frequent re-vaccinations and the short duration of
protection from each vaccination, as follows:

    “THE NECESSITY FOR RE-VACCINATION.--There is abundant reason
    for believing that a person who has been successfully
    vaccinated is absolutely protected against smallpox during
    a period varying from six to twelve months, probably the
    latter. After this time his immunity may or may not continue
    indefinitely....

    “In the absence of means of determining accurately the length
    of perfect resistance it is best to re-vaccinate once a year.”

Now here we plainly see that this Government Expert after long
experience in the fertile field of the Philippines admits clearly and
positively the very limited protective power of vaccination, so that
it is practically evanescent in duration, or extends over a few months
only, or at most can not, or should not, be relied on for sure and
safe protection longer than from six months to one year! And for this
reason Dr. Olesen carefully advises that “_it is best to re-vaccinate
once a year_.”

Now, surely, this modest position of Dr. Olesen as to the short
duration of protection and the necessity of re-vaccination _once a
year_ is very similar to the position of the anti-vaccinators, but very
different from the positive claim of Dr. Jenner on which vaccination
started and for which he got his big prize or “graft” of thirty
thousand pounds for the grossly false claim of his alleged “discovery”
that _one vaccination_ would give _absolute protection_ from smallpox
_for life_!


THE DANGEROUS “VACCINATION CREED” OF THE CHICAGO BOARD OF HEALTH
EXPLAINED AND CONDEMNED

I will now give another great authority on vaccination, viz., the
famous and dangerous “Vaccination Creed” of the Chicago Board of
Health, issued in 1906, and still in use, which limits the protective
power of vaccination still more than Dr. Olesen and makes it absolutely
dependent on multiple or doubly repeated vaccinations to the point of
“saturation,” as follows:

    “After many years of experience with smallpox and vaccination,
    the Chicago Department of Health hereby declares:

    “First: That true vaccination--repeated until it no longer
    takes--ALWAYS prevents smallpox. NOTHING ELSE DOES.”

It may be now noted that the first and essential article of this
creed, printed with its big emphatic capitals, positively states that
the only vaccination that protects against smallpox is a duplicated,
successive, repeated or multiple vaccination--“_repeated until it no
longer takes_.” This means that there must be at least two or three
successive vaccinations or multiples of them before any “protection”
is obtained, that is, at least one or more successful “takes” and one
subsequent vaccination which fails to take! In other words, we must
vaccinate repeatedly until it takes, and then vaccinate repeatedly
until it fails to take, to get any protection; and this, in some cases,
may of course require from two to four or six successive vaccinations!
And yet this is the only kind of _redoubled_ vaccination which this
famous, or infamous, creed gravely and emphatically tells us in full
and loud capitals “ALWAYS” prevents smallpox and that “NOTHING ELSE
DOES”! And while Dr. Olesen tells us that one successful vaccination,
repeated at least once every year, is a fairly reliable protection
against smallpox, yet this “Chicago Creed” positively tells us that
such “successful” yearly vaccination is no good at all unless followed
at once by another vaccination _which is not successful_! What do you
now think, Mr. President, of the absurdity and confusion in these
vaccination theories? And what do you think of the great personal
repulsiveness and great medical danger of these theories in calling for
so many and such frequent inoculations of disease virus or blood poison
to give alleged protection from the so-called dangerous disease of
smallpox which ordinarily kills less people every year than lightning
and which in an epidemic year kills less than ordinary measles or
whooping-cough kills every year?

Now while such wholesale and repeated or redoubled or saturated
vaccinations for every person, every year, would undoubtedly be a most
profitable thing for vaccinating doctors and vaccine makers and would
extend the use of vaccine virus _ten to one hundred fold_, yet it is
very doubtful whether this would be any benefit to public health.
On the contrary, this would be the most grave menace to private and
public health that could be conceived; for, whereas, the limited
vaccination now practiced actually causes more deaths per year than
smallpox, particularly in little school children, what would happen to
our precious children and our brave soldiers and sailors if we were
to adopt the horribly dangerous theories of multiple or redoubled or
“saturated” vaccination every year for each person, according to the
“Creeds” of Dr. Olesen and the Chicago Board of Health, which these
experts assure us is the only way to get any certain protection from
smallpox?

Now if only one vaccination were required for life protection, it
would, obviously, not involve as much risk from vaccinal infections
or “complications,” such as Lockjaw, Septicemia, Meningitis and
Pneumonia; but if the vaccinations have to be repeated every few
months or a year as Dr. Olesen directs, or, furthermore, if they have
to be redoubled and repeated “_until it no longer takes_,” as in the
“Chicago Creed,” then the infecting risk is obviously very different
and is so much increased with each repeated inoculation that the danger
of these repeated and cumulative infections from the artificial or
inflicted septicemic disease called “cowpox” becomes much worse than
the danger from the natural disease, smallpox, so that the patient is
thus more likely to suffer and die from the “cure” rather than from
the “disease,” as now frequently happens from vaccinations, as I have
already abundantly proved by shocking examples in these pages.


THE FALSE GLORY OF JENNER AND THE DISGRACE OF THE MEDICAL PROFESSION

If, therefore, it were ever really true that one vaccination gave sure
protection from smallpox for life and that the act of vaccination was
in itself perfectly safe and harmless, as Jenner positively claimed,
vaccination might then of course be a grand thing, of immense benefit
to the human race, and might perhaps deserve all the good things
that have been said about it by its interested flatterers and false
advocates! But, of course, these big claims of life protection and
perfect safety never were true but have been the gigantic falsehoods
on which the great evil of compulsory vaccination has been justified
by the medical profession and forced by it upon the people for many
years past with great damage to human health and life--how much
will never be known--and with great ethical disgrace to the medical
profession itself, as I have already proved, and from which disgrace
the profession should, surely, free itself at an early day for the sake
of professional honor and decency if not for the sake of human right
and safety, health and life.


WHAT PROTECTS US FROM SMALLPOX IN MODERN TIMES? IS IT VACCINATION OR
SOMETHING ELSE? A FALSE CLAIM EXPLODED

We have just seen in the preceding chapter that high medical
authorities positively assure us that vaccination gives no protection
against smallpox unless it is done freshly once a year and is also then
done _repeatedly_, “_until it no longer takes_,” which will surely
require at least two successive vaccinations and may require from two
to three, four or more successive vaccinations each year! Now let us
seriously ask here: How many persons are there in the civil population
or in the Army and Navy who have ever been, or are now, vaccinated in
this way, viz., regularly once a year and then vaccinated repeatedly
until the condition of _vaccinal saturation_ is reached where “_it no
longer takes_”? I firmly believe that no well informed doctor, student
or statistician will deny that _not five per cent._ of the civil
population or of the Army and Navy has ever been vaccinated according
to this rule and system which the experts assure us is the only safe
and certain rule for vaccinal protection from smallpox! What, then,
keeps the general population and the men of the Army and Navy so free
from smallpox that for the generation past there are ordinarily less
annual deaths from smallpox than from lightning? Surely it can not
be vaccination that is responsible for this freedom from smallpox in
modern times when not five per cent. of the population is vaccinated so
that it can have any protection from smallpox!

The extreme pro-vaccinator has, however, long and loudly claimed, and
has deceived himself and the trusting public with this false claim,
that general vaccination is practically the sole and only thing that
has brought about the modern reduction of smallpox or that can ever
reduce smallpox! But this claim is obviously absurd and false on
its face when we have already seen that not five per cent. of the
population is vaccinated in such a way as can give any protection,
and that ninety-five per cent. of the vaccinated population has no
effective vaccinal protection whatever!

This false claim that vaccination has been the chief cause of the
reduction in smallpox in modern times is further positively disproved
by the flagrant fact that countries which are most extensively
vaccinated have had the worst epidemics in modern times, such as the
case of Japan cited on page 53; and that as a rule in all smallpox
epidemics the great majority of cases always occur in well vaccinated
subjects and the minority in unvaccinated subjects as officially
acknowledged in the last epidemic in New York City in 1901 and 1902,
cited on page 204.

Surely, therefore, vaccination cannot be solely responsible for the
great modern reduction of smallpox, but, per contra, there have been
some great benign, natural and artificial conditions which have
intervened in human life since the old days of big smallpox epidemics
and the adoption of vaccination, which benign conditions have brought
about the great decline in smallpox--and not the unnatural and
irrational condition of vaccination which has been falsely credited
with this result. And it must be obvious that benign conditions which
act by the _prevention_ and _reduction_ of disease are more likely to
produce this result than a remedy like vaccination, which means the
actual propagation and infliction of disease. Now what are these benign
conditions? They are clearly of two kinds, “Natural” and “Artificial.”
They are, first, natural, that is, some pervasive natural changes in
conditions of human life, which are more or less unknown or not yet
fully understood in their exact nature, but which have surely brought
about a great reduction in the general death-rate and also in specific
death-rates from several deadly diseases, in which no remedy such as
vaccination has ever been used, and yet the general death-rate and
the death-rates of these particular diseases have been reduced in
modern times even more than smallpox has been reduced since the use
of vaccination. For a few examples of these greatly reduced diseases
we might mention Bubonic Plague, Epidemic Erysipelas, Typhus Fevers,
Cholera, Scurvy, etc., etc. All of these terrible diseases which were
once as bad or worse than smallpox have been not only reduced more
than smallpox in modern times, but most of them have practically been
totally obliterated in modern life, so that they have now become
almost medical curiosities, and yet no such thing as vaccination has
been used in this reduction. The other conditions which have brought
about this reduction of these deadly diseases are the artificial and
purely benign conditions of Sanitation, Hygiene and Isolation. Now
if these safe and benign natural and artificial conditions have,
undeniably, brought about the reduction or obliteration of these
terrible diseases without any vaccination, is it not most logical and
reasonable to conclude that these same safe and benign conditions have
been the chief cause in reducing smallpox also, and that the burden
of proof is clearly on the pro-vaccinators to prove, if they can, the
preposterous claim that vaccination is the chief cause of this great
reduction of smallpox?

At this point this striking historic and medical fact should be
distinctly remembered that before the adoption of vaccination, and
for some time afterwards, there were practically no such remedies
known or used as Sanitation, Hygiene or Isolation. These rational
defenses against smallpox and other diseases are in fact of very recent
usage and have practically been used, in any extended or efficient
manner, only within the last generation! And the reduction in smallpox
practically dates from this usage and is proportional to the extent
and regularity of this usage. See the great success of sanitation and
isolation, etc., in reducing smallpox, without vaccination, in the
English City of Leicester and the general effect of sanitation in
recent times as set forth in the book, “The Vaccination Question,” by
Dr. Millard, London, 1914.

It may therefore be very hard for us to realize this fact in modern
times, that in the old unsanitary days of big epidemics and deadly
plagues, the general population had no clear idea at all of the actual
contagiousness of epidemic diseases or that they were spread by actual
_contact_ or close proximity, from one person to the other, and
therefore no effort whatever was made to isolate cases of dangerous
disease like smallpox, which were thus commonly left freely exposed
in public and private until they spread like wildfire through the
whole community in frequent and wide-spread epidemics common in those
days. Per contra, the idea generally held by the people in these old,
unsanitary times was that epidemic diseases were spread universally,
by some general malign influence, through the air--not by contact
from person to person--and that they were _divine scourges_ sent by
the wrath of God to punish man for his sins, and that it was not only
useless but even impious to try to escape these scourges. Hence the old
barbarous schemes of smallpox inoculation and cowpox vaccination agreed
perfectly with this barbarous medical theology, for by these remedies
the sinner or penitent patient did not try to escape the wrath of God
but willingly bowed to it and took the scourge upon himself in a mild
form with the hope in Divine Mercy to escape it in its worst form! This
seems to have been the medical psychology of vaccination in past times!


THE UNSANITARY CONDITIONS OF JENNER’S DAY EXPOSED. POWER OF SANITATION
TO EXTINGUISH SMALLPOX ADMITTED BY JENNER’S CHIEF ASSISTANT IN 1815

It can therefore be readily seen that, as soon as the barbarous
system of deliberately inviting and spreading disease described in
the preceding paragraph was abandoned, and the reckless exposure of
smallpox in public and private was prevented by strict isolation
and proper sanitation, smallpox epidemics were bound to decline and
disappear. But this result has happened only in very recent times
in advanced communities which have adopted some effective system
of sanitation and isolation, and with little effect one way or the
other from vaccination except that smallpox and other diseases and
the general death-rate seem to be much worse where vaccination is
extensively used and sanitation, isolation and hygiene are neglected,
as has been proved flagrantly in the case of much-vaccinated Japan,
cited on page 53, and, reversely, in the case of the English City
of Leicester, cited on page 22, where the best effects in reduction
of smallpox and increase in general health have been produced by
abandoning vaccination and relying on sanitation, isolation and hygiene
for the last thirty-five years.

Now, a very interesting and convincing evidence in this direction is
furnished by Dr. Jenner’s chief assistant, Dr. James Moore, before
quoted, who, writing over one hundred years ago, clearly recognized
and admitted the truth and force of the above contention, viz., that
sanitation and isolation would extinguish epidemic smallpox, without
regard to vaccination; and this point I will now prove from Dr. Moore’s
book on “The History of Smallpox,” published in London in 1815, which
seems to have been one of the first authorities to urge sanitation and
isolation for the suppression of this disease.

On pages 304 to 307 in Dr. Moore’s book, he gives a very clear
statement of the above point, as follows:

    “The plague was a less destructive distemper than the Small
    Pox, yet no plan similar to the quarantine laws has been
    established to extinguish this infection; and one which was
    lately proposed in Parliament was discouraged as injurious to
    personal freedom.”

    “But surely every man susceptible of a dangerous contagion
    has a natural right to hinder persons who are contaminated
    with that disease, from touching or even approaching him. The
    exercise of this right is a species of self defence; which for
    the public safety may assuredly be regulated by law, without
    infringing any reasonable notions of political liberty.”

    “It is therefore much to be wished, that to preclude all
    persons infected with the Small Pox from mixing with the
    public, a law should be enacted to confine them strictly to
    their own houses, or in hospitals appropriated by the parishes
    for that purpose, as long as the infection is upon them.”

    “The plan is simple, to enforce it would be easy; and the sole
    inconvenience would be a temporary confinement of those persons
    whose enlargement spreads poison through the land.”

    “By such a measure, the infection of the Small Pox, for want
    of subjects to act upon, would necessarily decline, and soon
    become extinct; and multitudes of human creatures would be
    annually preserved from disease, blindness and death.”

It will now be seen that this interesting medical and historical
authority shows us that, while quarantine or isolation had been used to
some extent in old times in the prevention of the plague, yet it had
never been applied to smallpox, and that a law proposed in the English
Parliament in 1815 to make isolation compulsory was defeated; but Dr.
Moore distinctly tells us that such a law or practice, if enforced,
would by itself extinguish smallpox!

Now, this admission I regard as very significant and conclusive in this
contention in coming from Dr. Moore, who was a medical authority in
Jenner’s day, being a member of the Royal College of Surgeons of London
and Surgeon of the Second Regiment of Life Guards, and was also so
close to Jenner that he dedicated his book to him, and was not only his
chief assistant in the new scheme of vaccination but held the important
office of “Director of the National Vaccine Establishment,” which was
the government institution controlling the production of vaccine virus
and the administration of public vaccination.

Surely, therefore, we could have no better authority than Dr. Moore
to admit and establish our present contention against the modern evil
of compulsory vaccination, viz., that there is surely something else
besides vaccination that has prevented or reduced smallpox epidemics in
modern times, and that something is the benign and rational remedies
of sanitation and isolation with certain natural and human changes
and improvements in conditions of human life and health; and not the
irrational and malign remedy of propagating and inflicting general
disease upon the people, as falsely taught by the extreme vaccinators.


FURTHER PROOF FROM THE ENGLISH MINISTER OF HEALTH THAT SANITATION
PREVENTS SMALLPOX MORE THAN VACCINATION. POORLY VACCINATED LONDON MORE
HEALTHY THAN MUCH-VACCINATED BERLIN

In a speech by the Hon. John Burns, Minister of Health for England and
Wales, in the House of Commons on April 11, 1912, he gave the following
clear statement showing that vaccination cannot be alone credited with
the reduction of smallpox, but that, as a matter of fact, smallpox had
declined as vaccination was reduced and as sanitation and other benign
conditions of human life had increased. These most significant facts
are fully expressed in the following extract from the official speech,
which speaks clearly for itself and needs no further comment here.

    “I am not at all alarmed by the comparison made with
    Germany.... I entertain the respect for figures tempered by
    fact, which every responsible man ought to have. Just in
    proportion as in recent years exemptions (from vaccination)
    have gone up from four per cent. to thirty per cent., so
    deaths from smallpox have declined.... The facts are these:
    I am right in giving these figures with regard to London.
    During the time that I have had the honor of being at the
    Local Government Board the following have been the deaths from
    smallpox in a city of 4,500,000 inhabitants: 1906, no deaths;
    1907, no deaths; 1908, no deaths; 1909, two deaths; 1910, no
    deaths. So that in five years there have only been two deaths
    from smallpox in a city of 4,500,000 people. Not even Germany
    or Berlin can transcend those figures by the increasing
    cleanliness, increasing sobriety and greater attention paid
    both by the community and individuals to removing all causes of
    smallpox, and nearly every other disease.... I believe that all
    this fear and panic, all this talk about plague and smallpox,
    is due to misconception and misapprehension of social facts.
    These diseases are in a very different position from what
    they were in ten, twenty, thirty or forty years ago, and it
    is a creditable and a happy circumstance that I, as Minister
    of Health for England and Wales, am enabled to state that in
    regard to the administration of public health no other country
    is comparable to ours, and I am pleased to have heard such
    hearty recognition of our efforts from the different speakers
    this afternoon.”

I therefore think that this close study of vaccination facts thus far
presented must convince every reasonable mind, lay or medical, that
if these benign conditions of sanitation, isolation, etc., had been
generally adopted and enforced for the past century, in place of the
dangerous remedy of general or compulsory vaccination, smallpox would
have become extinct before this time and as much of a medical curiosity
as Plague, Cholera, Typhus and Scurvy now are, which at one time
slaughtered their thousands every year!

I also believe that it is probably due to this evil practice of general
vaccination, which is simply the propagation and infliction on the
general population of actual smallpox in one of its various forms, that
the pestilence of smallpox has been kept alive as a still dangerous
menace to human health and life, ready to burst out into conflagration
wherever vaccination is recklessly and extensively used, as in the
recent case of Japan, or where sanitation is grossly neglected, instead
of being now a medical curiosity, like the other great plagues of the
past which we have successfully extinguished without any vaccination.
And as smallpox is the only one of the ancient plagues that we have
deliberately cultivated, propagated and constantly inflicted upon
the human population, under a barbarous and false theory of thereby
preventing disease, is it any wonder, in common sense and common logic,
that we have so signally succeeded in keeping this ancient plague alive
by this strange medical malpractice, while the other ancient plagues
have become extinguished?


ONLY A LIMITED AND VOLUNTARY USE OF VACCINATION SUGGESTED AND APPROVED.
FORCED VACCINATION OF SCHOOL CHILDREN CONDEMNED

I firmly believe that vaccination should be used only, or chiefly,
in smallpox hospitals, or elsewhere, by doctors and nurses whose
professional duties require them to be exposed directly to smallpox
infection and who necessarily have to take the professional chances
of injury or infection from either the smallpox or the vaccination.
If, therefore, vaccination confers any protection or immunity from
smallpox, even for a short or limited time, it is, of course, proper
for doctors, nurses and attendants to make use of this protection as
far and as frequent as they may wish or consider necessary. It is, of
course, also proper for any person, whether exposed or not exposed to
smallpox, to voluntarily resort to vaccination whenever he may see fit
to do so, or as his doctor may advise, as this is the unalienable right
of Medical Freedom for which we contend and to which all citizens are
entitled. But to force the whole population, and particularly little
children, to submit to the dangerous operation of vaccination, when
the merest fraction of this population, or not one in a thousand,
would ever be exposed to any probable chance of actual contact with
smallpox, and therefore not requiring any protection against it, would,
obviously, be a very absurd, unwise and dangerous practice; because to
thus vaccinate the mass of this healthy, unexposed and unendangered
population would simply be widely extending disease and infection where
it did not already exist, and would be inflicting a form of artificial
smallpox on the whole population which, as I have already clearly
proved, might be more dangerous in the long run than the ordinary
chances from natural smallpox itself. This is particularly true when I
have shown from high medical authorities that vaccination gives only
an evanescent protection, or immunity for short periods of time, from
a few months to a year, and requires to be continued at such short
intervals and doubled or repeated at each interval, which frequent
repetitions greatly increase the chances of incurring more injury from
the many vaccinations than from smallpox!

Where, however, vaccination is used by the doctors, nurses or
attendants at the smallpox hospitals, or by any other person actually
exposed or likely to be exposed to the disease, the case is entirely
different and the burden of the chances and dangers is safely shifted
and greatly reduced, as, in this case, the artificial disease of
vaccination is inflicted to protect the vaccinated person from the
natural disease of smallpox only where this disease already exists and
actually endangers the person exposed to it. This is entirely different
from the practice of inflicting and spreading disease widely where
it does not already exist, as in the evil system of the wholesale
vaccination of school children and the general population who are not
exposed to smallpox and may never be exposed to it in a lifetime.
The absurdity and uselessness of vaccinating school children where
no smallpox exists, and where there is no chance of being exposed to
it, is proved by the short period of protection given by vaccination
and now admitted by vaccinators; because the limited protection given
by vaccination at such a time, when not needed, would probably have
expired by the time it was needed by the appearance of any epidemic
or sporadic case, thus making the previous vaccination needless and
another vaccination necessary. As a fresh vaccination, therefore, is
the only thing that gives any sure protection, and this for a few
months only, there is surely no use in vaccinating any children, on
the vaccinators’ own showing, until they are actually menaced by the
presence of smallpox infection or epidemic.


ABSURDITY OF COMPULSORY VACCINATION OF CHILDREN OF SCHOOL AGE WHO HAVE
HIGHEST IMMUNITY AND VITALITY AND LOWEST DEATH-RATE OF ANY PART OF THE
POPULATION

To single out children of school age for this application of wholesale
and compulsory vaccination, as is done under the present evil school
vaccination law which has been originated and sustained by our medical
societies, is particularly absurd, mischievous and unethical from a
true medical, sanitary and hygienic standpoint; because it is a most
extraordinary fact, which seems to be little known by the doctors or
the laity, that children of school age have the greatest immunity
from all disease and the lowest general death-rate of any part of the
population, and to a most surprising degree, and are therefore in less
need of the alleged protection of vaccination than any other part of
the population! Whereas it is generally falsely assumed that they are
in most need of such protection. This relative immunity and vitality
is, however, so great that children of school age from 6 to 19 have
only five per cent. of the total deaths from all causes, although they
constitute about twenty-five per cent. of the whole population! The
children of school age have therefore about twelve times the immunity
and vitality of the infant age under six years and about six times
the vitality and immunity of all the rest of the population over
nineteen! See Report of the New York State Department of Health for
1912, page 125. See also my pamphlet, “The Crime Against the School
Child,” 1915, pages 32-33. This extraordinary fact alone condemns
all compulsory vaccination of school children as a most medically
incongruous, barbarous and unnecessary practice. But this evil creation
of our medical societies will never be given up by our infallibilistic
vaccinators until the common sense of the laity is firmly asserted to
make all vaccination in schools or elsewhere free and voluntary and
to demand the repeal of the evil compulsory vaccination law wherever
it exists, which has probably killed three times more children than
smallpox in the last ten or fifteen years.


VACCINATION A POOR PROTECTION AGAINST DISEASE. FLAGRANT AND FREQUENT
FAILURE TO PROTECT FROM SMALLPOX OR TYPHOID FEVER SHOWN BY MANY TYPICAL
INSTANCES AT HOME AND ABROAD

At the outset I stated that I did not need to discuss the merits or
demerits of vaccination in its alleged preventive or immunizing power
against disease; and while these merits had been much exaggerated,
yet, whatever they were, small or large, did not matter much, as the
chief question was the danger of vaccination to health and life. This
was also the chief question with the evil predecessors of modern
vaccination, viz., the old smallpox inoculation and Jenner’s arm-to-arm
vaccination, both of which were admitted to have some protective power
against smallpox, yet both were finally condemned and prohibited
by public opinion and penal law because they were found to be very
dangerous to human health and life and actually caused more disease and
death in the long run than they prevented.

I think I have already proved in the preceding pages, without any
doubt, the serious dangers of modern bovine vaccination to human health
and life, and that it now, in fact, often causes more deaths than
smallpox, particularly in infants and school children, and has also
been the cause of many dangerous epidemics among animals and mankind;
and that for these capital reasons all compulsory vaccination should
be absolutely abolished and prohibited, and voluntary vaccination only
allowed.

In order, therefore, to show the meager or limited protective power
of vaccination and its common, proved and admitted failure to protect
from epidemic disease, I will now give several typical examples of this
failure, both with the more common smallpox vaccination and the more
recent typhoid vaccination, so as to complete this indictment against
the medical malpractice of compulsory vaccination in all forms and
leave nothing further which need be said on this subject in these pages
to bring conviction to every reasonable mind that the barbarous medical
scheme of compulsory disease is a very dangerous and fallacious mode of
improving public health.

EXAMPLE FIRST. From Report of Registrar General of England for last
great epidemic year of 1902:

  Population of England and Wales 33,000,000
  Total Deaths from Smallpox            2464
  Vaccinated Cases                821
  Unvaccinated Cases              791
  Condition Not Stated            852
                                  ---
                                 2464

Surely there is no proof here that vaccination is much of a protection
from smallpox, but rather the very reverse, because it is here shown
that the majority of fatal cases are vaccinated.

EXAMPLE SECOND. During the last great smallpox epidemic in New York
City in 1901 and 1902, the City Department of Health issued a printed
circular to doctors, dated in 1902, which clearly acknowledged that
the majority of all cases in this epidemic occurred in persons who
had been successfully vaccinated a few years previously, and not
in unvaccinated persons! This statement was signed by Dr. Ernst J.
Lederle, Commissioner of Health, and Dr. Hermann M. Biggs, Chief
Medical Officer, and was in part as follows:

    “Experience in the recent outbreaks in New York City, contrary
    to the general opinion, has shown that the majority of the
    cases occurring here are not in unvaccinated persons, but
    in those who have been vaccinated successfully some years
    previously.”

Dr. Lederle, who signed this statement, is now a manufacturer of
vaccines and serums in New York City, and Dr. Biggs is now the Health
Commissioner of the State of New York at Albany.

EXAMPLE THIRD. Health Officer Raymond of Brooklyn stated in the
_Brooklyn Eagle_ of June 5, 1902, that in the epidemic in Brooklyn in
1902, in the first half of that year, there were 357 cases of smallpox
and that 322 of these cases were all vaccinated and only 35 cases
unvaccinated!

Surely these last two examples, right at our own doors, show that
vaccination is little or no protection, or, to say the least, is a
very poor protection, from smallpox, or has such a limited duration
or period of protection that it fades out very rapidly and needs to
be renewed and repeated frequently, with great possible danger to
health and life, as already proved, and admitted by medical authorities
previously quoted, so that this “cure” not only often fails but may
become finally worse than the “disease.”

EXAMPLE FOURTH. Smallpox in Germany, the best vaccinated country in
Europe, as given in U. S. Public Health Report for January 23, 1914:

_Record of Smallpox Cases and Vaccinal Conditions for Three Years,
1908, 1909, 1910_

  Total cases                              917
  Vaccinated and re-vaccinated         671
  Unvaccinated                         143
  Unknown                               28
  Vaccinated unsuccessfully or too late 75
                                       ---
                                       917

Here we plainly see that in this much-vaccinated country--the pride
of vaccinators--the cases of smallpox among the well vaccinated and
re-vaccinated were _over four times_ the number of cases among the
unvaccinated! Surely this example, with the two previous ones, clearly
proves that vaccination is not very much of a protection! And surely
there is nothing in these examples which any vaccinator can get much
comfort from or use as a moral or medical justification of the shameful
and evil practice of forcing compulsory vaccination upon the whole
community under the shocking falsehood that it is the infallible and
only protection against smallpox! And surely these forceful and
humiliating facts give a stinging rebuke to this false contention.

EXAMPLE FIFTH. The fully vaccinated U. S. battle-ship _Ohio_ versus the
unvaccinated City of Niagara Falls, N. Y.

A smallpox epidemic raged on this battle-ship at Guantanamo, Cuba, in
December, 1913, and January, 1914, with these figures:

  Population about      1000
  Smallpox Cases          29
  Deaths                   5

Per contra, an epidemic existed in Niagara Falls from 1912 to 1914,
inclusive, as follows:

  Population                            40,000
  Total cases of Smallpox          550
  Deaths from Smallpox                       1
  Deaths from Vaccination                    3
  Never vaccinated                 483
  Vaccinated over five years        26
  Vaccinated for less than 5 years   5
  Not stated                        36
                                   ---
                                   550

Logical comparison of the vaccinated ship with the unvaccinated city,
as follows:

The vaccinated ship had twenty-nine cases and five deaths per thousand
population.

This same ratio of disease and death applied to the 40,000 population
of Niagara Falls would call for 1160 cases and 200 deaths! Whereas
the cases were actually only fourteen per thousand population and the
deaths one fortieth of one person per thousand population, while the
known deaths from vaccination were three!

It is surely not difficult to decide here as to which makes the worst
showing, the vaccinated ship or the unvaccinated city! And while
vaccinators are very fond of referring to this case of Niagara Falls
as a great example of the virtue and need of vaccination, we think it
must be obvious that the less they say of this case as compared with
the vaccinated battle-ship _Ohio_, the better it will be for the cause
of vaccination and the logic of the vaccinator. Here we see five deaths
from smallpox in the well vaccinated battle-ship with 1000 population,
and one death from smallpox in the unvaccinated city of 40,000
population, which is a ratio of mortality, on basis of population, _two
hundred times greater_ in the well vaccinated battle-ship than in the
unvaccinated city!

Besides this difference of smallpox cases and deaths in favor of the
unvaccinated city, there were three deaths from vaccination in the
Niagara Falls population or three times more than the deaths from
smallpox!

For some of these facts as to Niagara Falls see the Report of the New
York State Department of Health for 1914, page 102. The three alleged
deaths from vaccination are denied, as usual, by the health officials,
but we have convincing evidence to prove them as most probably due to
vaccination. These three fatal cases were: Miss Hull, school teacher,
vaccinated when she was suffering from kidney disease; Bernard Moran,
a very old man, vaccinated when he was suffering from heart disease;
and John George Chambers, a strong man, killed by a clear case of acute
blood poisoning or septicemia with complications immediately following
the vaccination and extending from the vaccination sore.

EXAMPLE SIXTH. The flagrant failure of Typhoid Vaccination in the U. S.
Army in England and France.

The following extracts are taken from the Report of the Chief Surgeon
of the A. E. F., printed in U. S. Public Health Reports for March
28, 1919, entitled: “Typhoid Vaccination No Substitute for Sanitary
Precautions.” These extracts tell their story, most plainly and
positively, as to the abject failure of typhoid vaccination to protect
from disease where and when this protection is really needed, that is,
where serious actual infection exists due to unsanitary conditions;
and they also prove the necessity and superior value of sanitation as
a protection from disease. I now quote these extracts verbatim as they
appear in the official Report. They speak clearly for themselves and
need no comment here to emphasize their great force and significance as
a strong argument against compulsory vaccination from the vaccinators
themselves.

    “In July, 1918, a replacement unit consisting of 248 men from
    Camp Cody, N. Mex., reached England with typhoid prevailing
    extensively; 98 men, or 39.5 per cent., had typhoid, and the
    case death-rate was 8.42 per cent.

    “It was evident from the investigation that the men were
    exposed to infection through contaminated drinking water while
    en route to the port of embarkation in the United States. The
    unit had been vaccinated a few months prior to the occurrence
    of the epidemic. Most of the patients presented the typical
    clinical features of typhoid.”

    “In August, 1916, a small but severe epidemic occurred in a
    detachment of Engineer troops stationed at Bazoilles. In this
    unit fifteen cases of typhoid occurred, with a death-rate
    approximating ten per cent.”

    “Following the offensive in the Argonne sector, typhoid and
    paratyphoid began to be reported from practically all divisions
    engaged in that offensive. It is quite evident that the initial
    cases were due in large part to drinking infected water.”

    “More than 300 cases of typhoid-paratyphoid may be attributed
    to the Argonne offensive. Eight hundred and seventy-four
    typhoids and paratyphoids have been reported in the American
    Expeditionary Forces since October 1, 1918.”

    “A small but severe epidemic occurred in the Joinville
    concentration area in December and January. In a group of
    Medical Department units (evacuation and mobile hospitals
    and sanitary trains) concentrated there seventy-five cases
    occurred, with a case death-rate of approximately twenty per
    cent.”

    “The records of this office show that patients with typhoid
    have passed successively through camp, field, evacuation, and
    base hospitals without any documentary evidence that typhoid or
    paratyphoid was even suspected. There are records of a stay of
    two weeks or more in a single base hospital without diagnosis,
    and not a few records are on file showing that it remained for
    the pathologist to make the diagnosis at the autopsy table.”

    “The vaccinated individual protected against general systemic
    infection may still act as a carrier of typhoid infection,
    and frequently shows clinical manifestations of local disease
    of some portion of the gastrointestinal tract, while the
    characteristic symptom complex of typhoid fever due to general
    infection, namely, continued fever, rose spots, and enlarged
    spleen, may be wholly absent.”

    “Many cases originally diagnosed as influenza in the American
    Expeditionary Forces have subsequently proven to be typhoid.”

    “Intestinal types of supposed influenza should always be
    considered as possible typhoid until proven otherwise.”

    “The frequency with which atypical, mild, unrecognized cases
    of typhoid and paratyphoid fever has occurred in the American
    Expeditionary Forces among vaccinated men makes it absolutely
    essential to surround all such cases of undetermined fever with
    the same precautions which it is found necessary to apply to
    established typhoid or paratyphoid patients, to avoid contact
    infections in the wards among other patients and hospital
    personnel.”

    “Several protocols have been received in which the complete
    pathological and bacteriological pictures of typhoid fever were
    recorded but the cause of death was entered as ‘peritonitis,’
    ‘perforation of the intestine,’ ‘broncho-pneumonia,’ ‘acute
    enterocolitis.’”

    “Typhoid fever is increasing in the American Expeditionary
    Forces--so are the paratyphoid fevers.”

    “Vaccination is a partial protection only and must be
    reinforced by sanitary measures.”

It will be noted that not only does the above official Report contain
a frank, full, and free admission of the outright and inexcusable
failure of typhoid vaccination to protect from typhoid fever where it
is most needed, viz., where “sanitary precautions” do not exist, but
it also clearly shows some other serious evils which I have repeatedly
charged to the practice of compulsory vaccination, viz., it shows
how frequently false diagnoses are made of vaccinated cases, either
wilfully or inadvertently, so as to conceal the actual occurrence
of typhoid fever in vaccinated men and report it as some other
disease, such as “Influenza,” etc., and thus conceal the failures
of vaccination. It also shows that many cases of death from typhoid
fever in vaccinated men are reported as not due to this disease but
to some of its terminals or complications such as “Peritonitis,”
“Broncho-Pneumonia,” “Enterocolitis,” etc. By these mistaken, or
wilfully false, reports, the failures, dangers and fatalities of
vaccination are often concealed and denied, thus verifying my charge of
serious medical falsification in these matters, which I have openly and
publicly stated for years past and challenged denial or disproof.

EXAMPLE SEVENTH. Failure of Typhoid Vaccination in the U. S. Army in
America.

In the _Journal of the American Medical Association_ for February
15, 1919, there is a report of a bad epidemic of Typhoid Fever which
occurred among the vaccinated men in Camp Greene, Charlotte, North
Carolina, in June, 1918. In this case infection is reported to have
come from ice cream which the men had eaten, and the rather pitiable
and ridiculous excuse is given for the failure of the vaccination in
this case, that the infection in the ice cream was so virulent or in
such “massive doses” that the protective power of the vaccination
was not sufficient to overcome such “massive” infection, and hence
the vaccination failed to protect the men and they succumbed to the
disease, notwithstanding their extensive and repeated vaccination! This
is, of course, another and equally positive admission of the failure
of typhoid vaccination, but, unlike the previous example, it is a
rather ridiculous or farcical admission, as it attempts to excuse
the failure by saying that the “doses” of infection in the ice cream
were so “massive” that the vaccination was overpowered and could not
be expected to overcome such odds! In other words, vaccination will
protect you where there is no dangerous or serious infection to be
guarded against, but will fail where any serious or “massive” doses of
infection are present! This is equivalent to saying that vaccination
is a good policeman for any town where there are no lawbreakers and no
disorder, but is no good where there is any serious crime, violence
or danger. Vaccination, we are thus told, is a good bulletproof armor
provided you shoot only pop-guns against it, but it is no good to
resist real pistol or rifle balls! This is just about what opponents
of compulsory vaccination have been contending for years, and this is
therefore one of the chief reasons why we now contend that no such
ineffective, unreliable and dangerous remedy should be forced on any
person, child or adult, against free will and consent.


SUMMING UP--THE CASE PROVED

To sum up briefly, I think it may now be seen that our several cardinal
points against the evils of Compulsory Vaccination have been proved by
impregnable legal, medical and historical facts and out of the mouth of
high authorities on vaccination. These cardinal points may be stated in
seven numbers as follows:

    FIRST: The illegality and unconstitutionality of all compulsory
    vaccination and its gross violation of Medical Freedom and
    Bodily Sanctity, which are unalienable American rights equal
    with Religious Freedom.

    SECOND: The medical barbarism and malpractice of all compulsory
    medicine and compulsory disease as being opposed to all true
    standards of medical ethics and logic.

    THIRD: The poor protective power of vaccination, which gives no
    immunity from smallpox except for short periods of a few months
    or a year and requires frequent repetition, which is obviously
    ineffective as a protection and dangerous as a remedy.

    FOURTH: That sanitation, isolation and hygiene have been and
    are the chief means of preventing and suppressing smallpox
    epidemics independent of vaccination.

    FIFTH: That vaccination is very dangerous to health and life,
    causes epidemics in animals and mankind and is oftentimes more
    fatal than smallpox and now causes more deaths than smallpox.

    SIXTH: That vaccinating doctors and health officials most
    shamefully deny and conceal injuries and deaths from
    vaccination and falsify our vital statistics accordingly.

    SEVENTH: That the practice of inflicting on the human body a
    compulsory medical disease, which is dangerous to health and
    life and causes many deaths every year, is obviously illegal
    and a medical crime on the people which must be suppressed.


CONCLUSION

As soon, therefore, as this crushing fact of the great danger of
vaccination to human health and life enters the mind and conscience
of the mass of the people, and is fully grasped by the legislative,
the judicial and the executive minds of the country--from whom it
has been so long concealed by medical falsehood in high places--this
enlightenment will, I firmly believe, result in the permanent
abolishment of all compulsory vaccination, if not in the penal
prohibition of general vaccination, as being now more dangerous
than natural smallpox; and to that great fact and to this final and
prophetic thought, Mr. President, I ask your careful attention in
closing this exposure of vaccination horrors and medical mendacities.

  Respectfully submitted,
  CHAS. M. HIGGINS

  Dated at 271 Ninth St., Brooklyn, N. Y.,
  U. S. Constitution Day,
  September 17, 1919.




  AMERICANISMS

  MEDICAL FREEDOM IS AN UNALIENABLE
  AMERICAN RIGHT

  MEDICAL COMPULSION,
  LIKE RELIGIOUS COMPULSION, IS UN-AMERICAN
  AND MUST BE ABOLISHED

  NO GOVERNMENT WITHOUT CONSENT
  OF THE GOVERNED

  NO MEDICATION WITHOUT CONSENT
  OF THE PATIENT

  NO COMPULSORY VACCINATION

  NO COMPULSORY INFLICTION OF DISEASE




  “IN THE DISCARD”

    “The world has just destroyed the arbitrary force of a military
    junta. It will live under no other. All that is arbitrary and
    coercive is in the discard. Those who seek to employ it will
    only prepare their own destruction.” President Wilson, in
    Message to Congress, August 8, 1919.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] See U. S. Hygienic Laboratory Bulletin 91, Dec., 1913. Also
“Preventive Medicine,” by Dr. Rosenau, 1914, page 410.

[2] See U. S. Naval Medical Bulletin, Oct., 1914, page 591, Smallpox on
Battleship _Ohio_ confounded with Influenza.

[3] This subject of Alimentary Freedom as an unalienable right of the
people in time of peace has been treated in a separate pamphlet issued
November 25, 1919, entitled “Unalienable Rights and Prohibition Wrongs.”

[4] A change has recently been made in the law in England whereby the
medical profession obtains control of the Ministry of Health, which
is believed to be a change for the worse; and this illustrates the
constant effort of the profession to increase its power over the people
and to control all health matters, which, for the best interests of the
public, it should not be allowed to do.

[5] The term “pemphigus” means a disease with _bubbles_ or _blisters_.

[6] See eruption in Fig. 12.




Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation and accents have been standardised but all other
spelling and punctuation remains unchanged.

On page 11, “COMPULSORY DISEASE” has been corrected to “COMPULSORY
VACCINATION” as per the table of contents.

Italics are represented thus _italic_.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 69965 ***
