
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 76647 ***





                           THRILLING INCIDENTS

                                 IN THE

                           INDIAN WAR OF 1862;

                                 BEING A

                           PERSONAL NARRATIVE

                                 OF THE

                          OUTRAGES AND HORRORS

                              WITNESSED BY

                            MRS. L. EASTLICK,

                              IN MINNESOTA.


                           MINNEAPOLIS, MINN.:
                   ATLAS STEAM PRESS PRINTING COMPANY.
                                  1864.




                                PREFACE.


In presenting this pamphlet to the public, I have given merely a
plain, unvarnished statement of all the facts that came under my own
observation, during the dreadful massacre of the settlers of Minnesota.
Mine only was a single case among hundreds of similar instances. It is
only from explicit and minute accounts from the pen of the sufferers
themselves, that people living at this distance from the scene of
those atrocities can arrive at any just and adequate conception of
the fiendishness of the Indian character, or the extremities of pain,
terror and distress endured by the victims. It can hardly be decided
which were least unfortunate, those who met an immediate death at the
hands of the savages, or the survivors who, after enduring tortures
worse than death, from hunger, fear, fatigue, and wounds, at last
escaped barely with life.

My object in publishing my story is two-fold: I wish to inform the
public as to the extent of the wrongs inflicted upon the innocent
Minnesotians; and I also hope and expect to realize from the proceeds
of its sale sufficient pecuniary aid to enable me to return from my
temporary home in Grant County, Wisconsin, to my desolate home in
Minnesota--to the region where I left the bodies of my husband and
three children, on the bloody sod where they fell.

                                                  MRS. L. EASTLICK.

PLATTEVILLE, WIS., APRIL 1, 1864.




                               NARRATIVE.


I was born in the year 1833, in Broome county, New York. When I was
about one year old, my father, Mr. Giles Day, moved from that State to
Trumbull county, Ohio. Here I remained with my parents, till I reached
the age of fifteen, when I went with my brother’s family to Seneca
county, where I became acquainted with John Eastlick. In the year 1850
we were married, and we remained there until 1854, when we removed to
Indiana. My husband was a poor man, and seeing a little family growing
up around him, he began to feel keenly the need of a home. Thinking he
could obtain a homestead cheaper by going further west, we removed to
Illinois in the spring of 1856. But here it was entirely out of our
power to purchase, as the price of land was still higher than in the
place we had left. My husband now began to talk of going to Minnesota.
In the year 1857, our wagon was loaded once more, and we emigrated to
Minnesota, accompanied by one of our neighbors, named Thomas Ireland.

It was our intention to go to Bear Valley, but, on account of cold
wet weather setting in, we were obliged to stop in Olmsted county.
Here we staid until 1861, when my husband thought he could better his
condition by going to Murray county,--a distance of two hundred miles.
I felt a little fear of going there, knowing that there were a great
many Indians in that and the adjoining counties; still, I was willing
to accompany my husband wherever he thought he could best provide for
his family. We started on our journey in the fall, taking nothing with
us but our clothing, bedding, cattle, &c. Mr. Ireland again moved in
company with us; his family consisted of his wife and four children. My
husband chose to settle by a small lake, called Lake Shetek, where we
arrived on the 5th of November. We found that there was already a small
settlement here: but, after our arrival there were only eleven settlers
in all. The lake was about five miles long, with a belt of timber
running along the east side of it, where all the settlers had located
themselves.

My husband chose a beautiful spot for our home, situated about
midway between the two ends of the lake. In the spring of 1862, he
built a house and put in crops, and we began to feel quite happy and
contented in our new home. I no longer felt any fear of the Indians:
quite a number of them had lived by the lake all winter, and had been
accustomed to come to our home almost every day. Whenever any of them
came, they invariably begged for something to eat, which was never
refused them. We never turned them away, as did many of our neighbors,
and in return they appeared to be very friendly, and played with our
children, and taught them to speak the Indian language a little. In the
spring, they left the lake, and we saw no more of them for two or three
months.

About the last of July Mr. Eastlick left home to work during harvest.
He returned on the 17th of August, and said he had met sixteen Indians,
naked, and painted red, who seemed very friendly, and talked some time
with him. He seemed very much oppressed at heart, after his return,
as if some secret anxiety weighed heavily on his mind. I have since
thought that he must have seen or heard something that convinced him
there was great danger ahead. I heard him say often to Mr. Rhodes, who
had come home with him, that it would be a good plan to build a fort.
But when I asked him if there was danger to be apprehended from the
Indians, he answered evasively, to relieve my anxieties though his own
were so great, by saying he thought there was no danger, but that it
would do no harm to build a fort.

On Monday following, I went to the lower end of the lake to carry some
butter to Mrs. Everett, when, on my return home, I met six Indians with
their squaws and “_teepes_” or lodges. One of the Indians was “Pawn,”
with whom I was acquainted. I bowed, without speaking, as I passed him,
but he wished me to stop; more, I think, for the sake of seeing the
pony I was driving than myself. He came up, shook hands with me and
greeted me by saying “ho! ho! ho!” meaning “how do you do?” He talked
with me for some time, and said he was going to build his “teepe” at
Wright’s, and wait for some more Indians that were coming to go on a
buffalo hunt in the course of a few days.

On the morning of August 20th, I arose and prepared breakfast as usual
for my family, which consisted of my husband, myself, Mr. Rhodes, who
boarded with us, and our five children. The children were all boys:
the oldest was aged eleven years, and the youngest, fifteen months.
My husband and Mr. Rhodes had just sat down to the breakfast table,
when my oldest boy, Merton, came to the door, saying “Charley Hatch is
coming, as fast as he can run!” Hatch was a young man who lived with
his brother-in-law, Mr. Everett, and, thinking that perhaps some one
was sick, or hurt, I ran to the door. As soon as he came near enough
to me, I saw that he was very pale and quite out of breath. “Charley,
what is the matter?” I asked. He shouted--“The Indians are upon us!”
“It cannot be possible,” said I. “It is so,” said Charley, “they have
already shot Vought!” He then went on to relate all he knew about it:
but first let me relate the manner in which the Indians commenced their
attack upon our settlement, as we afterwards found out the facts. They
entered our neighborhood at the head of the lake, and begun operations
upon the farm owned by Mr. Myers. They tore down a fence and rode into
his corn, breaking it down and destroying it. As Mrs. Myers happened
to be sick at the time, Mr. Myers had risen quite early to wait upon
her, when he discovered what the Indians were doing. He called to them
and told them if they did not leave he would whip them, and asked if he
had not always used them well. They owned that he had. He then told
them there was plenty of room for them outside of his field. One Indian
outside the fence shouted to the rest, in his own tongue, saying that
Myers was a good man. He then rode away as fast as possible, and all
the rest followed him.

Thence they went on to the house of Mr. Hurd, who, in company with
Mr. Jones, had started on a journey to the Missouri river, about the
first of June, and, who never having been heard of afterwards, were
supposed to be murdered by the Indians. Mr. Hurd had left a German,
named Vought, to attend to things in his absence. When the Indians
approached the house Mrs. Hurd, who was out milking, hastened into the
house. The Indians followed her into the house, and with pretended
friendship, asked for some tobacco. Mr. Vought gave them some, and
they began to smoke, when Mrs. Hurd’s babe awoke, and began to cry;
Mr. Vought took the child in his arms, and walked out into the yard.
Just as he was turning to go into the house, one of the Indians stepped
to the door, raised his gun and deliberately shot him through the
breast. They then began to plunder the house, telling Mrs. Hurd that
if she made any noise they would kill her, too, but if not, they would
permit her to escape, and return to her mother. They broke open and
destroyed trunks, chests, beds, and all the other furniture of the
house, scattering the contents upon the ground. After compelling her to
see her home despoiled of all her household treasures, the savages sent
her away, showing her what direction she must take, and threatening
that if she tried to go to any of the neighbors, or make any outcry, to
warn them, they would follow and murder her. She was obliged to leave
by an unfrequented path, with two small children, the oldest of which
was three years of age, and the youngest not yet a year. After leaving
Mrs. Hurd, the Indians proceeded to the residence of Mr. Cook, who was
at the house at the time, while his wife was away in the corn-field,
keeping birds away from the corn. The Indians divided their force, a
part going to the house and the rest to the field. On coming up to Mrs.
Cook in the corn-field, they asked to see her husband’s gun, which she
had been using. She handed it over, and they kept it, refusing to give
it back, and telling her that she might go to her mother, for they were
going to kill off all the white men in the country. Those that went to
the house requested Mr. Cook to give them some water. As there was none
in the house, he was obliged to take the pail and go to the spring, to
supply their wants. But when about half way across the yard, one of the
cowardly villains shot him through the back. Mrs. Cook staid around
the premises, concealed from the Indians, till they had plundered to
their hearts content and taken their departure; then, returning to the
house and finding the corpse of her husband lying upon the ground, she
determined not to leave, without first alarming the settlement. After
going through brush and timber until her clothes were badly torn,
and wading along the edge of the lake until she was wet through, she
reached the lower part of the settlement undiscovered by the Indians.

Having wandered somewhat from my own tale, and brought the story of
their ravages up to near the time when they appeared at our place, I
will return to Charley Hatch’s account. Charles had gone, early in the
morning, to the head of the lake, on an errand. He rode a horse as far
as Mrs. Cook’s, but here he hitched his horse and proceeded on foot to
the house of Mr. Hurd, where he found the murdered body of Vought.
He returned to Mr. Cook’s where he had left the horse, but on coming
in sight of the house, he saw several Indians around it, and heard
the report of a gun. This so frightened the horse that it broke loose
and ran away, and while the Indians were trying to catch it Charles
got away unseen. He came down the lake and warned all the neighbors,
and when he came to our house he was nearly exhausted. He asked for a
horse, to ride to the lower end of the lake, to warn the rest of the
settlers. Mr. Rhodes had two horses there, and was willing he should
do so. Charles asked us for the bridle several times, but we were all
so horror-stricken and mute with fear and apprehension that we stood
for some minutes like dumb persons. At last I seemed to awake as from
a horrible dream, and began to realize the necessity of immediate and
rapid flight. I sprang into the house and got the bridle for him,
urging him to hurry away with all speed. He started off, and bade us
follow as fast as we could to Mr. Smith’s house.

On this, my husband caught little Johnny, our youngest, in his arms,
took his two rifles, and started, telling myself and the children to
hurry as fast as we could. I took some of my clothes, but my husband
told me to leave them. I asked him if I could not get my shoes, even,
but he said “no, we have no time to spare,” so I started, barefooted,
to follow Mr. Eastlick. Rhodes called to me, and asked if I was not
going to carry anything. So I went back, and he gave me some powder,
shot and lead. I took it in the skirt of my dress, and started as fast
as I could run; and that was but slowly, for my limbs felt very weak,
and I felt as if I should fall to the ground. My load seemed very
heavy, and the pieces of lead kept falling to the ground every few
rods. I felt so perfectly unnerved with fear that I gave up and told
John, my husband, that I could not go much further. He urged me to keep
on, and support myself by holding to his coat. This I did not do, but
told him if he would go slowly, I would try to get to Mr. Smith’s with
him.

When we came in sight of the house my strength began to return a
little, but on coming up, we saw no appearance of any one being at
home. My husband called “Smith!” several times, and, receiving no
answer, he concluded that they were all gone on to Mr. Wright’s. We
hurried on and soon overtook them. When we came in sight of the house
we could see the same Indians that had camped there on Monday, as
before mentioned. They motioned us to hurry along, pretending to be
much frightened, and when we came near the house a squaw met us first,
and asked what was the matter. I told her that some Indians had killed
Vought, and we expected they would kill all of us, upon which she
professed great sympathy for us, and even pretended to weep. We entered
the house and found Mrs. Wright very cool and collected. She encouraged
us very much by telling us that those Indians that were there would
fight for us. Soon all the nearest neighbors gathered in. Mr. Duly
and Uncle Tommy Ireland came without their families. Mr. Ireland was
obliged to leave his wife and children behind, for the Indians had been
shooting at him but not at his family. When the Indians arrived at the
road that led to our house and Mr. Duly’s, they left off pursuing Mr.
Ireland and went to our houses in search of more plunder.

Mr. Duly’s wife was much exhausted, from running, so he left her
concealed with the children in the bushes. Old “Pawn” volunteered to
go after them, so a party consisting of “Pawn,” Mr. Duly, Mr. Ireland,
and some squaws, set out to bring in the missing women and children.
They soon met Mrs. Ireland and her children, and, a little further on,
they found Mrs. Duly and her children, accompanied by Mrs. Cook. They
all came to Mrs. Wright’s, where we were, when Mrs. Cook, with tears
rising from her eyes, told us of the sad fate of her husband. My heart
was touched with sympathy for my dear friend. I threw my arms about her
neck, and begged her not to weep, telling her that, perhaps, ere night,
I should be left a widow, with five fatherless children, and that would
be still worse, for she had no children. Mrs. Wright gave her some dry
clothes, and she was soon made comfortable.

The men had, by this time, prepared the house as well as possible
for defending ourselves against our pursuers, by opening crevices in
numerous places, to be used as loop-holes for the rifles. They gave
us weapons, such as axes, hatchets, butcher-knives, &c., and sent us
all up stairs, where we had a good look-out from the windows. The men
told the Indians who still staid by us, that they could take their
stand in the stable, not liking to trust them in the house. They said
they would fight to the last for the white people, but that they had
no ammunition, whereupon two guns and a quantity of ammunition were
furnished them. I told my husband I had no confidence in them. He
replied that he did not know as they could do any better than to trust
them; if they proved friends, we should need their help very much,
but he said he should keep an eye on them. He then asked an Indian
who could talk a little English, if he would fight for the whites. He
replied that “he didn’t know.” Our enemies now made their appearance.
We could see them around the house of Mr. Smith, shaking some white
cloths, and making a great noise. Now and then an Indian would mount
his pony, ride out into the field, fire a gun, and then turn and ride
back as fast as he could. They performed in this manner a long time,
occasionally shooting an ox or cow, running loose in the field. The
Indians that were with us said that if we would all fire our guns it
would frighten them away. Accordingly they all went out, Mrs. Wright
with the rest. Her husband being gone at the time, down below Mankato,
she had slung the powder-horn and shot-pouch over her shoulder, and
loaded his gun. They all fired together, but the Indians, who reserved
their fire till after all the rest had fired. I went to my husband, and
begged of him not to discharge his gun again until after the Indians
had fired. I think they reserved their charges to shoot the white men,
when their weapons were all empty, but were too cowardly to do it,
when the time came to act. These volleys of musketry did not seem to
alarm the savage troop in the least. Old “Pawn” then said he would go
and meet them, and see how many there were, and what they wanted. But
before he had gone far, several Indians came towards him as fast as
they could ride. He stopped, and they called to him: he then went up
to them, and stopped there talking with them for some time. He finally
came running back, and reported that there were two hundred hostile
Indians coming, and if we would go peaceably away, they would not harm
us; but if not, they would burn down the house over our heads. Upon
this, the men held a short council: the majority of them decided that
it was best to leave the house. So we all started, across the prairie,
except Charley Hatch and Mr. Rhodes. These latter were sent with two
horses to the house of Mr. Everett, a distance of half a mile, to get
a wagon to carry the women and children, and some flour and quilts,
for we all expected to sleep on the prairie that night. Alas! some
of our group slept before night--yes, slept the sleep that knows no
waking. The two men overtook us in going the distance of half a mile,
and the women and children all got into the wagon, except Mrs. Wright,
myself, and my two oldest boys, Merton and Frank. In all, there were
thirty-four of us, including men, women and children. We traveled
over a mile in this manner, when the appalling cry was raised, that
the Indians were upon our track. The Indians, who had pretended to
be friendly at the house, had deserted us, and joined their fellow
savages in their demoniac quest of blood and plunder. All was terror
and consternation among us: our merciless foes were in sight, riding
at their utmost speed, and would soon be upon us. All now got into the
wagon that could. Mrs. Smith held the reins, while I, sitting on the
fore end of the wagon box, lashed the horses with all my strength, but,
with such a load, the poor brutes could not get along faster than a
walk. The Indians were fast gaining on us, and the men, thinking it was
only the horses they wanted, bade us leave the wagon. We accordingly
all jumped out, and ran along as fast as possible, while the men fell
in behind, to give the women and children what protection they could.
Some one asked if they should shoot at the Indians, or not: my husband
declared that he would shoot the first one that touched the horses.
When almost within gunshot, they spread themselves out, in a long line,
and approached, yelling and whooping like demons. They fired upon us,
but the first round did not touch us. They had now come up to our team;
one of them sprang from his pony, caught the horses by the bit, and
turned them around. Four of our men now fired upon them, and the one
who held the horses fell dead.

After the first fire from the savages, two of our men ran away from
the rest, keeping the road for some distance; they were called to come
back, and one of them turned around as if he was coming back. But there
were two or three Indians pursuing them, and close on their track, so
he went on, some distance, then turned and fired upon his pursuers.
One Indian snapped three caps at him, and then turned and rode back.
The two men made their escape without a scratch; one went to Dutch
Charley’s, and warned his family; the other went to Walnut Grove, and
warned two young men there, and they all made good their escape.

When the first Indian was shot, Mr. Duly called to us women and
children, and bade us go to a slough, not far off, which was the only
place that presented itself for concealing ourselves, and that was but
poor. We turned our course toward the slough, amid a shower of balls
and shot. One large ball entered my heel, which caused me much pain.
Mrs. Ireland’s youngest child was shot through the leg; Emma Duly
through the arm, and Willie Duly in the shoulder. We soon reached the
slough, and all concealed ourselves as best we could, by lying down
in the tall grass. This, however, only hid us from the sight, but not
from the shot and balls. For two hours, or more, we were exposed to
the random shots of our merciless foe. My husband tried several times
to shoot the savages, but his gun missed fire, and he was obliged
to work a long time before it would go off. Meanwhile, to me, every
minute seemed an hour, for I thought John could do good service with
his gun, being a good marksman and having a good rifle. Several times
our comrades called on him to shoot, saying, “There is an Indian! why
don’t you shoot him? for my gun will not reach him.” The Indians only
showed themselves one or two at a time, they would skulk behind the
hills, crawl up to the top, rise up, fire on us, and drop out of sight
instantly, thus proving themselves to be great cowards. The odds were
fearfully against us; two hundred Indians to six white men. We felt
that we were but weakly protected, and we could expect no mercy from
our inhuman enemy: we all knew that death or captivity was before
us, and I had no idea that any of our company would escape them. The
balls fell around us like hail. I lay in the grass with my little ones
gathered close around me: as it was very hot and sultry, I tried to
move a little distance from them, but could not get a foot away from
them, for they would follow me. Poor little dears! they did not know
how much they were destined to suffer, and they seemed to think if
they kept close to mother, they would be safe. I could now hear groans
about me in the grass, in various directions, and Mrs. Everett told me
she was shot in the neck; and in a few minutes more, I was struck by a
ball in the side. I told my husband I was shot. “Are you much hurt?”
he asked. “Yes, I think I shall die,” I answered, “but do not come
here, for you can do me no good; stay there, for you can do more good
with your rifle.” I knew he could not come without being discovered by
the Indians. Another ball soon struck me on the head, lodging between
the skull and the scalp, where it still remains. I could tell when a
ball struck any one, by the sound. My husband then said he thought he
would move a little, as the Indians had discovered his hiding-place.
He removed, re-loaded his gun, and was watching for a chance to shoot,
when I heard a ball strike some one. Fearing that he was the one, I
called to him, saying, “John, are you hurt?” He did not answer. I
called again, but there was no reply, save that I heard him groan
twice, very faintly. Then I knew that he was hurt, and thought I must
go to him, but Mrs. Cook begged me not to go. I told her that he was
badly hurt, and I _must_ go to him. “Do not, for God’s sake,” said Mrs.
Cook, “stay with your children; if you stir from that spot they will
all be killed; your husband is dead already, and you cannot possibly
do him any good, so stay with your children, I beg of you.” I took her
advice and staid with them, for they were all I had left in the world,
now, and I feared it could not be long before we were all to sleep in
the cold embrace of death, like my poor husband!

The whites now made but little resistance, for the men were all
wounded, and one of them killed. Three of the Indians now came from
their skulking place, and began calling upon the women to come out.
Mr. Everett answered them as he lay wounded in the grass. One of these
three Indians was old “Pawn,” who had professed to be our friend in
the morning, but who now proved to be as bitter a foe as we had. Pawn
knew the voice of Everett, and, calling him by the name, commanded him
to come out of the slough; Mr. Everett told him he could not, for he
was wounded, and could not walk, and asked Pawn to come to him. Pawn
replied, “You lie, you can walk well enough, if you want to.” Two
of the Indians then fired into the grass, in the direction in which
they heard his voice, and a bullet struck Mr. Everett near the elbow,
shattering the bone very badly. He then told his wife to tell Pawn
that he was killed: she boldly rose upright, in sight of the savages,
and in the most melting and piteous tones, told them her husband was
dead, and they had killed him. Pawn assured her that they would not
hurt the rest of them; but that they must come out, for he wanted her
and Mrs. Wright for his squaws. Mr. Everett, thinking that perhaps they
could obtain safety by obedience, until they could make their escape,
told her perhaps the best thing she could do was to go. She then called
out, and asked me to go with her. I told her I could talk but very
little with them, and asked Mrs. Wright to go, knowing that she could
speak Indian. She agreed to go with Mrs. Everett, and confer with the
Indians.

While Pawn was talking to Everett, Mr. Duly said he would shoot him;
but Mrs. Smith and myself begged him not to shoot, for well we knew
that if he did, the balls would shower around us again with renewed
fury. “It is too good a chance to throw away,” said he; “the Indians
will kill us all, sooner or later, and I’m bound to make one less of
them, while I have a chance!” The women then all begged him not to
shoot; and I urged as a reason that, perhaps, he might escape, and
let the world know what had been our fate. Upon this he desisted from
his purpose. After the savages had shot Mr. Everett, as I have just
related, Uncle Tommy Ireland rose up out of the grass, and plead with
them to save the women and children. Two of the Indians, who were only
three or four rods distant from him, drew up their guns, and fired with
murderous aim! He fell to the ground with a groan, shouting in anguish,
“Oh, God! I am killed!” He had received seven buck-shot, two of which
passed through his left lung, one through his left arm, and the rest
lodged in various parts of his body. When Mrs. Everett and Mrs. Wright
came back from their interview with old Pawn, they reported that he
said they would spare the women and children. We, therefore, thought
that since we were in their power so completely, we had better go with
them at once. When we all got out of the grass, I found there were not
as many killed as I had at first supposed, although many of us were
wounded. The rest all went to the place where these three Indians were
waiting for us, for they dared not go into the slough after us, but I
could not go without first seeing my husband. I went to him, and found
him fallen over upon his side, probably having died without a struggle.
One hand was lying on his face, and the other still grasped his trusty
rifle; his hat was on his head, and his dog lay by his side, watching
over his lifeless remains. I could see no blood about him. I kneeled
down beside him, and there, in the tall grass, alone with the dead,
but surrounded by cruel enemies seeking my life, and dead and dying
friends, I took my last farewell of poor John, expecting soon to follow
him. I took his cold hand in mine, leaned over and kissed his brow, and
looked, for the last time, on him who had been my companion for twelve
years, and had now laid down his life in trying to protect his wife and
little ones. I did not shed a tear, that I am aware of, when I parted
from him thus.

I now found that I was quite lame, and could scarcely walk. Merton
carried little Johnny in his arms, and Frank and Giles, two of my other
boys, assisted me to walk, by going on each side of me, and letting me
rest my weight partially upon them, by placing both hands upon their
little shoulders. As I came out of the slough, I saw Uncle Tommy
Ireland lying not far from me. He was still alive, but the blood and
froth were oozing from the wound made through his lungs, and I did not
think he could survive, for another hour. His wife was bending over
him, receiving his last words. He bade her and the little ones a last
adieu, thinking his end was nigh. The Indians had sent Mrs. Wright to
gather up the guns. As she came back, she passed close by him, upon
which he begged her to shoot him and put an end to his torment. She
told him she would be glad to help him, if it were possible, but she
could not kill a friend, even to relieve his sufferings. We came out
to where the Indians were, and found that three more had joined them,
making six in all. The prisoners seated themselves on the ground, and
we now learned how many had been wounded, while in the slough. The men
were all wounded, but kept concealed in the slough. Mrs. Smith was shot
through the hip, and could scarcely stir. Mrs. Everett was wounded
in the neck, and her clothes, on one side, were wet with blood, but
her wound had nearly ceased bleeding, and did not pain her much. Mrs.
Ireland’s next youngest child was shot through the bowels, and must
have been suffering greatly, for her face had turned spotted, and the
froth was running out of her mouth. I do not think she could have lived
long.

The sky now became overcast with heavy clouds, and a furious
rain-storm, accompanied with thunder and lightning, was coming on.
Soon the rain descended in torrents. The Indians now hurried and
caught their ponies, and made all preparations for starting away. We
expected to be all taken along with them, as prisoners, but we were
disappointed, for, as it afterwards proved, some were taken, while
others were put to death, or left in a dying condition. Those of us
who afterwards escaped, were for a long time in such a plight that
death seemed inevitably to stare us in the face. One Indian started,
taking Mrs. Cook, as his prisoner; another took one of Mr. Ireland’s
daughters; while a third started off, leading by the hand Mrs. Duly and
myself, neither of whom made any resistance. I stopped, however, and
looked around to see if my children were coming, and to tell them to
follow me. Little Freddy, one of my boys, aged five years, arose out of
the grass, at my call, and started to come. Then, for the first time, I
observed a hideous old squaw, who had just joined the Indians: she ran
after him, and felled him to the ground, with a blow upon the head from
something she carried in her hand. Weak, wounded, and tightly held by
my captor, as I was, I could only stand and look on at the scene which
follows, while such anguish racked my soul as, I pray God, that _you_
ye mothers who read this, may never feel. The old hag beat him for some
minutes upon the back part of the head, till I thought she had killed
him. She stepped back a few paces, when the little innocent arose,
and again started for me: but, oh! what a piteous sight for a mother
to behold! The blood was streaming from his nose, mouth and ears. The
old squaw, not yet satisfied, again knocked him down, and pounded him
awhile; then took him by the clothes, raised him as high as she could,
and, with all her force, dashed him upon the ground. She then took a
knife and stabbed him several times. I could not stop or return, for
my captor was by this time dragging me away, but my head was turned
around, and my eyes riveted upon the cruel murder of my defenceless
little ones. I heard some one call out, “Mother! mother!!” I looked,
and there stood little Frank, my next oldest child, on his knees, with
hands raised toward heaven, calling, “Mother!” while the blood was
streaming from his mouth. Oh! who could witness such a sight, and not
feel their hearts melt with pity! None but the brutal Indians could.
He had been shot in the mouth, knocking out four of his teeth--once
through the thigh, and once through the bowels. But what could I do?
Nothing, but gaze in silent horror on my children while they were
being murdered by savages. I was well aware that any interference of
mine, even were I capable of making it, would only occasion greater
cruelty. In the meantime, the Indians had been killing several women
and children, but I did not notice it at the time. I could not take my
attention from my own children, to observe what befell the rest. The
Indian now let me go, and went on without me. I fastened my eyes on the
pleading face of the little sufferer, but dared not go one step toward
him, while surrounded by our foes. Old Pawn now came along with Mrs.
Wright and her children. He brought a horse that belonged to Charley
Hatch, and ordered her to put her children on it, which she did. He
then gave her the halter strap, and sent her along, telling me to go
along with her. I looked around, as I started, and saw Mrs. Everett
running towards the slough, where her husband lay wounded, and an
Indian in pursuit of her, and just in the act of catching her, when
some one else shot her through the back. Next I saw Willie Duly fall,
shot through, a few yards in front of his mother; upon this, she turned
around and begged of old Pawn to spare her other children. One was a
girl, two years old, whom she carried in her arms; another, five years
old, she led by the hand; another, a boy, was hanging to the skirts of
her dress. I can never forget the pale, pleading face of my friend and
neighbor, Mrs. Duly. Pawn then told her, as usual, that he would not
kill them. I asked him what he intended to do with me, and if he meant
to kill me. He replied in the negative, then stopped, leaned on his
gun, and told me to hurry on.

I had now got some distance from the spot where I left my children,
and did not know whether all of them were murdered or not. I could now
walk without difficulty, for fear had driven away all pain. Part of
the prisoners were gone out of sight, and Mrs. Duly and Mrs. Wright
were fast leaving me. So I limped along at a rapid pace, but, looking
back, I saw old Pawn standing where I had left him, loading his gun,
and I instantly feared that, in spite of all his protestations, he was
going to shoot me. I had a small slough to cross, and when about half
way through it, some one, probably Pawn, shot me again, making four
bullets which I had received, in all. The ball struck me in the small
of the back, entering at the left side of the spine, and coming out
at the right side, just above my hip--also passing through my right
arm, between my elbow and wrist. I fell to the ground upon my face,
and lay here for some minutes, wondering if my back were broken, and
expecting the Indians would ride over me, as I had fallen in the trail.
Finding that I could move with great difficulty, I crawled about a
rod from the trail, and lay down again on my face. In a few moments
more I heard the step of an Indian, and held my breath, thinking he
would pass me, supposing me dead. But I was sadly mistaken. He came up
close beside me, stood a moment watching me, then commenced beating me
on the head with the butt of a gun. He struck me a great many times,
so hard that my head bounded up from the sod, at every stroke, and
then gave me three severe blows across the right shoulder. I did not
lose all presence of mind, although the blows fell heavy and fast. I
endeavored with all my might to hold my breath, in order to make him
think I was dead, but it was impossible: I was so nearly smothered with
my face beaten into the grass, that I caught my breath several times.
He probably supposed me to be dying, and threw down his gun. I thought
he was preparing to scalp me: I expected every moment to feel his hand
in my hair, and the keen edge of the scalping-knife, cutting around my
head. But, for once, I was happily disappointed, for he went away, and
left me, thinking, no doubt, I was dead. And, in fact, I _was_ so dead
to every feeling but fear, that I believe he could have taken my scalp,
without my moving a muscle.

I lay here for some two or three hours, not daring to stir. While I
was lying here, I heard Merton calling me, and now knew that he still
lived, and wondered how he had escaped the red-skins, but supposed he
had concealed himself in the grass. I dared not answer him, for fear he
would come to me, be discovered by the Indians, and be killed. The rain
had continued falling all of this time; my clothes were wet through,
and I was very cold and chilly. At about four o’clock p. m., on trying
to get up, I found that I was very weak, and that it required a great
deal of painful effort to raise myself to a sitting posture. As I had
been lying, my hand was under my forehead: I now found that the blood
had run down from my head and coagulated among my fingers; hence I knew
that my head had bled quite freely, or the rain would have washed it
away. Upon this, I tried to ascertain how much my head was injured by
the blows. I was insensible to pain in that quarter, but by turning
my head back and forth, I could plainly hear and feel the bones grate
together. I thought my skull must be broken, and this afterwards proved
to be true. My hair was very thick and long, measuring about three
feet, and this, I think, saved my life, by breaking the force of the
blows. Here I sat, wet and cold, not daring to move from the spot. I
had heard the cry of a child at intervals, during the afternoon, and
thought it was Johnny. I thought Merton must have taken him to the
wounded men, to stay with them. So I determined to try and go to them,
thinking we could, perhaps, keep warm better, for the rain still fell
very fast, and the night was setting in, cold and stormy. I rose upon
my feet, and found that I could walk, but with great difficulty. I
heard Willie Duly, whom I supposed dead long before this, cry out,
“Mother! mother!!” but a few steps from me, and then he called, “Mrs.
Smith! Mrs. Smith!!” Having to pass close by him, as I left the slough,
I stopped and thought I would speak to him; but, on reflecting that I
could not possibly help the poor boy, I passed him without speaking.
He never moved again from the spot where I last saw him; for when
the soldiers went there to bury the dead, they found him in the same
position, lying on his face, at the edge of the slough. I was guided
to the place where my children and neighbors were killed, by the cry
of a child, which I supposed to be Johnny’s voice: but, on reaching
the spot where it lay, it proved to be Mrs. Everett’s youngest child.
Her eldest, Lily, aged six years, was leaning over him, to shield him
from the cold storm. I called her by name: she knew my voice instantly,
and said, “Mrs. Eastlick, the Indians haven’t killed us yet?” “No,
Lily,” said I, “not quite, but there are very few of us left!” “Mrs.
Eastlick,” said she, “I wish you would take care of Charley?” I told
her it was impossible, for my Johnny was somewhere on the prairie, and
I feared he would die unless I could find him, and keep him warm. She
begged me to give her a drink of water; but it was out of my power to
give her even that, or to assist her in any way, and I told her so.
She raised her eyes, and, with a sad, thoughtful, hopeless look, asked
the question, “Is there any water in heaven?” “Lily,” I replied, “when
you get to heaven, you will never more suffer from thirst or pain.” On
hearing this, the poor little patient sufferer, only six years old,
laid herself down again, and seemed reconciled to her fate.

I next searched around and found the bodies of Mrs. Smith and Mrs.
Ireland; they both appeared to have been dead for some hours. Their
clothes were in great disorder, and I have no doubt, judging from
appearances, that the foul fiends had ravished their persons, either
before or after death. The only service I could render their lifeless
forms, was to place them in as decent position as I could, which I did.
Mrs. Smith had a thick, heavy apron, which I thought would help to keep
me warm. I kneeled beside her, and tried to pull it off, but could not.
I then found it fastened behind her back with a button, which, from her
position, I could not loosen. I at last succeeded in running my left
arm under her waist, and thus I raised her body, unfastened the apron,
and put it over my head and shoulders, to keep off the constant rain.
About half an hour was consumed in getting it, owing to the fact that
my right arm was almost entirely useless, by reason of the bullet-hole
through it, and the bruises on my shoulder, from the butt of the gun. I
am naturally of a timid disposition, when near the dead, but this time
I felt not the least fear, although it was, by this time, quite dark,
and I was alone in the wilderness with the dead and dying.

When in our great haste to escape into the slough, that morning, I had
torn the binding of my skirt very badly, and, since that, I had been
obliged to hold it together with my hand. I now had a double task to
perform with my left hand: first, to hold my skirt from dropping, not
wishing to lose it, because it was all the clothes I had on, excepting
a short loose sack and a chemise; and, second, I was obliged to hold
up my right hand and arm with my left, for I could not let it hang by
my side without great pain, neither was there strength enough left in
it to hold itself up. Therefore, I felt over the waist of Mrs. Smith’s
dress for some pins to fasten on my skirt with, but without success.
I then moved to the body of Mrs. Ireland, and found two pins, which I
used, so that they were of invaluable service. I also discovered the
youngest child of Mrs. Ireland, lying upon the breast that had ever
nourished it. I bent down my head and listened; the soft, low breathing
showed how sweetly she slept, upon that cold, cold bosom. I left her,
as I did the rest, being unable to carry anything, and she being
unable to walk, and under two years of age. I looked around, and, in
the darkness, found another lifeless form, stretched upon the ground,
a few steps from me. My eyes had become accustomed to the darkness,
so that I could see, indistinctly. I found that it was my poor little
boy, Giles, shot through the breast by the Indians. He appeared to
have died without a struggle; I seemed to see a smile wreath his cold
lips and a dimple on his cheeks, and I fancied the angel spirit was
watching me as I bent over that little house of clay. I could not wish
him back, for he had gone to the land where suffering is unknown. I
now left him as I found him, and proceeded to where my attention was
attracted by the heavy breathing of some one. I found it was a child,
and, stooping down, I examined it by feeling, as well as I could.
Alas! to my unspeakable grief and horror, I found it was my own little
Freddy! What tongue can tell the anguish that I felt, to reflect on
the cruel treatment I had seen him receive, and that he had been left
to suffer for hours. I thought, “O! that I had found him dead!” He lay
upon his face with his clothes torn nearly off; he was quite warm, and
breathed very hard, with a dreadful rattling in his throat. I knew that
he was then dying, and could not live long. I wished to lie down and
die beside my sweet boy, but an after reflection seemed to say, “No,
you must not do it; you still have something for which to live, for
are not Merton and little Johnny somewhere on the vast prairie, and,
at this moment, hungry, wet, cold, and in danger of wolves?” Knowing
this, could I lie down in the rain and die, without, at least, trying,
with all my remaining strength, to find them, and give them what poor
comfort I could? Oh! no; and I accordingly left the little sufferer,
praying that God would soon release him from pain.

I had gone but a short distance when my attention was arrested by a
loud, laborious breathing, in an opposite direction, and I found that
it proceeded from Mrs. Everett, who had been shot through the lungs.
The noise she made in breathing struck a complete horror over me; it
was a rattling, gurgling sound, that made my very flesh crawl. I did
not, dared not touch her. I was, all at once, overcome with such a
dread or terror, or something of the kind, that I feared her. I called
her by name several times, as I stood over her, but she answered not;
she was beyond speaking. I hurried along, for I could not bear to
witness the suffering of my friend and neighbor. I wandered around on
the prairie, calling “Merton,” at intervals, but receiving no answer.
Sometimes I fancied I could hear John crying: I would then hurry in the
direction it seemed to come from, and call him again and again: then I
would seem to hear him another way, and turn my course thither. Often,
when forced by fatigue, I rested my bruised and weary frame on the wet
ground.

As I was going along I saw a light about two feet in length, and one
and a half in breadth; it was a pale red light, and seemed to float
along just above the grass, at the distance of about forty rods from
me. It went entirely around me, some three or four times, or, perhaps
more, for I did not count. It first appeared on the right hand side,
going around before me: it soon moved very swiftly. I thought at first
it might be an Indian, but soon saw that no Indian, or even horse,
could move with such rapidity. What it was, or what was the meaning of
it, I do not know, but it was very mysterious.

Morning dawn found me still wandering over the prairie, in search of
my children, for I was confident that they still lived, unless they
had perished from cold or hunger. I looked around, and strained my
eyes in the vain hope of seeing some known object by which to learn
where I was: but no, I was lost upon the trackless prairie. My fear
of savages was too great to allow me to travel by day-light, so I hid
myself all day in a bunch of tall weeds. The rain continued to fall
till about 9 a. m., when it ceased, and, soon after, the sun cheered
me with his warm rays. About ten o’clock, I heard the report of guns,
not far distant, and heard the cries of children again. This proved to
me that I was not far from the place where my husband and friends and
children were murdered. I heard the agonizing cries of the children,
during most of the day. They cried constantly, and sometimes would
scream and shriek, as if in great pain. This led me to the conviction
that the fiends were torturing them. I believed my own surviving boys
to be among them, with poor Lily and Charles, and I expected they would
all at last be killed, when the Indians were tired with their hellish
sports: for I believe that it was rare sport to them, to torture such
little innocents. But about four o’clock, I heard the report of three
guns in succession: the wail of the infants instantly ceased. “Alas!” I
cried out in despair, “what have I to live for now? My husband and five
darling children are all murdered: my home is plundered and desolate;
and I myself am left upon the prairie, alone among enemies, with many
a wound, and scarcely able to walk!” This was, indeed, a sad picture;
but how true it is that while there is a spark of life, there still is
hope, in the heart. Poor human nature soon found for me another excuse
for not giving up, and for trying to prolong my miserable existence. I
wished to live long enough to tell to some white persons, and, through
them to the world, the story of our sad fate. I then began to look
around, to ascertain in what direction to go, to reach the house of
“Dutch Charley,” a German living sixteen miles from Lake Shetak. I
could just barely see, in the horizon, some timber, which I thought
must be close to Buffalo Lake, and on the road to “Dutch Charley’s,”
and I determined, that, as soon as it was dark, I would try to reach
it. I had now passed two days without anything to eat or drink: I felt
no hunger, but was almost ready to perish with thirst, as it seemed.

As soon as it was dark, I started on my weary journey toward the
timber. I walked some hours, and then laid me down to rest, on the
damp ground. The dew on the grass was very heavy; I thought I could
scoop up some of it with my hand, and obtain relief, but it was in vain
that I tried it. I then took up the bottom of my skirt, and sucked
the moisture from it, until I had partially quenched my thirst. I
thought it the sweetest water I ever drank. I now curled myself up on
the ground for a nap, trying to get myself warm, by drawing the apron
over my head and face, and breathing on my benumbed hands. I shook
from head to foot. I was chilled through, and my teeth chattered. I
heard something approach me, which I supposed, from the step, &c., was
a wolf. I heard him snuffling around my head awhile, and then running
away. I did not even look up, for I felt not the least fear of anything
but Indians. Soon sleep and weariness overcame me, and I slept for some
time. When I awoke, I felt quite refreshed, and started once more on
my toilsome journey. But, by this time, my feet had become very sore;
the flesh was worn almost to the bone, on the top of my toes, by the
coarse prairie grass. Indeed, it was quite a hardship for me to walk,
at all, but the sweet hope that I should soon reach “Dutch Charley’s,”
buoyed up my sinking spirit. If I could only reach that place, I should
be well cared for, and assisted to some friendly settlement, whence I
could inform distant friends of my misfortunes. I traveled on in the
darkness, through sloughs, and high tangled grass, and soon found a
slough that was filled with water. Here I satisfied my burning thirst,
but it was very difficult getting through it: the grass was as tall as
my shoulders, and twisted and matted so that I had to part it before
me, to get along. Most of the way, the water was as much as two and a
half feet deep. I got so fatigued in wading this wide slough that I was
almost obliged to sit down in it, and rest myself. As soon as I set
my foot on dry land again, I lay down and rested a long time, before
starting again.

It was now early twilight, and I could see timber at a short distance.
I was so weak that I reeled badly, as I walked, but the sight of
the woods revived my strength somewhat, and I dragged myself along,
thinking that about five of the sixteen miles of the route to “Dutch
Charley’s,” were accomplished, and vainly hoping that before night I
might travel the remaining eleven miles. As I neared the timber, I
heard the crowing of fowls in several directions. It was now broad
day, and I discovered that this was not Buffalo Lake, but Lake Shetak!
I cannot describe my grief and despair, at finding myself back there,
after wandering two long nights, with feet bleeding and torn by briers
and rough weeds, and with nothing to eat for three nights and two
days. My fear of Indians caused me to creep into the first bunch of
weeds, for shelter, and I covered my head and face with the apron, to
keep off the musquitoes, which stung me beyond all endurance. I began
to feel sick, and a weak, faint feeling would come over me at times,
which I attributed to extreme hunger. I thought that if I got away
from that place, I must get something to eat, or die soon of weakness
and starvation. There was a house not far off, which I knew to have
belonged to my old friend and neighbor, Thomas Ireland, and if I could
get to it, I might, perhaps, find something eatable. After wavering for
a long time, in a state of uncertainty, between the fear of starvation
and the fear of the Indians, I chose to risk the danger of being
discovered by them, knowing that to remain without food longer, was
death. At about ten o’clock I started for the house. I had to cross a
small slough, the opposite side of which was a high bank, covered thick
with brush. With great pain attending every step, I crossed the slough,
gained the other side, and essayed to climb the bank; I parted the
brush, in order to get through with the least possible pain, but the
brush would catch between my toes at every step, causing me to groan
aloud. God only knows what I suffered. Entirely discouraged, I lay down
in the midst of the brush to _die_! I reflected that all that had kept
me alive, hitherto, was my great desire and determination to live;
hence, that all I now needed to do, was to lie down, determined to
die, and death would soon relieve my sufferings. But I was mistaken: I
found that I could not die, unless it was God’s will, and in His time.
I lay here until noon; then arose and started once more for the house.
By pulling myself up by the bushes, I at last reached the top, and
found myself within a short distance of a corn field. Though in such
an exhausted state that I could scarcely walk, I dragged myself to the
field. I plucked the first ear I could reach, sat down, and, after many
efforts, pulled off the green husks. I then ate two rows of the milky
kernels of green corn, but they made me very sick at the stomach. But,
after lying down for some time, I arose, feeling a great deal better,
and stronger, and soon reached the house.

Here I found the head and bones of a young bullock the Indians had
butchered: several dead pigs, old clothes, dishes, Indian blankets,
&c., scattered all about the yard. The ground was covered with
feathers which they had emptied from the beds. I entered the house
and found in one corner, a dead dog; I found a crock containing some
buttermilk, so sour and covered with mould that I found it impossible
to use it for food. But I took a cup to the spring, drank some water,
and crawled into some plum-bushes, where I remained until night. When
it got sufficiently dark, I went back to the house, where I caught and
killed a chicken, tore off the skin, and with my teeth tore the flesh
off the bones. This I rendered eatable by dipping it in some brine that
was left in a pork barrel; wrapped it in paper, and put it in a tin
pail that I found. This must be my provision for next day, for well I
knew that I must have food of some kind, even if raw. I also pulled
three ears of corn, and deposited them with the meat. This little store
of provision, I thought, would be enough to keep up my strength until
I could reach “Dutch Charley’s.” This I imagined would be a haven of
rest, where kind hands would care for me, and nurse me up. I put on an
old ragged coat, to keep me warm, bound up my raw and painful feet, in
old cloths, and started anew on my journey.

I knew the direction to the road to be due east from this place, and
the distance about two miles. This night I kept the right course by
the north star, but did not travel far, for I could go but a short
distance, before I was obliged to lie down and rest. Just at day-break,
I reached the road, making the distance of two miles in the whole
night! This I thought was slow traveling, but I was quite encouraged,
now that I had found the road, and was sure of going right. I lay
down and slept until after sunrise: then, after eating some green
corn, I started again. Often did fatigue force me to sit down and
rest, and each time, after resting, I could scarcely put my foot to
the ground. My heel, which had been shot through, was very sore, and
badly swelled; but, discouraging as this was, I still pressed onward,
till I reached Buffalo Lake, at about 11 o’clock, a. m. Here I found
that I must cross the outlet of the lake, upon a pole that some one
had laid across, long ago. But when I trusted my weight upon it over
the middle of the stream, it broke, and I fell into the water. After
repeated efforts I got out and passed on, but was obliged to stop and
repair damages caused by the accident. I took off and wrung out some of
my clothes, such as my skirt and the rags on my feet; then hung them
in the sunshine to dry. I also laid the meat in the sun to dry, for
it was so soft and slippery that I could not eat it. After this I lay
down in the bushes that grew around the lake, and slept very soundly,
for some time. I arose, at length, put on my skirt, coat, and apron, as
usual, dressed my feet again, sat on a log and ate some corn and forced
down some meat. Just as I finished my lonely meal, a flock of ducks
flew off the lake, and soon a crane followed them. This was proof that
something had disturbed them, and, fearing that Indians were close at
hand, I hid behind a tree, and watched the road in the direction I had
just come. Presently the head of a horse was seen to rise over the hill
near by. “Indians, without doubt,” thought I, and shrank down among the
bushes, and watched to see a dozen or more of the hated savages file
along before me. But, oh! what a revulsion of feeling, from fear to
joy! It proved to be the mail-carrier from Sioux Falls to New Ulm. I
crept out of the brush, and addressed him. He stopped his horse, and,
staring me in the utmost astonishment, asked, in the Indian tongue, if
I were a squaw. I answered yes, not understanding him, and told him the
Indians had killed all the white people at the lake. “Why,” said he,
“you look too white to be a squaw.” “I am no squaw,” replied I, “I am
Mrs. Eastlick; you have seen me several times at Mrs. Everett’s house;
but I am very badly wounded.” While talking with him, the first tears
I had yet shed, since the beginning of my troubles, began to pour like
rain over my cheeks. While I was alone, without an earthly friend to
listen to my grief, I bore up stoically; but now the warmth of human
sympathy unlocked the frozen current of my tears, and I tried with
joy, at once more beholding the face of a white man. He then inquired
about the extent of my wounds, and asked to see them; so I turned up my
sleeve, and showed him my wounded arm, and the place where my head was
broken. He then helped me up on his sulky, and walked along, leading
the horse. At about four o’clock we came in sight of “Dutch Charley’s,”
when we drove the horse away from the road into a ravine, helped me to
the ground, telling me to conceal myself in the grass, and he would go
to the house and see if there had been any Indians about. He returned
presently, saying there had been none there: that the family had
deserted the premises, but that there was an old man there, who came
from Lake Shetak. He helped me to mount the sulky again, and we were
soon before the door. As soon as I had got to the ground, the man made
his appearance at the door, and, wonderful to tell, it was poor “Uncle
Tommy Ireland.” I hardly knew him, for he looked more like a corpse
than a living being; his face was pale, his eyes deeply sunk, and his
voice reduced to a whisper. I hurried to greet him, rejoiced to find,
still living, my old friend and neighbor, who had witnessed the same
heart-ending sights with myself. He clasped his arm around me, kissed
me several times, and we both wept like children at the sight of each
other.

While the mail-carrier cared for his horse, we entered the house, and
he told me that Merton had left the scene of the massacre on the same
day, carrying little Johnny, and he thought, perhaps, he had reached
that house before “Dutch Charley’s” family had left, and so gone along
with them. I was filled with hope and joy, to think that, perhaps, two
of my children were spared. He detailed to me the circumstances how
the rest of the men, who were lying there with him wounded, had made
their escape from the slough about the middle of the afternoon of the
same day, after the Indians had left. That Merton then told him that
_he_ was going to leave, too. “Oh! no,” said Uncle Tommy, “you will
starve to death on the prairie; you had better lie down with me, and
both die here together, than to wander over the prairie, and finally
starve.” “No,” bravely replied Merton, “Mother told me to carry Johnny
as long as I live, and I’m going to do it.” Uncle Tommy then, seeing
the child’s determination to go, told him he would go with him as far
as the road. Poor little Frank started to go with them, but was wounded
so badly, and so enfeebled by loss of blood, that he soon fell upon his
knees, and besought his brother, Merton, to wait for him, saying he was
_sick_ and could not keep up, Oh! how the poor boy must have felt, to
see his brother leave him alone in such agony. He had been shot through
the thigh, through the abdomen and through the mouth. I afterwards
learned that he remained two days on the prairie, and was then found by
a band of Indians, who carried him to Mrs. Smith’s house. Here they
remained and doctored him two days; there were worms in his wounds
at the time; and, finding he could neither eat nor drink, but would
probably die, they left him in this situation. But he lived, and after
staying there alone for three weeks, and living on cheese, &c., he was
taken prisoner by a half-breed, named Joe Leaboshie. God only knows
what the poor child suffered, and what he still suffers, for if still
living, he is yet a prisoner.

Uncle Tommy only went about half a mile with Merton; being very faint
from the loss of blood, he lay down in the grass, and was unable to
turn himself over for thirty-six hours. Then, finding himself able
to walk, he arose, and went as far as “Dutch Charley’s” that day, at
which place we found him on Saturday, the next day. As he was unable
to get himself a drink, he was suffering greatly, but the sight of the
mail-carrier and myself raised his spirits to such an extent, that
he thought he could travel a little. The mail-carrier came in after
feeding his horse, brought in some hay, which he put in a corner, and
advised me to lie down upon it and rest. He found a cheese in the
chamber, which he cut and fed us upon. After resting some time, I went
to the garden, and pulled a few turnips; taking them and a part of the
cheese for food, we started once more. At first, Uncle Tommy could not
walk very well, but, after going a mile or two, he could walk as fast
as the horse. After going about eight miles, we went about half a mile
away from the road, to camp for the night; ate a part of our turnips
and cheese, and lay down on the ground to sleep. The mail-carrier gave
me a quilt, that he had with him, and this I shared with Mr. Ireland,
who had nothing but his shirt and pants. During the night, a severe
storm arose, and it rained for some time; the kind mail-carrier put his
oil-cloth blanket over us, reserving but a small portion for himself.

As soon as day-light on Sunday morning, we started again. It was very
cold, and I should have suffered much, if the mail-carrier had not
given me his blanket to ride in, which kept me very comfortable. At
about eleven o’clock, we espied some persons ahead of us, and the
mail-carrier, thinking they might be Indians, turned from the road,
followed along a ravine, for some distance, till he thought he could
come up with them. He then cautiously crept to the top of the hill, and
looked over, upon the road. But he could see nothing of them; they were
out of sight. He returned and said he would go back to Sioux Falls, if
I would. I told him, if he thought he would be any safer to return,
to do so, by all means: but that I would rather he would leave me to
go onward, to New Ulm, which I supposed must be a place of safety.
He said he would go there with me. I urged him not to run any risks
for my sake, for we might all get killed if we went on, but he would
not leave me behind, alone. We then all started on again, with the
mail-carrier some distance in advance. As we neared the place where
we had seen the supposed Indians, he took a circuitous route, telling
me to wait until he could go to the top of a hill, and look out for
them. After looking in every direction, he motioned to me to go on,
and soon rejoined me. But when we had traveled about a mile further,
on ascending an eminence, I saw at a long distance the objects that
had alarmed us, which appeared to be a woman and two children. When we
arrived near to them, the woman looked to me like Mrs. Duly: I beckoned
to her to stop, and, on coming up, it proved to be Mrs. Hurd, with her
two children. She was unable to speak, for some time, but shook hand
with us all, and finally told me that my Merton was a short distance
ahead, just out of sight, and was carrying Johnny. I could stay to
hear no more, and, urging the horse along, I soon came up with them.
Merton stopped, gazed upon me, but spoke not a word. The mail-carrier
took Johnny, who was sleeping, in his arms, and gave him to me; I
clasped him to my breast, and, with tears of joy, I thanked God--Oh!
how fervently--for sparing my children thus far. How I longed to press
to my bosom my poor Merton, but could not, for I was unable to get off
the sulky; all I could do was to press his wasted hand, and call him
my dear brave boy. He, though only eleven years old, had carried the
child, who was fifteen months old, fifty miles, but now he could hardly
stand alone; for he felt no fear now, and had nothing to excite him
or keep up his strength. He was the poorest person I ever saw, able
to stand alone. Two weeks of hard sickness could not have altered his
looks more. And little Johnny, too, was sadly changed; his face was
entirely covered with a scab, where the musquitoes had bitten him and
he had scratched off the skin: he lay stupid in my arms, and seemed not
to notice anything; and he had pulled the hair all out of the back of
his head. They had both been two days without food. After Merton had
left Mr. Ireland, exhausted upon the prairie, he soon found the road to
“Dutch Charley’s,” and reached Buffalo Lake before dark, on the day of
the massacre, and stopped there all night. He laid his little brother
on the ground, and bent over him to protect him from the cold rain. The
wolves came around in the night, and he was obliged to halloo at them
with all his power of voice, to scare them away. Think of it, mothers,
and fancy your own cherished darlings sleeping thus!

Thus he spent the long, cold, weary night, and at day-light, started
on his way. All day long he carried little John, resting at intervals,
until about five p. m. he overtook Mrs. Hurd, near the house of the
German. Together they proceeded to the house, where they found and
ate some cheese full of skippers, which was the first morsel they had
tasted for two days. The people of the house had left, taking with them
all their provisions, that were fit to eat. At about dark they went and
concealed themselves in the corn-field for the night.

Mrs. Hurd, also, had had a very hard time since the beginning of her
troubles. After the Indians had driven her from her home, she wandered
on till she became bewildered, and lost her way, while the rain poured
in torrents. At night she laid her children on the ground, tried to
shield them from the storm with her body, and spent the night in
watching over them. Next day, after wandering round for a long time,
and crossing numerous sloughs, she found the road, but her eldest child
became very sick, and vomited often. Soon he became unable to walk,
and then she was obliged to carry him. But having two to carry, and
being quite weak, she was under the necessity of carrying one of them a
quarter or half mile, laying him down and returning for the other one,
so that, for every mile that her children got along, she was obliged to
walk three miles. Her oldest child cried bitterly for bread, but she
cheered him by promising that he should have some when they reached
“Dutch Charley’s.” She traveled thus till she reached the house, when
she was almost discouraged by finding them all gone. Her boy reminded
her of her promise, but she could find no bread for him. Next morning,
after returning from the corn-field, they resumed their search for
food, and at last found in an old building some spoiled ham, which they
fed to the little ones. Merton pulled some carrots in the garden, and,
after making their breakfast of carrot, ham and cheese, they started
again, taking what provision they had left. Thus they traveled, with
but little to eat and nearly destitute of clothing, and sleeping on the
ground at night. Johnny’s sole clothing was a dress, with a very low
neck: Merton had, at first, a shirt, pants, and hat, but the hat was
shot to pieces in the slough, and he had torn his pants nearly off, in
walking, so that he replaced them with an old pair which were picked up
at the German’s.

At about noon we reached Brown’s place, which was two miles from where
I met with my children, but found the house deserted, and the family
gone. From the appearance of things, they were judged to have left
the house of their own accord, and had taken most of their goods with
them. The mail-carrier, being unable to enter the door, which was
fastened, climbed in at the window, which had been broken in, and found
some bread on the table, which he distributed among us, reserving but
a small piece for himself. After feeding his horse, he started alone
for New Ulm, leaving us around the house, and promising to send some
one after us. He said that about seven miles from there, lived a man
who owned a pair of horses, and he would send him after us. After he
was gone, being afraid to stay around the house, we went about eighty
rods from the house, into the brush that grew along the bank of the
Cottonwood river. Here we staid until near sunset, when we returned
to the house, crawled in through the broken window, and examined the
premises. The house looked as though it had just been left; it was
quite clean, and everything was placed in good order. There were one
feather bed and three straw beds in the house, some forty pounds of
pork and a crock of lard in the cellar; in short, we found enough to
make us comfortable, and, though there was nothing that would make
bread, we were still very thankful. In the garden, Mrs. Hurd and Merton
dug some potatoes, and found plenty of such vegetables as onions,
turnips, cabbage, beets, tomatoes and melons. Mrs. Hurd then cooked
some potatoes, fried some pork and onions, and we all made a hearty
meal, which was the first one I had had since Tuesday night. As soon as
dark, we all gladly went to bed, and found clothes enough to keep us
quite comfortable. I slept but little, however, for I felt not so safe
here as on the prairie, and fear of the red-skins kept sleep from my
eyes.

Here we remained at Mr. Brown’s house, from Sunday p. m. till Wednesday
night, when the mail-carrier returned. He reported that all the
settlers on the Cottonwood river were driven away by the Indians, or
killed; that he had gone in sight of New Ulm, on foot, leaving his
horse some miles behind; that he could see the ruins of a great many
burnt houses there, and people, of some kind, walking about the street,
but could not determine whether they were Indians or whites; that as he
was traveling along, on foot, he suddenly came upon six Indians, two of
whom shot at him and pursued him; that he ran and concealed himself in
a slough, till his pursuers were weary of hunting for him, and gave up
the search. He came back and reached Brown’s on Tuesday night, but,
on listening for us, he heard nothing, so he concluded that we were
either killed by the Indians, or had gone away, and, perhaps, the house
contained Indians, so he went to the corn-field and staid there for the
rest of the night, and part of the next day, till he ventured to come
to the house. After hearing this tale, we all knew we were not safe a
moment in the house. But now I was no longer able to walk; my wounded
foot had become much inflamed and swollen. So our kind protector put me
upon his horse and took Johnny and myself to a thicket, about a fourth
of a mile from the house. He also brought the feather bed and placed
it for me to lie upon, among some wild plum bushes. Having done all he
could to render us comfortable, he shook hands and bade me farewell,
saying that he never expected to see me again. He started to return to
Sioux Falls, to send some soldiers to rescue us, and, if he had good
luck in getting through, he thought the soldiers could reach us in one
week from that day. When he left me I wept like a child, for he had
been so very kind to me, he seemed like a brother, and, now that he
was gone, I felt that the last of my hopes was gone with him. I knew I
could not get away without help, and I feared lest the Indians should
come along and find us: if they did our lives would not be worth a
farthing. After cooking a pail of potatoes, some meat and parched corn,
Mrs. Hurd came to me; Uncle Tommy and Merton also came, bringing some
bed clothes to cover us with. But the night proved so sultry, that we
could not bear to cover our faces, and the mosquitoes seemed to draw
the last drop of blood from our veins. I slept but very little, during
this long and tedious night. The prospect was discouraging beyond
measure, and I feared that the mail-carrier would never reach his
destination. But I afterwards learned that when he reached Sioux Falls,
the settlers there had all been murdered by the savages, as also all of
the soldiers but two, who escaped: finally, however, he reached Fort
Clark in safety.

Next morning, Thursday, we arose and made our breakfast of cold
potatoes, and meat. We dared not speak aloud from fear that Indians
might be near. It was some trouble to keep the little ones quiet,
sometimes, but usually they were very still. Johnny now got so that he
began to walk a little again, but when I first overtook him, he was
unable to stand alone. About ten o’clock, Mr. Ireland said he could
not stand it any longer, and would go to the house. He was much better
now than he had been, before: but, one night, while we were staying at
the house, Mrs. Hurd and myself thought he was dying, from the wounds
through his lungs. He set out for the house, but had gone but a little
way, when we heard the barking of dogs. This seemed to us proof that
Indians, with their dogs, were upon us, and we expected to hear the
report of a gun that should be the first fired at poor Uncle Tommy. No
one can imagine what we then suffered with fear. Presently the dogs
came crackling through the bushes, and stopped, when in sight of us,
looking intently at us. I feared they would bark, and bring Indians
about us, but they did not. They turned back and were gone some time.
Next time, they came close to us, lay down about a rod from us, and
finally went away again. They were large, coal-black dogs, and did not
look cross, but quite the reverse. I told Mrs. Hurd that if they came
to us again, I would try to make friends with them, and, perhaps, they
would not betray us. Sometime after noon, they came the third time; the
largest one came close to me and looked very wistful. Not daring to
speak, I merely snapped my fingers at him, on which he came up, showing
all a dog’s signs of joy, and licking my face and hands. Glad to see a
friendly disposition shown us, by even a dog, I caressed him and gave
him some meat. Presently the crackling of the brush was again heard.
Looking up, in dismay, we caught sight of an object, that looked like
an Indian, a blanket over his head. A terrible fright seized us all: my
heart beat so loud that I thought he must hear it; but he soon appeared
from behind some bushes, and proved to be no one but Mr. Ireland. His
coming cheered us now, as much as it had, just before, frightened us.
He said the dogs probably had belonged to Mr. Brown, for they seemed at
home at the house. He tried his best to persuade us to go there, but we
steadily refused. He had eaten some potatoes, corn, &c., and brought us
some of the parched corn: he soon returned to the house, to stay there
alone.

I spent this night, like the preceding one, without sleep; and Mrs.
Hurd, also, spent a most miserable night, for she was sick, and vomited
a great many times. In the morning she was much better. Uncle Tommy
came out early from the house, and begged us again to go there with
him. I had about concluded to go, and run the risk of being killed by
the Indians, for, if we staid there, we should, of a certainty, be
tortured by the mosquitoes, and, perhaps, die after all. Mrs. Hurd,
also, concluded to accompany him. I managed to get out of the brush
alone, but could go no farther without help. The others all having a
load to carry, left me behind, on the ground. Merton came back, after
he had borne Johnny to the house, and helped me a little. I placed my
hand upon his shoulder, and, using him thus, as a staff, I got on a
short distance; but was, at last, obliged to get down on my hands and
knees, and thus crawl to the house, where I at once threw myself upon a
bed. After resting awhile, I thought, perhaps, I might be able to sit
up, to dress my wounded foot, but I was too faint and weak to succeed,
until afternoon, when I dressed my wounds. The one upon my arm was
beginning to heal fast, but my heel was badly swollen, and in a very
bad condition. I did not walk again for several weeks. During the rest
of the time that we staid here, the days wore slowly away: we remained
in silence, most of the time, and, even the little ones, were seldom
allowed to laugh or play. I began to think I should never live to get
away, though the others were now able to walk some miles. Mrs. Hurd
was very anxious to start for New Ulm, and thought every day, that my
foot would next morning be well enough to start: but each successive
morning brought the same disappointment. Finally I advised Mrs. Hurd
and Mr. Ireland to go, and wait no longer for me: that if they remained
we might all be murdered, and, if they left, it might be the means
of saving _their own_ lives, at least. But they refused to leave me,
helpless, which was very generous in them. Still I thought it not
right, to risk their lives, for the sake of keeping me company. So Mr.
Ireland finally proposed that, if we would all stay at the house, he
would go to New Ulm, and, if he could find men enough there, he would
have them come after us. We promised him to stay at the house, and
await the coming of help, if he felt able to walk to New Ulm. “Then,”
he exclaimed, “I _will_ go, and have you all rescued, or die in the
attempt!” He began at once to prepare for the journey.

On Monday morning of the ninth day, that we had staid at Mr. Brown’s,
very early, Mrs. Hurd cooked two young chickens, and Uncle Tommy,
taking them for his provisions, started for New Ulm, telling us to be
of good cheer, for, if he had no bad luck, he would reach the town
sometime that night, and by Tuesday night, we might look for some one
after us. I could not keep from shedding tears, as he left us, for
now I seemed more lonely than ever, and I hardly dared to hope that
he would succeed in bringing us succor. I still thought that it would
ultimately be my lot to be murdered by the savages, and my constant
prayer was, that God would give me strength to die like a Christian.
I determined that if they came and murdered me, they should not have
their ears delighted by a single groan, or cry. Having found some
newspapers in an old trunk, I tried to read, thinking it would relieve
the tedium of the hours, and divert my sad heart. But the first story
I found, was something horrible about Indians! I threw the paper from
me, for my mind was already filled with such dreadful scenes, as none
of the writers of fiction have described. All the afternoon of Tuesday
we looked long and eagerly for some one to come to our relief, until
after dark, when I retired and slept for some hours. At about midnight
we were awakened by the barking of the dogs and I asked Mrs. Hurd
what they could be barking at. “It may be the cattle,” replied she,
“but they act as if afraid of something.” She arose and went to the
window, but could see nothing. The dogs now barked more savagely than
ever, running out a short distance, then back against the door. This
frightened us very much, as we thought it must be Indians, or the dogs
would not act so. But, thought I, whether it be enemies or friends I
must arise and dress, if I have strength, though it may be the last
time. So I began putting on my clothes, still asking Mrs. Hurd if she
saw anything, when, just as I was about dressed, she exclaimed, “My
God! Cook, is that you?” Then I knew that it was some one whom she
knew. I knew their voices when I heard them speak. It proved to be a
young man named Cook, who lived at Lake Shetak, and some time before
the outbreak had gone to Crystal Lake, to work in harvest: and my
neighbor, Mr. Wright, who was also gone at the time. They came into
the house, pressed our hands warmly, with tears running down their
faces, while Mrs. Hurd and I wept aloud for joy! Immediately after
them, a number of soldiers entered, and when Mr. Wright took out some
matches, and lit a lamp, the sight that met their eyes caused the eyes
of all the brave boys to grow dim with tears. Some of them, tired and
worn out, had lain down on the floor to rest, but their leader, Lieut.
Roberts, told them that was no place to rest; that they must get up and
stand guard. They remained but a few minutes in the house, when he went
out and stood guard with the rest of them.

We now learned that Uncle Tommy had succeeded in getting to New Ulm,
about noon, on Tuesday, and at once made known our condition to Capt.
Dane. Thereupon the Captain ordered fourteen men under Lieut. Roberts,
as commander, to prepare to start as soon as possible to our relief. It
was almost sunset before they were ready to start, when, lo! Mr. Wright
and Mr. Cook came into town, and, learning the facts, volunteered to
attend them as guides. They reached our place at midnight, and, fearful
that the sight of them all would frighten us, the guides came on alone
to rouse us. They had brought some crackers and tea for us; they went
out and caught, killed and cooked some chickens for the soldiers,
refusing all assistance from Mrs. Hurd; and, having prepared a good
meal, of chickens, potatoes and tea, a part of the soldiers came in and
ate, while the rest stood guard. After the first half of the soldiers
were fed, the other portion were also relieved and furnished a good
warm supper. I drank a cup of tea, but could eat scarcely any.

At length morning began to dawn, and we were soon ready to start. They
placed the feather bed in a light two horse wagon, which they had
brought, also, some quilts and a buffalo robe. I was then helped in,
with Mrs. Hurd and our children. The Lieutenant ordered the men to
mount their horses, and eight to ride in advance of the wagon while the
rest were to act as rear guard. All being now ready, we started, and I
gladly bid adieu to the lonely house in which I had suffered so much. I
saw one of the soldiers dismount, and go to the corn-crib, but thought
no more of it. But, after proceeding some three miles, a soldier rode
ahead, and told the Lieut. there was a man left behind, upon which he
ordered back three men in search of him. When about five miles from Mr.
Brown’s, Lieut. Roberts rode back to our wagon, and told the driver to
turn out of the road, pointing a little distance ahead of us. Thinking
it a bad place in the road, I looked in the direction he pointed, and
beheld the body of an old grey-haired man, lying in the road. I was
forced to turn my eyes from the sickening spectacle. This was the body
of Mr. Brown, whose family were all murdered here. We soon crossed a
little run, where stood their wagon, the goods thrown out, books and
clothing scattered on the ground, as, also, were two feather beds,
which the soldiers carried away with them. Near the wagon we found the
body of Mrs. Brown: her head was split open, and a few feet from her
lay a tomahawk. In this place the soldiers found, in all, the bodies
of four men and two women. We made all haste to pass by and leave this
horrid scene of death, but its memory will never leave us. Soon after,
the three soldiers overtook us, having seen nothing of their missing
comrade. But it was thought that he had gone back upon the north side
of the Cottonwood river: they had gone up the river by that route,
but, thinking it safer to return by the south side, they had done so.
But, as this intention was not announced until after leaving Brown’s,
the man who was left, named Gilfillan, being entirely ignorant of the
change of route, had started back by the same road he came. It was just
growing light a little, in the east, when we started, and, it was too
dark for him to see which way we returned. On the next day, a company
of soldiers went out from New Ulm in search of him, as I afterwards
learned. They found him on the south side of the Cottonwood, about six
miles from town. He had been shot through the breast, and, afterwards,
his head severed from his body. The savages had beaten it to pieces
until there was not a piece of the skull left as large as a man’s hand.
From the appearance of the grass, he had fought bravely for his life,
for it was wallowed down for rods around; at least, so the soldiers
reported. They buried him where they found him, and left the place with
sad hearts.

When about ten miles on our way, we found two wagons standing in the
road; the white covers were torn off, and dresses and other clothes
hanging on the bows. Some of these the soldiers put into the wagon
for our use. Not far from the wagons, in the grass, lay the body of
a man with his scalp torn off. Every house that we passed showed
unmistakable signs of having been plundered by the redskins. As we
passed one farm, about forty head of cattle, far off in the field,
were attracted by the noise: they started for us, seeming to feel
the need of a master, and ran at full speed, bellowing like mad, up
to the fence; then followed along in the field, until they came to a
cross-fence, where they were obliged to halt. We reached New Ulm a
little after noon, and drove to Capt. Dane’s head-quarters, which was
a large hotel. The porch was filled with soldiers who came out to see
us. A man named Robertson helped me out of the wagon, and asked me if I
could walk, to which I replied, that perhaps I could, if he would give
me some assistance. He then, seeing that it gave me great pain to touch
my sore foot to the floor, took me up in his arms, carried me into the
house and up two flights of stairs, to a room where he laid me upon
a bed. Here I saw Uncle Tommy, who was delighted to see us. We were
attended by a young man named Hillsgrove, and two ladies, who dressed
my wounds, brought us wine to drink, and took the best possible care of
us. The ladies lived some thirty miles from that place, and soon left
for their home. I learned that the Indians had attacked the place some
three different times, had burned some fifteen or twenty houses, and
killed quite a number of men, but that, after much hard fighting, the
whites had succeeded in driving them away. The women and children had
left the town. The soldiers here were very kind to us: Lieut. Roberts
gave Mrs. Hurd and myself each a dollar. I was as proud of this as a
little child, and wondered what I should purchase with it. I could
think of a great many things that I needed, but could not decide what
I needed most, so I put it away, feeling very grateful to the donor.
Capt. Dane gave us some clothes that he found. Mr. Wright found a piece
of calico, which he brought to us, and divided between Mrs. Hurd and
myself, and which was sufficient for a dress for each of us.

On the morning of the fifth of September, a party of us, consisting of
Mrs. Hurd, and myself, with our children, Mr. Ireland and Mr. Wright,
started for Mankato. Capt. Dane kindly sent some fifteen or twenty of
his soldiers as our escort part of the way. About sunset we reached
South Bend, where we thought we had better stay over night, but, on
stopping to see what accommodations could be obtained, we found the
hotels crowded to overflowing, and there was no chance for us. But
the wagon had hardly stopped, before it was surrounded by men asking
questions as to who we were, &c. On learning my name, they exclaimed,
“Is this the little hero that traveled from Lake Shetak, carrying his
little baby brother? We had heard about him, but supposed they had
starved to death upon the prairie before this.” They became quite
excited about the boy, and crowded each other hither and thither to
get a sight of him. We drove on a short distance to a grocery, where
the men of our party stopped to refresh themselves with a glass of
beer, when a man came running after us in great haste. On coming to
our wagon, he asked, “Is this the boy that ran away from the Indians,
and carried his brother?” “Yes,” said I. “Give me your hand, my brave
little man,” said he, shaking his hand warmly: “and is this the child
he carried so far?” On being told it was, he took Johnny in his arms,
and kissed him several times: then, after we had started on, he walked
half a mile beside our wagon, talking to Mrs. Hurd and myself.

Late in the evening we reached Mankato; here they took Mr. Ireland,
Mrs. Hurd, myself, and our children, to the hospital, where supper
was soon prepared for us. I was assisted to bed, and the surgeon came
and dressed my wounds. We here received excellent care and nursing.
Dr. McMahan was the head surgeon, and was very kind to us; indeed, it
would almost cure a sick person, to see his good-natured face. In his
absence, Dr. Wickersham attended the sick and wounded, and he, too,
treated us with kindness. On the next day, which was Saturday, I was
told that some of my old neighbors were at the hospital, namely, Mr.
Everett and Charles Hatch. They had made their escape, and reached
Mankato in very sad plight. Charley had by this time nearly been
healed of his wounds, but it was thought doubtful if Mr. Everett ever
recovered. On the morning of this day, Mrs. Hurd left for St. Peter and
La Crosse; this was the last I saw of her. The ladies of Mankato showed
their generosity while I staid there, by giving me clothes for myself
and children. I often overheard some one inquiring for the boy that
carried his brother so far: soldiers and officers came there in large
numbers, thinking it quite a sight to see my Merton, and generally
gave him or myself, small sums of money, from a dime to a dollar.
When several companies of the 25th Wisconsin Regiment came through
the town, on their way to the scene of the Indian war, they remained
in town over night. Next morning, they came to the hospital to see
me and my children: they crowded my room and the halls, till at last
the surgeon, seeing that there were a great many more coming than the
house would hold, locked the door against them and refused to let them
in. Not being able to see me, then the soldiers clamored for a sight
of Johnny. Dr. Wickersham took the child down among them, where he
was caressed and passed from hand to hand, causing great amazement at
the strength and endurance of the boy that had lugged him fifty miles
without food. When they left town, they took Merton along with them
some distance, and sent him back with a present of fifteen dollars,
all in silver, which was a scarce commodity at that time, and is still
more rare now. I shall never cease to remember, with gratitude, the
benevolent soldiers of the 25th Wisconsin. The money came very timely,
for, until then, I had nothing with which to get clothing for Merton.
I had remained at the hospital six or seven weeks, and he was much in
need of clothes, for the weather was now growing colder. I was now very
tired of staying here, and determined to leave, whether they gave me a
discharge or not. My foot had healed so that I began to use it some,
but was very lame: the rest of my wounds were all healed.

Three days before I left, the Government sent a new surgeon to take
charge of the hospital--viz: Dr. Clark, of Mankato. He at once tried to
send me into the kitchen, to work, but I had no intention of paying my
board by working in the kitchen, while he drew pay from the Government
for keeping me, and so I did not agree to the proposal. Finding he
could not drive me to work, he said that if I was going to leave at
all, I could do so at once, which I soon afterwards did. On another
occasion, a gentleman called and inquired for Dr. Clark. Mr. Ireland
told him he was in Mr. Everett’s room, and volunteered to go and call
him; went to the door, and, finding it ajar, pushed it open just in
time to see Dr. Clark in the act of tipping up a bottle of brandy to
take a dram. Clark at once got in a passion, charged Uncle Tommy with
hanging around watching him, and, swearing he would not keep a spy
about him, he discharged him, on the spot. But Mr. Ireland was unable
to get a living, for his arm, that had been shot through, was of no
use, so Dr. Wickersham, in the benevolence of his heart, took him to
the hotel and paid his board for one week. At the end of this time, Mr.
Ireland refused to stay longer, not thinking it right to take advantage
of the Dr.’s kind offer. I was not in a condition to travel, for I had
no bonnet or shawl. But Mr. Daniel Tyner bought me a bonnet, shawl,
a pair of shoes, stockings and gloves, as well as clothing for the
children, and gave them all to me. When I asked him what they cost, so
as to pay him, if I ever got able; he said that if that was my reason
for asking, he would not tell me. I shall ever remember him and the
ladies of Mankato, with gratitude.

One day a gentleman came and asked me if I wished to leave and go to
my friends. I replied that I did. After inquiring if I had the means
to carry me to them, and finding I was nearly destitute, he offered to
give me a pass. He left, and, shortly after, sent me a pass to Otomy,
a distance of fifty miles. But this was of no account, for I wanted
a pass to go to Ohio. The next day I took a journey to St. Peter, to
see the man who gave me the pass, and try to get one that would carry
me farther; but, on arriving there, I found he had returned to St.
Paul. I then returned to Mankato, and back to South Bend, to see Judge
Flandreau. He could only give me a pass to the State line. He finally
gave me a pass to St. Paul, and told me to go to Gen. Pope, who would,
if possible, give me a pass to Ohio. I took a letter of introduction
to Gen. Pope, and on Monday morning took the stage for Shakopee,
thence went by boat to the city of St. Paul. After considerable search
and inquiry, I found Gen. Pope’s head-quarters in a very large brick
building. Here I was directed up a flight of stairs, into a long hall,
where sat a man by the door of one of the rooms. On making known my
wants, I was told that I could not see the General, but that if I had
any business with him, I could send it in by him. I told him I wished
for a pass that would carry me to Ohio, and gave him Judge Flandreau’s
letter of introduction to carry in. He was gone but a few moments, when
he returned, saying, that Pope could not give me a pass, but would do
what he could for me, by way of subscription, and advised me to go to
Gov. Ramsey. I turned away in great disappointment, but concluded to
try once more, so I went to the Capitol, in search of the Governor. One
gentleman, among the crowd who were there, offered me a chair, which I
was very glad to accept, for, by this time, I was suffering much from
weariness and lameness. I stated that I wished to see the Governor,
and learned that I would have to wait about an hour, so I sent Merton
back to the boat, to have my baggage put on shore. At last, after long
waiting, a man came and told me that I could then have an opportunity
to see the Governor. There were a great many others waiting, and I
improved the chance at once. On entering the room, Mr. Ramsey spoke
very kindly to me, and I seemed to know, by intuition and by the sight
of his open countenance, that he would do all in his power to assist
me. “What can I do for you, madam?” he asked. I replied that I wished
for a pass to leave the State. He then inquired my name, circumstances,
and where I was from. So I related something of my story. “Ah!” said
he, “are you the mother of the little boy who carried his brother
such a great distance?” He became much interested, found out all the
circumstances, and had about an hour’s conversation with me. He said
that he would give me the pass, which I wanted, and hoped Merton would
return in time so that he could see the little hero, that he had read
so much about, but that he could spend no more time with me, for there
were a number of men wishing to see him upon business. He said that no
boats would leave until next morning: then gave a gentleman directions
to go with me to a photograph artist, and have pictures taken of myself
and children, for he said he wanted them very much. We did as he
requested, and sat for three different pictures. The artist made me a
present of two dollars and requested me to leave my address, in order
that he might afterwards send me one of the pictures, when finished.
I received the photograph, in due season. The next morning the same
gentleman, whose name I have forgotten, came and paid my hotel bill,
attended us on board the steamboat, Northern Belle, paid my fare as
far as Winona, and gave me fifteen dollars, saying that Gov. Ramsey
thought the money would be better for me than a pass, as I wanted to
stop in several places, on my way: having done all he could to assist
me, he returned to the Governor. Next morning we landed at Winona;
as I was just going to step ashore, the lady passengers gave me some
money, for which I stopped to thank them, but there was no time, and I
was hurried on shore. Hardly had I left the boat, when a hotel runner
took us and our trunk to the Franklin House, where I left my children
and started out to see if I could find a team going to St. Charles,
hoping to get a ride that far on my way. I was directed to Mr. Bauder’s
hotel, where the teamsters from that direction usually staid. I went
into the bar-room and made my inquiries of the landlord, who told me
that the teams from that way were all gone, but more would arrive,
that night. He asked if I lived at St. Charles. I told him I had lived
three miles south of that place, but that the autumn before I had moved
to Lake Shetak. A gentleman, sitting there, having inquired and found
out my name, said that he had been acquainted with my husband, but had
heard that the settlers at Lake Shetak were all murdered. I told him
some particulars about the massacre, in which he took a deep interest.
“Where are you stopping?” asked Mr. Bauder. “At the Franklin House,” I
replied. “Well,” said he, “you had better get your children, and come
here to put up, and go out on the stage to-morrow.” “But,” said I, “if
I go with some teamster, it will cost me less than by stage, and I must
economise in every possible way.” “Well,” said the landlord, “you shall
come here to stay and welcome; and if the stage agent won’t give you
a ticket on the stage, I’ll pay your fare myself.” This was too good
an offer to be disregarded, so I returned to the Franklin House, and
offered to pay for my ride up from the river. The landlord asked if I
was going, and had found a team; “I have found no team,” said I, “but
I am going to the Bauder House.” “You had better stay here,” said he,
“we are running opposition to Bauder, and will do as well by you as
he will.” I then got him to state the lowest terms on which he would
keep me, considering my poverty. As a special favor, he agreed to give
us one day’s board for a dollar. “Then,” said I, “I think I will go
to Mr. Bauder’s, as he will keep us free and pay my stage-fare to St.
Charles.” This being a degree of generosity beyond his conception,
he charged me a quarter for my ride to his house, and, having paid
him, I went to Mr. Bauder’s. In the evening, Mr. Bauder brought me
twenty-five cents which he said was sent me by a blacksmith, who also
promised that when I came again to Winona he would pay my fare. I do
not know the man’s name, but I know he has a kind heart.

Next morning Mr. Bauder handed me a small sum of money which he and
others had contributed, and the stage agent gave me a ticket to St.
Charles, so I was soon on my way. On the stage was a man named John
Stevens, an artist by profession: he had learned of my misfortune, and
asked me a great many questions. He had a panorama of the war nearly
completed, and offered, if I would stay with him until he had painted
some additional scenes of the Indian massacres, to give me the benefit
of the first exhibition at Winona. He thought it would pay me well for
staying, and said it would be about four weeks before its completion.
I concluded to stay until that time, among my old neighbors, who, when
I reached my old home, gave me a hearty welcome. While stopping near
St. Charles, I was delighted to receive a visit from one of my old
neighbors from Lake Shetak: namely, Mrs. Cook, who, I heard, had been
taken prisoner by the Indians, and afterwards, released, with a great
many other women and children. I was so glad to see her alive once
more, that I threw my arms around her, and wept for joy. She related
how she had escaped from her captors, and, though rather a long story,
it may not be uninteresting here. She was taken, with the rest of the
prisoners, to Mr. Ireland’s house, where a great many Indians were
encamped for the night. The Indian who claimed her, told her to stay
in the “teepe” or the Indians would kill her. They had a great dance
that night notwithstanding the storm. Some one of them would jump into
the ring, declare that he had that day killed a pale-face, and then
proceeded to represent in pantomime the manner in which his victim had
died. He would jump as though struck by a bullet, stagger around till
he fell, groan a few times, and lie as though he were dead, while the
rest joined in a demoniac dance with yells, whoops, and songs, around
him. Then another would spring out and boast of his exploits, acting
out the sufferings of the victims, and thus they spent the whole night,
perfectly intoxicated over their banquet of blood. Their chief had
been killed that day, so this night they chose old “Pawn” chief. Next
morning they brought Lily Everett into their camp, so chilled and wet
that she could hardly speak. Mrs. Cook and Mrs. Duly took compassion
on her, wrapped her in a shawl and set her close by the fire. But the
savages, not liking to see any one showing mercy or pity to a child,
instantly took aim at them, and fired. One ball went through the skirt
of Mrs. Duly’s dress, and another pierced the shawl worn by Mrs. Cook,
just below her shoulders, cutting a slit through the shawl, about half
a yard in length, but, fortunately, neither of them were hurt. The
Indians staid at the lake till Friday morning, when they decamped,
taking away all the cattle, and several wagons loaded with plunder.
They compelled the women to drive the oxen that drew the wagons, and
also the loose cattle, which spread out over the prairie in quite a
drove. While on their way to the house of Mr. Ireland, Mrs. Cook was
leading little Belle Duly, aged five years, when the same old squaw
who had murdered my poor Freddy came along, snatched the child away
and began to torture her. First she whipped her over the face, with
a raw-hide; then took her up by one arm and one leg, and beat the
ground with her, till the breath was nearly driven from her body; next,
tied her to a bush, stepped back a few paces, and threw knives at her,
sometimes hitting her in various parts of the body. In this brutal
manner, she caused the poor thing’s death, while the mother was forced
to behold the sight. She then told me about a band of Indians who had
found my boy, Frank. This was the first I had heard about him, and for
a long time I thought, as she did, that he had died at the house where
they left him. She was seven weeks with the Indians; the first half of
the time she had plenty to eat, but was then sold to an old chap who
was very good to her sometimes, and at other times very cruel. One day
he announced to her that he was going to another band of Indians, at
some distance, and some of the squaws told her, that where they were
going, there was hardly anything to eat. Next morning he started off,
compelling her to go with him: she made no resistance, but, after going
some five miles, she offered to carry his gun for him. He gave it to
her, probably thinking her a remarkably good squaw, and she soon, while
walking behind him, took off the percussion cap, threw it away, and
spit in the tube, to make sure that it would not go off. She then told
him she should go no farther. He seized his gun and told her to go on,
or he would shoot her, and pointed the muzzle at her breast. She boldly
told him to shoot, then, for she was determined to go no further, and
bared her breast before the muzzle, as if to receive her death-shot.
But he did not do it; he dropped the butt of his musket upon the ground
and looked at her in amazement. She was probably the bravest squaw he
had ever seen. At last he agreed to go back with her. That night she
intended to escape with a squaw, who had married a white man, and was
also a prisoner. But their plan was defeated by the sickness of the
squaw’s child. The next morning, however, the child was better, and the
Indians all went away, save the one who owned Mrs. Cook. This was a
splendid opportunity. Mrs. Cook stole away to the river, unperceived;
the squaw rode a pony the same way, pretending to be going to water
him; but let him go, at the river, and joined Mrs. Cook. They traveled
all day, crossing the Minnesota river ten times, in order to hide their
trail, if followed. They walked, they thought, about thirty miles,
when they came to “Red Iron’s” band of Indians, whom they joined.
After being in their possession three days, with a great many other
prisoners, they were all surrendered by “Red Iron” to Gen. Sibley.

Mrs. Cook urged me hard to go back to Mankato with her, for they had
taken some three hundred and eighty Indians prisoners, and, if I knew
any of them, to appear as a witness against them. I told her that she
could go on to Rochester, where she was to stop a few days, and I
would join her there. I thought it advisable to return and see about
the claim which I had put in, like a great many others, claiming to be
reimbursed by the Government, for all my property which was taken from
me by public enemies. I had made out a list of the items, and employed
a lawyer, named Buck, to prosecute my claim, not knowing what he
intended to charge. So I concluded to return, and find how the matter
stood. On the Saturday after Mrs. Cook left, I went to Rochester, where
I staid a week, with a German family named Kolb, and went to see my
artist friend, Mr. Stevens. His panorama was not yet completed, and
would not be, for three weeks. On my telling him I could not wait that
long, he said he would exhibit what he then had of the panorama, for
my benefit. Accordingly, he had an exhibition and donated to me the
proceeds, twelve dollars, together with some more money which he had
collected for me. He was a man of great generosity.

Then I returned to Mankato, and staid at Mr. Thayer’s. Called to see
Mr. Everett at the hospital; he was now gaining fast. I met Mr. Tyner,
who invited me to his house to dinner, and insisted on my staying
there. Next day he sent a man, with a carriage, to take me to see the
prisoners. The prison was in the midst, of Gen. Sibley’s camp. We found
the prisoners seemingly enjoying life much better than they deserved;
some sleeping, some smoking, some eating, and some playing cards. It
made my blood boil, to see them so merry, after their hellish deeds. I
felt as if I could see them butchered, one and all; and no one, who has
suffered what we settlers have, from their ferocity, can entertain any
milder feelings toward them. I returned to the house of a friend, named
Wilcox, where I staid three days. I called on Mr. Buck, at his office,
to ascertain what his charge was to be, for attending to my claim. His
reply was, that he should demand twenty-five per cent. I mentioned
the subject at the house of Mr. Wilcox, and was told that it was very
little trouble to prosecute any of these claims; that the usual charge
was ten per cent., and that Mr. Wilcox, who was an attorney, would
attend to it for that, or that I might give him what I chose. Next
day I again called on Buck, and got back the schedule of my property.
He said he was glad I had taken it, for he could hardly afford to
collect the claim for twenty-five per cent. as there would have to be
an administrator appointed, and the expense would be heavy. I told him
if he was satisfied, that I was much more so. I left the list with Mr.
Wilcox, in whom I felt I could trust, for he and his lady had proved
themselves to be my friends in time of need. Thus far, in prosecuting
my claim he has given me good satisfaction. While I had been gone from
Mankato, a party of men had been up to Lake Shetak, to bury the dead.
They found and brought back my husband’s rifles, one of which was in
good condition, and the other much broken to pieces. I went to the
person who had them in charge, and claimed them. He delivered them up,
as soon as convinced that I knew and owned them. The best one I lent to
poor Uncle Tommy, but the broken one I took with me, as a memento of
the departed, for it was my husband’s favorite weapon, and he loved it
with feelings that every true hunter will appreciate.

I had now arranged my business satisfactorily, and, on Monday, I
started once more for my friends, at four o’clock, a. m. At about
twenty-four hours from that time, I reached Rochester very much
fatigued. I went to the house of Mr. Stevens, as soon as light,
intending to proceed to St. Charles that day, but his kind-hearted wife
urged me to stay with them and rest myself, till next day. I gladly
accepted the invitation. Mr. Stevens told me that if I would leave
Merton with him, he would afterwards bring him to me, at my sister’s
in Wisconsin. Accordingly, I left him, and, two months afterwards, he
brought him to me, in much better condition, having bought and given
him a full and very comfortable suit of clothes. Merton had become
much attached to his kind benefactor, and, on the day that Mr. Stevens
left him, to go farther east, he wept for nearly an hour. Well, I left
Rochester, and staid at St. Charles a few days. While here, I met with
another of my Lake Shetak neighbors, Mr. Myers. From him I learned the
manner in which himself and family had fled the country, which was as
follows: After the Indians had gone and left his place unharmed, in
consequence of his being a “good man,” and been gone about an hour, he
sent his oldest son, ten or eleven years of age, to the house of Mr.
Hurd, to get some bread for his sick and helpless wife. But the boy,
finding Mr. Vought dead in the yard, the house ravaged, and the family
gone, brought home only the story of what he had seen. Myers then,
thinking that Vought must have provoked a quarrel with the Indians,
went to Mr. Cook’s to tell him what had taken place, but, on finding
Cook shot through and lying on the ground, he saw the danger they were
in, ran home, and prepared for instant flight. He sent his boy to the
inlet after the oxen, and, after a long hunt, they were found, and
driven home. He took them over to Hurd’s, yoked them to a wagon, and
drove back, hearing the continual yell and the report of guns, that
came to him from the lower end of the lake. After putting in the wagon
some bedding and provisions, and placing on the bed his poor sick wife
and the children, he started, and got away unnoticed by the Indians.
But the dreadful news of the morning had thrown his wife into a
dangerous fit. After traveling a great distance upon a circuitous route
to shun the savages, they reached Mankato, but, on the same night, the
poor woman died, leaving five children to mourn her loss.

It was now getting quite late and cold, and winter was fast
approaching; I was anxious to be once more upon my way to my friends.
On the next Monday I started, bidding good-bye to my kind neighbors.
I took the stage about a mile from St. Charles. When we came to the
village, the stage agent, whose name, I think, was Hall, demanded my
fare to Winona. I told him that a blacksmith at Winona had promised to
pay my stage-fare when next I came there, and I wished him to wait till
I got there; and, if the blacksmith did not pay it, I would. I knew I
had not money sufficient to carry me through, and hoped to economise it
so as to have no trouble when I got among total strangers. But it was
of no use; I could not go unless I paid in advance, so I gave him the
necessary amount.

We arrived at Winona about dark; and, finding the boat had already
gone, I told the driver to take me to the Bauder House. There I staid
all night, and learned that the next boat would leave in the morning,
for La Crosse. Accordingly, next morning, I was aroused in season, and
Mr. Bauder told his son to take me to the boat in the carriage, but
first to stop and meet him at a certain building. We drove off, and Mr.
Bauder followed us, stopping in at various places of business. After
driving about for some time in this manner, he came and told me that
the boat had gone, and I would be obliged to stay until night. So I
was taken back to the hotel, wondering what the kind landlord meant by
this course; but it was soon explained. He came in, and said he had
been around town, to see how much the citizens could assist me, and
that he had succeeded in raising forty-one dollars. For this I was very
grateful; indeed, I felt comparatively rich. I can never forget what
the people of that place, and especially the active and benevolent
Mr. Bauder, have done for me, for it was through his agency, that I
received my board at his house and these welcome sums of money. He then
went to the bank and exchanged the money into national currency, for
me, then went with me on board the boat, and stated to the captain the
circumstances of my case; whereupon he carried me, free of expense.
On arriving at La Crosse, I journeyed on by railroad via Madison to
Boscobel. I staid over night at Boscobel: and, next day, took the
stage for Lancaster, but the stage agent refused payment for my ride.
He left me at that excellent hotel, the “Mansion House,” where I was
treated with the greatest kindness by all of Mrs. Hyde’s family. I am
very grateful for their goodness; and not only am I grateful to them,
but all those kind people, who have given me their sympathy and their
assistance, and thus smoothed down the rough and thorny places in my
walk of life. I have great cause to thank God, not only for sparing my
life, and that of my dear boys, but for raising up friends wherever I
have been, to help me along.

While at the Mansion House, in Lancaster, Mr. J. C. Cover, editor of
the Grant Co. Herald, called on me, and requested me to relate to him
my story. This I did in a very poor way, which I am sure he would
excuse, if he knew how many times I had previously related it. The next
day I reached my brother’s house, where I was received with tears of
joy.

I will now mention what I know of the surviving settlers of Lake
Shetak, as far as possible, in my limited space. Mrs. Duly and Mrs.
Wright are with their husbands, having been ransomed, after four months
captivity. Mrs. Duly’s youngest child was murdered while a prisoner,
but two of her other children are with her. Mrs. Cook is married, and
lives in Mankato. Uncle Tommy Ireland has recovered from his wounds; he
still lives in Minnesota, and his daughters likewise. Mr. Duly joined
the 1st Minnesota Mounted Rangers, and afterwards became captain of
scouts: he lives now in Mankato. Mr. Everett recovered, and went East
with his little “Lily,” who was ransomed from the Indians. Charles
Hatch returned to his friends in Wisconsin. Mr. Myers still remains
in some part of Minnesota. Mr. Smith joined the Mounted Rangers, and
served his time. Mr. Rhodes joined the same company, but, as he was
soon afterwards missing, it was supposed that he deserted, as he was
not heard from again. Mr. Bently enlisted to fight Indians, in some
company. Mrs. Hurd is living at La Crosse.

Now, dear reader, since you have attended me till I finally reached my
destination, and joined my relatives, I will bid you good-bye, hoping
that if you are ever as unfortunate as I have been, God will give you
as many kind friends as he has given me.


                   COPYRIGHT SECURED ACCORDING TO LAW.




Transcriber’s Note:

Words and phrases in italics are surrounded by underscores, _like
this_. Obvious printing errors, such as upside down, or partially
printed letters and punctuation, were corrected. Final stops missing at
the end of sentences were added. Extraneous punctuation was removed.
Obsolete spellings were not changed. Thirteen misspelled words were
corrected.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 76647 ***
