The Project Gutenberg eBook of Prose remains of Arthur Hugh Clough
with a selection from his letters and a memoir, by Arthur Hugh Clough

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Prose remains of Arthur Hugh Clough with a selection from his
       letters and a memoir

Author: Arthur Hugh Clough

Editor: Blanche Mary Shore Smith

Release Date: February 19, 2023 [eBook #70070]

Language: English

Produced by: Emmanuel Ackerman, Krista Zaleski and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROSE REMAINS OF ARTHUR HUGH
CLOUGH WITH A SELECTION FROM HIS LETTERS AND A MEMOIR ***






  PROSE REMAINS

  OF

  ARTHUR HUGH CLOUGH

[Illustration]




  PROSE REMAINS

  OF

  ARTHUR HUGH CLOUGH

  WITH A SELECTION FROM HIS LETTERS
  AND A MEMOIR

  _EDITED BY HIS WIFE_


  London
  MACMILLAN AND CO.
  AND NEW YORK
  1888

  _The right of translation is reserved_


  PRINTED BY
  SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
  LONDON




CONTENTS.


                                                                    PAGE

  MEMOIR OF ARTHUR HUGH CLOUGH                                         1

  LETTERS FROM 1829 TO 1836. RUGBY                                    57

  LETTERS FROM 1836 TO 1849. OXFORD                                   75

  LETTERS FROM 1849 TO 1852. LONDON                                  141

  LETTERS FROM 1852 TO 1853. AMERICA                                 187

  LETTERS FROM 1853 TO 1861. LONDON                                  216

  A CONSIDERATION OF OBJECTIONS AGAINST THE RETRENCHMENT
  ASSOCIATION AT OXFORD DURING THE
  IRISH FAMINE IN 1847                                               283

  LECTURE ON THE POETRY OF WORDSWORTH                                305

  ON THE FORMATION OF CLASSICAL ENGLISH: AN EXTRACT
  FROM A LECTURE ON DRYDEN                                           325

  LECTURE ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF ENGLISH LITERATURE
  FROM CHAUCER TO WORDSWORTH                                         333

  REVIEW OF SOME POEMS BY ALEXANDER SMITH AND
  MATTHEW ARNOLD                                                     355

  LETTERS OF PAREPIDEMUS                                             381

  A PASSAGE UPON OXFORD STUDIES: EXTRACTED FROM A
  REVIEW OF THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY COMMISSIONERS’
  REPORT, 1852                                                       399

  EXTRACTS FROM A REVIEW OF A WORK ENTITLED ‘CONSIDERATIONS
  ON SOME RECENT SOCIAL THEORIES’                                    405

  NOTES ON THE RELIGIOUS TRADITION                                   415




MEMOIR

OF

ARTHUR HUGH CLOUGH


Arthur Hugh Clough was born at Liverpool, January 1, 1819. He was
the second son of James Butler Clough. His father belonged to an old
Welsh family, who trace themselves back to Sir Richard Clough, known
as agent at Antwerp to Sir Thomas Gresham. His mother’s name was Anne
Perfect. She was the daughter of John Perfect, a banker at Pontefract
in Yorkshire, of a respectable family long established in that place.

Sir Richard Clough, we are told, was related on his mother’s side to
John Calvin. In his own county of Denbigh he was evidently a man of
considerable position. He built two houses, Plâs Clough and Bachegraig,
about the year 1527. He married first a Dutch lady, by whom he had a
son, Richard, who carried on the name, and to whom he bequeathed Plâs
Clough. He married, secondly, Katharine Tudor, heiress of Berain, and
descendant of Marchweithian, lord of the Welsh tribe of Is-aled. She
was a relation and ward of Queen Elizabeth, being great-granddaughter
of Henry VII.; and the Queen’s consent is mentioned as having been
required for her marriage. Sir Richard Clough was her second husband;
and the story is told that he, as well as Morris Wynn of Gwydir,
accompanied her to her first husband’s funeral, and that Morris Wynn
when leading her out of church requested the favour of her hand in
marriage, to which she answered that she had already promised it as
she went in to Sir Richard Clough; but added that should there be any
other occasion she would remember him. After the death of Sir Richard,
accordingly, she did marry him, and afterwards married, fourthly,
Edward Thelwall, of Plas-y-Ward. She is said however, to have preferred
Sir R. Clough to her other husbands; and a curious picture of her
exists, a companion to a somewhat remarkable one of Richard Clough,
holding a locket containing his ashes in one hand, and resting the
other on his scull.

By this lady, Sir R. Clough had only two daughters, one of whom married
a Wynn, and was the ancestress of the family of Lord Newborough, which
still possesses Maynau Abbey, given to her by Sir R. Clough. The second
daughter, Katherine, married Roger Salusbury, and received from Sir
Richard the house and property of Bachegraig, which afterwards came
into the possession of Mrs. Thrale, her lineal descendant.

His son Richard inherited Plâs Clough, where his descendants continued
to reside. In the beginning of the eighteenth century, the family was
represented by a Hugh Clough, who had thirteen children, one of whom,
called also Hugh, was Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge, and is
buried there: he was a friend of Cowper the poet, and is said to have
been something of a poet himself. Hugh died unmarried; but three sons
and one daughter of the first Hugh married, and left large families.
One son, Roger, thirteenth child of Hugh Clough, married Ann Jemima
Butler, a lady possessed of considerable estates in Sussex, to which
she was co-heiress with her sister, who married Roger Clough’s elder
brother Richard. He did not, however, leave much to his children,
for he was of a liberal and profuse turn, and he had ten children,
of whom James Butler Clough was the third. This son was the first of
his family to leave the neighbourhood of their old house in Wales. He
removed to Liverpool, where he settled and went into business as a
cotton merchant, and where his four children were born. When Arthur
was about four years old, his father migrated to Charleston, in the
United States, where he passed several years, and this was the home
of Arthur’s childhood till he went to school. We give here a few
recollections furnished by his sister, the next to him in age in the
family, which bring before us the scenes in which his childhood was
passed, and the influences which even then began to tell strongly upon
him.

‘The first distinct remembrance,’ she says, ‘that I have of my brother
is of his going with me in a carriage to the vessel which was to take
us to America. This must have been in the winter of 1822-23, when he
was not quite four years old. My next recollection is of our home at
Charleston, a large, ugly red brick house near the sea. The lower
storey was my father’s office, and it was close by a wharf where from
our windows we could see the vessels lying by and amuse ourselves with
watching their movements.

‘In the summer of this year (1823) we went to the North, and stayed
some time in a boarding-house at New York, and afterwards with some
friends who lived on the banks of the Hudson, and had a large and
pleasant garden. It was here, I have heard, that Arthur learned to
read. In the autumn we returned to Charleston, having made the passage
there and back by sea.

‘The two following summers (1824 and 1825) we again visited the North;
both times we went to New York, and the first year on to Albany and
Lebanon Springs, and the second time as far as Newport. After our
return to Charleston in the autumn my father was obliged to go to
England, and he took with him my eldest brother Charles, who was old
enough to go to school. Arthur and I and my youngest brother George
remained in the red brick house at Charleston with my mother and a
faithful old nurse. My father was absent eleven months. Then Arthur
became my mother’s constant companion. Though then only just seven, he
was already considered as the genius of our family. He was a beautiful
boy, with soft silky, almost black hair, and shining dark eyes, and a
small delicate mouth, which our old nurse was so afraid of spoiling,
when he was a baby, that she insisted on getting a tiny spoon for his
special use.

‘As I said, Arthur was constantly with my mother, and she poured out
the fulness of her heart on him. They read much together, histories,
ancient and modern, stories of the Greek heroes, parts of Pope’s
“Odyssey” and “Iliad,” and much out of Walter Scott’s novels. She
talked to him about England, and he learnt to be fond of his own
country, and delighted to flourish about a little English flag he had
possessed himself of. He also made good progress in French. He was
sometimes passionate as a child, though not easily roused; and he
was said to be very determined and obstinate. One trait I distinctly
remember, that he would always do things from his own choice, and not
merely copy what others were doing.

‘In the summer we went down to Sullivan’s Island, and lived in a sort
of cottage built upon piles. Here we could walk on the shore and gather
shells, and we also had a garden. We amused ourselves by watching the
steamers and sailing-vessels that came over from Charleston. Sometimes
we had visits from friends of my father, often bringing over letters
for my mother; but, on the whole, we lived very quietly, learning our
lessons, and looking forward joyfully to the time of our father’s
return from England. We went back to Charleston in the autumn. This was
a weary time for our dear mother, who was continually expecting and
longing for our father’s return. We, too, were always on the watch for
the first sight of the ship on the bay. One November morning, while we
were at our lessons with our mother, there came a hasty ring at the
bell. We wanted to look out and see if visitors were coming. We were
not fond of visitors, and generally used to run off to our nursery at
sight of them, but our mother would not let us peep this time; we must
attend to our lessons, she said; she was sure it was only a negro man
with a message. And then the door opened and our father was in the
room, catching up our mother in his arms, for she was nearly fainting,
while we skipped about for joy, and shouted to our mother that she had
called our father a negro man. Then came the unpacking of trunks, and
all the presents sent to us by our relations in England, and the news
of our brother Charles.

‘After my father’s return it was a very happy time for Arthur. He still
went on reading history and poetry with our mother. About this time,
I believe, he read with her some of Robertson’s “Charles V.,” and the
struggle in the Netherlands in Watson’s “Philip II.”; also the lives of
Columbus, Cortez, and Pizarro. He used also to say the Latin grammar
to my father in the early morning, and do sums in the office, lying
on the piled-up pieces of cotton bagging which were waiting there to
be made into sacks for cotton. Here, too, we used to play and tumble
about upon the cotton heaps. One of our games was playing at the Swiss
Family Robinson, in which I remember Arthur was always Ernest, because
Ernest liked reading and knew so much. In hot weather, Arthur used to
lie on his bed in the afternoon, reading the “Universal Traveller”
and “Captain Cook’s Travels,” in the purchase of which he had one day
expended all his savings. They were both full of pictures, and he used
to tell us that he dreamt of the places he had been reading about.
He also used to go out with my father when he had business to do on
the wharves and on board the ships, and sat with him and my mother in
the evenings and saw the occasional visitors who came in, such as the
captains of the merchantmen with whom he had dealings, and heard their
stories.

‘In the summer of 1827, we again went to Sullivan’s Island. It was a
pleasant time, especially as we now had our father with us. We lived
in a large rambling house, with a pleasant verandah in which we had
a swing, and a large garden fenced in with a hedge of yuccas, called
there Spanish bayonets. The house had once been an inn, and was built
in two parts. My father and mother slept in a room over a great
billiard-room, only reached by an open staircase or by a little open
path across a roof; and when great storms arose, as often happened, my
father used to carry us in his arms, back over the open space into the
more protected part of the house.

‘The walks on the sand were delightful to us children. It was the
finest white soft sand without a vestige of shingle on which we used
to play; and I remember that Arthur even then was too fastidious to
take off his shoes and stockings and paddle about as we did. The whole
island was like a great sandbank, with little growing naturally on it
but a few palmettos and low woods of myrtle. Our walks along the sea
often took us as far as Fort Moultrie, which in our time was a red
brick fort with a dry ditch round it, without the earthworks which
have since become famous. A high bank of sand lay between it and the
sea; and, after crossing this, we came to a few desolate houses half
buried in sand, which here lay in great heaps. Here and there grew a
few palmettos, which the high tides or autumn storms too often carried
away, and when we came to look for a favourite tree, to our great
grief, we found it gone. These sands were the haunt of innumerable
curlews whose wild screams seemed to make the shore more lonely still.
A beautiful grove of myrtles rose farther along the shore.

‘The other end of the island was the inhabited part. There was the pier
busy with its arrivals and departures of steamers, and sailing boats
going to and fro between the island and the city, and covered with
numerous carriages, old-fashioned gigs and waggons, mostly with hoods
or some sort of protection from the sun, and a seat for the negro boy
behind. The bay was gay, too, with many fishing-boats belonging to
the gentlemen who had a fishing club, which met at a house among the
myrtles; and many rowing-boats also, chiefly rowed by negroes. Arthur
often went out with my father on the water.

‘Six miles off lay Charleston, on a peninsula, between its two rivers,
the Cooper and the Ashley. The first sight of it showed a long line of
wharves made of palmetto logs fastened together into a sort of wall,
stretching perhaps half a mile along the bay, and lined with the ships
and smaller craft that frequented the port. As you approached from
the water you heard the songs of the negroes at work on the vessels.
Beyond the wharves was a battery or public walk, supported against the
sea by a substantial very white wall formed of oyster shells beaten
fine and hard. This species of pier extended nearly a mile along the
sea, and was a favourite resort both for walking and driving in the
summer. It was all roughly done, as most things were in the South, but
the sunshine and clear skies made it bright and cheerful. The city was
not regularly built like the Northern towns. In the lower part indeed
the houses were mostly built close together in rows; but in the upper
part, where the wealthier people lived, it was full of villas mostly
standing in gardens, all built with verandahs, and many with two, an
upper and a lower one. In the gardens grew many flowering trees, such
as the almond, occasionally the orange, the fringe tree, a gay shrub
with a very abundant white flower, and the fig; and these hung over
the garden walls into the streets. The streets, too, which were for the
most part unpaved, were often planted with trees for the sake of shade.
Here and there one came on a large old-fashioned mansion, that at once
showed it belonged to the times before the Revolution.

‘From Charleston, Sullivan’s Island was to be seen in the distance,
beyond the battery, and on the right James Island, marked by a long low
line of wood. Between these two islands, commanding the entrance, Fort
Sumter was afterwards built, not far from James Island. On the left was
Fort Pinckney, built on a small island or sandbank near the city.

‘In 1828 we all returned to England. We sailed from Charleston early
in June. We greatly enjoyed the voyage; being the only children on
board, we were exceedingly petted, and the unusual sights impressed our
imagination. I remember very well the sea-weed floating in quantities
on the Gulf Stream; also we saw a waterspout, and grander still--but
happily for us only in the distance--an iceberg. When at last we came
in sight of the South of Ireland, we were met by the Irish fishermen
coming out to sell us their fresh fish. Then came the slow creeping up
the Channel against a head wind, and then a calm, till one night the
wind sprang up, and in the morning we found ourselves in Liverpool.

‘We then went to stay with an uncle in the country, where we met my
eldest brother, and found ourselves among nine or ten cousins of
different ages. This was quite a new experience to us. Arthur could
not enter into the boys’ rough games and amusements, and missed the
constant companionship of his father. We travelled however for some
months from one relation’s house to another, and by degrees Arthur
became more sociable.

‘In October Arthur went to school at Chester, and my father, mother,
George and I sailed again to Charleston. This was practically the end
of Arthur’s childhood.

‘Our father was most affectionate, loving, and watchful over his
children. It was from him that we received many of the smaller cares
which usually come from a mother, especially on the long voyages,
during which my mother suffered greatly, when he took the care of
us almost entirely, and comforted us in rough storms. This watchful
and tender care for the feelings of others Arthur inherited in the
largest degree from his father. My father was very lively, and fond
of society and amusement. He liked life and change, and did not care
much for reading. He had a high sense of honour, but was venturesome
and over sanguine, and when once his mind was set on anything, he was
not to be turned from it, nor was he given to counting consequences.
My mother was very different. She cared little for general society,
but had a few fast friends to whom she was strongly attached. In her
tastes and habits she was rigidly simple; this harmonised with the
stern integrity which was the foundation of her character. She was
very fond of reading, especially works on religious subjects, poetry
and history; and she greatly enjoyed beautiful scenery, and visiting
places which had any historical associations. She loved what was grand,
noble, and enterprising, and was truly religious. She early taught us
about God and duty, and having such a loving earthly father, it was not
difficult to look up to a Heavenly one. She loved to dwell on all that
was stern and noble. Leonidas at Thermopylæ, and Epaminondas accepting
the lowliest offices and doing them as a duty to his country; the
sufferings of the martyrs, and the struggles of the Protestants, were
among her favourite subjects. There was an enthusiasm about her that
took hold of us, and made us see vividly the things that she taught
us. But with this love of the terrible and grand she was altogether a
woman clinging to and leaning on our father. When he left us Arthur
became her pet and her companion. I cannot but think that her love, her
influence, and her teaching had much to do with forming his character.’

From Charleston, as appears from what precedes, Arthur Clough went, in
November 1828, to school at Chester; and, in the summer of 1829, he was
removed to Rugby. His eldest brother, Charles, was with him at both
schools, but Charles left Rugby before him, as early as the year 1831.

During these first years he was a somewhat grave and studious boy,
not without tastes for walking, shooting, and sight-seeing, but with
little capacity for play and for mixing with others, and with more of
varied intellectual interest than usual with boys. He seems to have
had a fondness for drawing; and he was perpetually writing verses, not
remarkable except for a certain ease of expression and for a power of
running on, not common at that early age. The influence of Dr. Arnold
on his character was powerful, and continued to increase. We find him
mounting rapidly through the lower forms and beginning to get prizes.
It is also clear that, besides this application to his actual work,
he exerted himself with great energy in the endeavour to improve the
school and to influence his companions for good. This remarkable
interest in Rugby matters is partly to be explained by the fact that he
had no near home interests to distract his attention; partly it must
be referred to that strong sense of moral responsibility which Arnold,
first among schoolmasters, seems to have impressed upon his pupils.

Too early a strain seems to have been put upon him, especially as
he had not till 1836 any home to go to in his holidays. Of kind and
affectionate relations, who received him hospitably, there were
plenty. His uncles, the Rev. Charles Clough, then Vicar of Mold, and
the Rev. Alfred Clough, then Fellow of Jesus College, Oxford, always
showed him the greatest kindness; and he had a large connection of
friendly cousins, his visits among whom gave him many opportunities for
journeys into Yorkshire and in different parts of Wales. How lively
a recollection he retained of this period of his life, and of the
incidents of his holiday excursions, may be gathered from the picture
he has painted in ‘Primitiæ,’ the first tale of ‘Mari Magno.’ He did
thus enjoy much variety, but he lacked rest; and his family instincts
and affections were so strong, that he evidently suffered greatly
through his separation from those nearest and dearest to him. That a
great strain and sense of repression were upon him at this time is
clear from a letter written after the interval of twenty years. The
self-reliance and self-adaptation which most men acquire in mature life
were, by the circumstances of his family, forced upon him in his early
youth.

In July 1831, his father and mother, sister, and youngest brother,
came over for a visit from Charleston, and he spent his holidays with
them; after which he went back to school, this time without his eldest
brother. His sister remembers how their stay was unexpectedly prolonged
till the beginning of the following Christmas holidays, by a delay in
finding a ship, and how Arthur, hearing this, rushed off to Liverpool
to spend their last two or three days together, bringing his new prize,
Johnson’s ‘Lives of the Poets,’ in his bag, to show his mother, to whom
it was his greatest enjoyment to pour himself out. His mother suffered
greatly from the voyages, and from the uprooting consequent on such
great changes; and she resolved never again to come to England till it
should be her home. His father paid one more visit to England, alone,
in 1833, when he took his three sons to London and over to Paris.

At school Arthur continued to prosper. He gained a scholarship, open
to the whole school under fourteen, the only one which then existed.
He was at the head of the fifth form at fifteen; and as sixteen was
the earliest age at which boys were then admitted into the sixth,
he had to wait a whole year for this. It was probably a misfortune
to him that this rule prevented his advance through the school, and
his proceeding at once to Oxford, as he was much exhausted by the
intense interest and labour he expended on his moral work among the
boys, and also on the ‘Rugby Magazine.’ This was a periodical which
absorbed much of the writing powers of the cleverer boys, and to which
he contributed constantly, chiefly poetry. For a considerable time
he was also its editor. Besides this he took an active part in some
of the school games, and his name is handed down in William Arnold’s
‘Rules of Football’ as the best goal-keeper on record. He was also
one of the first swimmers in the school, and was a very good runner,
in spite of a weakness in his ankles, which prevented his attaining
proficiency in many games. He made at this time several close and
intimate friendships, and gained a very high character among his
schoolfellows in general; a sign of which is given by the story told by
some of them at the time, that, when he left school for college, almost
every boy at Rugby contrived to shake hands with him at parting. ‘The
grace of his character when he was a boy,’ says one of his friends,
‘can be estimated by nothing so well as by the force with which he
attracted the attachment of some, and the jealousy or encroachment of
others.’ Another says: ‘I always said that his face was quite another
thing from any of those of our own generation; the mixture of _width_
and sweetness was then quite as marked as it was later.’ Dr. Arnold
also regarded him with increasing interest and satisfaction; and, as
another friend describes, at the yearly speeches, in the last year of
Clough’s residence, he broke the rule of silence to which he almost
invariably adhered in the delivery of prizes, and congratulated him
on having gained every honour which Rugby could bestow, and done the
highest credit to his school at the University. This was in allusion
to his having just gained the Balliol scholarship, then and now the
highest honour which a schoolboy could obtain. Some months previous
to this (in July 1836), his father, mother, and sister came over from
America, to settle in Liverpool; and thenceforth Arthur was no longer
without a home in England. His sister describes him as she then saw
him, after an interval of five years, as a blooming youth of seventeen,
with an abundance of dark soft hair, a fresh complexion, much colour,
and shining eyes full of animation. Though kind and affectionate as
ever in his family, they now found him changed in mind; eager and
interested in many fresh subjects; full of growing force, and of the
fervour of youthful conviction. With boyish vehemence he stood forth
on all occasions as the devoted disciple of his beloved master, Dr.
Arnold, and the exponent of his various theories of church government
and politics.

In November 1836 he had gained the Balliol scholarship, and the October
following he went into residence at Oxford. There he soon made friends
with some of those with whom he became afterwards intimate--Mr. Ward,
Sir B. Brodie, and Professor Jowett;--a little later, with Dr. Temple
and Professor Shairp; and, later still, with Mr. T. Walrond and the
two eldest sons of Dr. Arnold, whose names frequently occur in his
correspondence.

Now came the time which we regard as essentially the turning-point of
his life. He began his residence at Oxford when the University was
stirred to its depths by the great Tractarian movement. Dr. Newman
was in the fulness of his popularity, preaching at St. Mary’s, and
in pamphlets, reviews, and verses continually pouring forth eloquent
appeals to every kind of motive that could influence men’s minds. Mr.
Ward one of Clough’s first friends at Oxford, was, as is well known,
among the foremost of the party; and thus, at the very entrance into
his new life, he was at once thrown into the very vortex of discussion.
Something of the same fate which, as a young boy, forced on him a too
early self-reliance and independence in matters of conduct, followed
him here; and the accident of his passing from the Rugby of Arnold to
the Oxford of Newman and Ward, drove him, while he ought to have been
devoting himself to the ordinary work of an undergraduate reading for
honours, and before he had attained his full intellectual development,
to examine and in some degree draw conclusions concerning the deepest
subjects that can occupy the human mind. This must be felt to have
been a serious disadvantage. As his friend Mr. Ward himself says with
much feeling, when looking back on that time after many years, ‘What
was before all things to have been desired for him, was that during
his undergraduate career he should have given himself up thoroughly
to his classical and mathematical studies, and kept himself from
plunging prematurely into the theological controversies then so rife at
Oxford. Thus he would have been saved from all injury to the gradual
and healthy growth of his mind and character. It is my own very strong
impression that, had this been permitted, his future course of thought
and speculation would have been essentially different from what it was
in fact. Drawn as it were peremptorily, when a young man just coming up
to college, into a decision upon questions the most important that can
occupy the mind, the result was not surprising. After this premature
forcing of Clough’s mind, there came a reaction. His intellectual
perplexity preyed heavily on his spirits, and grievously interfered
with his studies.’

Another cause, also, which rendered him less able to endure the
various demands made upon him in his new life was, that the strain of
his school-work and interests at Rugby had evidently considerably
exhausted him.

Any reader of that marvellously vivid book, the ‘Apologia’ of
Dr. Newman, will understand the trouble of spirit into which an
impressionable nature must have been thrown by the storm that was
raging round him, and by contact with such powerful leaders. The
appeals made at once to the imagination, to all the tenderer parts
of human nature, and to the reason, combined to render this struggle
peculiarly intense. For a time Clough was carried away, how far it is
impossible with any approach to certainty to say, in the direction of
the new opinions. He himself said afterwards, that for two years he
had been ‘like a straw drawn up the draught of a chimney.’ Yet in his
mind the disturbance was but temporary. His own nature before long
reasserted itself, proving, by the strength of its reaction, how wholly
impossible it was for such a character to accept any merely external
system of authority. Still, when the torrent had subsided, he found
that not only had it swept away the new views which had been presented
to him by the leaders of the Romanising movement, but also that it had
shaken the whole foundations of his early faith, and had forced him to
rely upon his own endeavours in the search after that truth which he
still firmly believed in.

This spirit of doubt and struggle, yet of unshaken assurance in the
final conquest of truth and good, comes out strongly in the poems
written about this time, and contrasts markedly with the boyish
effusions of the Rugby period. It is this which forms the very essence
of the scepticism of which he is accused, the truth of which charge,
in a certain sense, we do not attempt to deny--nay, we believe that in
this quality of mind lay his chief power of helping his generation. But
his scepticism was of no mere negative quality--not a mere rejection
of tradition and denial of authority, but was the expression of a pure
reverence for the inner light of the spirit, and of entire submission
to its guidance. It was the loyalty to truth as the supreme good of the
intellect, and as the only sure foundation of moral character.

He was absolutely truthful towards his own soul. The experiences he had
gone through forced him to look religious questions full in the face,
and he could no longer take any dogmatic teaching on trust. He ignored
no difficulties, he accepted nothing because it was pleasant--he could
retain faith in nothing but his own soul. But that he did retain this
faith--faith in the intuitions which he regarded as revelations of
God to him, in absolute faithfulness to duty, strict adherence to
intellectual and moral truthfulness, single-minded practice of all
social and domestic virtues--is not only true of his outward life, but
is shown, as far as concerns his moral and intellectual convictions,
even in the poems which most strongly testify to the struggle and the
darkness in which he often found himself. In illustration of this point
we may mention in particular the ‘Summum Pulchrum,’ ‘Qui laborat orat,’
and the ‘New Sinai.’ The often-quoted lines in ‘In Memoriam’ might
almost be supposed to have been written for him:--

  Perplext in faith, but pure in deeds,
  At last he beat his music out.

Such scepticism--scepticism which consists in reverent waiting for
light not yet given, in respect for the truth so absolute, that nothing
doubtful can be accepted as truth because it is pleasant to the
soul--was his from this time forth to the end of his life. Some truths
he doubtless conceived himself to have learnt to _know_, in the course
of his life, but his attitude was always chiefly that of a learner. The
best key for those who care to know his later thought is to be found
in the fragment on the ‘Religious Tradition’ contained in the present
volume. But the scepticism which assumes a negative position from
intellectual pleasure in destructive arguments, which does not feel the
want of spiritual support, or realise the existence of spiritual truth,
which mocks at the grief of others, and refuses to accept their honest
experiences as real, was never his. He never denied the reality of
much that he himself could not use as spiritual nutriment. He believed
that God spoke differently to different ages and different minds. Not
therefore could he lay aside his own duty of seeking and waiting.
Through good report and through evil report, this he felt to be his own
personal duty, and from it he never flinched.

To return to Clough’s early days. It would not, we think, be true
to say that he abandoned all his early belief; he still, no doubt,
preserved much of his old feeling, and was in no sense hostile to
existing institutions; but _certainty_ as to anything resting on
personal or traditional authority was gone for him.

The result of this disturbance of mind was naturally to distract his
attention from his immediate studies, and to make his labour less
productive. Yet he did read hard, even more so, perhaps, than most
men of his time; and one of his friends records that the only bet he
ever remembers making in his life was seven to one that Clough would
get a first. His habits are said to have been at this time of Spartan
simplicity: he had very cold rooms in Balliol on the ground floor,
in which he passed a whole winter without a fire; and he used to say
that, now that he was working in good earnest, this was an excellent
plan for keeping out visitors, as nobody else could stand it for
more than a few minutes. He disclosed but little to any one of the
mental struggle within him, but his family were aware that some great
change was going on in him, and were anxious about his health, which
evidently suffered; one sign of which was the falling off of his thick
brown hair. He is described by his friends at this time as ‘a most
noble-looking youth.’ One of them says, ‘I remember well the first
time I saw him, just after he got the Balliol. I had no acquaintance
with him for years afterwards, but I never lost the impression of the
beautiful eyes which I saw opposite to me at dinner in Balliol Hall.’
He had, as we are told, a very high reputation as an undergraduate; and
among his contemporaries and those immediately succeeding him, many
were found to say that they owed more to him than to any other man. We
quote, again, some passages from the affectionate remembrances of Mr.
Ward: ‘Certainly I hardly met any one during my whole Oxford life to
whom I was so strongly drawn. Among the many qualities which so greatly
attracted me were his unusual conscientiousness and high-mindedness
and public spirit. As regarded himself, his main desire (so far as I
could see) was to do what he felt to be right; and as regarded others,
to stand up for the cause of God and of right principle. This latter
view--the duty of making a stand in society for good principles--was
one especial characteristic of Dr. Arnold’s pupils. Many think that
he impressed it on them too prominently, so as to expose them to a
real danger of becoming priggish and self-sufficient; but certainly
I never saw in Clough the faintest trace of such qualities as these.
Closely connected with this were his unselfishness and unworldliness.
The notion of preparing himself for success in a worldly career was so
far from prominent in his mind, that he might with some plausibility
have been accused of not thinking about it enough. But his one idea
seemed always to be, that he should to-day do to-day’s duty, and
for the rest leave himself in God’s hands. And as to unselfishness,
his self-abnegating consideration for others may be called, in the
best sense, feminine. Then his singular sweetness of disposition: I
doubt if I have anywhere seen this exceeded. I have known him under
circumstances which must have given him great vexation and annoyance,
but I never saw in him the faintest approach to loss of temper.

‘Intellectually he struck me as possessing very unusual independence,
and (if I may so express myself) straight-forwardness of thought. He
was never taken in with shams, pretences, and traditions, but saw
at once below the surface. On the other hand, he was perhaps less
remarkable for logical consecutiveness. But at that time the Oriel
fellowship was universally accounted, I think, the best test in Oxford
of intellectual power; and he obtained that fellowship the first time
he stood for it. I took part myself in examining him for the Balliol
fellowship, and I do not remember to have seen so much power displayed
in any examination within my experience.

‘As regards his ordinary habits at the time, since I was a fellow and
he only an undergraduate, I cannot speak with perfect certainty; but my
impression is that from the first he very much abstained from general
society. This was undoubtedly the case at a later period, when his
intellectual perplexity had hold of him; but I think it began earlier.
I remember in particular that every day he used to return to his
solitary room immediately after dinner; and when I asked him the reason
for this, he told me that his pecuniary circumstances incapacitated
him from giving wine parties, and that therefore he did not like to
wine with others. I think also there was a certain fastidiousness of
taste and judgment about him which prevented him from enjoying general
society.

‘The opinion both of tutors and undergraduates undoubtedly was,
that there was an unusual degree of reserve in his demeanour which
prevented them from understanding him; but they all--certainly all the
tutors, and I believe all the undergraduates--greatly appreciated his
singularly high principle and his exemplary spotlessness of life.’

We give another sketch of him during his undergraduate period,
furnished by Principal Shairp. ‘It was towards the end of 1840 that I
first saw A. H. Clough. As a freshman I looked with respect approaching
to awe on the senior scholar of whom I had heard so much, stepping
out on Sunday mornings to read the first lesson in Balliol Chapel.
How clearly I remember his massive figure, in scholar’s surplice,
standing before the brass eagle, and his deep feeling tones as he read
some chapter from the Hebrew prophets. At that time he was the eldest
and every way the first of a remarkable band of scholars. The younger
undergraduates felt towards him a distant reverence, as a lofty and
profound nature quite above themselves whom they could not quite make
out, but who was sure to be some day great. Profaner spirits, nearer
his own standing, sometimes made a joke of his then exceeding silence
and reserve, and of his unworldly ways. But as he was out of college
rooms and reading hard for his degree, we freshmen only heard of his
reputation from a distance, and seldom came in contact with him.

‘It must have been early in 1841 that he first asked me to breakfast
with him. He was then living in a small cottage, or cottage-like house,
standing by itself, a little apart from Holywell. There he used to
bathe every morning all the winter through, in the cold Holywell baths,
and read hard all day. There were one or two other freshmen there at
breakfast. If I remember right, none of the party were very talkative.

‘I have heard that about that time he wrote one day in fun an oracle,
in the style of Herodotus, to his brother scholar, who was reading like
himself for the Schools. The Greek I forget; the translation he sent
with it ran something like this:--

  ‘Whereas ---- of Lancashire
    Shall in the Schools preside,
  And Wynter[1] to St. Mary’s go
    With the pokers by his side;
  Two scholars there of Balliol,
    Who on double firsts had reckoned,
  Between them two shall with much ado
    Scarce get a double second.

‘This turned out only too true an oracle. Since the beginning of
class-lists, the succession of firsts among Balliol scholars was
unbroken. And few Balliol scholars had equalled, none ever surpassed,
Clough’s reputation. I well remember going, towards the end of May or
beginning of June, with one of the scholars of my own standing, to the
School quadrangle to hear the class list read out, the first time I had
heard it. What was our surprise when the list was read out, and neither
of our scholars appeared in the first class. We rushed to Balliol and
announced it to the younger Fellows who were standing at their open
window. Many causes were assigned at the time for this failure--some in
the examiners, some in Clough’s then state of spirits; but whatever the
cause, I think the result for some years shook faith in firsts among
Clough’s contemporaries. It made a great impression upon others; on
himself I fancy it made but little. I never heard him afterwards allude
to it as a thing of any consequence. He once told me he was sick of
contentions for prizes and honours before he left Rugby.’

Thus he missed his first class, of which perhaps the worst result
was that for the time it seriously distressed his parents and his
friends, especially Dr. Arnold, who had looked forward to his achieving
great distinction, and whose well-known dislike of the Tractarian
movement made him doubly grieve at what he regarded as indirectly
one of its consequences. Clough himself seems always to have felt a
solid confidence in his own powers, and perhaps to have too little
regarded the outward means of displaying them. Perhaps, too, he was
somewhat conscious of that inaptitude to put himself forward to the
best advantage, which many of his friends have noticed, and accepted it
with his usual stoic philosophy. At any rate his failure did not long
produce the effects he most feared, of want of pupils; for through Dr.
Arnold’s kindness he was soon provided with profitable employment in
teaching a number of Rugby boys who were kept at home at Liverpool by
the breaking out of fever in the school. During this time he stayed
at home with his family. In the autumn he returned to Oxford, and
tried for a fellowship at Balliol. In this he was unsuccessful. He
continued, however, to reside at Oxford, and supported himself on
the exhibition and scholarship which he still held. In the spring of
1842 he was elected fellow of Oriel, which was in every way a great
and cheering success to him. It healed the disappointment which his
former failure and the judgment of others on it had caused, and seemed
to give him a new life. It is clear by this determination of his to
abide by Oxford and to seek his career and his living there, that he
had as yet formed no definite views at variance with the principles of
the Church. He had come, we believe, to see the unimportance of many
things commonly insisted on; his intellect could no longer accept the
ordinary formulas of religious opinion; but he was not provided with
any other scheme to set up; his habits and his affections all clung
to the old ways; then and many years afterwards he continued to feel
that real liberality, width of view, and mental and moral cultivation
were more commonly found among those nursed in the Anglican Church than
in any exclusive sect, and probably the idea of any violent move, of
quitting the home in which he had been reared, had never yet crossed
his mind. His pleasure in his success in obtaining the fellowship was
much enhanced by the satisfaction which it gave to Dr. Arnold, and in
a practical way it was doubly valuable, because more troubles were now
thickening round him and his family. Money difficulties pressed hard on
his parents at this time; his help was much needed, and was unsparingly
given. For some sketches of this period and a little later we will
again quote Mr. Shairp’s words.

‘In the November of the same year he tried for a Balliol fellowship,
but was not successful. Tait,[2] however, was strong in his favour,
and, I believe, some other of the Fellows. I remember one of them
telling me at the time that a character of Saul which Clough wrote in
that examination was, I think he said, the best, most original thing
he had ever seen written in any examination. But Oriel had at that
time a way of finding out original genius better than either Balliol
or the Schools. In the spring of 1842, Arthur Hugh Clough was elected
fellow of Oriel, the last examination I believe in which Newman took
part. The announcement of that success I remember well. It was on
the Friday morning of the Easter week of that year. The examination
was finished on the Thursday evening. I had asked Clough and another
friend, who was a candidate at the same time, to breakfast with me on
the Friday morning, as their work was just over. Most of the scholars
of the College were staying up and came to breakfast too. The party
consisted of about a dozen. We had little notion that anything about
the examination would be known so soon, and were all sitting quietly,
having just finished breakfast, but not yet risen from the table. The
door opened wide; entered a fellow of another college, and, drawing
himself up to his full height, he addressed the other candidate: “I
am sorry to say you have _not_ got it.” Then, “Clough, you have;” and
stepping forward into the middle of the room, held out his hand, with
“Allow me to congratulate you.” We were all so little thinking of the
fellowship, and so taken aback by this formal announcement, that it was
some little time before we knew what it was all about. The first thing
that recalled my presence of mind was seeing the delight on the face of
Clough’s younger brother, who was present.

‘In the summer of 1842, while I was reading in a retired part of Wales
with two or three others, Clough, then wandering through the Welsh
mountains, one morning looked in on us. I took a walk with him, and
he at once led me up Moël Wyn, the highest mountain within reach. Two
things I remember that day: one, that he spoke a good deal (for him) of
Dr. Arnold, whose death had happened only a few weeks before: another,
that a storm came down upon the mountain when we were half-way up. In
the midst of it we lay for some time close above a small mountain tarn,
and watched the storm-wind working on the face of the lake, tearing
and torturing the water into most fantastic, almost ghostly shapes,
the like of which I never saw before or since. These mountain sights,
though he did not say much, he used to eye most observantly.

‘Early in the autumn of 1843, Clough came to Grasmere to read with a
Balliol reading party, of which I was one. He was with us about six
weeks, I think staying till towards the end of September. This was his
earliest long vacation party, all things on a smaller scale than his
later ones by Loch Ness, or on Dee-side, but still very pleasant. He
lived in a small lodging immediately to the west of Grasmere church;
we in a farm-house on the lake. During these weeks I read the Greek
tragedians with him, and did Latin prose. His manner of translating,
especially the Greek choruses, was quite peculiar; a quaint archaic
style of language, keeping rigidly to the Greek order of the words, and
so bringing out their expression better, more forcibly and poetically,
than any other translations I had heard. When work was done we used to
walk in the afternoon with him all over that delightful country. His
“eye to country” was wonderful. He knew the whole lie of the different
dales relatively to each other; every tarn, beck, and bend in them. He
used, if I remember right, to draw pen-and-ink maps, showing us the
whole lineaments of the district. Without any obtrusive enthusiasm,
but in his own quiet manly way, he seemed as if he never could get
too much of it--never walk too far or too often over it. Bathing too
formed one of his daily occupations up in a retired pool of the stream
that afterwards becomes the Rotha, as it comes out of Easedale. One
walk, our longest, was on a Saturday, up Easedale, over the Raise by
Greenup, Borrowdale, Honister Crag, under the starlight, to Buttermere.
In the small inn there we stayed all Sunday. Early on Monday morning we
walked, by two mountain passes, to a farm at the head of Wastwater to
breakfast. On the way we crossed Ennerdale, and up the pass close under
the nearly perpendicular precipices of the Pillar--a tall mountain,
which is the scene of Wordsworth’s pastoral of “The Brothers.” From
the head of Wastwater, up past the great gorge of the Mickledoor, to
the top of Scawfell, then down past the east side of Bowfell towards
Langdale Pikes, and so home to Grasmere. As we passed under Bowfell
a beautiful autumn afternoon, we lay a long time by the side of the
lovely Angle Tarn. The sun, just before he sunk beside Bowfell, was
showering down his light, which dimpled the smooth face of the tarn
like heavy drops of sun-rain. Every now and then a slight breeze would
come and scatter the rays broadcast over the little loch, as if some
unseen hand was sowing it with golden grain. It was as memorable an
appearance as that different one we had seen a year ago on Moël Wyn.
These things, though Clough observed closely, and took pleasure in, he
did not speak often about, much less indulge in raptures.

‘Some of our party were very good hill-men. One day, five or six in
all set out on a race from our door by Grasmere Lake to the top of
Fairfield. He was the second to reach the summit. His action uphill was
peculiar; he used to lay himself forward almost horizontally towards
the slope, and take very long strides which carried him quickly over
the ground. Few men, so stout as he then was, could have matched him up
a mountain.

‘Shortly after this time at Oxford, somewhere that is between 1843 and
1845, I remember to have heard him speak at a small debating society
called the Decade, in which were discussed often graver subjects, and
in a less popular way, than in the Union. Having been an unfrequent
attender, I heard him only twice. But both times, what he said and the
way he said it, were so marked and weighty as to have stuck to memory
when almost everything else then spoken has been forgotten. The first
time was in Oriel Common-room; the subject proposed--“That Tennyson
was a greater poet than Wordsworth.” This was one of the earliest
expressions of that popularity--since become nearly universal--which
I remember. Clough spoke against the proposition, and stood up for
Wordsworth’s greatness with singular wisdom and moderation. He
granted fully that Wordsworth was often prosy, that whole pages of
the “Excursion” had better have been written in prose; but still,
when he was at his best, he was much greater than any other modern
English poet, saying his best things without knowing they were so
good, and then drawling on into prosaic tediousness, without being
aware where the inspiration failed and the prose began. In this kind
of unconsciousness, I think he said, lay much of his power. One of the
only other times I heard him speak was, about the same time, when a
meeting of the Decade was held in Balliol Common-room. The subject of
debate was--“That the character of a gentleman was in the present day
made too much of.” To understand the drift of this would require one
to know how highly pleasant manners and a good exterior are rated in
Oxford at all times, and to understand something of the peculiar mental
atmosphere of Oxford at that time. Clough spoke neither for nor against
the proposition; but for an hour and a half--well on two hours--he
went into the origin of the ideal, historically tracing from mediæval
times how much was implied originally in the notion of a “gentle
knight”--truthfulness, consideration for others (even self-sacrifice),
courtesy, and the power of giving outward expression to these moral
qualities. From this high standard he traced the deterioration into the
modern Brummagem pattern which gets the name. These truly gentlemen of
old time had invented for themselves a whole economy of manners, which
gave true expression to what was really in them, to the ideal in which
they lived. These manners, true in them, became false when adopted
traditionally and copied from without by modern men placed in quite
different circumstances, and living different lives. When the same
qualities are in the hearts of men now, as truly as in the best of old
time, they will fashion for themselves a new expression, a new economy
of manners suitable to their place and time. But many men now, wholly
devoid of the inward reality, yet catching at the reputation of it,
adopt these old traditional ways of speaking and of bearing themselves,
though they express nothing that is really in them.

‘One expression I remember he used, to illustrate the truth that where
the true gentle spirit exists, it will express itself in its own rather
than in the traditional way. “I have known peasant men and women in the
humblest places in whom dwelt these qualities as truly as they ever did
in the best of lords and ladies, and who had invented for themselves
a whole economy of manners to express them, who were very ‘poets of
courtesy.’”

‘His manner of speaking was very characteristic, slow and deliberate,
never attempting rhetorical flow, stopping at times to think the right
thing, or to feel for the exactly fitting word, but with a depth of
suggestiveness, a hold of reality, a poetry of thought, not found
combined in any other Oxonian of our time.

‘It must have been in the autumn of 1845 that Clough and I first met
in Scotland. One visit there to Walrond’s family at Calder Park I
especially remember. On a fine morning early in September, we started
from Calder Park to drive to the Falls of Clyde. We were to spend the
day at Milton Lockhart, and go on to Lanark in the evening. Besides
Walrond and Clough, there were T. Arnold, E. Arnold, and myself. It
was one of the loveliest September mornings that ever shone, and the
drive lay through one of the most lovely regions in south Scotland,
known as “the Trough of Clyde.” The sky was bright blue, fleeced with
whitest clouds. From Hamilton to Milton Lockhart, about ten miles, the
road keeps down in the hollow of the trough, near the water, the banks
covered with orchards, full of heavy-laden apple and other fruit trees
bending down till they touched the yellow corn that grew among them.
There is a succession of fine country houses, with lawns that slope
towards lime trees that bend over the river. It was the first time any
of us but Walrond had been that way, and in such a drive, under such a
sky, you may believe we were happy enough. We reached Milton Lockhart,
a beautiful place, built on a high grassy headland, beneath and round
which winds the Clyde. Sir Walter Scott, I believe, chose the site, and
none could be more beautifully chosen. It looks both ways, up and down
the lovely vale.

‘As we drove up, near ten o’clock, we found the late Mr. J. G. Lockhart
(Scott’s biographer) walking on the green terrace that looks over the
river. The laird himself being from home, his brother was our host.
Soon after we arrived, his daughter, then very young, afterwards Mrs.
Hope Scott, came out on the terrace to say that breakfast was ready.
After breakfast she sang, with great spirit and sweetness, several of
her grandfather’s songs, copied into her mother’s books by herself,
when they were still newly composed. After listening to these for some
time, her brother, Walter Scott Lockhart, then a youth of nineteen or
so, and with a great likeness to the portraits of Sir Walter when a
young man, was our guide to an old castle, situated on a bank of one
of the small glens that come down to the Clyde from the west. It was
the original of Scott’s Tillietudlem in “Old Mortality.” A beautiful
walk thither; the castle large, roofless and green with herbage and
leafage. We stayed some time roaming over the green deserted place,
then returned to a lunch, which was our dinner; more songs, and then
drove off late in the afternoon to the Falls of Clyde and Lanark for
the night. It was a pleasant day. Clough enjoyed it much in his own
quiet way--quietly, yet so humanly interested in all he met. Many a
joke he used to make about that day afterwards. Not he only, but all
our entertainers of that day, Mr. J. G. Lockhart, his son and daughter,
are now gone.

‘In the summer of 1847, Clough had a reading party at Drumnadrochet,
in Glen Urquhart, about two miles north from Loch Ness, where, about
the beginning of August, I, along with T. Arnold and Walrond, paid him
a visit. Some of the incidents and characters in “The Bothie” were
taken from that reading party, though its main scenes and incidents
lay in Braemar. One anecdote I specially remember connected with
that visit. On our way to Drumnadrochet, T. Arnold and I had made a
solitary walk together from the west end of Loch Rannoch, up by Loch
Ericht, one of the wildest, most unfrequented lochs in the Highlands.
All day we saw only one house, till, late at night, we reached another
on the side of the loch, about six miles from Dalwhinnie. It was one
of the loveliest, most primitive places I ever saw even in the most
out-of-the-way parts of the Highlands. We told Clough of it, and when
his reading party was over, later in the autumn, he went on our track.
He spent a night at the inn at the west end of Loch Rannoch, called
Tighnalyne, where he met with some of the incidents which appeared in
“The Bothie.” He also visited the house by the side of Loch Ericht, a
small heather-thatched hut, occupied by one of the foresters of the
Ben Aulder forest. He found one of the children lying sick of a fever,
the father I think from home, and the mother without any medicines or
other aid for her child. He immediately set off and walked to Fort
William, about two days’ journey from the place, but the nearest place
where medicines and other supplies were to be had. These he got at Fort
William, and returned on his two days’ journey, and left them with
the mother. He had four days’ walk, over a rough country, to bring
medicines to this little child, and the people did not even know his
name. On these occasions in Scotland, he told me that he used to tell
the people he was a “Teacher,” and they were at once at ease with him
then. I doubt whether he ever mentioned this to any one but myself, and
to me it only came out casually.

‘If I am not mistaken, it was from this place that he took the original
name of what is now Tober-na-Vuolich. In this year he visited the West
Highlands, and went through “Lochaber, anon in Locheil, in Knoydart,
Moydart, Morrer, Ardgower, and Ardnamurchan.” In the first edition this
line was--“Knoydart, Moydart, Croydart, Morrer, and Ardnamurchan.” But
he discovered afterwards that Croydart was only the way that the Gael
pronounce what is spelt Knoydart. During this wander he saw all the
country about Ben Nevis, westward to the Atlantic--

  ‘Where the great peaks look abroad over Skye to the westermost Islands.

He walked “where pines are grand in Glen-Mally,” and saw all the
country which in a few lines here and there he has pictured so
powerfully in “The Bothie.” The expression about Ben Nevis, with the
morning sprinkling of snow on his shoulders, is absolutely true to
reality.

‘In this expedition he came to Glenfinnan, at the head of Loch Shiel,
the place where Prince Charles met the Highland clans, and unfurled his
standard. Here there used to stand a nice quiet little-frequented inn,
where one could live for weeks undisturbed. But at the time when Clough
reached it, a great gathering was being held there. The Queen had gone
to Loch Laggan, and the ships that escorted her to Fort William were
lying at the head of Loch Linnhe. McDonald of Glen Aladale had invited
all the officers of these ships to have a day’s deer-stalking on his
property of Glen Aladale, down the side of Loch Shiel, and to have a
ball at the Glenfinnan Inn after their day’s sport. Clough came in for
the ball. It was a strange gathering--the English sailors, officers, a
few Highland lairds, Highland farmers and shepherds, with their wives
and daughters, were all met altogether at the ball. Clough and one
of his reading party were invited to join the dance, and they danced
Highland reels, and went through all the festivities like natives. The
uproar was immense, and the ludicrous scenes not few. He often used to
speak of it afterwards, as one of the motliest, drollest gatherings he
had ever fallen in with.

‘Often afterwards he used to speak of his Scotch adventures with great
heartiness. There was much in the ways of life he saw there that suited
the simplicity of his nature. Even when Englishmen would laugh at the
baldness of our Presbyterian services, he would defend them as better
than English ritualism and formality.’

To these reminiscences of Principal Shairp’s may be added some notes
supplied by Professor Conington, of his recollections of the speeches
made by Clough in the debates of a society at Oxford, called the
Decade. Mr. Conington was himself the secretary of the society at the
time of which he speaks. ‘The first occasion of my meeting Mr. Clough
at the Decade,’ he says, ‘was on February 14, 1846, when I myself
brought forward the subject for discussion. The subject was--“That
means ought to be adopted by the Legislature for recognising formally
the social and political importance of the manufacturing interest.”
Sir Robert Peel’s change of policy about the corn laws had just been
announced, and those of us who were on the movement side were naturally
more or less enthusiastic in favour of the manufacturers, who appeared
to us as the winners of a great social victory. My proposal, if I
remember rightly, was to the effect that they ought to be made peers,
just as great landowners were. In this the bulk of the members present
at that meeting do not seem to have concurred with me; but I had Mr.
Clough’s support. I do not recollect thoroughly a single sentence of
his speech, but I can recall his commanding manner, and the stately
serene tones in which he delivered a kind of prophecy of the new era
which in a few days was to be inaugurated, and told us that “these
men” (the manufacturers) “were the real rulers of England.” The next
occasion was some months afterwards, on June 9, 1846, when the question
for debate was--“That any system of moral science, distinct from a
consideration of Christianity, is essentially imperfect.” Mr. Clough
is reported as having spoken for this motion in part. He eventually
moved a rider, which, with the motion, was unanimously accepted--“But
the existence of moral science is recognised and presupposed by the
idea of a revelation.” The only point which remains on my mind is
an application by him of the text “comparing spiritual things with
spiritual;” “that is,” said he, “comparing the spiritual things in a
revelation with the spiritual things in one’s own mind.”

‘I see there were five other occasions, in 1847 and the early part of
1848, on which Mr. Clough appeared at the Decade during my membership.
One dwells in my memory with tolerable distinctness--a speech made
in a debate on March 6, 1847, the subject being--“That the study of
philosophy is more important for the formation of opinion than that
of history.” I see that he made five speeches on that evening. I have
entered him as supporting the motion “with qualifications,” a common
mode of registering opinion in our debates: but I remember that, as
the debate grew warm, his qualifications seemed to disappear, and
in the speech which I happen to recollect, few if any of them were
visible. “What is it to me,” he said, “to know the fact of the battle
of Marathon, or the fact of the existence of Cromwell? I have it all
within me.” Correcting himself afterwards, he said, “I do not mean that
it is of no importance to me that there should have been such a battle
or such a person; it is of a great deal: but it is of no importance
that I should know it.”

‘The only other occasion when I recollect anything of Mr. Clough which
seems worth recording was a conversation which I had with him in the
autumn of 1848. He had given up his fellowship, and was living for a
few weeks in small cheap lodgings in Holywell Street, Oxford, where
I remember finding him without a fire on a cold day. His “Bothie”
was just about to be published, and he gave me some account of it,
particularly of the metre. He repeated, in his melodious way, several
lines, intended to show me how a verse might be read so that one
syllable should take up the time of two, or, conversely, two of one.
The line which he instanced (altered, I think, from “Evangeline”) was
this:--

  White | naked | feet on the | gleaming | floor of her | chamber.

This was new to me, as I had not risen beyond the common notion of
spondees, dactyls, and the rest. So I asked for more explanation. He
bade me scan the first line of the “Paradise Lost.” I began, “‘Of
man’s:’ iambus.” “Yes.” “‘First dis-’”----There I was puzzled. It did
not seem an iambus or a spondee: it was nearly a trochee, but not quite
one. He then explained to me his conception of the rhythm. The two feet
“first disobe-” took up the time of four syllables, two iambic feet:
the voice rested awhile on the word “first,” then passed swiftly over
“diso-,” then rested again on “be-,” so as to recover the previous
hurry. I think he went on to explain that in the next foot, “dience
and,” both syllables were short, but that the loss of time was made up
for by the pause required by the sense after the former of the two,
and that finally the voice rested on the full-sounded word “fruit.”
Possibly this last impression may really be the result of my own
subsequent use of the clue which he then gave me. But a clue it was in
the fullest sense of the term: it gave me an insight into rhythm which
I had not before, and which has constantly been my guide since both in
reading and writing.’

In June 1842 occurred the death of Dr. Arnold, which was a severe shock
as well as a great grief to Clough from its suddenness as well as from
the intense reverence and affection he felt for him. ‘He was for a long
time more than a father to me,’ were his own words, and no doubt the
sensitive boy, exiled from his own family in his childhood, clung with
even more of filial feeling than is common to the teacher to whom he
owed so much. He heard the news at Oxford, and came home immediately,
seeming, as his sister describes him, completely stunned by the blow,
incapable of realising or speaking of what had happened, and unable to
rest. He soon left home, and wandered away among the Welsh hills, where
Mr. Shairp tells us of their meeting.

Later in the summer he had some pupils in Ireland, but left them to
come over to bid farewell to his brother George, who sailed for America
in October 1842. He was deeply attached to this his youngest brother,
whose lively spirits combined with most affectionate devotion to him
had done a great deal to cheer him even in his darkest moments. And
this was, as it proved, their last meeting. The poor young fellow, only
just twenty-two, was struck down by fever at Charleston, when away from
all his own family, and died there, after a very few days’ illness.
His father had sailed for America, intending to join him, before the
news of his illness reached England, and arrived in Boston only to hear
that all was over. The shock was a dreadful one to the unhappy father,
and came with a double force, because he relied on his son’s help at
this moment in a period of great anxiety concerning business. He never
recovered the blow, and in the following summer, in 1843, he returned
home much shaken by grief and very ill in health, and after lingering
on for a few months, during which time he was most tenderly nursed by
all his family, including Arthur, he also died.

During his father’s illness, and the years that immediately followed,
Arthur spent much of his time with his own family; and when he was away
from them, he always took an active part in all plans and arrangements
for their comfort and happiness. He had never become estranged in any
way from his home, as is often the case with sons and brothers whose
calling separates them from their families. Essentially tender and
domestic in his feelings, and full of consideration for others, it
always seemed natural to him to enter into their interests, and to
undertake trouble and responsibility for their sakes.

In 1843 he had been appointed tutor as well as fellow of Oriel, and
he is spoken of as being remarkably effective in this capacity. ‘A
most excellent tutor, and exceedingly beloved by the undergraduates,’
one of those who best knew has called him. But little need be said
of this period. He led a quiet, hardworking, uneventful tutor’s life,
diversified with the reading parties, which have been commemorated in
the ‘Bothie.’ This was the time when most of the poems in the little
volume called ‘Ambarvalia’ were written. He took a warm and increasing
interest in all social questions, and in every way he seems to have
been full of spirit and vigour. To his younger friends and pupils he
especially endeared himself. Mr. Walrond says: ‘My Oxford days seem
all coloured with the recollection of happy and most instructive
walks and talks with him. We used to meet every day almost, though at
different colleges; and it was my regular Sunday holiday to breakfast
with him, and then take a long ramble over Cumnor Hurst or Bagley
Wood. When I recall those days, the one thing that comes back upon me
most, even more than the wisdom and loftiness and suggestiveness of
his conversation, is his unselfishness and tender kindness. Many must
have told you what a gift he had for making people personally _fond_
of him; I can use no other word. For myself, I owe him more than I can
ever tell, for the seed of just and noble thoughts sown, for the pure
and lofty type of character set before me; but the feeling of personal
attachment is the strongest of all.’ Another friend of this period
says: ‘In him I felt I had an example of a nobleness and tenderness of
nature most rare, and one, too, who, since I was an undergraduate, had
always given me not only sincere love, but wise and sincere counsel in
many difficulties. What he would think on any doubtful point was indeed
often in the mind of many others with me. Often, too, I have remembered
that, by his taste, I was first led to read and take pleasure in
Wordsworth.’

Thus his life passed on with much of cheerful and active interest
and work. Yet it would seem, from his letters, that he was living at
Oxford under a sense of intellectual repression. He appears at one
time to have doubted about undertaking the tutor’s work, but to have
overcome the doubt. He evidently regarded teaching as his natural
vocation, and he had great enjoyment in it; but the sense of being
bound by his position to silence on many important subjects probably
oppressed him. At intervals he expresses vague inclinations to leave
Oxford, and seek work elsewhere; but the difficulty of finding this,
and the undefined nature of his objections, appear to have hindered
him. At this time, in order to secure the comfort of a near relative,
he entered into a pecuniary arrangement, by which he bound himself to
pay 100_l._ a year, on condition of receiving a considerable sum at
the death of one of the parties to the negotiation. This was looked on
as an event certain to occur very soon, but, in fact, it did not come
to pass for fifteen years; and this liability, very easily borne while
his circumstances were prosperous, became a drag upon him when he had
no longer any assured income. Thus, though everything in his outward
circumstances combined to make it desirable for him to remain in his
present position, yet by degrees his dissatisfaction with it became
too strong to be endured. His was a nature ‘which moveth all together,
if it move at all;’ and, once entered upon the course of free inquiry,
nothing could stop the expansion of his thought in that direction. His
absolute conscientiousness and intense unworldliness prevented the
usual influences which slacken men’s movements from telling upon his.

It is not very obvious what eventually decided him to quit Oxford at
the precise moment when he did so. In the year 1847 he was powerfully
stirred by the distress in Ireland at the time of the potato famine,
as may be seen from the pamphlet on ‘Retrenchment’; and the general
ferment of his nature, as well as the ripening of opinions in his
own mind, probably tended to make him more open to change. Emerson
also visited England in this year. Clough became intimate with him,
and his influence must have tended to urge him on in the direction
in which he was already moving. With another friend, also, whose
general dissatisfaction with European life was strong, he was at
this time very familiar. We are, therefore, disposed to think that
it was some half accidental confirmation of his own doubts as to
the honesty and usefulness of his own course, which brought him at
last almost suddenly face to face with the question whether he ought
to resign his tutorship. After a correspondence with the head of
his college--in speaking of whom he always expressed a strong sense
of the uniform kindness which he had received from him under these
trying circumstances--he eventually gave up his tutorship in 1848;
and this done, though his fellowship had not yet expired, he began
to feel his whole position hollow; and six months later (in October
1848) he resigned this likewise, and thus left himself unprovided with
any present means of making a livelihood, and with the burden of the
annuity to which we have alluded still hanging on him. The sacrifice
was greater to him than to many men, because he had no natural
aptitude for making money. His power of literary production was always
uncertain, and very little within his own control. His conscientious
scruples interfered with his writing casually, as many would have done;
for instance, we are told that he would not contribute to any paper
or review with whose general principles he did not agree. He was,
therefore, constrained to look out for some definite post in the line
of education; and from the best chances in this department he had cut
himself adrift by resigning his fellowship. He did, nevertheless, take
this step, apparently with a certain lightness of heart and buoyancy,
in singular contrast with what might be expected to be the feeling of a
man taking a decision so important to his future life. It is clear that
he ‘broke away with delight’ from what he felt to be the thraldom of
his position in Oxford.

Immediately after laying down his tutorship, he made use of his leisure
to go to Paris, in company with Emerson, where he spent a month in
seeing the sights of the Revolution.

It was in September of this year (1848), when staying at home with his
mother and sister in Liverpool, that he wrote his first long poem, the
‘Bothie of Tober-na-Vuolich.’ This was his utterance to the world on
quitting Oxford, and not the theological pamphlet which was expected
from him. In later days he would often speak of the amusement it had
been to him to think of the disappointment which the appearance of
these lively verses would produce among those who looked for a serious
vindication of his conduct. Some further explanation of his feeling
will be furnished by an unpublished letter, which we subjoin:--

    ‘My objection _in limine_ to subscription would be, that it is
    a painful restraint on speculation; but beyond this, to examine
    myself in detail on the Thirty-nine Articles, and say how far
    my thoughts upon them had passed the limit of speculation and
    begun to assume the form of concretion, would be not only
    difficult and distasteful to me, but absolutely impossible.
    I could not do it with any approximation to accuracy; and
    I have no wish to be hurried into precipitate declarations
    which, after all, might misrepresent my mind. It is fair to say
    that the points in question with me would not be subordinate
    matters; but at the same time I feel no call to the study of
    theology, and for the present certainly should leave these
    controversies to themselves, were they not in some measure
    forced upon my notice. Of joining any sect I have not the most
    distant intention.’

This year he spent chiefly at home; and, in the winter of 1848, he
received an invitation to take the Headship of University Hall,
London, an institution professing entirely unsectarian principles,
founded for the purpose of receiving students attending the lectures
at University College. His tenure of office was to date from October
1849, and he determined before this to take his first long holiday of
travel, and to go to Rome. Thus his visit coincided accidentally with
the siege of Rome by the French; and this, though it deprived him of
many opportunities of travel and sight-seeing, was historically and
politically of very great interest to him. This was the scene and the
time during which he wrote his second long poem, the ‘Amours de Voyage.’

In October 1849 he returned to enter on his duties at University Hall.
His new circumstances were, of course, very different from those
of his Oxford life, and the change was in many respects painful to
him. The step he had taken in resigning his fellowship isolated him
greatly; many of his old friends looked coldly on him, and the new
acquaintances among whom he was thrown were often uncongenial to him.
The transition from the intimate and highly refined society of Oxford
to the bustling miscellaneous external life of London, to one not well
furnished with friends, and without a home of his own, could hardly
fail to be depressing. He had hoped for liberty of thought and action;
he had found solitude, but not perfect freedom. Though not bound by any
verbal obligations, he found himself expected to express agreement with
the opinions of the new set among whom he had fallen, and this was no
more possible to him here than it had been at Oxford. His old prestige
at Oxford availed him little in London; it has been remarked by his
friends that he often failed to show himself to the best advantage,
and this was doubly the case when he felt himself not understood. This
was without doubt the dreariest, loneliest period of his life, and he
became compressed and reserved to a degree quite unusual with him, both
before and afterwards. He shut himself up, and went through his life in
silence.

Yet here too he gradually formed some new and valuable friendships.
Among these, his acquaintance with Mr. Carlyle was one of the most
important; and to the end of his life he continued to entertain the
warmest feeling for that great man. It was part of the sensitiveness of
his character to shrink from going back on old impressions; and though
he always retained his affection for his early friends, yet intercourse
with fresh minds was often easier to him than with those to whom his
former phases of life and thought were more familiar. In the autumn
of 1850 he took advantage of his vacation to make a hasty journey
to Venice, and during this interval he began his third long poem of
‘Dipsychus,’ which bears the mark of Venice in all its framework and
its local colouring.

We have now mentioned, at the dates at which they were composed,
all his longest works--the ‘Bothie,’ the ‘Amours de Voyage,’ and
‘Dipsychus.’ No other long work of his remains except the ‘Mari Magno,’
which is properly a collection of short poems, more or less united by
one central idea, and bound together by their setting, as a series of
tales related to each other by a party of companions on a sea voyage.
The ‘Ambarvalia,’ poems written between 1840 and 1847, chiefly at
Oxford, though without any setting at all, have something of the same
inward coherence. They are all poems of the inner life, while the ‘Mari
Magno’ poems deal with social problems, and the questions of love and
marriage. His voyage to America, again, produced a cluster of little
sea poems, closely linked together by one or two main thoughts.

It has often been a subject of surprise, that with such evident powers
and even facility of production, Clough should have left so little
behind him, even considering the shortness of his life, and that for
such long periods he should have been entirely silent. We think the
best explanation is to be found in his peculiar temper of mind, and
we might say physical conformation of brain, which could not work
unless under a combination of favourable circumstances. His brain,
though powerful, was slow to concentrate itself, and could not carry
on several occupations at once. Solitude and repose were necessary for
production. This, combined with a certain inertia, a certain slowness
of movement, constantly made it hard for him to get over the initial
difficulties of self-expression, and would often, no doubt, cause him
to delay too long and lose the passing inspiration or opportunity.
But, once started, his very weight carried him on, as it did in the
‘Bothie,’ ‘Amours,’ and ‘Dipsychus,’ and ‘Mari Magno.’

Besides this, much in the very quality of his poetry will explain
this scantiness of production. His absolute sincerity of thought, his
intense feeling of reality, rendered it impossible for him to produce
anything superficial, and therefore actually curtailed the amount of
his creations. His excessive conscientiousness winnowed away so much
as to leave often a sense of baldness. His peculiar habits of thought
also, his sense of being constantly at variance with the ordinary
sentiments of those who surrounded him, his incapability of treating
the common themes of poetry in the usual manner, his want of interest
in any poetry which did not touch some deep question, some vital
feeling in human nature (always excepting his love for the simple
beauty of nature), all combined to diminish his range of subjects. He
had to enter on a new line, to create a new treatment of old subjects,
to turn them over and bring them out in the new light of his critical
but kindly philosophy. This, in ‘Mari Magno,’ he had begun to do, and
the rapid production of these last poems makes us believe that this
new vein would have continued had he lived, and that we should have
received a further expression of his views about the daily problems of
social life.

Looking now to the facts of his life, we see that there were in it very
few intervals during which he enjoyed the combination of favourable
circumstances necessary to enable him to write. He never was free,
except during those short intervals, from the pressure of constant
hard practical work. He was constantly under the necessity of using
his power of work for the purpose of immediately making a living. His
conscientious efforts, first to relieve his parents from the burden of
his education, and then to assist them, have been related before. As
fellow and tutor his earnings were freely contributed, and no doubt the
desire of doing this was one great reason for undertaking the tutor’s
work at Oriel. It is true that this was a time of comparative wealth,
but it was earned by hard labour of a practical kind, and it has been
already shown that during this period he made a pecuniary engagement
which burdened him for many years after. Thus his duty to others never
allowed him for any interval to cast himself on his fortune, and run
risks for a while for the sake of freedom and opportunities. To many
men this burden would have been lighter, but he was a heavy moving
vessel; he could not turn and set his sails to catch light favouring
winds. He could not use spare half-hours to write well-paid reviews
or popular articles, or even poetry. The demand for his wares seemed
to spoil the supply. That it should be profitable, seemed to make
it impossible to him to write. Thus he was driven to harder, less
congenial work, simply because it was positive and certain. Nothing,
for instance, would have been more grateful to him than after leaving
Oxford to be free for a few years to roam about the world before
settling to a new vocation, but this was never to be thought of. No
doubt there is another side to the picture; the real acquaintance
with life and men, which this entire acceptance of various positions
taught him, not only gave him valuable training, but furnished him with
materials which in a mind of his calibre would, we doubt not, have
come out in some literary form. But for the time they simply choked
his power of production, and no doubt prevented the utterance of many
thoughts on religious and other subjects.

After two years at University Hall, the founding of a new college at
Sydney induced him to seek a change, and he presented himself as a
candidate for its principalship, a post which Dr. Woolley eventually
obtained. This would have brought him a safe income, and one on which
he could afford to marry. He had great hopes of success, and this
tempted him to engage himself to be married. But very soon after he
had done this the appointment was decided against him, and he was at
the same time obliged to give up University Hall. His prospects were
thus less hopeful than ever. Yet the stimulus which he had received
supported him in the struggle to obtain some kind of position in
which he might gain a livelihood. His friends endeavoured to procure
an appointment for him in the Education Office; but the downfall of
the Liberal Ministry destroyed all his chances for the time. Then,
after much deliberation and inward hesitation, he resolved to go out
to America, and try what opening he might find there, as a teacher
or a literary man. But to leave England, to make a new beginning in
life, and to pull himself up again, as it were, by the roots, was not
an easy matter to one of his tenacious temperament. Some expression
of the feelings which possessed him comes out in the poems written
on shipboard. Eventually he sailed, in October 1852, and settled
at Cambridge, Massachusetts. There he was welcomed with remarkable
cordiality, and formed many friendships which lasted to the end of
his life. Still his position was too solitary to be cheerful, but he
appreciated very highly the hopefulness and the moral healthiness of
the new country, and he always retained warm feelings of admiration and
affection for its citizens.

At Cambridge he remained some time without much employment, but by
degrees he gathered a certain number of pupils. He also wrote several
articles at this time in the ‘North American Review,’ and in ‘Putnam’s
Magazine,’ and other magazines, and before long undertook a revision
of the translation, known as Dryden’s, of Plutarch’s ‘Lives,’ for
an American publisher. Thus he carried on a great deal of work,
and was gradually making himself an assured position; and he would
probably have felt no difficulty in settling down in America as his
home, had not the offer of an examinership in the Education Office,
which his friends obtained for him, come to draw him homewards again.
The certainty of a permanent, though small income, the prospects of
immediate marriage, and his natural affection for his own country,
decided him to accept the place, and give up his chances in America,
not without some regret, after he had gradually brought his mind to the
idea of adopting a new country. His genuine democratic feeling rejoiced
in the wider diffusion of prosperity and substantial comforts which he
found in America; at the same time he would doubtless have suffered
greatly from the expatriation, and would probably have always regretted
his exclusion from what he calls ‘the deeper waters of ancient
knowledge and experience’ to be found in the old country.

In July 1853 he returned to England, and at once entered on the duties
of his office. Henceforth his career was decided for him. He was freed
from perplexing questions as to choice of occupation. His business
life was simple, straightforward, and hardworking; but it was made
up of little beyond official drudgery, and the fact of his entering
the public service so late diminished his prospect of reaching higher
posts. His immediate objects, however, were answered; and in June
1854 he married. For the next seven years he lived quietly at home;
and during this time three children were born to him, who formed his
chief and unfailing delight. No events of any moment marked this
period; but it was one of real rest and contentment. It is hard to
speak of happiness which has vanished from the earth; yet what comfort
remains lies chiefly in the thought that now at last his life did
reach a sort of culmination, that a great-hearted man did for a short
time find his natural repose in the pleasures of a home, and that he
was able, for a short space at least, to devote his great faculties
freely to the service of others. Up to this date we may almost say
that he had been too free from active and absorbing employment for his
own happiness. Circumstances had forced him to try different schemes
and to engage in various undertakings with very moderate success, and
the want of definite and continuous occupation left his mind free to
deal restlessly with the great insoluble problems of the world, which
had for him so true a vitality that he could not dismiss them from
his thoughts. After his marriage there was none of this enforced and
painful communing with self alone. He had plenty to do; and the close
relations into which he was brought with various members of his wife’s
family kept him actively employed, and tasked his sympathies to the
full. All the new duties and interests of domestic life grew up and
occupied his daily thoughts. The humour which in solitude had been
inclined to take the hue of irony and sarcasm, now found its natural
and healthy outlet. The practical wisdom and insight into life, for
which he was distinguished, were constantly exercised in the service
of his friends; and the new experience which he was daily gathering at
home made many perplexed questions, both social and religious, clear
and simple to his mind. In this way, though he did not cease to think
about the problems which hitherto had occupied his leisure, he thought
about them in a different way, and was able, so to speak, to test them
by the facts of actual life, and by the intuitions and experience of
those whose character he valued, instead of submitting them only to the
crucible of his own reflection. The close and constant contact with
another mind gave him a fresh insight into his own, and developed a
new understanding of the wants of other people, so that the results of
many years of meditation grew distinct and solid. Having thus passed
from the speculative to the constructive phase of thought, it is quite
certain, from little things which he was in the habit of saying, that,
had he been permitted, he would have expressed his mature convictions
in works of a more positive and substantial kind. But, unfortunately,
he was too willing and too anxious to take work of every sort, and to
spend himself for others. Therefore he soon became involved in labours
too exciting for a constitution already somewhat overtasked, nor was
he ever able to yield himself wholly to the healthful indolence of
private life. To a period of wasting thought and solitude succeeded
one of over-strenuous exertion; bracing indeed, but, for a man of his
sympathetic temperament and laborious past life, too absorbing and
engrossing. What, however, must always be remembered is, that Clough
was happy in his work, and happy in his home life. It would be easy,
were it necessary, to show from his poems how strong in him was the
sense of family feeling, how tenderly and delicately he appreciated the
family relations, how fond he was of children and young people, how
naturally he enjoyed domestic life. Nor can any one doubt that in work
itself he found full satisfaction, especially in such work as made him
helpful to others, and brought him into vivid human contact with his
fellow-workers. Both of these sources of satisfaction, home life and
congenial work, had hitherto been denied him. Now they were largely
given to him, and, had his strength been equal to the demands which
were made upon it, a long life of happiness and usefulness was clearly
open to him.

Besides the work of the office, the translation of Plutarch, begun in
America, absorbed a great part of his scanty leisure during five years
after his return from America. In the spring of 1856 he was appointed
secretary to a commission for examining the scientific military schools
on the Continent. He visited, in consequence, the great schools for
artillery and engineers in France, Prussia, and Austria. The travelling
lasted about three months, and besides being very interesting and
agreeable, it afforded him much occupation during a considerable time
afterwards. Another employment, which frequently fell to him, was
the examining of candidates in his own special subject of English
literature, sometimes for Woolwich, sometimes in his own office. But
the work in which he took the deepest interest was that of his friend
and relation, Miss Nightingale. He watched over every step in her
various undertakings, affording her assistance not merely with advice,
and little in his life gave him greater satisfaction than to be her
active and trusted friend.

We see that his life, though uneventful, was full of work, and we
can also understand why this period of his life produced no poetical
result. The conditions under which he could create were at this time
wholly wanting. He had not time or strength or leisure of mind to
spend on his natural gift of writing; and to his friends it must ever
be a source of sorrow that his natural vocation, what he himself felt
as such, was unfulfilled. He himself always looked forward to some
time when greater opportunity might be granted him, when the various
experiences of later life, the results of his later thought, might
‘assort themselves upon the brain,’ and be given out in some definite
form. In the meantime he _waited_, not impatiently or unwillingly, for
he was slow to draw conclusions, as he was also patient in hearing
the views of others, and ready in his appreciation of them. Yet his
mind did not fail to exercise a powerful influence upon others. All
who knew him well will bear witness to the strong impression left by
his character, and by the force and originality of his intellect. He
was not prompt to give out distinct opinions or answers to theoretical
questions, but he seldom failed to find a practical solution to any
immediate difficulty, whether mental or practical. His mind turned more
and more to action as its natural relief; and in his family circle his
gentle wisdom and patience and great tenderness of feeling caused him
to be constantly appealed to in all difficulties. It was indeed only in
the intimacy of daily life that the full charm and grace of his nature
was felt, the intense lovableness of it, the tender unselfishness,
and the manly courage with which he met the difficulties of life,
and helped others through them. His was a character not easy to
describe, whose charm was so personal that it seems to evaporate when
translated into words. He was a singular combination of enthusiasm and
calmness, of thoughtfulness and imagination, of speech and silence, of
seriousness and humour. Ordinarily somewhat slow of utterance, he often
seemed, as a friend said of him, ‘to be choked by his own fulness.’ His
own words in the ‘Bothie’ not unaptly described him--

  Author forgotten and silent of currentest phrases and fancies;
  Mute and exuberant by turns, a fountain at intervals playing;
  Mute and abstracted, or strong and abundant as rain in the tropics.

On special occasions he would pour out the accumulation of his mind,
but most often the stream remained hid, and only came to the surface
in his poetry, or in little incisive phrases, most apt to engrave
themselves sharply on the minds of his hearers. He had a strong sense
of humour, and was always ready to look on this side of the daily
incidents of life; and his friends will long remember his genial
smile, and his hearty, almost boyish, laugh. This brightness, and
the sunny sweetness of his temper, gave cheerfulness to what might
otherwise have been too serious a temperament, for though not specially
anxious in personal things, yet the habit of his mind, his high-wrought
conscientiousness and susceptibility of feeling, rendered him liable
to be deeply impressed by the sad things of the world, the great
difficulties especially of modern social life, which were in truth to
him ‘a heavy and a weary weight.’

It has been remarked that in his later poems there is no distinct
expression of the peace he had attained. It is true we find in them
rather a freedom from disturbance than a positive expression of belief.
But his peace was not the result of a crisis, of a sudden conversion,
which often pours itself out in words; it was the fruit of years of
patient thought and action, it was a temper of mind. He felt no impulse
to speak of it. He turned his mind to the practical questions of the
world, as appears in these later poems, which instantly began to flow
forth as soon as his brain was relieved from the constant pressure of
work.

With so much of inward peace, absolutely free from envy or jealousy,
not depressed by the want of outward success, given in so much larger
measure to many of his contemporaries, capable of looking at outward
things from a truly philosophic height, gifted with genuine humour, and
open in his soul to all kindly natural feelings, endowed with a rare
power of inspiring unclouded affection, he could not but enjoy a high
degree of happiness. It has been called a broken life. Broken indeed
it was, by death, too soon for the work he might have done, too soon
for any full comprehension of him by the public, or by any but his near
friends, too soon for those who loved him and depended on him. But not
too soon for the realisation of a great and manly character, for the
achievement in himself of the highest and purest peace; not too soon
to give to a few who really knew him the strongest sense of what he was
in himself. It was easiest to describe him by negatives, yet perhaps
no one ever made a more concrete positive impression on those who knew
him. As one of his friends said, ‘I always _felt_ his presence;’ and
truly he was above all a power, a warm supporting presence. His poems
tell us of his perplexities, his divided thoughts, his uncertainties;
those who remember him will think rather of his simple directness of
speech and action, the clearness of his judgment on any moot point;
above all, it is remarkable how unanimous all those who knew him are
in expressing their feeling of his entire nobleness, his utter purity
of character. It seems impossible to speak of him without using these
words.

But now this happy and peaceful though laborious life was approaching a
too early close. There was never to be any complete opportunity given
here for showing to the full what his best friends believed to be in
him, and what his poems partly reveal. Probably ever since very early
youth he had been subjected to a too severe moral and intellectual
strain. His health, though good, had never been strong, and after
1859 it began to cause anxiety to his family, when a series of small
illnesses and accidents combined to weaken his constitution. In the
summer of 1860, he also suffered the loss of his mother. After a
lingering illness of several years, she died of paralysis, a disease to
which several of the family had succumbed, and which was so soon after
to strike down her son.

His usual autumn holiday, this time spent chiefly in Scotland, failed
of its usual good effect in reviving him, and finding himself seriously
out of health, he obtained six months’ leave from the Council Office.
He then underwent several weeks’ treatment at Malvern, which appeared
to improve his health. Afterwards, in February 1861, he removed to
Freshwater, in the Isle of Wight, and here, though at first in a
suffering state, he soon improved and regained his spirits, and for the
last time really enjoyed his family life with his wife and children.
He was naturally fond of children, and to his own little ones he was a
most tender and devoted father; he never tired of strolling about with
them, carrying them on his back along the country lanes, and listening
to their just beginning talk. The pleasures of the country had always
had a strong hold upon him, and the opening spring in that sweet spot
brought many pleasant sights; many walks among daffodil and snowdrop
beds, and discoveries of ferns in sheltered nooks. He always rose
early, and was often seen strolling over the downs before breakfast.
At this time he returned to his old employment of translating Homer,
the only form of versification which he had not laid aside altogether
during his office work. This became now a great pleasure to him. At
this time too he wrote two or three of the miscellaneous poems. Here
also it was a source of great enjoyment to him to be near friends whom
he especially valued, and whose society gave him just the intellectual
stimulus he needed for enjoyment.

But this pleasant time came too soon to an end. Though himself
unwilling to move from a place where he felt happy, and where he had
experienced an improvement in his health, he was warned that the good
would soon be exhausted, and that the climate was too relaxing for
warmer weather. Further change of air, and still more change of scene,
were ordered, and in the middle of April he went alone to Greece and
Constantinople. Apparently he greatly enjoyed this journey, and no
sooner was he again at leisure and in solitude than the old fountain
of verse, so long dry within him, reopened afresh. During this journey
he wrote the first and perhaps the second of the Mari Magno stories.
In June he returned for a few weeks to England; he seemed unable to
bear any protracted absence, and to long for his home; yet he consented
to quit it again in July and go to Auvergne and the Pyrenees. There he
was fortunate enough to join, though but for a short time, his friends
Mr. and Mrs. Tennyson, whose companionship made his solitary wanderings
pleasant, and to it he owed probably more than pleasure, some of the
stimulus which produced the poems which were his last creations. While
travelling in Auvergne and the Pyrenees he composed all the remaining
Mari Magno tales, except the last, which was conceived and written
entirely during his last illness. In the south of France he remained
till the middle of September, when he went to Paris to join his wife.
Their three little children had been left in England; he had very much
wished to come home and see them before starting on a further journey,
but in the present state of his nerves it was considered desirable to
avoid any unnecessary emotion, and he unwillingly yielded this point.
He felt the privation very keenly, though he shrank from any words,
and he could hardly endure to hear about the children whom he had not
been allowed to revisit. In this way it unfortunately came to pass
that he never even saw his youngest child, a little girl who was born
after he left England the second time. In Paris he spent a few days
and then set out to travel through Switzerland to the Italian lakes,
intending to stay some time at Florence, and reach Rome before the
winter. He was then able to enjoy much, though he could bear but little
fatigue. They stopped at Dijon to see the beautiful Puits de Moyse and
the sculptures in the Museum by the same hand; and then crossed the
Jura from Salines to Pontarlier and Neufchâtel. Between Salines and
Pontarlier was then still a beautiful drive in the diligence over low
grassy hills crowned with pine woods. At Pontarlier they rejoined the
railway; a striking line, seen as they saw it by moonlight, a ‘chemin
très accidenté,’ keeping half-way up the hill-side, equally steep
whether looking up or down, and continually darting in and out through
numerous tunnels. After this came three pleasant vetturino days over
the Simplon, one spent in the long drive up the Valais, monotonous
but pleasant, with occasional walks and halts to gather the deep blue
gentians and mountain pinks on the wayside. The next day, on which they
crossed the pass, a sudden deep snow came on, unusual so early in the
year as September; many little avalanches fell, and it was with some
difficulty they reached the crest. Then on descending the slope of the
great alpine wall, into the country of the sun, everything changed
suddenly, the snow disappeared, and all seemed bursting into rich
vegetation. Arthur enjoyed this part of the journey excessively; first
the beautiful Pass of Gondo, full of waterfalls and cascades, then the
descent lower down on Domo d’Ossola, among walnut and chestnut trees.
The sense of southern beauty and richness seemed to penetrate him with
enjoyment. The third day’s drive to Stresa on Lago Maggiore was also
full of pleasure. At Stresa they rested a few days and made expeditions
to Isola Bella, Orta, and Magadino; but here he became slightly unwell,
and hurried on to Milan, thinking it would be more bracing. He did
apparently improve, and took pleasure in visiting the pictures and
churches, but never recovered himself; and they continued their painful
journey, during which he grew gradually worse, to Florence, where they
expected to meet friends, and where they found good medical help. Some
days were better than others, and at Parma he spent a few hours among
the pictures of Correggio with great enjoyment. The last day before
entering Florence they had a drive of several hours over the Apennines,
coming down on Pistoia. It was a lovely sunny day; the hills were
covered with young chestnuts and flowering arbutus; the air was fresh
and soothing, and he seemed to revive on the heights, but looked with
dread on the valley lying beneath, with its white towns shining hot in
the sun.

They reached Florence early in the day of October 10. That afternoon
Arthur went to the Boboli Gardens, and to look at the grand arches of
Orcagna in the Piazza del Granduca. The next day too he attempted to
walk as far as the Cathedral and the Baptistery, which were close to
the hotel. But on the 12th, when a permanent lodging had been found, he
went to bed, unable longer to resist the fever. He had suffered much
rheumatic pain in the head, but it very soon gave way to treatment,
and after this he did not suffer much. The fever, a sort of malaria,
had its course, and appeared to give way. During the first three weeks
he seemed perpetually occupied with a poem he was writing, the last in
the volume of his poems; and when he began apparently to recover, and
was able to sit up for several hours in the day, he insisted on trying
to write it out, and when this proved too great an effort he begged
to dictate it. But he broke down before it was finished, and returned
to bed never to leave it again. A few days before his death he begged
for a pencil and contrived to write down two verses, and quite to the
end his thoughts kept hold of his poem. Fortunately it had all been
completed and written out in pencil in the first stage of his illness,
and was found after his death in his notebook. It seemed a comfort
to him to have his mind preoccupied and relieved from the weight of
illness and anxiety by this creative instinct.

The fever left him worn out, and then paralysis, with which he had been
threatened, struck him down. On the 13th of November he died, in his
forty-third year.

Three days before his death his sister reached him from England. He
knew her, and was glad to see her near him, but he was too weak to
realise the parting that was coming.

He lies buried in the little Protestant cemetery, just outside the
walls of Florence, looking towards Fiesole and the hills which he loved
and which he had gazed on as he entered Florence, little thinking he
should leave it no more. ‘Tall cypresses wave over the graves, and the
beautiful hills keep guard around;’ nowhere could there be a lovelier
resting-place.

The memory of Arthur Clough will be safe in the hearts of his friends.
Few beyond his friends have known him at all; his writings may not
reach beyond a small circle; but those who have received his image into
their hearts know that something has been given them which no time can
take away, and to them we think no words will seem fitter than those of
the poet, happily also his friend, which have cherished the memory of
another beautiful soul:--

  So, dearest, now thy brows are cold,
    We see thee as thou art, and know
    Thy likeness to the wise below,
  Thy kindred with the great of old.




LETTERS.

FROM 1829 TO 1836.

RUGBY.


_To his Sister._

  Chester: May 15, 1829.

DEAR ANNE,--I received your kind letter by the barque ‘Melantho,’
after an extremely long voyage. Charles received one on the same day
from uncle Charles, intimating that we were to spend our vacation at
Easter with him at the vicarage. During the Easter holidays, which we
spent very pleasantly at Mold, I had plenty of leisure for drawing.
Two men were hung here lately for robbing an old clergyman. We have
bought a book entitled ‘The Newtonian System of Philosophy,’ which
treats chiefly of the power and weight of air; the cause of volcanoes,
earthquakes, and other phenomena of nature, such as lightning, the
aurora borealis; also a description of the sun, planets, their moons or
satellites, constellations, comets, and other heavenly bodies; likewise
of air-guns, balloons, air-pumps; also a very pleasing one of snow,
hail, and vapours. It also describes electricity and magnetism, and
gives a brief account of minerals, vegetables, and animals.

The summer vacation is now just approaching, after which time we shall
be conducted either by uncle Alfred or uncle Charles to Rugby, which is
not far from Leamington, at which place cousin Eliza is at school.

Were you not grieved to hear that magnificent building York Minster
had been partly destroyed through the destructive means of fire?


_To his Mother._

  Rugby: May 15, 1830.

DEAR MAMMA,--I am glad to tell you that both Charles and myself have
been removed out of the third form into the lower fourth; we enjoyed
uncle Alfred’s company (he was steward to the Easter Meeting at Rugby)
and also the speeches and holidays very much. There were four prizes.
There was also a prize for boys in the fifth form, which was gained by
Stanley for an English essay ‘On Sicily and its Revolutions.’ These
were all recited by their different writers on Wednesday in Easter
week. After the four first had repeated their poems and read their
essays, Stanley came forth and read his essay. Unfortunately the prizes
had not arrived, and therefore Dr. Arnold was obliged to postpone the
delivery of them. One morning, however, at prayers, we saw a great many
books in extremely handsome bindings; and after prayers, Dr. Arnold
gave them to those for whom they were intended.


  School House, Rugby: May 28, 1833.

... I have gained one place in the form by this examination, and I
shall certainly be in the sixth form next half-year. I am now seventh,
and ten at least of the Præposters leave either now or at Lawrence
Sheriffe.[3]


_To his Brother George._

  School House, Rugby: October 13, 1834.

MY DEAR GEORGY,--You say you do not like your school even so well as
you did last year. I believe that it is worse than many places, but
even here at Rugby, the best of all public schools, which are the best
kind of schools, even here there is a vast deal of bad. It was but a
few nights ago that a little fellow, not more than thirteen at the very
most, was quite drunk, and that for the second time in the last year.
I do not know that there is here much of the low mean spirit (which I
fear you have so much of), but it must be remembered that Rugby is far
better off in this way than most schools.


_To his Mother._

  Jesus College, Oxford: July 9, 1835.

The exhibitioners this year are Lake, Penrose, and Gell. We had an
extremely pleasant time up at Rugby at the examination, as the Oxford
vacation was just beginning, and we had six or seven old Rugbeians
down, and in so busy and exciting a time their company was a great
relief. I had not been very well after Easter all along, but I believe
that time did more to make me well than all the physic, which has
lengthened the doctor’s bill to a most boa-constrictor-like size. I
have been in one continued state of excitement for at least the last
three years, and now comes the time of exhaustion. When you all come
over next year, and I get home at last, I do think this will end.

I must send you our ‘Rugby Magazine,’ which I beg you will patronise
with all your might, though I suppose your canvassing materials in
America are rather small.


_To his Brother George._

  School House, Rugby: September 13, 1835.

... Only remember--don’t be indolent, George; you recollect what I
told you about that family failing. Idle, I do not think you will be;
but take care you never say, ‘It is too much trouble,’ ‘I can’t be
bothered,’ which are tolerably old favourites of yours, and, indeed,
of all who have any Perfect blood in them.

... No doubt you will feel very much the loss of any one to talk to
about religion, but let this, my dear George, only make you keep more
close to God; and I still--for I know that our weakness does often
want more direct and visible aid than this, and that our minds are too
imperfectly brought to righteousness and goodness to be continually
talking even with our kind Father God, just as you would wish to talk
to those of your own age sometimes, and not always to those above you
only, however much you might love them--if you do still want some one
to talk to, you have only to write to me, and I shall be sure to answer
you within a week or two. Remember, too, that if the school is bad, it
is no reason, no excuse for you to do as they do. Remember, they are
not many, and Jesus said that a little leaven leavens the whole lump:
now, do not think that I am telling you to put yourself forward as a
kind of apostle or missionary to them. Only go on without fearing or
shrinking in any point from your duty; do not mind their knowing that
you are trying to serve God.

The magazine prospers; it will probably be out on the 1st October.
‘Egmont’ will appear, and one or two other things of mine. I assure you
I have enough to do. I sometimes think of giving up fagging hard here,
and doing all my extra work in the holidays, so as to have my time here
free for these two objects--1st. The improvement of the school; 2nd.
The publication and telling abroad of the merits of the school by means
of the magazine.


_To the same._

  School House, Rugby: October 11, 1835.

Simpkinson left me last Monday for Cambridge, and his absence has made
me head of the school house, which is an office of considerable trust
and great difficulty. Indeed, you could not do better than try to win
the liking and esteem of your schoolfellows by being as kind to them
as you can. I hope I am trying earnestly to do the same. But there is
one danger in this occupation which assails _me_, at least, very often;
and that is, the danger of carrying our wish too far. And remember
always, that to be liked is not the thing we should wish for on its
own account, but only because it will make it more easy for us to do
good to those who like us. Try, my dear George, to be as active in this
good work as you can be; only take care that you have a few moments to
yourself with God every day, so that you do not forget Him in your more
active employments; if you do these two things I do not think you will
be likely to fall into any more _stupors_, as you call those states of
mind, which I very well know and have often experienced. As soon as you
feel anything of the kind coming on, go and do something, no matter
what, which will employ you actively. Perhaps, if you do some kindness
to a schoolfellow, or resist him in some evil practice, you will feel
this go down very rapidly. You never told us how your school-work is
getting on; do you do any Euclid now? I have not heard from America
lately; the last letter I had was from my father, dated at Saratoga.
Tell me when you write all about No. II. of the ‘Rugby Magazine.’
It is very much liked here, better than the first, and we have had
intelligence of its being thought very well of in the literary circles
in London. I only hope it will not decay under my hands; for I have got
the management of it almost entirely by myself.


_To his Sister._

  School House, Rugby: October 10, 1835.

My oldest and only friend, Simpkinson, is just gone to Cambridge, and
there are also two or three more gone whom I knew and loved better
than the rest; so that I am now quite alone, and am doomed so to remain
for two long years.

I see, however, quite plainly that this is far better for me, for
now I shall not fag so much, as being of necessity thrown much more
with other fellows, and wishing now most earnestly to know as many
as possible; for there is a deal of evil springing up in the school,
and it is to be feared that the tares will choke much of the wheat.
There is a great deal of good in the top of the school, but then it
is what may be called disagreeable good, having much evil mixed with
it; especially in little matters. So that from these persons good is
disliked. I am trying, if possible, to show them that good is not
necessarily disagreeable, and that a Christian may be, and is likely to
be, a gentleman.


  Monday, October 12.

The nights (that is, after locking-up time) are getting very long,
beginning as they do now from a quarter-past six; so that I have a
great deal of time in my study, and am almost more by myself than I
wish. Sometimes, when I am thus alone, I long very much indeed to have
you all over here; for before Simpkinson left, Rugby was almost like
a home to me, and now I feel the want of a home far more than I ever
did before; so that I cannot tell you how welcome next summer will be
to me. Even the holidays without you seem a thing to be looked forward
to very much, which they never did before, except last half-year, when
I was unable to work. I am very tolerably well now, and think I have
recovered altogether, though I verily believe I shall not be able
ever again to fag so much; indeed, I shall never wish to do so in the
same way. You will understand a good deal of the way in which fagging
hard is so frequently ruinous both to body and mind, from an article
in the ‘Rugby Magazine,’ No. III., which I hope you will like as much
as the people on this side the Atlantic (I mean the article entitled
‘A Schoolboy’s Story’); I think you will see a good deal in that to
explain it.

By this time, I suppose, you are back in Charleston, and ere long I
shall have heard the full account of your trip to Lake George. I had a
great deal of pleasant travelling myself in the summer, particularly in
that part of my journey which took me from Oxford through Cheltenham
and Shrewsbury, to Beaumaris. I met a very curious animal in the
coffee-room at the Shrewsbury inn, a German merchant’s son from Bremen.
He was very ignorant and very intelligent, so that he was also very
amusing. At one time he made me think him half an idiot, at another he
seemed quite clever. Probably he had never been out of a counting-house
in his life before; at any rate, his observation must have been very
limited, for I went to show him Lord Hill’s column, and as we were
walking up to it he said, ‘Well, that is very beautiful, very big,’ and
a moment or two after, ‘and it gets bigger as we come nearer!’


_To J. P. Gell, Esq._

  School House, Rugby: October 24, 1835.

I do wish that I could be acquainted and intimate with a great many
fellows, but I really have not time; and here is another advantage
on the side of evil, that bad characters are also idle, whereas good
characters are industrious, so that when a fellow wants a companion he
is much more likely to pitch on a bad than on a good one. I am afraid
that writing or thinking much about these things does me harm. I only
wish you would write to me about it, for your letters always put me
more on my legs. Do you remember what Arnold says (Sermons, vol. iii.
Introduction) about the enduring value of the ancient philosophical
and historical works? Well, I really think that letters from fellows
who have left act much in the same way, keeping one’s mind ‘fresh and
comprehensive.’ So spare not pen and paper when you can spare time.


_To the same._

  School House, Rugby: November 9, 1835.

... I have to take care lest the excitement should carry me away;
for though assuredly there is no Simpkinson here, nor Vaughan, nor
Burbidge, yet it is most easy to find excitement, on the one hand,
fagging, and on the other, in associating with fellows for their good,
which is a more dangerous employment than I looked for; there is such
an excess of acquaintance and such a lack of friends here; nobody to
look up to in one’s common school-dealings, and so much to look up to
at times in Arnold, that it is no easy matter to ‘keep a level temper,’
as young ---- used to say. Sometimes all seems so very bright, the
little good one has done seems so great, and the good one hopes to
do so certain, that one gets quite elevated; then there soon follows
the exhaustion, and I think it is no use trying; and in the meantime
copies, &c., have been accumulating and I am obliged to set to, though
the true cure of such a state is forcing oneself to try even against
hope. Besides, there are all the letters from Oxford and Cambridge,
than which more exciting things were never created.

I don’t know which to think the greatest, the blessing of being under
Arnold, or the curse of being without a home.


_To his Mother._

  Finch House, near Liverpool: December 1835.

To-day is Monday, and during the last eight or nine days I have had as
many changes of place and companions as I ever remember, and have had a
right busy and exciting time of it. On Friday evening before last our
great examination closed, and I was not a little disappointed, thinking
that I ought to have done better. Then on Saturday one of my Oxford
friends came down (Lake), and this of course made a great change, and
raised my spirits as high as before they had been low. In the evening
the class-paper came out and I found I had got all I had hoped for, and
also that I was head of the form in composition marks, thus securing
two prizes; then I dined at Arnold’s, and had a very pleasant evening.
Then followed all the misery of the last night--noise, noise, noise
of preparing, and wishing good-bye, &c., till twelve o’clock and
after; followed at two o’clock by the still greater noise of going.
After my two hours’ sleep, I had a busy morning of breakfasting with
my tutor, of paying off window-bills, &c. &c., packing up, &c. &c.;
and so on till twelve o’clock, when I dined out, and returned to the
school at three o’clock calling-over, wished the fellows good-bye,
and waited for the coach till four in the school field. In a short
time your old friend the Oxford and Leicester Regulator--vulgarly
termed the Pig--transported me to Leicester, and here I found myself
in a completely new world, at a house I was strange to, with my old
schoolfellow Burbidge correcting the proofs of No. III. of the ‘Rugby
Magazine.’ Next day at 10 P.M. we were joined for an hour by two more
Cantabrigians (Vaughan and Gell), which was very delightful indeed.
Well, not to trouble you with a further account of what we did at
Leicester, on Friday night after walking for two and a half hours along
Leicester streets (for the coach should have started at half-past ten
and did not till one o’clock), I began a long journey to Liverpool.
After one of the coldest and bitterest nights I ever remember, and a
day not much less so, I found myself about 3 P.M. at the end of the
lane by the fifth milestone. I must go a little further and tell you
what we are going to do these holidays. George is now in Chester; he
is going to Mold on Thursday, the 24th inst., where I shall join him
the same day. Hence after a few days we shall proceed to Min-y-don[4]
for ten days, and thence again he will return here, and I shall
probably go to Chester.

I suppose we shall have a regular rambling time of it, which I dare say
will be pleasant enough in its way; but I cannot tell you how very,
very much I long for next summer, even on this ground only, that then
we shall have done with this way of living. I am quite well now, and
shall be, I hope. I have not been so hard at work this last half-year,
and that may have something to do with it. But I think it is a good
deal owing to my having to go about with other fellows more than I used
to do, and this will be the case for sometime now. I have, however, to
look forward to a very busy half-year; but as it will not be my last
half-year, I need not be very anxious about it or excited in it. I
shall have another Easter and another Exhibition time after this; but I
must do my best to be ready for next November, when I shall go up for
the Balliol scholarship. At any rate, my dear mother, it is no long
time now before July comes, and time passes very quickly, at least I
find it does to me now. It seems now that there is nothing wanting to
make my earthly happiness complete, so far as it can be complete, that
will not be given me next summer, though indeed even now I can see some
flaws in it. But there will be so many and such friends at Cambridge
and Oxford, and so happy a situation at school where I know that I am
loved by many, and where I am ever living under and gathering wisdom
from a great and good man. Such a prospect makes one tremble, for it
seems to be too fair for earth: at least it makes one resolve to do all
to fix one’s affections on things above, lest God should see that such
fortune was too great for one, and that one could not bear it.


_To his Sister._

  Mold Vicarage: December 30, 1835.

I have some difficulty in prevailing on George to do what he does not
like (_i.e._ read) for an hour and a half in the day. But I hope and
believe he is much better at school than he is in the holidays: indeed
I think it is very natural he should be so. And it is wonderful what a
degree of kind and affectionate feeling he has; only fancy, for six or
seven years he has been treasuring up his money in the savings’ bank,
and now it is all spent to buy me a watch. On Christmas day I found a
little paper box on my plate at breakfast, and on opening it first came
a quantity of brown paper, then a note, then the ribbon, and at the
bottom a gold watch.

The examination went off very well for me last half-year. In regular
work four first-classes, in composition, divinity, classics and
history; I might have got two more in modern languages and mathematics.
In extras I got two first-classes, which was all I tried for, and which
will give me a prize. I shall also get a prize for being among the four
first in the composition of the half-year in the sixth; which means
the Latin, prose and verse; Greek, prose and verse; English, prose and
verse, which we have done in the half-year.


_To J. N. Simpkinson, Esq._

  Stanley Street, Chester: January 18, 1836.

I am most utterly busy now at Niebuhr for November, which time is
very much in my thoughts. The bare idea of missing is horrible, and
I have not done a page for the magazine as yet, though I have great
hopes of writing a good deal. As to Q., you know he invited me to his
house this winter, so I suppose he has taken a great fancy to me.
He is disagreeable sometimes, and is rather narrow-minded, or rather
narrow-notioned; and having said so much ‘con,’ I might say a great
many ‘pros,’ but it is this very narrowness of ideas which prevents one
loving him. Such people have no idea that it is anything approaching
to a duty to make oneself agreeable; they have a great deal too much
of the itch to become martyrs and undergo persecution. Even two or
three years under Arnold have not wholly eradicated this notion in Q.
himself; but if he goes, as I believe he does, to Balliol, he will, I
trust, soon lose it, as I think he is sure to be admitted into the High
Arnold set that is just germinating at Balliol under the auspices of
Stanley and Lake.... You know how differently a boy regards home when
he has once been to school. The kind of passive and almost apathetic
feeling (to indulge in a bull) which he before had becomes high, steady
and active feeling and principle. I will not say that my feelings
towards him are so personal as they are to some others, because they
are so closely connected with Arnold, but I am very much attached
to him.... I verily believe my whole being is soaked through with
the wishing and hoping and striving to do the school good, or rather
to keep it up and hinder it from falling in this, I do think, very
critical time, so that all my cares and affections and conversations,
thoughts, words and deeds, look to that involuntarily. I am afraid you
will be inclined to think this ‘cant,’ and I am conscious that even
one’s truest feelings, if very frequently put out in the light, do
make a bad and disagreeable appearance; but this however is true, and
even if I am carrying it too far, I do not think it has made me really
forgetful of my personal friends, such as, in particular, Gell and
Burbidge and Walrond, and yourself, my dear Simpkinson.


_To the same._

  School House, Rugby: February 13, 1836.

... I am sure this constant writing of letters is not really a waste
of time. Everyone of us has much he needs to receive, and there are
few who have nothing to give; and I, for one, cannot speak too highly
of the good I have got from others in this way; it is such a constant
correction of each other’s wild and foolish tendencies of mind,
opinion, &c. I wish I could have come to Cambridge very much; but I
do not agree at all in your second reason, viz. that it would make me
discontented with the Balliol prospect. If I do get the scholarship, I
shall not long one bit for Cambridge; no, nor do I think I shall do so
if I don’t get it. It is the very thing for which you uphold Cambridge
which makes me prefer Oxford. At Oxford we only form part of a large
set, and there is more hope there that a little leaven will leaven
the whole lump, which is, I think, more useful than your scheme. To
be sure, there will only be Stanley, Lake, Fox, Arnold, and myself;
but then there are a great number of very nice men, with whom, I hope,
we shall get more acquent, and this will be better. Do not think I
underrate the blessing of Rugby friends; I am only anxious to give
others that blessing. I have a great deal more to say, but I must go to
the _De Coronâ_, _i.e._ first lesson, so good-night.

Combe’s[5] shop is delicious. So is the new Irish Title Bill--_auctore_
Lord John Russell--at least I am told so. So also is the fact that,
_malgré_ scandal, libels and lies, ‘Morning Herald,’ ‘Times,’ and ‘John
Bull,’ the school is above 300. So also, I doubt not, will be the
reading of ‘Knight’s Quarterly,’ which I have just got. So also (this
is indeed a climax) will be Easter.


_To his Mother._

  School House, Rugby: March 1836.

... At last the prizes are over, and the last half-sheet of the
Magazine, No. IV., is also sent off, I believe; and you can hardly
fancy the feeling of this freedom, most unusual indeed to me. As for
the prizes, I have this Easter got one, the Latin verse; and a second
for each of the others, viz. the Latin prose and the Greek verse, so
that I shall still have two to try for next year; so that, of course,
I am very well satisfied. I have been very well, too, on the whole;
indeed I may say exceedingly well, not withstanding all the hard work,
and happy too, though sometimes in rather low spirits, for I stand much
alone in the school now, and I am afraid it is anything but good for me
to be alone; but I hope I am conquering these fits, and I do not think
they come nearly so frequently or so strongly as they used to do; and
when you are come over and settled, I think they may cease altogether;
if they do not, it will not be my own fault.

Dr. Arnold, I am afraid, you know too little about yet to give him and
his concerns much interest for you. Only if any rumours of ill-conduct
as head-master here have crossed the Atlantic (I believe they have
got a great way through the ‘Times’ and ‘John Bull’ newspapers), I
might as well tell you that the Trustees of the School met last week
in London, all being present except three of the twelve, and wrote a
letter to the Doctor, saying that they had the most complete confidence
in him; that the school was going on as well as could be expected, and
that the discipline was perfectly humane. Lord Aylesford, one of the
absentees, wrote still more complimentarily to him. It is, indeed, a
marvel how any one could think of circulating such utter falsehoods and
absurdities as have been spread about by different papers for the last
three months. The school is certainly at this moment not at its very
highest state of excellence, such as it was in two or three years ago,
but there is a very great deal of goodness and talent springing up, I
hope and believe.

From some cause or other, immense numbers left last Midsummer, and will
again this coming one; and the sudden elevation this causes of a large
number into the place of trust and authority renders the spirit of the
highest class more childish and less sensible and manly than it used to
be. These are things which no one can calculate on, though of the most
material consequence to the well-being of the school, and only show
the extreme difficulty of education. Only fancy, out of the thirty-two
first in the school I suppose just half (if not more) will go; and thus
a full half of the sixth will be new and quite inexperienced, many
of them quite young. Perhaps I let these things grow too much into
everything else. Yet it is very fine and striking to see many of the
best and cleverest Oxford and Cambridge men still watching with great
interest all the little changes in the school, and still helping those
that remain with their experience and wisdom.

I shall not be sorry to go to Oxford now, for I find Stanley and Lake
like it very much; and I dare say Dr. Arnold will be a bishop before
long. I only hope it may not be just yet. I must, however, do my best
to go there as I wish, viz. with a Balliol scholarship; and that not
only for the honour’s sake, though the honour is the greatest part of
it, but for the 30_l._ per annum which, with an exhibition, will, I
trust, all but pay my way at Oxford, as Balliol is 20_l._ or 30_l._
cheaper than any other college, I understand. What may come after this
I know not; this is enough to look to as yet. And I mean, if possible,
to have a quiet month for reading at Finch House before you come over.

Our Easter time is just beginning. Two of our University people are
down already, Burbidge and Lake, and Gell and Simpkinson are to be here
next Wednesday. From that day to its namesake of the first week after
Easter, I suppose there will be little or nothing done but walking and
talking.


_To J. N. Simpkinson, Esq._

  Rugby: 1836.

You must not be angry at my turning back from the turnpike. I don’t
understand Arnold’s saying what he did to Vaughan, for surely, at that
rate, C. or S. (I don’t mean to be invidious on either university)
might, if they ever came here, take fellows over by wholesale, without
asking leave, for of course they are in the same position, relatively
to schoolboys, as you or Vaughan. And I was thinking of a good deal of
mischief that D. and others had done at Easter among the fellows by
taking advantage of their being ‘gentlemen at large,’ so that on the
whole you may see that I had something more like reason, at any rate,
than mere scrupulousness about the letter of the law; though, indeed,
the letter of the law is a very good thing, as the spirit is apt to
vary with the interpreters, but what is written is written. I assure
you I should have liked nothing better than to have gone with you to
Dunchurch, and I reproached myself very much for not having asked
Arnold, as I had meant to do, at first lesson.

Do you know that to-morrow the most liberal, or rather radical, measure
is to be brought forward, of throwing open the Island to the fags? I
am not quite so liberal as to vote for that, but I am afraid it will
succeed. The reason of the attempt to open it is the establishment of
these new gymnastic affairs--swings, vaulting-poles, and all kinds of
monkey-trick instruments, which excite a great desire in the fags for
this privilege.


_To the same._

  Liverpool: July 16, 1836.

Do you know I believe I am become quite a convert to the Cambridge
set’s superiority, though, after all, Cambridge can never be equal to
Oxford in the grandness of the idea of it? One may fancy Cambridge a
very excellent and useful big place of education, but Oxford is the
place for the education of statesmen and great political men; and the
influences of Oxford and its place in relation to the commonwealth
is far higher for good or for evil. Suppose Oxford became truly good
and truly wise, would it not be far more important, and a far greater
blessing than Cambridge in the same condition? And in this consists
the superiority I used to stick up for of the Balliol set, because I
believed them truly wise, and withal full of the Oxford public and
political and national feeling. But to live in, and among, and as mere
society, you are doubtless better and more delightful.


  August 8.

What a delightful thing it must be, being so near Fox How! I cannot,
indeed, conceive any one calling ‘the Dr.’ Tom, even at Fox How.


  Rugby: September 23, 1836.

We are all getting on very pleasantly this half-year, and the school
looks remarkably harmless, and everybody inclined to do their best
and behave well, which is very delicious. We are not, however, by any
means full--not more than 286, which will probably be raised to the
full complement next half. Of course, we have quite a new sixth,
and certainly an improvement. The night-fagging is at last abolished
totally, except half an hour at the beginning. We have our supper in
the most gentlemanly fashion, in the room together, on a tray with
plates and knives, and we buy very good cheeses ourselves, and make
a very sociable meal of it. And at last the dream of former days is
becoming a reality: the Sixth Form Room is to be furnished; Arnold
gives us 5_l._, and the Trustees advance the rest, except a small
sum raised by immediate subscription. Also, at last, the new window
is put up, and looks, I think, very beautiful, I am very happy and
comfortable, and working pretty well.




LETTERS.

FROM 1836 TO 1849.

OXFORD.


_To his Father._

  Oxford: November 26, 1836.

I have just come out from Balliol, of which college I am now a scholar.
The examination concluded this morning about twelve o’clock, and it
has just been given out I have got the head one, which also includes
an exhibition added to it to make it more valuable, as of themselves
the scholarships are not worth much. We have had a long and laborious
examination, but I am quite well, and not much tired, at least I do
not feel so at present. I stay up here till next Wednesday, as the
inauguration is on Tuesday evening.


_To J. N. Simpkinson, Esq._

  Rugby: December 9, 1836.

I am sitting in Arnold’s drawing-room, of all places in the world,
for my nine days at Oxford have so tired me, that after vainly trying
yesterday to return to regular work, to-day I have resolved to stay
out and rest myself; and as there are to be, I believe, half a score
fellows in the sick-room, Mrs. Arnold kindly took me in here. The
examination was on the whole, I think, neither very favourable nor yet
unfavourable to me, and it pleased God that I should be in health and
strength and good spirits, and not much excited during the days of the
work. I could not but feel, from what I heard and saw, that I had a
very good chance among them, and that in one or two things I had the
advantage.


_To his Sister._

  Balliol College: October 15, 1837.

Behold, I am in Oxford, safe and sound, capped and gowned: have
attended chapel twice, once with and once without surplice; have been
to Hall (signifying dinner in Hall); also twice to a wine party; also
to call on the Master, and to the University Sermon this morning; so
that by to-morrow evening, when, I hope, my books will be arrived and
arranged on my shelves, and when also, I trust, I shall be furnished
with a kettle and set of tea-things (for as yet I have been dependent
on the bountiful hospitality of my friends), I shall be pretty
completely settled. I came up with Stanley and with two other Rugbeians
on Friday evening, and got established in my rooms that night. They
consist of one small and one smaller room, both, however, considerably
larger than my study at Rugby, in the attics of No. 4 Staircase, Outer
Quadrangle.


_To J. P. Gell, Esq._

  Hope Street, Liverpool: January 15, 1838.

Did the intelligence arrive in your parts of Arnold’s wonderful victory
in the Senate of London University? _i.e._ the introduction of an
examination in the Gospels and Acts into the Degree Examination, which
must seem a strange novelty in that godless place. It must have been a
very grand thing to see him get up among all those people and declare
that they must do something to show that they were Christians and that
it was a Christian University. I do not know what would become of the
various shades of Whigs now existing in the University if Hawkins were
to be made a Bishop. These people, however, have done a vast deal of
good at Oxford, where anything so ‘ungentlemanly’ and ‘coarse’ and in
such bad taste as Evangelicalism would never be able to make very much
way. It seems just the sort of religious activity and zeal which one
would expect to develop itself in an age of activity and shaking up in
such a place as the University of Oxford.

I am great friends with Brodie, and still more so, I think, with Ward,
whom I like very much. I have seen more of him and of Lake than of any
one else.


_To the same._

  Oxford, Balliol College: April 8, 1838.

Do you not envy me my idleness? you, who, I suppose, are in the
miseries of entering the Trinity College Examination. I have got
through all my trouble, and am now fully at liberty to lie in bed, go
to the newsroom, read reviews and novels, learn to skiff, and finally
to insult you and Simpkinson.

It is supposed that but for this Hertford, which has turned out so ill
for us, all knowledge of Latin in the University of Oxford would have
been by this time quite extinct, except as surviving in College graces
and University oaths; those also not understood.

I wish that you were at Oxford; it is, I am sure, so much better a
place than Cambridge, and you would have the great advantage of a good
chance of becoming a disciple of ὁ μἑγας Νἑανδροϛ, whom I like much
better than I did, and admire in many points exceedingly.


_To the same._

  Balliol: May 8, 1838.

One thing, I suppose, is clear--that one must leave the discussion of
Τἁ Νεανδρωπικἁ, κ.τ.λ., all snug and quiet for after one’s degree.
And it is no harm, but rather good, to give oneself up a little to
learning Oxford people, and admiring their good points, which lie, I
suppose, principally in all they hold in opposition to the Evangelical
portion of society--the benefit and beauty and necessity of forms--the
ugliness of feelings put on unnaturally soon, and consequently kept
up by artificial means, ever strained and never sober. I should think
very likely, too, their anti-Calvinistic views of justification were,
if not just, at least very useful to lead us to the truth. I should
be very sorry ever to be brought to believe their further views
of matter acting on morals as a charm of sacramentalism, and the
succession-notion so closely connected with it. All this and their
way of reading and considering Scripture--such a contrast to the
German fashions--rests, I suppose, entirely on their belief in the
infallibility of the Church down to a certain period, to which they are
led by a strong sense of the necessity of some infallible authority
united with a feeling of the insufficiency of the New Testament.
Indeed, I think a good deal of what they say as to this latter point is
stronger than anything I ever heard against it. Newman is now giving
lectures on the Mystical Power of the Sacraments, and seems to have
stated the objection to it Scripturally in a very fair and candid
manner. If I had said a quarter of this to ----, he would have set me
down at once for a thorough-going convert ad Newmanismum. But you will
not be so rash; and you remember that you asked me to write about it.

It is very striking that there is a German divine among the large
assortment living and thinking here, who has come to a mystical view
which is no less difficult than Newman’s, though not in form the same.
Olshausen is his name. His notion is of a mysterious union of our
bodies with our Lord’s, though not by the bread and wine.


_To the same._

  Rugby: September 1838.

Arnold is coming with Bunsen to Cambridge next Christmas holidays;
about the time, I suppose, of your going up for your degree. He is
quite well again, being restored by Bunsen’s visit. I think, for
myself, I would give two years of my life to come to have back the last
one I spent at Rugby. Many of the big, unruly fellows who are troubling
the school so much now, and were in my time only showing the beginnings
of their badnesses, quite haunt me at times; but that cannot be helped,
so one can only hope earnestly for Theodore, who seems indeed very
brave and manly. One sees very little of Arnold here, and indeed to
talk with him almost nothing.


  Balliol: November 18, 1838.

You must know when you modestly requested me to answer your letter by
return of post, that I was then in the midst of preparations for my
little-go, which fiery ordeal I have passed through now nearly three
weeks. Also that Congreve and I have come to the conclusion that time
in fee simple does not exist in Oxford, but only on credit, and that
with heavy interest.

Stanley was as much delighted as you were with Whately, and was greatly
rejoiced too at finding you so unusually (for a Cambridge man) like
an Oxford man. There is, I suppose, no doubt much more interest in
such matters (theological, ecclesiastical, political, &c.) here, than
with you; though the society ---- sees is much the most _inquiring_,
at any rate, on them, than any in Oxford, and it is not a very large
set. The Newmanistic undergraduates mostly shut their ears and call it
blasphemy, but not quite universally, and of course they, though they
will not listen to anything else, have a scheme of church government,
&c., which they uphold, not to say anything about understanding or
appreciating it.

If you were to come here (as I hope you will after your degree is done
with), you would at once have Ward at you, asking you your opinions
on every possible subject of this kind you can enumerate; beginning
with Covent Garden and Macready, and certainly not ending till you
got to the question of the moral sense and deontology. I don’t quite
like hearing so much of these matters as I do, but I suppose if one
can only keep steadily to one’s work (which I wish I did), and quite
resolve to forget all the words one has heard, and to theorise only for
amusement, there is no harm in it. Hawkins, Provost of Oriel, in a very
good University Sermon last Sunday, on the _Duty_ of Private Judgment
as opposed to the Right, seemed to say that undergraduates were to mind
their Latin and Greek and nothing else; or nearly so. And many people
here speak of the Union as an institution of very doubtful usefulness.


_To the same._

  Oxford: 1838.

We have been up here just a month and a day, enjoying for the last week
of it most glorious weather, greatly to the increase of hunting and
boating, and to the decrease of reading. Among other incidents I have
had the pleasure of twice meeting the heresiarch αὐτότατος, namely,
John Henry Newman, once at a dinner party, and once at a small and
select breakfast. I was introduced, and had the honour of drinking wine
with him; on the strength of all which of course, as is one’s bounden
duty, I must turn Newmanist. As a first step in which process, I should
rebuke you for the heresy of your last letter, dated (more shame to
me) Nov. 22. I hoped very much you would come here after your degree
was done, but if you continue to rest on Milton’s Christian Doctrines
for one leg, and Calvin’s Institutes for the other, I recommend you
to walk away on them as fast as you can from this seat and citadel
of orthodoxy. It is difficult here even to obtain assent to Milton’s
greatness as a poet; quite impossible, I should think, if you are
unable to say that you ‘do not know anything about his prose writings.’
Also you must be ready to give up that ‘irreverent’ third book. Were
it not for the happy notion that a man’s poetry is not at all affected
by his opinions, or indeed character and mind altogether, I fear the
‘Paradise Lost’ would be utterly unsaleable, except for waste paper, in
the University.

Concerning the Newmanitish phantasm, as some people term the Church,
I do not know very much; but perhaps you may be enlightened a little,
and even softened, by the knowledge that Newman (I believe, decidedly
in words, and certainly his real notion is such) holds the supremacy
of the αυτη καθ ἁυτην ειλικρινης διανοια, but says that submission to
a divinely-appointed body of teachers and governors, to wit, bishops
and presbyters and deacons, is the course that is pointed out to us
by the aforesaid ειλικρινης διανοια: inasmuch as it is evident to the
reason from the circumstances of the case, &c., that the preponderance
of probabilities is for this view, viz. that Christian privileges and
covenanted salvation have been attached to the use of certain forms
and sacraments whose only qualified administrators are the Apostles’
successors, the clergy; and that these gifts and graces cannot be
obtained except through the medium of these divinely-appointed priests.
All persons, therefore, who wilfully refuse to receive God’s blessings
through this channel are guilty of very great sin, and put out of the
covenanted privileges of Christians. ‘Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers
of Damascus, better than all the rivers of Judah? may I not wash in
them and be clean?’ Such is, I believe, the doctrine which, they say,
is but a proper carrying out of the argument of Butler’s Analogy. I
think its proper answer must be in the lives of good men out of the
influence of any such ordinances, though when any one speaks of such
they at once cry ‘name,’ which it is perhaps difficult to do. As for
Milton, he is rejected altogether because of his divorce notions and
his neglect of devotions, as stated in Johnson’s life of him. Doddridge
is often mentioned, but I believe there is some charge against him
also. This disquisition, counting the Greek, must, I think, make this
letter a due member of the proportion proposed in your last--viz.:--

As your letter : a repartee :: this : something digestible.


_To the same._

  Oxford: April 18, 1839.

I found that at Rugby I had been quite set down among theological
gossips as a Newmanist, but the impression was pretty well removed by
the time I came away. P----, as usual, flowed with a continuous stream
of German divinity and Biblical philology.


  Whit-Sunday, May 30.

June 12th is Commemoration Day; I hope we shall have one Rugby prize
between the five attempts made by Stanley, Lake, and myself; and indeed
I believe Congreve and Arnold have also made one apiece; but the
English poems are this year fifty in number, and better than usual in
quality, according to Keble, and as mine was rather worse than usual I
have but little hope of proving a prize gooseberry; indeed I am afraid
I possess none of the necessary qualifications you enumerate.

I have been reading five books of Plato’s Republic, and wish to examine
you in return as to whether you be a Platonist. 1st. Do you believe
that πᾶσα μάθησις ἀνάμνησίς ἐστι? 2ndly. Do you agree to dividing
human nature into τὸ φιλόσοφον, τὸ ἐπιθυμοειδές, and τὸ ἐπιθυμητικόν?
3rdly. Do you believe that all wickedness is ἀκούσιον and [Greek: δι’
ἀγνοίαν]? 4thly. Do you agree to this assertion, ‘That the world will
never be happy till philosophers are kings, or kings philosophers’?
5thly. Do you think it would be advisable to turn H.M.’s colony of Van
Diemen’s Land into a Platonic Republic? the φύλακες whereof should be
educated at ---- College ----? (the blanks you must fill up yourself;
Queen’s College, Vandiemensville, is what I conjecture).

If you have not hitherto studied this wondrous book I recommend you to
cast aside those heterodox and heretical authors, Calvin and Milton,
and immediately commence upon it. Plato, not being a Christian, is
quite orthodox; in fact, Sewell says that his Republic is realised in,
and indeed is a sort of prophecy of, the Catholic Church; Coleridge
meanwhile declaring it the most wonderful anticipation of Protestant
Christianity. You must really come to Oxford, overcoming circumstances
and cacoëthes and everything else; as otherwise I have no prospect
whatever of seeing you. It is also advisable that you should see the
Arch-Oxford-Tractator before you leave this part of the world, that
you may not be ignorant on a topic doubtless interesting even to the
remote barbarians in Van Diemen’s Land. It is said that Romanists are
increasing, Newmanists increasing, Socinians also, and Rationalists
increasing, but all other kinds of men rapidly decreasing; so that
on your return to England perhaps you will find Newman Archbishop of
Canterbury and Father Confessor to the Queen; Lord Melbourne (if
not burnt) excommunicated, and philosophers in the persons of the
Apostles’ apostolically ordained successors fairly and Platonically
established as kings. The seeds of which contingent revolutions it is
requisite that you should come and contemplate in Oxford. You will also
have the opportunity of seeing Conybeare Pater issuing fulminatory
condemnations of the Fathers at the heads of astonished Newmanists from
St. Mary’s pulpit; himself in shape, conformation, and gestures most
like one of his own ichthyosauri, and his voice evidently proceeding
from lungs of a fossil character. Again, you will see Chevalier
Bunsen, Poet Wordsworth, and Astronomer Herschel metamorphosed into
doctors of civil law; a sight worthy, especially in the second case,
of all contemplation. Furthermore, there will be boat-races, with much
shouting and beer-drinking; a psychological study of great interest.
Cum multis aliis, quæ nunc describere longum est. Nil mihi rescribas,
attamen ipse veni.


  May 2, 1839.

I hope you will carry out with you, or send home for, a good Germanised
Cambridge scholar or historian, as that (next to Paley’s ‘Horæ
Paulinæ’ and ‘Rationalistic Divinity’) is the great bulwark against
Newmanism. And I have to tell you that Bishop Broughton, your diocesan
to be, has lately been sending to Oxford to beg for contributions of
spare books, μάλιστα μέν new, but if not, old, to set up a clerical
library in Australia. Such opportunities of disseminating Patristical
and Ecclesiastical views are never missed by the ardent Newmanistic
spirits, old and young, specially the latter. Whereby, unless the
convict Clerisy be slower than their convict parishioners in their
intellectual development, Newmanism is not improbably already founded
in the far East on the foundation of Kerr and Bramhall, St. Ignatius,
St. Basil, and the Oxford tracts.

Pray come; and write and let me know. I said in my last--Nil mihi
rescribas, attamen ipse veni. But Latin is of course to be taken
rhetorically and figuratively, and ‘nil mihi rescribas’ means
only--Come, if you can, before your letter.


_To J. N. Simpkinson, Esq._

  Oxford: Die Celeberrimi Laurentii Sheriffii, 1839.

I wish you would recommend me some book to give Gell before he goes
to Tasmania. I should not like to give him anything ephemeral, which
is a fault attaching itself, I suppose, even to ‘Carlyle’s Essays,’
which are just published though I admire him extremely in general, and
these essays even more than the ‘Revolution.’ Has he got a ‘Boswell’s
Johnson’? I suppose so. Carlyle says Johnson is the last of the English
Tories; all since him have been but Toryish men. He has got an article
on Boswell which is extremely beautiful; likewise on Burns, which is
so too. He is certainly, however, somewhat heathenish; but that, it
seems to me, is the case with all literature, old and new, English and
foreign, worth calling literature, which comes in one’s way.

I truly hope to escape the vortex of philosophism and discussion
(whereof Ward is the centre), as it is the most exhausting exercise in
the world; and I assure you I quite makarise you at Cambridge for your
liberty from it.


_To the same._

  Tuesday, December 21, 1839.

Q----‘s Newmanistic tendencies are, I am afraid, as certain if not as
strong as you represent. He is so determined on having a conscious
system that these tendencies are, I think, not unnatural. I hope you
do not think me much perverted. The resistance, when there is occasion
for it, against proselytisers is of the most vague unsystematic kind,
resting in the most unstable way on intuitions, idealities, &c. &c.,
but I am not conscious of being in any wise leavened by them.

What do you think I have been bestowing the firstfruits of Christmas
idleness upon? The first part of ‘Die Leiden des jungen Werthers,’
and really with more satisfaction and admiration than I expected; or
rather, I have found all the power and little of the extravagance
I looked for. I have read, too, with great pleasure, Schiller’s
‘Votiv-Tafeln’; at least, about half of them. Here is one--

  _Hast_ du etwas? so theile mir’s mit, und ich zahle was recht ist.
  _Bist_ du etwas? o dann tauschen die Seelen wir aus.

Again--

  Allen gehört was du denkst, dein Eigen ist nur was du fühlest;
  Soll er dein Eigenthum seyn, fühle den Gott den du denkst.

I have but little appetite for work, mathematical or classical; and
there is as little compulsion to it, and as much enticement from it, as
is possible in our ways of life at Oxford.


  November 24, 1839.

  Whence comest thou, shady lane? and why and how?
  Thou, where with idle heart, ten years ago,
  I wandered, and with childhood’s paces slow
  So long unthought of, and remembered now!
  Again in vision clear thy pathwayed side
  I tread, and view thy orchard plots again
  With yellow fruitage hung,--and glimmering grain
  Standing or shocked through the thick hedge espied.
  This hot still noon of August brings the sight;
  This quelling silence as of eve or night,
  Wherein Earth (feeling as a mother may
  After her travail’s latest bitterest throes)
  Looks up, so seemeth it, one half repose,
  One half in effort, straining, suffering still.

This I wrote in some cornfields near Liverpool, on one of our few fine
days.


_To J. P. Gell, Esq._

  New Year’s Day, 1840 (To Hobart Town, V. D. L.)
  Liverpool: January 16, 1840.

Of the three principal theological appearances spoken of for this
past autumn, two have appeared--‘Arnold on Prophecy,’ as you know,
I suppose, and two fresh volumes of ‘Froude’s Remains’; the third,
‘Julius Hare’s Sermons,’ are still only in preparation. Oxford is,
as usual, replete with Newmanism and Newmanistic gossip, from which
it is one blessing for you that you are preserved. I saw a letter
from Arnold, dated Fox How, January, in which he said that not the
schoolhouse only but the school would be, he believed, full next
half-year.


_To J. N. Simpkinson, Esq._

  26 Castle Street, Liverpool: August 27, 1840.

The English verse disappointment, as you suppose, was no heavy burden
to bear, and if Burbidge has sent you the specimen line he threatened
to do, you will say that it should have been no disappointment at all.
I have been since the vacation three weeks at Grasmere with Ward, not
very far from Thorney How; the rest of the time here studying the
ethics, &c., for November. I shall go for a day or two to Rugby at
the beginning of October, and then to Oxford about a fortnight before
term commences, to effect the removal I must undergo from College to
lodgings; indeed, I should go earlier for the sake of better reading,
but my two brothers are going out to America together (the younger for
the first time), and will hardly be off sooner than October.

That I have been a good deal unsettled in mind at times at Oxford,
and that I have done a number of foolish things, is true enough, and
I dare say the change from Rugby life to its luxury and apparent
irresponsibility has had a good deal of ill effect upon me.


_To the same._

  Oxford: Feb. 16, 1841.

I should like much to have heard Carlyle’s complaint against Coleridge.
I keep wavering between admiration of his exceedingly great perceptive
and analytical power, and other wonderful points, and inclination to
turn away altogether from a man who has so great a lack of all reality
and actuality. By the bye, there is a new and very striking portrait of
him just published by Holloway, which I have seen in our Coleridge’s
rooms, and which, he says, is said by those who knew him to be the best
by far there exists.

We had a two days’ visit from Arnold just before the half-year began. I
thought he was not in _very_ good spirits; but he was certainly not out
of heart.

Oxford is now in full enjoyment of the Carnival. You have no idea how
fast things are going here Romewards. The more need, therefore, for
Hare’s defence of Luther, who is in terrible ill-odour here. Is it ever
to appear? I have some idea of going to London at Easter, to get some
lectures of Lowe, my tutor of Easter Term, who is now established there.

I heard the other day that Walrond was to come up to try for our
scholarship. Burbidge has spoken a good deal of his coming here instead
of to Cambridge. I told him that I thought your discipline infinitely
superior in the way of instruction; and so, I feel sure, it must be,
though I am willing we should be thought superior in other points.


_To his Sister._

[After failing to obtain a first-class in the schools.]

  Oxford: Sunday, June 6, 1841.

You must not trouble yourself about my class. I do not care a straw
for it myself, and was much more glad to get it over than I was
disappointed at hearing of its result. I suppose a good many, whom I
ought to wish to gratify, are disappointed a good deal, and it will
perhaps leave me without an adequate supply of pupils this summer; but
I have already an offer of one for a month, and do not despair of two
or three more before term ends. Otherwise it does not matter, I think,
at all; and I can assure you it has not lessened my own opinion of
my ability, for I did my papers not a quarter as well as my reading
would naturally have enabled me to do; and if I got a second with my
little finger, it would not have taken two hands to get a double first
(there’s for you!) Neither must you think that it is about my class
that I have been bothered during the last year, and that I _must_
therefore be disappointed. I can assure you that it was principally
about other things altogether, though you need not read or say this
to my father or mother, unless you think it will do any good, which I
suppose it won’t.

I did not like going up last October, though I dare say I should have
done better then, because I had not read what I ought; but after having
so read, I had so much less care about it than I ought to have had,
that I mismanaged everything in every way I could.

Besides, you know the object of honours is to make men read and not to
make them distinguished; and if I have read, it is all the same whether
I am distinguished or not, and, so far as I am concerned, perhaps
better. The disappointment has been general; two or three certain
firsts, besides myself, are in the second, and two or three hopeful
ones in the third. Balliol has, however, got two of the four prizes. So
we are getting up again in the world.

I only wish I might go home, but if I don’t stay here every day to eat
bread and butter out of the College buttery till Wednesday fortnight I
shall lose 60_l._ Wherefore you and I must both be patient.

Commemoration is to be a week earlier, as Prince Albert and the Duke
are to be here at that time.

I had a delightful walk to Braunston and Rugby, and still more so
back here--about fifty miles, and mostly through fields and green
lanes--quite a new way, and far pleasanter than the old one.


  Oxford: June 1841.

I am glad my explanations have relieved your disappointment, though
I hope you will not blab my bravado any further. However, it is not
perhaps so great as you may think, for I do not doubt there are many in
every examination who are capable of as much and fail much in the same
way as I, only nobody knows. I am not sorry to lose reputation, for it
is often a troublesome companion. Did I tell you that my friend Ward
has been turned out of his tutorship for Ultra-Newmanism?


_To J. N. Simpkinson, Esq._

  Oxford: July 11, 1841.

... And now to thank you for the kindness of your letter. You will have
seen that I am inclined rather to care too little than too much about
it. My papers, I am quite sure, deserved no more than a second, and so
I was, too, at the time; there can be no question as to the fairness of
the decision. At the same time, knowing as I do how far my papers were
from representing my acquirement and my usual ability of writing upon
that acquirement, I can measure more than any one else how much was in
my average grasp. As for the causes of this mismanagement, I do not
feel very guilty about them, though it does not therefore follow that
I ought not so to feel. The only real loss that I care about is that
of pupils whom I should have been glad to have had this summer for the
money’s sake, and now I hardly expect to get any.


_To Rev. J. P. Gell._

  Liverpool: October 8, 1843.

I do not think I am particularly inclined to become a Puseyite, though
it is very likely my Puseyite position may prevent my becoming anything
else; and I am ruminating, in the hope of escaping these terrible
alternatives, a precipitate flight from Oxford, that is, as soon as my
exhibition expires, for I cannot think of sacrificing 60_l._ on any
consideration. Also, I have a very large amount of objection, or rather
repugnance, to sign ‘ex animo’ the thirty-nine Articles, which it would
be singular and unnatural not to do if I stayed in Oxford, as without
one’s M.A. degree one of course stands quite still, and has no resource
for employment except private pupils and private reading. It is not
so much from any definite objection to this or that point, as general
dislike to subscription, and strong feeling of its being a bondage and
a very heavy one, and one that may cramp and cripple one for life.

What to do, if I don’t stay at Oxford, is a very different question. I
do not dislike the tutor’s work at Oriel, but without taking an M.A. I
cannot go on with it; and if, as I supposed, I give up both this and
residence, where to go and what to do will be a perplexity. However,
I shall do nothing ὥστε ἀνηκεστόον τι παθεῑν before this time year;
though, as to the tutorship, I shall probably have to decide before
this reaches you.

I have employed this Midsummer vacation half in going abroad, and half
with pupils at Grasmere. I left England, July 1, with Walrond; went
to Havre, Paris, Lyons, Marseilles, Genoa, Leghorn, where Burbidge
joined us; with him we went to Pisa and Florence, and from Florence
made excursions to the monasteries of Vallombrosa, Camaldoli, and
Laverna. I was then ill for about a week at Florence; left Walrond
and Burbidge, and started for England. I went by Bologna, Parma, and
Piacenza, to Milan; saw the Cathedral, the most beautiful building I
ever beheld, as also the Leonardo da Vinci, which is, I think, the most
beautiful painting. Then I crossed the Simplon, went up the Rhone,
over the Grimsel Pass, and one or two others in the Bernese Oberland,
and so to Thun and Berne, and thence by Basle and the Rhine home. I
liked Switzerland much better than Italy myself, principally, perhaps,
because it was so exceedingly hot, and so impossible to enjoy exercise,
in the latter; perhaps, also, in some degree, from being continually
lionised about galleries and the like, which is far less agreeable than
walking through the beauty of a country.

I went off directly after my return to Grasmere, where I had a party of
pupils waiting for me, and there passed six weeks of a very pleasant
mixture of work and walking about. Stanley was at Fox How for the last
three weeks, working at the memoir.

We have all been reading a grand new philosophy-book, ‘Mill on Logic’;
very well written at any rate, and ‘stringent if not sound.’


_To Rev. T. Burbidge._

  Oxford: June, 1844.

I have just received your letter with a rejoinder to my
anti-non-interference philippic. Of course I do not mean that if a
labourer has at present his proper proportion for twelve hours’ work,
he should have the same sum for ten. But I do believe that he has not
his proper proportion, that capital tyrannises over labour, and that
Government is bound to interfere to prevent such bullying; and I do
believe, too, that in some way or other the problem now solved by
universal competition or the devil-take-the-hindmost may receive a more
satisfactory solution. It is manifestly absurd that, to allow me to get
my stockings a halfpenny a pair cheaper, the operative stocking-weaver
should be forced to go barefoot. It is, surely, not wholly Utopian to
look for some system which will apportion the due reward to the various
sets of workmen, and evade this perpetual struggle for securing (each
man to the exclusion of his neighbour) the whole market.

I have got two beautiful white water-lilies floating in a green dessert
dish beside me. Enviest thou not, O Sicilian Shepherd? or hast thou
thyself also such treasures?


_To Rev. J. P. Gell._

  Liverpool: July 13, 1844.

I believe my last letter was written at the end of last long vacation.
I remember I was at that time in doubt about signing the Articles;
I did, however, sign them, though reluctantly enough, and I am not
quite sure whether or not in a justifiable sense. However, I have for
the present laid by that perplexity, though it may perhaps recur some
time or other, and in general I do not feel perfectly satisfied about
staying in my tutor capacity at Oxford.

I suppose Stanley’s memoir will somehow or other have reached you. I
found the letters more interesting even than I had expected, and the
biographical part as good, though I think in some parts it is wanting.
It is very judicious in keeping the right mean between reserve and
exposure.

I have in the last ten days also seen the monument, which is placed at
a considerable height, so as to rise above any one’s head in the pew,
in the north division of the east wall, looking down the chapel. I
think I should have preferred it on one side; the figure, also, though
from the recumbent position it is of less matter, is sadly devoid of
likeness; the design in other respects is good, and I liked Bunsen’s
epitaph better than I thought I should have done.

The chapel looks very well with its five painted windows; the St.
Thomas is, though modern, as good, I think, as the old ones. They
are making alterations in the quadrangle. Tait wants the schoolhouse
fellows to have single studies throughout, and is in consequence
building fresh studies over the cloister opposite the writing-school.

I am considerably inclined just now to set to work at Political
Economy, for the benefit of the rising generation, and to see if I
cannot prove the Apostle of anti-laissez-faire.


_To his Sister._

  Patterdale: July 26, 1844.

I cannot say that I believe that the walk to the Orme’s Head, however
beautiful, was equal to what we have here; but then I am very fond of
lakes, and not very partial to the sea. There is no part of Wales equal
to this, except the immediate districts of Snowdon and Cader Idris, and
I am not sure that they are.

Yesterday we went to Helvellyn, meeting a party from Fox How,
Ambleside, and Grasmere at the top. I have been up three times before,
so that I had no objection to see the hills as they were yesterday,
namely, in a good deal of haze, and by no means distinct.


_To Rev. J. P. Gell._

  Patterdale: July 31, 1844.

I came to Fox How about three weeks ago to meet Matt, and stayed one
day. Walrond joined us here after the first week; at the end of the
5th I depart, go home to see my father, who has just got home from
America, after a visit by the way, superinduced by south-easters, to
the vicinity of the Hebrides, and then I go to coach two pupils in
Yorkshire for a month or five weeks. The vacation then will be ‘welly’
(as they say here for ‘well-nigh’) run out, and I shall then presently
return to my tutorialities at Oxford.

Your request for a sermon cannot be acceded to. I am not, nor am likely
as yet, to be aught but a laic, and lay sermons I leave for Johnson and
Coleridge. You must, therefore, be content with such poor and scanty
_sermones repentes per humum_ as you get in my rare epistles. You shall
have one when I go into orders--oh, questionable when!

What, according to your experience, is the best division of the day in
this country? The question centres in that other momentous question,
‘What is the properest hour to eat?’ We began with--breakfast, 8; work,
9.30 to 2.30; bathe, dinner, walk, and tea, 2.30 to 9.30; work, 9.30 to
11. We now have revolutionised to the following constitution, as yet
hardly advanced beyond paper:--Breakfast, 8; work, 9.30 to 1.30; bathe,
dinner, 1.30 to 3; work, 3 to 6; walk, _ad infinitum_; tea, ditto.

M. has gone out fishing, when he ought properly to be working, it
being nearly four o’clock, and to-day proceeding in theory according
to Constitution No. 2: it has, however, come on to rain furiously; so
Walrond, who is working sedulously at Herodotus, and I, who am writing
to you, rejoice to think that he will get a good wetting.


_To the same._

  Oriel: Nov. 25, 1844.

Your letter reached me just at the time of my father’s death. In
August, when I wrote, he was improving, and our alarm had ceased; but
he had a relapse not long after, and for a month before the end we were
in full expectation of such a result. He died on October 19, a few
hours after the arrival of my eldest brother from America.

Your letter was in answer to mine written exactly twelve months before,
when I was in doubt about subscription to the thirty-nine Articles.
It certainly was very curious getting an answer to feelings which
were of a year’s standing, especially as I had _pro tempore_ (perhaps
_tempori serviens_) laid them by almost completely; and indeed you know
already that I signed without demur, and have been working away in
the thoroughly terrestrial element of College tutorism, not to speak
of Mendicity Societies and the like. Nevertheless, I still consider
the old scruple to be a sort of St. Paul who ought not to be put off
by any, in however high place, to a more convenient season, or at any
rate ought to have a convenient season found him before long. And I
can’t profess myself one whit appeased by your burst of wonder and
opposition. So the sooner you come home the better, otherwise you
will perhaps hear of some very desperate step, though of becoming an
Independent minister I certainly have no present thought or desire.

My own justification to myself for doing as I am doing is, I fear,
one which would be as little approved of by you as my objections on
the other hand. However, it is simply that I can feel faith in what
is being carried on by my generation, and that I am content to be an
operative--to dress intellectual leather, cut it out to pattern, and
stitch it and cobble it into boots and shoes for the benefit of the
work which is being guided by wiser heads. But this almost cuts me
out of having any religion whatever; if I begin to think about God,
there arise a thousand questions, and whether the thirty-nine Articles
answer them at all, or whether I should not answer them in the most
diametrically opposite purport, is a matter of great doubt. If I am
to study the question, I have no right to put my name to the answers
beforehand, or to join in the acts of a body and be to practical
purpose one of a body who accept these answers of which I propose to
examine the validity.

I will _not_ assert that one has no _right_ to do this, but it seems
to me to destroy one’s sense of perfect freedom of inquiry in a great
degree; and I further incline to hold that inquiries are best carried
on by turning speculation into practice, and my speculations no
doubt in their earlier stages would result in practice considerably
at variance with thirty-nine-Article subscription. Much as I like,
fond as I am of Oxford, and much as I should hate the other element
undisguised, I verily believe that, as a preliminary stage, it would
be far better to be at Stinkomalee (the London University acknowledges
that agnomen, I believe). Amongst the irreligious, I should have
Abdielitish tendencies; here, what religion I have I cannot distinguish
from the amalgamations it is liable to, and I am, right or wrong, as
matter of fact, exceedingly averse to act on anything but what I have
got from myself, or have so distinctly appropriated as to allow my
original tenants as it were time and space to state and vindicate their
claim against the new comers.

Without in the least denying Christianity, I feel little that I can
call its power. Believing myself to be in my unconscious creed in some
shape or other an adherent to its doctrines, I keep within its pale;
still, whether the spirit of the age, whose lacquey and flunkey I
submit to be, will prove to be this kind or that kind, I can’t the
least say. Sometimes I have doubts whether it won’t turn out to be
no Christianity at all. Also, it is a more frequent question with me
whether the master whom I work under, and am content to work under, is
not carrying out his operations himself elsewhere, while I am, as it
were, obeying the directions of a bungling journeyman no better than
myself.

As the great Goethe published in his youth the ‘Sorrows of the Young
Werther,’ so may I, you see, the great poet that am to be, publish my
‘Lamentations of a Flunkey out of place.’ You, perhaps, will say the
lamentations are more out of place than the flunkey. And certainly
Flunkey hath no intention of giving notice to quit just at present,
nor of publishing lamentations at all. Thou, however, in thy wisdom,
consider the sad examples and perplexities that encounter said flunkey
amidst all the most flunkeyish occupations of his flunkeydom, and in
the hope that at this time next year he will still be engaged in these
same occupations, transmit to him advice and good counsel as to those
same scruples and perplexities. In the meantime he must dress and put
on his livery for dinner.

  [_Exit Flunkey._


_To the same._

  Liverpool: April 2, 1845.

Easter vacation should furnish forth a letter, more especially as I
anticipate a singularly busy Easter Term, since one of our three tutors
is to be examiner in the schools. First of all; you will be glad to
hear that Matt Arnold is elected Fellow of Oriel. This was done on
Friday last, March 28, just thirty years after his father’s election.
Mrs. Arnold is of course well pleased, as also the venerable poet at
Rydal, who had taken M. under his special protection. Mrs. Arnold
I saw at Fox How; she was looking remarkably well, though the party
seemed strangely small, all the boys being away.

The beauties of Parson’s Pleasure, where we were wont to bathe in
the early morning, have been diminished by the unsightly erection,
by filthy lucre-loving speculators, of a bathing-house, and I have
therefore deserted it. But a substitute is to be found.

If you do not come soon, I shall perhaps have fled from my tutorial
bower and committed something ἀνήκεστον.


_To ----_

  August 17, 1845.

About the National Debt, I believe the ‘Prospective’ reviewer is wrong.
Arnold, according to the best authorities on such matters, is quite
right in regarding it as a grievous burden. I can’t see that it can
be otherwise, but people have fancied it rather a blessing than the
reverse. The article on Blanco White seems to be temperate enough;
with the Inquisition hanging over him, he could not be otherwise than
he was--he could not but fancy throughout his life that he was being
bullied into a sham belief. At the same time I believe there is a
vicious habit of poking into intellectual questions merely for the fun
of it, or the vanity of it, only not quite so common as people make
out. At any rate, taking it easy and acquiescing in anything is much
more common. Perhaps every clergyman is not called upon to fit himself
for cases like Blanco White’s. How could it be?


_To Rev. T. Burbidge._

  Calder Park, Glasgow: August 31, 1845.

It is too hot to go out (72° in the shade), and in Scotland we are
too sabbatic to read anything but sermons. It remains therefore that
I retire to my room and do as I am doing. We returned yesterday from
our Highland expedition. We went by steamer up Loch Fyne, across the
Mull of Cantire in a canal boat, and again in a steamer among the
multitudinous isles, the skirts of the Hebrides, up the great fiord of
Loch Linnhe, which narrows gradually, and at the headland of Ardgower
is transmuted into the inland lake, a salt Winandermere, of Loch Eil,
at the head of which stands Fort William, where begins the Caledonian
Canal. This, our most northerly point, we attained on Monday. Tuesday
was devoted by the rest to _Ben_, by me to _Glen_-Nevis. The former
hid his head in a cloud--the latter arrayed his woody sides for me in
glorious light and shade (!!)

It is really the most beautiful glen I ever saw. I went seven miles
up, and was still far from the end. You first go up what appears a
sort of glorification of Grisedale; then a sudden turn at right angles
leads you into a sort of magnified Hartsop--the birch-wood and ashes
being here accompanied with the native Scotch fir. And at the bottom
all along rolls a stream of the clear water over rocks and stones of
porphyry, which give it a most glorious yellow-red colour.

In the evening we moved southward by land to Ballahulish, on Loch
Leven; thence the next morning by Glencoe, a magnificent pass into
a moorland country, wherein are the sources of some feeders of the
Tay, running eastward. We descended into the glen of Loch Tulla and
the Orchay, which leads off to Loch Awe; Loch Awe is very fine but
rather cold. Ben Cruachan, which rises above it, is a very fine peaked
mountain. We crossed over and reached Inverary for bed. On Thursday, we
passed through Glencroe, descended on the fine salt Loch Long, crossed
the four miles intervening, and found ourselves on Loch Lomond, six
or seven miles from its head. We went up it about three miles in a
steamer, to ‘the rough falls of Inversneyd,’ crossed a high moor of
five miles, and found ourselves at the head of Loch Katrine, rowed
twelve miles down, and were landed in the Trosachs. On Friday T. A.
and T. W. crossed the hills to Loch Ard, and I went up the lake, and
there took a pony and joined them in a roundabout way, passing a very
beautiful water called Loch Chon. I came back and slept at Inversneyd;
they remained and attended a highland-reel party in a shoemaker’s
hut at Loch Ard, and after staying up dancing and drinking milk and
whisky till half-past two, rose at half-past four, walked eleven miles
to a hasty breakfast with me, and then took steam down to the foot
of Loch Lomond, and so by Dumbarton we came home, dirty, and dusty,
and bankrupt. Loch Katrine and Loch Lomond are both like Ullswater;
the former less beautiful the latter, I think, more so. Both are less
cultivated; Loch Katrine quite wild, and the little landlocked lakelet
at its foot, cut off by the Lady’s Island and one or two promontories,
is exceedingly beautiful. The heather also is a great accession to the
Highlands. So endeth my story.

At present there are staying here young Walter Scott Lockhart, who
is just leaving Cambridge to join the army in his uncle Sir Walter’s
regiment; also his sister. Young Walter is thought a good deal like his
grandfather, but, though far from dull, he is anything but literary,
and is going out to join his uncle’s regiment in India, rather against
his father’s wish, as he is heir to Abbotsford and to Milton Lockhart,
where his father’s elder brother lives, and where they are now staying.


  September 5.

On Wednesday morning we started for the Falls of Clyde. We breakfasted
at Milton Lockhart, lionised Craignethan Castle, the original of
Tillietudlem, returned to luncheon, and to songs from Miss Lockhart,
and after this went on to see Stonebyres, Cora Linn, and Bonnyton, the
three falls, which are all very fine--nothing _new_ in feature, but
remarkable for size. We slept at Lanark, and came back to breakfast
here.

The ‘Quarterly’ was at Milton Lockhart, and I had some conversation
with him; he spoke of the prevalence of infidelity, even among the
country folk of Scotland, saying that all the small farmers in that
neighbourhood were avowed unbelievers. He ascribed it greatly to Burns.
Chalmers, he said, was once in a factory at Glasgow, and began to talk
to some of the work-people in his way, when he was interrupted by an
old woman, who told him that he ‘needna go on; there are nae Christians
in this ward, Doctor.’

In Monday’s ‘Times’ appeared a letter written by Ward to the ‘Oxford
Herald,’ announcing his intention of leaving the English Church at
last; and implying the like on Newman’s part, that indeed being his
own ground for changing his opinion. His defence of his position in
the English Church had rested, he said, on the facts--1st. That the
said Church allowed Romanist teaching.--2nd. That Romanisers (like
Newman) found themselves feel continually better satisfied with the
resolution of remaining in the English communion. The late decision of
the Ecclesiastical Courts had, he said, destroyed the former ground,
and Newman’s change the latter.


_To the same._

  Calder Park: September 11, 1845.

We went to Edinburgh on Tuesday; saw the Castle and Holyrood, including
Queen Mary’s apartments and Rizzio’s blood, the Calton Hill, and
Flaxman’s statue of Burns, which I admired much.

We went to dine and sleep at Houston, the house of Shairp, and
lionised the grounds of Hopetoun next day, which lie on the Forth, over
against Dunfermline gray, &c. &c. I liked the place very much; it is
a tall, perpendicular house, four storeys and attics; such peep-hole
windows in thick stone walls; all manner of useless little rooms on all
manner of unequally disposed levels; a stone staircase from bottom to
top. Wainscotted partition walls, and old folks by the dozen looking
down on you therefrom; among the rest, Archbishop Sharpe, who seems
to have been of the family, but is hardly acknowledged, as they are
now Presbyterians. And the second flower of Yarrow, really a beautiful
face, though in the picture rather faded, who lived at Houston with her
sister, who had married its owner. The garden, moreover, of flowers and
kitchenry without distinction, with high hedges of beech and yew, &c.,
running hither and thither about it, was very pleasant.


_To Rev. J. P. Gell._

  Liverpool: September 21, 1845.

Is it news to you that Ward has at last gone over to Rome, wife and
all; is at this present moment at St. Mary’s College, Oscott, having
just received confirmation? Newman, it is said, will not go over
finally till Christmas, but his intention to do so is definitely
announced. It is thought that his immediate followers will not be many;
ten or twelve subordinates and Oakeley is large allowance. But a great
many will be rendered uneasy by his departure, and one may look out
for changes in one way or other: it will be ‘dropping weather’ in the
Romanising line for some time to come, I dare say. Newman’s Apologia,
entitled ‘Notes of the Church,’ is expected to appear soon. So also
the volumes of the reprint of Arnold’s Lives, in the ‘Encyclopædia
Metropolitana.’ The miscellaneous volume, including the Church Reform
and Catholic Emancipation pamphlets the Sheffield and Hertford letters
and other minora, has been out for a month. The Catholic Emancipation
I had never read till to-day; to-day I did so with great delight. My
last reading before that was (strong meat) the ‘Life of Blanco White’:
almost wholly from his own papers; a very striking production, which
has called out a review from Gladstone in the ‘Quarterly,’ and a more
powerful one by Mozley in the ‘Christian Remembrancer’ (Puseyitic
extreme). For me, almost it persuaded me to turn Unitarian, that is,
for the moment; and even now I feel no common attraction towards the
book and the party who have brought it out, viz. the high Unitarians,
such as Miss Martineau’s brother, a preacher here; Mr. Thom, his
colleague, the editor of book, &c., and others. They have a review,
the ‘Prospective,’ ‘Aspice, Respice, PROSPICE’ (sic) being the motto,
in each of the eight numbers of which Arnold’s volume, the Life, the
Fragment on the Church, and the last miscellaneous volume have received
an article; and in their particular section of the people they are, I
should think, doing a great deal of good.

I renewed my acquaintance at the Lakes this year with Hartley
Coleridge. The only thing worth recording from his lips is a saying
which he repeated as his father’s, that etymology is in danger of death
from a plethora of probabilities.


_To Rev. T. Burbidge._

  Liverpool: September 23, 1845.

I have been reading ‘The Improvisatore,’ a Danish novel translated
by Mary Howitt. You know I hate Corinne. This is in the Corinne high
beauty-beatification style, Italy, art, and love à l’æsthétique; but
the thing is rendered truthful and sober in Dano-Gothic colouring. But
this kind of book makes me long for genuine live-and-act story, such as
the ‘Rose of Tistelön,’ which I recommend you.

Item.--I have bought a Cowley, rather a scrubby 18mo, but the first
edition after his death. I think Cowley has been Wordsworth’s model in
many of his rhythms, and some of his curious felicities.

I told you, perhaps, that I had some thoughts of laying down my toga
tutoria and going abroad for a year with a pupil; nor has the plan
evaporated wholly as yet.


  Oxford: September 28.

I went to Rugby on my way. The school is in number 490. They have built
a new schoolroom at the back of the fives court, between the chapel and
the stables.

Jowett comes hither, having been Stanley’s companion in Germany. They
saw Schelling, who spoke to them of Coleridge with high praise, saying
that it was an utter shame to talk of his having plagiarised from him,
Schelling.


_To his Sister._

  Oriel: October 1845.

What shall be done in the summer? Shall we go to Switzerland together,
see the Italian lakes and Milan, taking the Seine and Paris one way,
and the Rhine and Belgium the other? Alas! I fear there will be no
money to spare. Potatoes and all ‘bread-stuffs’ are like to be terribly
dear; and we shall have to live on butcher’s meat for lack of cheaper
food. Or have you laid in a stock of rice? Government, it seems, will
not open the ports for foreign corn: the free-traders are outvoted
in Privy Council, and for the present, at any rate, we must let our
neighbours buy for themselves without any interference of ours.

Moreover, I think it very likely I may give up this tutorship (quod
tamen tu tacere debes), and as private tutor I could not, without more
work than I should like, make the same sum per annum which I now
receive from the College.


_To Rev. T. Burbidge._

  Oxford: October 19, 1845.

There is a good article (a portent) in the ‘Quarterly,’ pronounced to
be Milman’s, on the ‘Relation of Clergy to People,’ against priestcraft
and authority, and extolling marriage; it is really very well done.

There is also (a portentous portent) another article not at all to be
despised, on the ‘Moral Discipline of the Army,’ specially in regard of
Chaplains; in a postscript to which announcement is made that certain
improvements have just been ordered by Government, as for instance the
building of chapels for barracks.

The poet Faber, men say, will go, but the ultra-Puseyites in general
seem inclined not to take headers à la Ward, but to sneak in and duck
their heads till they are out of their depth.

Liddell, it appears, is standing for the Moral Philosophy chair. I hope
he will get it; he is a man who will work, and who will be listened to.


  October 28.

I have, however, in the last three days found time to read ‘Jeanne,
par George Sand,’ the most cleanly French novel I ever read, and not
cleanly only, but pure. If I knew French well enough, and was not a
college tutor, I would translate it, and I believe it would take; for
one thing, the hero is an Englishman, and by no means a common, but a
very veritable hero.


  31st.

Liddell, thank Heaven, is elected Professor of Moral Philosophy. The
election brought Vaughan up, and we had the pleasure of seeing him. He
is very agreeable, converses very well, and I wish sincerely he was up
here always.


  November 1.

Potato-disease, and abolition of corn-laws--at any rate, immediate
opening of ports for foreign corn, which ports it may be found somewhat
hard to close again; panic in the railway market gradually dispelled
again, not unlikely howbeit to reappear; such is the news of the week.
Cobden sounds a note of triumph at Manchester, and dubs Hudson with the
title of ‘King of Spades,’ in joint allusion to his innumerable army
of navigators and his gifts at shuffling and card-tricks. O’Connell,
called upon by the Saxon press to do something more for his starving
countrymen than vapouring at the Conciliation Hall, comes out with a
10 per cent. tax on all landowners, and 50 per cent. on absentees.
London, meantime, fearless of lack of funds, proposes to adorn itself
with a grand verandah system--at least for all shopping streets. A very
desirable plan, I think. I have often wondered that the hint of Chester
rows had not been taken long ago.


_To his Sister._

  Oriel: November 23, 1845.

Another convert is gone over to Rome--Faber, the poet, who used to
excite admiration when preaching some seven years ago at Ambleside; and
at Cambridge a flitting from the Camden is expected.

The Irish Colleges are to be, I believe, at Belfast, and certainly at
Cork and Galway. This last would be wholly Roman Catholic, I suppose,
otherwise I should like it, for the country near it is very beautiful.
There is a great lake, some forty miles long, Lough Corrib, the upper
part of which they say is like Wastwater.

Belfast would be chiefly Presbyterian; at any rate, Protestant. Cork is
to be under a Dr. Kane, a chemist and I fancy a very able and sensible
man. I think it possible I may some day find myself at one of these
places. I don’t much mind which. But they won’t be ready for two years,
I should think.


_To the same._

  Rugby: December 23, 1845.

I hope you will forgive me. I am not coming home before Monday. It
appears that F. Newman (Newman’s brother) is coming here on Friday; and
I am very desirous to see him, and my hosts urge me to stay.

F. Newman, by-the-by, is the author of the paper in the ‘Prospective
Review,’ on Arnold’s Miscellaneous Works. I really think I ought not
to miss this opportunity of seeing him; so I trust you and mother will
forgive my truancy for once, though I fear that you will have but a
meagre Christmas party.


_To Rev. T. Burbidge._

  Liverpool: January 19, 1846.

Price has been writing a letter or two in the ‘Balance,’ a newspaper
set up on principles which may be described as Arnoldite out of
Evangelical, a somewhat mongrel progeny, perhaps, with more of
profession than fervour; and the paper is certainly weak, though
certainly at the same time well meaning. It wishes to become a sort of
Sunday newspaper for all sorts of people, gentle and simple, nobleman,
and serving man, and working man. Gurney, I believe, is editor; Lord
Robert Grosvenor and some others have promised to pay the piper for
a while. Gurney puts poems into it. I wrote a letter myself which is
to appear in its columns next week. Another newspaper, ‘The Daily
News,’ is placarding itself for issue on the 21st, the literary
department under the direction of Charles Dickens. Is ‘Boz’ proposing
to reform the press? to combat, a printer’s ink St. Michael, the Dragon
immorality of the ‘Times’? It is open to conjecture. But perhaps it
is only a quiet little job in the money-making way. Half a dozen new
newspapers are commencing their career; it is almost like a railway
mania.

An evening or two after I wrote I met Martineau accidentally. I liked
him greatly. He talked simply, courteously, and ably, and has a
forehead with a good deal of that rough-hewn mountainous strength which
one used to look at when at lesson in the library at Rugby not without
trembling.


_To his Sister._

  Oxford: February 1846.

I have only just time to sign my name. My lectures go on from ten
till two these days. Just at this time, too, there are numerous
parties--breakfasts, namely, and dinners--which cut me out of the
usual odds and ends that do for letter-writing. I have been very gay
this week; there is always a sort of carnival at Oxford, and this year
it happens to coincide with the end of the Rugby holidays. We had
several Rugby masters up--Tait, Arnold, Congreve, and Bradley, &c.;
and on Tuesday there was a Rugby dinner, which was very successful and
pleasant.

Concerning marriage, what you say is true enough, but to fall in love
without knowledge is foolery; to obtain knowledge without time and
opportunity and something like intimate acquaintance is, for the most
part, impossible; and to obtain time and opportunity is just the thing.
Then, again, there comes the question of reconciling marriage with
one’s work, which for me is a problem of considerable difficulty. It
is not every one who would like to be a helpmate in the business I am
likely to have.


_To the same._

  Castleton Braemar:[6] August 9, 1846.

Our house is very comfortable, and affords us two sitting-rooms, one of
which is conceded to my special use. The other has a nice look out up
the Glen of Clunie, a little stream which dashes through the granite
just beside us, and gives us a pool to bathe in. But the country in
general is not what I require for full delight. The hills are round,
and somewhat tame, though beautifully clad with heather. The Dee,
which is the great river of the district, into which the Clunie runs,
is very pretty, and indeed beautiful, three miles higher up. And the
mountain excursions still farther off, in the region of Benmacdhui and
Cairngorm, will I dare say prove satisfactory. The kirk to which we
went this morning is fairly administered, but not very much attended.
I fancy more go to the Free Kirk; and there is also a Roman Catholic
Chapel in the village, and a good many of the poorer folks are Papists.
I have given up the idea of the school at Birmingham, having settled to
stay out my time at Oxford.

You must remember what a great advantage for intercourse with the poor
is given by _any_ sort of cultivation, music, drawing, dancing, German,
French, &c. &c. They feel this distinction very sensibly, and carry
their liking of a lady almost to the vice of liking a _fine_ lady.


_To the same._

  Castleton Braemar: September 10, 1846.

Our neighbours continue to send us grouse and venison, which reduces
our butcher’s bills. To-morrow three weeks I expect to have done. I
mean, however, to get a little rambling to make up for the somewhat
poor scenery of this Valley of Dee, and I fear shall only pay you but
a brief visit before I go up to Oxford, about the 15th of October. We
are enjoying fine weather, sunshine and moonshine both, but perhaps a
little cold, though bathing continues as usual. To-night we all go to a
party at General Duff’s to see Highland dancing.


  September 26.

On Wednesday we had a regular flood, and it has been raining more
or less ever since, with intervals, however, yesterday, of very
respectable sunshine. Our two sportsmen (did I tell you two pupils were
gone up the hills?) have returned, bringing a few grouse and a haunch
of venison (not their own killing this last) from our neighbour the
Duke of Leeds.


The spring of 1847, as will be remembered, was the time of the Irish
famine. The distress caused by it, not only in Ireland, moved Clough
greatly, and stirred him to write an appeal to the undergraduates at
Oxford, of which the substance is given in the next chapter.


_To ----_

  March 28, 1847.

Perhaps what you say is true about the Unitarians in general, but in
this particular case I think they were not very far wrong in declining
to have any service. I think it presumptuous to set down the famine
to Divine displeasure, and not particularly wise to have a holiday
(for such it was in general) at the very time when people ought to
be working hardest to produce all they can to make up for the loss.
Let people save and curtail their enjoyments as much as they please;
that’s a very different thing, and a thing which I hope the good
self-humiliating fast-observers will not forget, now the fast is over.

The object of the new education measures is merely to assist schools,
by pensioning masters and mistresses in their old age, and assisting
clever boys in getting instructed for the business of teaching, and
all that the Government require in return is the right of inspection;
and any school which declines to receive assistance may refuse to be
inspected. The Dissenters are bigoted fools, in my judgment. It is the
very least which Government could do.

My Scotch plans are still somewhat uncertain, as the accommodation at
Drumnadrochet is dearer and also less comfortable than we had expected.


_To J. C. Shairp, Esq._

  March 1847.

Thanks for your letter. I can only say that I have made up my mind
against leaving this till my sixth year ends and turns me out.


_To his Sister._

  Oriel: May 1847.

You will see that the adorable Swede, Jenny Lind, has enchanted all
the world. I greatly rejoice at it, and think I _must_ go and see her.
I have promised to go and see Tom at Whitsuntide, and so I dare say I
shall do the thing then. Have you seen the lady’s picture? Look and see
if you can find a not very beautiful but very pleasant and true-looking
face, lithographed.

I have not read ‘Emilia Wyndham,’ but I did read a long time ago ‘Two
Old Men’s Tales,’ by the same author, and they certainly were, as I am
told ‘Emilia Wyndham’ is, too pathetic a great deal. I don’t want to
cry except for some good reason; it is ‘pleasant, but wrong,’ in my
mind. A novel ought to make you think, and if it does that, the more
vivid it is the better, and of course it follows that now and then it
will make you cry; but I am not aware that Mrs. Marsh does make you
think.

Schiller made the same impression on me, when I used to read him in
St. James’s Terrace, which he does now on you. Coleridge has been to
me the antidotive power; he was a philosopher and a firm believer (so
far as one can make out) in Christianity, not only as a doctrine, but
as a narrative of events. My own feeling certainly does not go along
with Coleridge in attributing any special virtue to the facts of the
Gospel History. They have happened, and have produced what we know,
have transformed the civilisation of Greece and Rome and the barbarism
of Gaul and Germany into Christendom. But I cannot feel sure that a
man may not have all that is important in Christianity even if he does
not so much as know that Jesus of Nazareth existed. And I do not think
that doubts respecting the facts related in the Gospels need give us
much trouble. Believing that in one way or other the thing is of God,
we shall in the end know, perhaps, in what way and how far it was so.
Trust in God’s justice and love, and belief in His commands as written
in our conscience, stand unshaken, though Matthew, Mark, Luke, and
John, or even St. Paul, were to fall.

The thing which men must work at will not be critical questions about
the Scriptures, but philosophical problems of Grace, and Free Will,
and of Redemption as an idea, not as a historical event. What is the
meaning of ‘Atonement by a crucified Saviour’? _How_ many of the
Evangelicals can answer that?

That there may be a meaning in it, which shall not only be consistent
with God’s justice, that is, with the voice of our conscience, but
shall be the very perfection of that justice, the one true expression
of our relations to God, I don’t deny; but I do deny that Mr. M’Neile,
or Mr. Close, or Dr. Hook, or Pusey, or Newman himself, quite know what
to make of it. The Evangelicals gabble at it, as the Papists do their
Ave Marys, and yet say they know; while Newman falls down and worships
_because_ he does not know, and knows he does not know.

I think others are more right who say boldly, we don’t understand it,
and therefore we won’t fall down and worship it. Though there is no
occasion for adding, ‘there is nothing in it,’ I should say, until I
know, I will wait, and if I am not born with the power to discover, I
will do what I can with what knowledge I have--trust to God’s justice,
and neither pretend to know, nor, without knowing, pretend to embrace;
nor yet oppose those who, by whatever means, are increasing or trying
to increase knowledge. This is not very clear, perhaps, but one can’t
correct in letter-writing.


_To the same._

[On hearing of a case of stealing among school-children.]

  Oriel: May 31, 1847.

Sad indeed it is to hear of the evil doings of the children; and
what you are to do with them, I really can’t say. However I wouldn’t
exaggerate either the sin or the evil. With the education (so to call
it) that these children get at home, what is to be expected from them?
And really in some children pilfering is a matter of mere fancy or
habit--a sort of trick, like biting their nails or shaking their legs.
Of course, it is necessary they should know that the thing _is_ wrong,
and also _why_ it is wrong; the former is not much use without the
latter. I am convinced it is very bad for children to be frightened
into believing themselves to have done wrong and to be very wicked. But
you might easily show them that people can never live with each other
in the world without respecting the rules of property; that it would
come otherwise to the strongest or the cunningest taking away what
other people had earned by their own hard work, and _that_ they would
see to be really wicked, whereas they can’t exactly see at present that
what they do is so _very_ wrong; you can easily spare the things, and
don’t much mind the loss; you are very rich (compared to them) and very
kind and liberal; what can it matter?

You must know that a friend of mine (not naturally scrupulous) stole a
book from a shop when he was at school, was never found out, has never
paid for it in any way, has it on his bookshelf still, and makes no
difficulty about his friends knowing how he came by it (not that he did
it by way of bravado at all, which is another kind of thing). Well, I
don’t think worse of him on the whole for this; I respect him for his
present frankness; and though I think he ought to have gone afterwards
and told the bookseller, and paid him, yet I don’t think it’s very much
matter.

Well, you know better about the way the children and their parents
would take it; but, for my own part, I should speak out to them all,
tell them what has happened, say that the thing must not go on, you
must give up the class if it continues, but that you don’t mean to
disgrace any of them for it at present. Explain why stealing cannot be
allowed, and why people are wrong in stealing. If you choose, tell them
that Elizabeth ---- has confessed, and let her say that she is sorry
for it, and sees that it is wrong; and ask those who have done the same
to confess, and promise to take care in like manner. Or, if you think
this would be too public a disgrace, can’t it be done privately without
publishing the names? or you may give the general exhortation without
noticing either E---- or the other thefts.

You needn’t, I think, insist on restitution. Say that you don’t want
the things back (you’ve got the locket, I suppose); that you will put
up with the loss. I hope you will excuse all this lengthy advice, which
I dare say, or rather I am sure, mother, and I dare say you, will not
think quite high-principled; but it is quite my conviction. Frighten
a child, and it cries, and is perhaps in an agony; but afterwards it
says to itself, ‘Well, indeed I can’t see that it’s wrong,’ and does
it again. You frighten it again, and again it is in an agony. And so
it gets into a way of living by the fear of man (at best), instead of
by its own sense of right and wrong, and that is not likely to keep it
safe under temptation; indeed, one can hardly wish that it should.

I advise you to go on the 8th to Westmoreland. Wednesday fortnight
will see me at home. Thursday will bring me with mother on my arm to
Lake-land, where we will lie upon the grass and forget.


_To ----_

  June 1847.

As for your making the marriage, I trust it was made elsewhere, where
they say all true marriages are made. All you did was to hinder an
unnatural divorce; _i.e._ you made the wedding, perhaps, in some
degree. And if she loves him, why all the better, whatever comes of
it--pain and grief, suicide and murder, all the tragics you can think
of. After all, pain and grief (for suicide and murder we will dismiss
as unnecessary) would be far better than that life-in-death with papa
and mamma in ---- Street, or elsewhere.

Meantime, I would not, I think, trouble them with any advice.
Laissez-faire, laissez-aller.


_To his Sister._

  Drumnadrochet:[7] July 26, 1847.

I think I shall wait upon Providence till the end of my time at Oriel;
though undoubtedly there are temptations in the Liverpool Mechanics.

My pupils are getting attached to this Glen Urquhart. I continue to
think it anything but beautiful. But Loch Ness offers a good deal.
Yesterday I went to Foyers. It is by far the highest of the Scotch
waterfalls, and there is a pleasant, quiet, sabbatic country-inn,[8]
overlooking the whole lake, with our highest hill, Mealfourvonie, just
over the water, and with the Foyers river less than a mile off.


_To J. C. Shairp, Esq._

  Glenfinnan Inn, Fort William: September 1, 1847.

Excuse a blotted sheet. I am out of the realm of civility, being in
your own well-beloved West, at Glenfinnan on Loch Shiel. The mountains
are extremely fine, but not the weather; the waters glorious, specially
the rain, which comes in upon my paper as I write, the window above me
being exposed to a raving, raging south-wester.

I have been as far as Arisaig, a poor place, curious perhaps, but
nothing more. On the way, I saw Loch Aylort and Loch na-Nuagh (salt),
and Loch Aylt (fresh), all of them fine. At Glenaladale’s house of
Borradale, Charles Edward landed. It stands off Loch na-Nuagh.

Glenaladale is the great man here: he marches with Lochiel close by,
and the lake separates him from Sir James Riddell of Ardnamurchan,
and Colonel Maclean of Ardgower. He is to have a deer-stalking party
to-morrow, Lord Adolphus Fitzclarence, and other majestarian officers.

This place is certainly very beautiful; scarcely however sufficiently
exalted out of the lake-country style to meet my expectations of the
genuine West. But whether I shall explore, as you suggest, all the
lochs up to Loch Broom, viz. Aylort, na-Nuagh, na-Gaul, Morrer, Nevish,
Hourn, Alsh, Carron, Torridon, Gairloch, Ewe, and Maree (on referring
to the map I find that I have missed two--the rest I may say I know by
heart), whether I shall do more than learn the names by heart is more
than doubtful.

Did you ever see a waterfall turned inside out, downside up? The
south-wester is doing this to one opposite the window.


_To the same._

  Liverpool: October 3, 1847.

I wrote to you last from Glenfinnan. I enjoyed myself greatly in that
Hesperian seclusion, though I did not go and see Skye, nor yet Loch
Hourn, nor yet Loch Nevish, nor yet Loch Morrer, but only Loch Aylort
and Loch na-Nuagh, and a strange solitary place called Loch Beoraik,
where, verily, I think Saxon foot had never been before. Also, I have
seen and rowed up Loch Ericht. Dallungart, where you and T. slept,
I also have slept at. With mine host on Tynaline, in Saxon called
Georgetown, I held discourse concerning Saxon swindlers, &c.

I came back here yesterday. If I could have forced myself sooner out of
the Highlands, I would have quitted Liverpool, and come to Rugby sooner
also; but I could not. Woe’s me, but one doesn’t like going back to
Oxford, nor coming to Liverpool either; no, nor seeing the face of hat
and coat-wearing man, nor even of elegantly attired woman.


_To R. W. Emerson, Esq._

  Oriel College, Oxford: November 26, 1847.

Dear Sir,--My sister, who has had the pleasure of meeting you in my
friend Mr. Bolley’s house, emboldens me to take what otherwise I should
consider an unwarrantable liberty.

But Oxford perhaps may have some interest for you. Our University
has not perhaps a very large influence in the world of letters and
learning, but it has even now, I think, a good deal to do with the
thinkings and doings of our upper classes; and at any rate has a good
deal of character of its own.

If you should think it worth while to visit the place it would give me
very great pleasure to show it you. I have resided here ten years, and
am a Fellow and tutor at Oriel College, so that I may account myself
qualified as a cicerone.

Your name is not a thing unknown to us. I do not say it would be a
passport in a society fenced about by Church-Articles. But amongst the
juniors there are many that have read and studied your books, and not a
few that have largely learnt from them and would gladly welcome their
author. At any time before or after our vacation any notice, however
brief, would find me prepared to show you all the hospitality in my
power.


_To J. C. Shairp, Esq._

  51 Vine Street, Liverpool: January 1848.

Last night I saw you in my dreams, sternly interrogating, ‘What hast
thou done with all those many commissions? and wherefore tarries in thy
purse the postal penny?’

The scribbling _puerities_ is not very strong on me at present. I’m
not going to write history, nor poetry neither--not a blessed verse,
I believe, have I manufactured since October. But it’s history, is it,
that you and Walrond recommend?--εἶεν--but I don’t think it will do.

Meantime, did Macpherson really say ‘The Bothie’ had paid? I have been
in distress about the worthy bibliopole, and hardly know whether I can
trust your report.

I am reading the ‘Inferno’ with John Carlyle’s translation, which seems
good, and is certainly useful to me. I recommend the ‘Inferno’ to you;
it will burn out your rose water, old boy, for a time, but the spring
is with you indestructible.

I think you people are making great donkeys of yourselves about ----’s
freedom of speech. Go to the Bible, thou prude; consider its language,
and be wise. Consult also Shakespeare, Milton, Dante, also ... and in
fact ‘all great poets.’


_To T. Arnold, Esq._

  Oriel: January 31, 1848.

In England we go on in our usual humdrum way; the ecclesiastical world
agitated by all manner of foolish Hampden-rows: of the confused babble
about which all quiet people are infinitely tired. I have given our
Provost notice of my intention to leave his service (as tutor) at
Easter. I feel greatly rejoiced to think that this is my last term of
bondage in Egypt, though I shall, I suppose, quit the fleshpots for a
wilderness, with small hope of manna, quails, or water from the rock.
The Fellowship, however, lasts for a year after next June.

I had not, I think, seen the Rajah Brooke when you departed. I liked
him extremely; met him once at breakfast with Stanley, and once in
the evening with our Provost; quite a kingly man, clear-sighted and
simple-minded, full of will and purpose, but without a grain of
self-will or ambition. Stanley says that he deprecated English, or
indeed European, colonisation in Borneo as bad for the natives. He had
had two thousand offers, but declined generally, saying the time was
not yet come.


_To a Friend._

[In answer to a remonstrance against his intention of resigning his
Fellowship.]

  February 20, 1848.

Be not afraid: I love my mother earth, and ‘in the air will never
float’ ‘Until I get a little boat,’ and of a better build than the
famous ‘Crescent Moon.’

No, but remember withal, that no man moves without having one leg
always _off_, as well as one leg always _on_ the ground. Your
stationary gentleman undoubtedly has both for a basis, and much good
may his double pedestal do him. ---- and ---- go shuffling along,
lifting their feet as little as possible from the earth. There are also
horses, are there not, called ‘daisy-cutters’? not, as I am told, the
best breed.

The mere carnal understanding, I grant you, goes on its belly in the
shape of the serpent. While this and other reptile faculties grovel on
the ground, imagination and fancy, with the eagle and the butterfly,
move in liquid air. But the vivipara, my friend, ‘in whom should meet
the properties of all,’ must do neither, or both. Expect therefore from
me, if not the stately march of the sublimest mammalian type, at any
rate nothing worse than the per-saltum locomotion of the kangaroo.

However powerful my centrifugal force, I shall be certain to be
recalled by the at least equally powerful gravitation of hunger and
thirst, not to mention nakedness.

The spirit truly is centrifugal, but the flesh centripetal; wherefore
man, being a compound, revolveth in a sphere. Under cover of which
theory I retreat to my bed.


_To T. Arnold, Esq._

  Oriel: February 25, 1848.

_Diis aliter visum_--so my packet had to lie by a month. Meanwhile,
Willie has gone to India, and the French have begun a new revolution.
Possibly my letter may bring the news.

Switzerland has had its revolution, and Naples also; Tuscany and the
Sardinian States have in consequence got new constitutions, and the
Pope has turned off his cardinals and replaced them by lay ministers,
and it is said is preparing a constitution. Surely the Frenchman
mustn’t be behindhand! One can hardly talk of other things when one
once gets on this topic.

Well, and when shall I see you again? ὁο Θεὸς οἶδεν. Will you hire
yourself out as a common labourer? I hope not; but one may do worse,
undoubtedly; ’tis at any rate honester than being a teacher of XXXIX
Articles. I rejoice to see before me the end of my servitude, yea,
even as the weary foot-traveller rejoices at the sight of his evening
hostelry, though there still lies a length of dusty road between. But
what will follow I can’t say. The chances of going abroad will very
likely be cut off, for we may shortly see _Europam flagrare bello_:
the Austrians driven out of Lombardy by French bayonets. _Alter erit
tum Lodi_, and another Arcola shall crown _delectos heroas_ with, we
will hope, a better-used victory. But the French armies are not quite
apostolic, nor do I put much faith in Michelet’s holy bayonets as
preachers of any kind of Gospel.


_To J. C. Shairp, Esq._

  March 16, 1848.

Another three weeks will see me at the end of these tutorial--what
shall I call them?--wearinesses, now at any rate. But whither the
emancipated spirit will wing its flight can’t be guessed. Paradise, or
purgatory, or ----? the limbo of meditation, the penal worms of ennui,
or the paradise of ----? Vanitas vanitatum--omnia vanitas.

There is a story-book called ‘Loss and Gain,’ ascribed to Newman, truly
or falsely as the case may be. You may read and see, if you please.

Edward has been here to breakfast--a phantom of the ancient glories.
If it were not for all these blessed revolutions, I should sink into
hopeless lethargy.


_To his Sister._

  Oriel: April 18, 1848.

I am glad you liked the Blumen-Frucht-und-Dorn-Stücke. If there is any
fault in Richter, it is perhaps that he is too sentimental; but it is a
great comfort to get a little taste of that sweetmeat now and then; and
in him you have it always not in its merely luscious form, but tempered
with agreeable acids and delicate laurel-leaf bitters.

Up here at Oxford I keep in general company very quiet; insomuch that
I heard yesterday that people not unfrequently take me for some little
time after introduction to be no less than a Puseyite; but at the same
time, I could sometimes be provoked to send out a flood of lava boiling
hot amidst their flowery ecclesiastical fields and parterres. Very
likely living in this state of suppressed volcanic action makes one
more exasperated than one should be when any sort of a crater presents
itself. Natheless, there is wisdom in withholding.

Tell mother not to finish _all_ her furnishings, and get ‘everything
handsome about her’ before I come home, which will be about the 1st of
May, for then I shall be able to stay if I please for three weeks or
more, as my tutorship will be in the hands of another.


_To the same._

  Paris: Thursday, May 11, 1848.

The only events since I wrote on Tuesday have been my visit to the
Théâtre de la République to see Rachel in ‘Phèdre,’ and the arrival of
Emerson. With the former I was a little disappointed, but I am going
again to study the thing. I have been to see the Jardin des Plantes,
and the column erected to the honour of the revolution of July 1830, on
the site of the Bastille. It was here that the Republic was solemnly
inaugurated in February, and here I think it was they burnt the throne.

George Sand’s newspaper, the ‘Vraie République,’ disapproves of the new
Provisional Government (Arago, Marie, Garnier-Pagès, Lamartine, and
Ledru-Rollin) altogether, though privately she is friendly with and
indeed attached to Lamartine.

People are coming up from the country to the great national fête of
Sunday next, and of course they all want to go to hear the debates. The
weather is splendid; the sun glorifies us by day, the moon by night.


  Sunday, May 14.

I don’t expect much good will come of this present Assembly. It is
extremely shopkeeperish and merchantish in its feelings, and won’t set
to work at the organisation of labour at all: but will prefer going to
war to keep the people amused, rather than open any disagreeable social
questions. The Socialist people are all in the dumps.


  Tuesday, May 16.

P.S.--Yesterday was a day of great peril and disorder: an émeute. The
Chamber was invaded and turned out by a mob, and the hall occupied
by them for two hours. At last the national guard turned them out.
A new government had been named by the mob, and some of the chiefs
went off to the Hôtel de Ville, a mile off, to set it going. However,
the national guard followed and put it down. Lamartine came with
Ledru-Rollin and rode along the quays to finish the work, with dragoons
and cannon. I was at his side for a quarter of a mile, and saw him of
course distinctly. There was no firing, and scarce any fighting. The
whole thing is put down for the present; and I am glad it is, on the
whole. The cry was ‘Vive la Pologne;’ but the object was to get rid of
the Assembly, and set up a more democratic set of people. From 11 A.M.
to 9 P.M., or even later, there was nothing to be seen but crowds and
excitement; fifty or sixty are arrested.


_To Rev. A. P. Stanley._

  Paris: May 14, 1848.
  Sunday, the fête as should have been.

I am still a stranger to the Assembly. The difficulty is extreme. Miss
Jewsbury got a diplomatic ticket for two or three hours: she describes
them as very good sensible-looking men. She has never been in the House
of Commons.

Lamartine’s culmination is said to be over; his declared desire not to
part with Ledru-Rollin is the commonly supposed cause of his sinking
to the fourth place in the votes. But some say that the bourgeoisie,
to shirk the organisation of labour question, are eager for war,
and Lamartine, having proclaimed ‘Paix à tout prix,’ is therefore
thought an obstacle. On all hands, there is every prospect, on dit,
of war. To-day the rumour ran that the armies had entered Piedmont,
and to-morrow comes the Polish question. The Socialists, _i.e._ the
leaders, for the most lament this extremely. The people of course are
excited about Poland, and either are indifferent to the Socialist
ideas or are blind to the certainty of these questions being then
indefinitely adjourned. The boys (17 and 18) of the garde mobile are
infected with bourgeoisitic loyalty, also the new members of the
national guard. The Socialists simply deplore the whole result; regard
the whole thing as at present a failure--a bourgeoisitic triumph. ‘Mais
attendons.’ ‘Voilà, mon cher,’ the socialistic statements as received
by me into arrect ears last night from a distinguished St. Simonian.

The Champ de Mars was not by any means ready yesterday morning for
the postponed fête: when I went I found there only the great statue
‘La République en plâtre,’ and a few boards, &c., and not many men
at work. There’s been thunder and lightning, and ‘grandes eaux,’
_not_ of Versailles, so perhaps it’s as well. Yesterday I had the
pleasure of hearing the ‘rappel’; a foolish, unnecessary order, on
account of a quiet Polish petition presentation, and now no one
acknowledges to having signed it. However, it made row enough at the
time. The Socialist party is too weak to attempt anything; in fact
they profess that the bourgeoisie is eager to attack and slaughter
_them_. However, I did see some St. Antoine-ish giants in bonnet-rouge
and blouse, who had a very who’s afeard? appearance, arguing with and
defying well-dressed multitudes in the Rue de Rivoli, about the rappel
time yesterday. Citizen Blanqui had, I confess, a certain hang-dog
conspirator aspect, which did him no credit.

Lamartine continues to live in his own house, and is _not_ going to the
Elysée Bourbon, nor the other men to the Petit Luxembourg. The Assembly
will go on till the next revolution, probably.

‘Les journaux du soir!’ ‘Voilà “La Presse,” dernière édition du
soir!’... ‘“La Séance,” demandez “La Séance,” “L’Assemblée.”’...
‘Colère du père Duchesne! ... le père en colère!--cinq centimes, un
sou.’... ‘“La Patrie,” voilà “La Patrie!”’... ‘Les éditions du soir,
dernières nouvelles de Pologne!’... ‘L’insurrection de Madrid, par
le citoyen Cabet, “Le Populaire!”--cinq centimes, un sou.’ ‘Demandez
“La Presse:” grande colère du père Duchesne, le père Duchesne est en
véritable colère! le père’.... ‘“Le National,” demandez “Le National!”
“L’Assemblée Constituante!”’

L----, attaché of the English press, is of opinion that if the money
hold out till confidence in a new government gets itself fairly
established, all will be well. The people mean to wait and see if
their condition is to be mended; if so, well, whatever the form of
government; if not, ‘we must go into the streets again.’

You know I am a bad hand at lionising. I do little else than potter
about under the Tuileries chestnuts, and here and there about bridges
and streets, _pour savourer la république_. I contemplate with infinite
thankfulness the blue blouses garnished with red of the garde mobile;
and emit a perpetual incense of devout rejoicing for the purified state
of the Tuileries, into which I find it impossible, meantime, to gain
admittance. I growl occasionally at the sight of aristocratic equipages
which begin to peep out again, and trust that the National Assembly
will in its wisdom forbid the use of livery servants. But there is
not very much to complain of generally: one cannot better express the
state of Paris in this respect, than by the statement that one finds it
rather pointed to be seen in the streets with gloves on.


_To the same._

  Paris: May 19, 1848.

Ichabod, Ichabod, the glory is departed! Liberty--Equality and
Fraternity, driven back by shopkeeping bayonets, hides her red cap in
dingiest St. Antoine. Well-to-do-ism shakes her Egyptian scourge to
the tune of ‘Ye are idle, ye are idle’; the tale of bricks will be
doubled: and Moses and Aaron of Socialism can at the best only pray
for plagues; which perhaps will come, paving stones for vivats, and
émeutes in all their quarters.

Meantime, the glory and the freshness of the dream is departed. The
very garde mobile has dropped its dear blouse and red trimmings for a
bourgeoisie-prætorian uniform, with distinctive green hired-soldier
epaulettes. The voice of clubs is silenced: inquisitors only and stone
walls of Vincennes list the words of Barbès. Anti-rappel Courtais no
longer hushes the drum which, as he said, vexes the people (‘cela
fâche le peuple’); conciliatory active Caussidière gives place to a
high-shop successor. Wherefore, bring forth, ye millionaires, the
three-months-hidden carriages; rub clean, ye new nobles, the dusty
emblazonries; ride forth, ye cavalier-escorted amazons, in unfearing
flirtations, to your Bois de Boulogne. The world begins once more to
move on its axis, and draw on its kid-gloves. The golden age of the
Republic displays itself now, you see, as a very vulgar parcel-gilt
era; nevertheless, in all streets and gardens, proclaims itself ‘L’Ère
Nouvelle!’ ‘La Liberté!’ ‘La Réforme!’... ‘Vraie République!’...
‘Grande Séance de l’Assemblée Nationale: dix centimes, deux sous;
seulement deux sous.’ ‘Arrestation!’ ‘Demandez “La Presse”; la lettre
du citoyen Blanqui!’... ‘Derniers soupirs du père Duchesne!’


  Saturday, May 20.

To judge from ‘Galignani’s’ extracts, the English papers are as usual
exaggerating. I don’t believe the affair of the 15th was anything like
the conspiracy described in the ‘Times’ and ‘Chronicle.’


  Monday, May 22.

The weather performed a most dramatic change; and Sunday morning, the
day of the fête, dawned all glorious. There was a noise of drums as
early as four o’clock. I got up about six, and found myself on the
Place de la Concorde at a quarter to seven, with a considerable crowd.

The deputies did not leave the Chamber till half-past eight. They sat
on the steps mostly, with their scarfs, &c. About half-past eight
they came down and headed the procession. There were parties from
the departments, in and out of uniform, with each its flag. Poland,
Italy, and Germany mustered a considerable show. There were not above
six or seven ‘noirs affranchis,’ and under a green flag, proclaiming
in front ‘L’Irlande,’ and behind ‘Club des Irlandais,’ walked about
three of our fellow-subjects of the sister island. ‘Les blessés’ were
noticeable, and ‘les vieux de la vieille.’ There was a great deal
of confusion, marching and counter-marching, and there was a full
half-hour’s interval in the procession before ‘le char’ came up; and
it was an ugly affair when it did come. The ‘jeunes filles’ looked
pretty in their white dresses, with the tricolor streaming from the
left shoulder, and artificial oak-wreaths in their hair; pretty _en
masse_, but individually not by any means remarkable either for face
or figure. Moreover, they were declassicised by their use of parasols.
I don’t think they and the char got fairly to their work’s end till
one o’clock. I passed and proceeded to the Champ de Mars, where, a
little after twelve, went up the tricolor balloon, but in a rather
disorganised condition. My modesty prevented my getting through the
exterior circle of national guards; so that I did not come into the
presence of the Government and Assembly, which I believe I might have
done. But the perpetual gun-firing gave me a head-ache, and I retired
early. The illumination in the Champs Élysées was extremely pretty; the
whole avenue was like a great ball-room, with double rows of pendant
chandeliers and continuous festoons of ‘lampions’ on each side. The
crowd was enormous. It was funny in the afternoon to see the classical
virgins walking about with their papas and mammas, people of the
under-shoemaking and back-street shopkeeping class. A good many of
them got into the enclosure round the Bourse, and were, about 6 P.M.,
dancing (without music) with gardes mobiles, and other indiscriminates.


_To his Sister._

  Paris: May 22.

There is no prospect whatever of any immediate recurrence of
disturbances. The old leaders and conspirators are either arrested or
in concealment. Within three months’ time, I have little doubt there
will be another émeute. But for the next month I think the Assembly is
quite secure, and if only it contrives to find out its wise men, it may
survive all troubles, and gradually regenerate the nation. But in this
_if_ a great deal of difficulty is involved. There are very few English
here, but a good many Americans.


_To Rev. A. P. Stanley._

  4 Rue Mont Thabor: May 26, 1848.

It is quite certain that the Government are hampered extremely by the
old Gauche-Dynastique, Odillon-Barrot et Cie, who are adroit debaters,
and frighten down the new men. Lamartine thinks it impossible to
do the thing without Ledru-Rollin, and the democracy who trust in
him; and in many ways he would wish to conciliate and even confide
in the bonnet-rouge. But the old Gauche, with the garde boutiquière
to back them, think they may carry things with a high hand; and in
the Chamber are not unsuccessful. Yet it is wholly impossible that a
Gauche-Dynastique Republic should succeed; Lamartine would be a fool
as well as knave to support such a chimera. It is very possible that
he may have to go out for a while, of course with Ledru-Rollin; but
unless Thiers comes in to the Chamber and aggravates the mischief by
lending his real oratorical power to the Gauche, and indeed I hope
even in that contingency, it is very probable Lamartine will gradually
discipline the inexperienced new members into a good working majority.
I don’t hear any one say Lamartine has been paying his debts; I suppose
Ledru-Rollin has. George Sand has gone into the country. She says that
the air of Paris seemed ‘lourde’ to her, after hearing the ‘à-bas’ of
the national guard, and after the arrests of so many generous-minded
men. Pierre Leroux was arrested, but is released.


  Saturday, May 27.

So you see, I rely on the wisdom of Lamartine’s tactics, however
untriumphant at present; not that I imagine he has got the solution
of the labour problem, or that mere well-meaningness and generous
aspiration will suffice. But at present no man can absolutely affirm
that by any definite plan more is attainable.

The new elections, you know, are on the 5th; I shall stay till that
night at any rate. The cry, ‘To your Clubs, O Israel!’ is commencing.
Thiers and Girardin will probably get in, but not for Paris. I have
just heard them crying, ‘Lettre d’_Henri Cinq_ au Président de
l’Assemblée: cinq centimes, un sou.’ For the last time but one I return
from Rachel’s ‘Marseillaise.’ To-night there is some ‘rappel’-ing going
on somewhere.

Have you seen in any of the papers revelations of the purposes of the
Constituent Committee? An Assembly of 750; and a President by universal
suffrage; gratuitous education, and right of work. So I read in the
‘Démocratie pacifique,’ with corroboration.

The coalition of the more democratic Clubs amongst the representatives
will be, I presume, a great assistance to the Government. You know that
two, one in the Rue des Pyramides, the other in the Palais National,
amounting to 200 représentants together, and one containing Carnot and
another minister, the other presided over by Dupont de l’Eure, have
united, and a third is expected to send in its adhesion.

I have just been to the Club de la Révolution, ci-devant Barbès.
They had a lively and almost fierce debate about ‘fusion.’ Were they
to ‘fusionner’ with the National? Advances having been made and ill
received, should they be renewed? News of Barbès’ condition and
behaviour in prison were given, and received with clamorous Vive
Barbès!! Said Barbès, I hear, is a man of wealth, enjoying, usually in
prison, 4,000_l._ a year.

I am grieved to hear of the mutilation of our statue. But I should
myself accept the most deformed renovation. The list of Chartist
petitioners (so to call them) was forwarded to me here, costing about
three francs. We, I presume, might easily make up a list of five
points: Abolition of Subscription; Reconstitution of Fellowship;
New Hebdomadal Board; Extra-Collegial Matriculation; and Permanent
Commission.


  Monday, May 29.

They are going to remodel, perhaps destroy, the ateliers. I hope not
destroy, for I conceive the system to be good, if it were only well
managed. At present, undoubtedly, there are great irregularities.
Alexandre Dumas has written a Protest against the Decree of Banishment
(of the Royal Family), which his friend ‘La Liberté’ declines to insert
(so declareth A. D. in the ‘Assemblée Nationale’) for fear of pecuniary
loss. The ‘Assemblée Nationale’ is a vile Guizotin journal, conducted,
I hear, by the man who perjured himself about the pistols in the famous
duel case. De Tocqueville voted for the Decree. Odillon-Barrot shirked;
Louis Blanc, apparently, against it.


  Paris: May 30, 1848.

Paris is tranquil and dull. The bourgeoisie, which had at first
awkwardly shuffled on the blouse, is gradually taking heart to slip
on its fine clothes again; and perhaps ere long will unbutton the
breeches-pocket.

To-morrow there is to be an ‘interpellation’ in the Assembly about the
Neapolitan business. One great subject under discussion in the Bureaux
(where most of the work is done) is the ‘projet de divorce,’ simply
restoring, I believe, the provisions of the Code Napoléon, which in
1816, on the return of the Bourbons, were in like manner simply erased.

Divorce is allowed for ‘sévice,’ and for incompatibility of temper
under restrictions; _e.g._ the husband must be above twenty-five,
and the wife above twenty-one and under forty-five: and consent of
parents must be obtained. Nor can divorce for this cause be allowed
except after two (or three) years of marriage. I see it stated that the
Bureaux are not favourable. But the great subject of subjects is of
course the question of the ateliers nationaux. The statistics published
in the ‘Constitutionnel’ are of course utterly repudiated by the other
party, and indeed they are partly withdrawn by the ‘Constitutionnel’
itself. But there must be a great deal of irregularity and unfair
dealing. For the real ouvriers out of work, a franc a day throughout,
plus two francs extra for two or three days’ work, is not, if a man has
a family, very extravagant. But lots of porters, _e.g._, are on the
list.


  Wednesday, May 31.

Last night I visited the Club des Femmes, presided over by a Mme.
Niboyer. Alas, poor woman! she has a terrific task; not to speak of
having to keep women silent, she has to keep men, or say beasts, in
order. The place is filled with them, and a more grievous spectacle of
the unpolitesse of Frenchmen I never saw; but I believe it has been a
good deal worse. However, Mme. Niboyer is a woman of considerable power
and patience, and she works through it, though to what effect I don’t
know. Perhaps it may be useful for Frenchmen to see a woman face them,
and present herself before them _not_ for purposes of flirtation. I
got disgusted with my male neighbours, and came away before it ended.
The subject was divorce. The feeling, I think, was against the present
project, the cries certainly so.


  Édition du soir.

To-day has produced three remarkable documents:--

1st. The Government exposition of the events of May 15, with which
may be read Lamartine’s speech of Tuesday night. The blame is left
on De Courtais and ---- the 1st Legion of the National Guard! Notice
towards the end the phrase ‘Y a-t-il eu de complot? Qui sont les
coupables?’--questions left at present unsettled.

2nd. The candidature of our friend A. Dumas. It is due to the Marquis
Alexandre to give his own words: ‘Ce qu’il faut à la Chambre, c’est des
hommes qui parlent hautement leur pensée. Des hommes qui la soutiennent
avec la plume, avec le bras, si besoin est. Je crois avoir prouvé par
la guerre que je fais depuis deux mois à la réaction et à la terreur
que je suis de ces hommes. Voulez-vous de moi pour représentant?

  ‘AL. DUMAS.’

3rd. The candidature of A. Dumas’s friend Joinville, who is proposed
by a shopkeeper, who gave his name, dating from the Rue Bergère. ‘The
Assembly has expatriated him; true; but the people made the Assembly;
ergo, if the people choose Joinville ...’ q. e. d.

The elections (eleven for the Seine, _i.e._ Paris) are considered
very uncertain; there is all kind of division. Caussidière, perhaps?
D’Alton Shee, not unlikely; Changarnier. Not Émile de Girardin, nor
Thiers; nor, I presume, any socialist, such as Pierre Leroux, Thorès,
Proudhon Cabet.

Here is a ‘mot’ on the situation: ‘Les seuls hommes possibles sont
incapables; et les seuls capables sont impossibles.’ Another clever
suggestion is that there should always be a _Provisional_ Government,
as the only security for _permanence_.

Remembrances to all my concitoyens at Oriel; how many tricolor _nœuds_
shall I bring?


_To the same._

  June 6, 1848.

I am safe again under the umbrageous blessing of constitutional
monarchy, at Long’s Hotel, Bond Street. I left Paris yesterday. The
République was ‘as well as can be expected.’ Of the city of Paris my
report must be ‘left voting’--voting, and reading in huge attroupements
the new edict _against_ attroupements. To-day was to tell the fate
of the candidates, and to-morrow commences the reorganisation of the
ateliers nationaux.


_To T. Arnold, Esq._

  Liverpool: July 16, 1848.

When I last wrote to you, the three days of February were still
echoing, and now the four days of June have scarcely ceased to
reverberate; between which times a good deal has happened both to
myself and to the world in general.

For myself, I went to Paris on the 1st of May, and stayed there five
weeks; saw the opening of the Assembly, the émeute or échauffourée (as
they prefer calling it) of the 15th, and the fête of the following
Sunday. After the 15th the sky was certainly overcast, but in my first
fortnight, and in a degree through the whole time, I was in extreme
enjoyment, walked about Jerusalem and told the towers thereof with
wonderful delight; the great impression being that one was rid of all
vain pretences, and saw visibly the real nation. The sentry posts were
all occupied by men in blouse, of the national or mobile or republican
guard, and the Tuileries gardens full of the same blue blouse; while
the Palace itself showed occasionally on its balcony some convalescent
‘blessé de février,’ helped along, as he took the air, by wife and
child. All things quite ‘decently and in order,’ without any visible
repressive external force; indeed for two days between the resignation
of the _Provisional_ and its reappointment as the _Executive_
Committee, there was no Government whatever, barring of course the
Assembly.

Lamartine (I saw him and Ledru-Rollin ride to the Hôtel de Villeon
the 15th) seems certainly to have been deficient in definite purpose
and practicality; but I fancy he and his colleagues hardly had a fair
chance; they had no time to get the Assembly into working condition,
hampered in it as they were by Odillon-Barrot and Co., who are very
skilful debaters, before the people began to get angry and suspicious.
The four days of June I dare say you have heard spoken of in a somewhat
shrieky accent. But the cruelties are unquestionably exaggerated, and
are attributable to the forçats, who naturally mixed with the ouvriers,
and there are many opposite traits recounted. The story of the
cantinières selling poisoned brandy was not verified by the examination
before magistrates, or by the analysis of the chemists. I confess I
regard it in the same light as a great battle, with, on the whole,
_less_ horror, and certainly more meaning, than most great battles that
one reads of.

However, there is no doubt that France’s prospects are dubious and
dismal enough, and one is almost inclined to think that the outbreak
was premature; with their ideas so far from ripe, the French had
better, if possible, have endured a little longer the immorality of
Louis-Philippe’s government; but yet, on the whole, one accepts the
thing with gratitude. It will, I think, probably accelerate change in
England: and perhaps you may yet live to see some kind of palingenesy
effected for your repudiated country. [Greek: θαῡμ’ ἂν πόρρωθεν
ὶδοιμην.]

The next topic is Emerson, whom I left yesterday on the deck of the
Halifax steamer, and saw pass rapidly down the Mersey on his way home.

He came to Oxford just at the end of Lent term, and stayed three days.
Everybody liked him, and as the orthodox mostly had never heard of him,
they did not suspect him. He is the quietest, plainest, unobtrusivest
man possible; will talk, but will rarely _discourse_ to more than a
single person, and wholly declines ‘roaring.’ He is very Yankee to
look at, lank and sallow, and not quite without the twang; but his
looks and voice are pleasing nevertheless, and give you the impression
of perfect intellectual cultivation, as completely as would any great
scientific man in England--Faraday or Owen, for instance, more in their
way perhaps than in that of Wordsworth or Carlyle. I have been with him
a great deal; for he came over to Paris and was there a month, during
which time we dined together daily: and since that I have seen him
often in London, and finally here. One thing that struck everybody is
that he is much less Emersonian than his Essays. There is no dogmatism
or arbitrariness or positiveness about him.

Next to myself, ---- is, I suppose, accounted the wildest and most
écervelé republican going. I myself, à propos of a letter of Matt’s,
which he directed to Citizen Clough, Oriel Lyceum, Oxford, bear that
title _par excellence_.


  Waterhead: September 4.

I have been visiting Fisher in Patterdale, where he has his first
reading party. He got a first-class duly and honourably at Easter,
πατρὸς ἀμείνων, outdoing his coach.

I believe I shall probably, in about six weeks’ time, publish,
conjointly with Burbidge, a volume of poems.[9] Some of them I hope
you will like, but I don’t think much will come of it. I don’t intend
writing any more verse, but have a notion for essays. I gave my
Tutorship up at Easter, and I seriously think of doing the same with
the Fellowship in October at latest.


_To ----_

  Oxford: October 23, 1848.

My relations wrote kindly and temperately (_on hearing of the
resignation of the Fellowship_), on the whole; made the most of
conscientiousness, but were alarmed with ideas of extreme and
extravagant views.

My little book, I hope, will be out in ten days.


_To T. Arnold, Esq._

  99 Holywell, Oxford: November 6, 1848.

I have given up the Fellowship, though the Provost still forbears to
go through the formal step of officially announcing my resignation; so
that I am loose on the world, and, being just out of my old place, I am
ready to look at every new place, and likely enough to go to none. Even
if literature does look likely, I confess I should like to knock about
the world a little bit more before I do much in that way; yea, though
I am all but thirty already. I am extremely jolly meantime, rejoicing
in my emancipation. I stay up here; it is now three weeks within
twenty-four hours since I resigned; and people don’t cut me at all. I
dine at some high tables, and generally (retaining my gown, for I don’t
wish to volunteer to cast that off) I am treated as a citizen.

I have an invitation to stand for the Headship of the new University
Hall (on the Oxford and Cambridge College system) to be attached to
University College, London. My poem, ‘The Bothie of Tober-na-Vuolich,’
in about two thousand hexameters, ‘A Long-Vacation Pastoral,’ has
appeared, and has tolerable success in Oxford; but that its local
allusions might readily give it.


_To his Sister._

  December 1848.

It is far nobler to teach people to do what is good because it is
good simply, than for the sake of any future reward. It is, I dare
say, difficult to keep up an equal religious feeling at present, but
it is not impossible, and is necessary. Besides, if we die and come
to nothing it does not therefore follow that life and goodness will
cease to be in earth and heaven. If we give over dancing, it doesn’t
therefore follow that the dance ceases itself, or the music. Be
satisfied, that whatever is good in us will be immortal; and as the
parent is content to die in the consciousness of the child’s survival,
even so, why not we? There’s a creed which will suffice for the present.

A---- belongs, I see, to the new High Churchites, who want to turn all
the quiet people adrift; it is the _New Plot_; but so long as one isn’t
obliged to sign articles, or go to daily service, or prayer-meeting, or
the like, I don’t see why one should excommunicate oneself. As for the
Unitarians, they’re better than the other Dissenters, and that’s all;
but to go to their chapels--no!


_To R. W. Emerson, Esq._

  February 10, 1849.

My dear Sir,--How could I tell you of my Pastoral-to-be when it had not
been thought of? It was only begun in September, and when I left you in
July on the deck of your steamer, I had no thought of that or any other
new poem. I hope ere this a little volume, half belonging to me, half
to an old school-friend, will have reached you: this does contain old
things, the casualties of at least ten years.

You may fancy how truly welcome all your kind praise of the first of
them has been to me; so far as praise goes I hardly venture to accept
it, but as recognition I heartily feed on it. Meantime, in England I
shall not be troubled with a very onerous weight of celebrity. Mr.
Kingsley, a chief writer in ‘Fraser,’ devoted the whole of a cordial
eulogistic article to the ‘Pastoral,’ and has made it tolerably known;
but the ‘Spectator’ was contemptuous; and in Oxford, though there
has been a fair sale and much talk of it, the verdict is, that it is
‘indecent and profane, immoral and (!) communistic.’

Will you convey to Mr. Longfellow the fact that it was a reading of
his ‘Evangeline’ aloud to my mother and sister, which, coming after a
reperusal of the ‘Iliad,’ occasioned this outbreak of hexameters?




LETTERS.

FROM 1849 TO 1852.

LONDON.


_To the Rev. ----_[10]

  January 4, 1849.

MY DEAR SIR,--After a good deal of thinking and some advising, I find
that I have only to repeat what I stated at your house.

I do not feel myself competent to undertake the conduct or
superintendence of any prayers, nor can I in any way pledge myself
to be present. Any attendance I might give would simply be that of a
private person--no way official; it would be as that of a junior member
of a family at domestic worship; it would be a matter of conformity,
not of individual choice; my own feeling, meantime, being to leave
it, as I understand the Quakers do, to spontaneous emotion; and so I
confess I should prefer any arrangement which would make my absence not
unnatural, as might for instance be the case if prayers were combined
with a Greek Testament lesson not given by me.

Meantime, I am sure I should have every disposition to facilitate
devotional arrangements. In fact, I should not unwillingly concede
that it might be _better_ that your Principal should be one who
could officially join in them, as indeed it might be best could all
your students be expected to attend. But, whether better or worse, I
had conceived your institution was to be one on which this maturer
form would not be fixed, one which would offer a _locus standi_ and a
home for Theology and other subjects excluded from the College, and
would aspire to encourage moral and religious sympathy, but would
nevertheless leave all this to free, quiet and spontaneous development.

I confess I see great advantages in this system, but whether greater or
less than those of the other, it is the only one in which I myself can
co-operate. Not that I entertain any reluctance to attend the worship
of others than those with whom I have hitherto been connected. Far from
it. In Scotland I have always gone by preference to the Presbyterian
churches; I have continually been to Mr. Martineau’s chapel at
Liverpool; I have joined in the prayers of Unitarian families. If
obliged to do one or other, I should probably go to Westminster Abbey
rather than to any either Scotch or English Presbyterian chapel. But
I have expressly testified my dislike to the Thirty-nine Articles,
and you yourselves are quite as likely to attach to me such names as
heretic, as I to apply that word to you.

I need not of course say that I suppose I have on these subjects, if
not convictions, sentiments; not assuredly a definite theological
creed, but what would be called religious views--views which may
prove very different from those commonly entertained by Unitarians.
But of course, too, I can entirely disclaim everything approaching
to a disposition to proselytise; so far from it, I hardly expect to
make up my own mind as yet, and am not likely to meddle with those of
others. At the same time, what a man feels for himself can hardly fail
to affect his communications with his neighbour, nor should I in any
way feel bound to suppress, because of the opinions of a young man’s
parents and friends, anything which other reasons would not induce me
to withhold. Hasty talking would be grievous misdoing, evasive dealing
would vitiate everything; but I should hope to find other matters to
occupy me with the students.

I believe I have only to add my thanks to yourself and your friends for
your kindness and courtesy during our communications, and to subscribe
myself,

  Yours faithfully,
  A. H. CLOUGH.


_To T. Arnold, Esq._

  Liverpool: February 15, 1849.

Alea jacta est; I stay for the present here. I have accepted the
position at University Hall; and commence there in October, with a good
deal of misgiving it must be confessed; but, on the whole, I believe
myself right. I am not so clear as you are of the rottenness of this
poor old ship here. Something, I think, we rash young men may learn
from the failure and discomfiture of our friends in the new republic.
The millennium, as Matt says, won’t come this bout. I am myself much
more inclined to be patient and make allowance for existing necessities
than I was. The very fighting of the time taught one that there were
worse things than pain, and makes me more tolerant of the less acute
though more chronic miseries of society; these also are stages towards
good, or conditions of good. Whether London will take my hopefulness
out of me remains to be seen. Peut-être.

I like the Manchester people, of whom I have been seeing a little,
better than the Liverpuddlians. They are more provincial perhaps,
but have more character; are less men of the world, but more men
of themselves. Your sanguine friend still puts his trust in master
manufacturers, as in those olden foolish days, when the face of
Fortescue shone triumph in the Decade. Yet why be troubled about
politics and social matters?

Here also, as on the Poirirua road, sweet odours of human nature ascend
to the heavens. To quit the country for altogether is not, so far as I
can tell, my vocation. This may be Ur of the Chaldees, or even Egypt,
but no angel hath as yet spoken to me, either in dreams by night or in
any burning bush of the desert.


  February 24.

To-day, my dear brother republican, is the glorious anniversary of the
great revolution of ’48, whereof what shall we now say? Put not your
trust in republics, nor in any institution of man. God be praised for
the downfall of Louis-Philippe. This, with a faint feeble echo of that
loud last year’s scream of à bas Guizot, seems to be the sum total;
or are we to salute the rising sun with Vive l’Empereur and the green
liveries? Meantime, the great Powers are to restore the Pope, and crush
the renascent (_alite lugubri_) Roman republic, of which Joseph Mazzini
has just been declared a citizen.


_To his Mother._

  Rome, Hôtel d’Angleterre:[11] April 18, 1849.

I am at Rome; I stayed two days at Paris, where I called on your
American friends the Murats, and saw Madame and her sister. She is now
Mme. la Princesse, and her daughter Mdlle. la Princesse.

There is no immediate expectation of any change in the Government here;
the only difficulty is to get money. They are going to divide the
lands of the Church in small farms among the peasants; but payment will
not be made for some time for these allotments.

St. Peter’s disappoints me; the stone of which it is made is a poor
plastery material; and, indeed, Rome in general might be called a
_rubbishy_ place; the Roman antiquities in general seem to me only
interesting as antiquities, and not for any beauty. The Arch of Titus
is, I could almost say, the only one really beautiful relic I have yet
seen. I have seen two beautiful views since I came, one from San Pietro
in Montorio, the other from the Lateran Church, over the Campagna. The
weather has not been very brilliant.


  April 21.

I have seen the Vatican gallery and Sistine Chapel. To-day being the
natal day of Rome, was to have been a great feast, with illumination of
the Colosseum, &c., but it is impossible for the weather.

I see the ‘Times’ tells very odd stories of Rome. People here tell
you that it has been bought by Austria. At any rate the story of the
proposed sale of the Belvidere Apollo to the Americans is as simply a
joke, I am told, as another story, that the Pantheon was sold to the
English for a Protestant chapel.


_To F. T. Palgrave, Esq._

  Rome: April 23, 1849.

In my way here I saw Genoa again, and visited the Doria Palace, which
had just been quitted by the victorious Piedmontese soldiery, who had
not, I am glad to say, damaged the frescoes on the ceilings, as far
as I saw (the battle of the Titans, which I suppose is the finest,
was quite uninjured), but in other respects had played all sorts
of furious and beastly pranks. The balcony with the fresco figures
of Andrea Doria and his family is a good deal damaged, one or two
cannon-balls have passed through, and the soldiers have scratched it
with their bayonets. The furniture is all destroyed; it belonged,
they say, to the Prince of Carignano, the King’s uncle or cousin, who
had latterly taken the palace: gilded cupboards and tables, japanned
cabinets and chess-boards, porcelain vases and French clocks, mingled
their precious fragments on the floors with relics of bread and other
deposits, among which empty bottles should be mentioned; the Prince
appears to have had a fine assortment of Madeira. No other damage is
done in Genoa.

About 150 refugees came off with us in the French steamer; the
government paid for them as far as Leghorn, but at Leghorn they
wouldn’t have them, so they came on to Civita Vecchia, and I see
several of them about in the streets; they are incorporated with the
other forces.

Yesterday was the most lively day I have had here. In the morning a
review in the Piazza before St. Peter’s, where Avezzana, the Genoese
commander, who is also an American citizen, and is now Minister of
War, reviewed about 10,000 men and twenty pieces of artillery. In the
evening a grand illumination of the Campidoglio, Forum, &c., all the
way to the Colosseum, which was the great scene. When I entered, it was
mostly dark, and a great crowd filling it, a band somewhere above the
entrance playing national hymns. At the end of the great hymn, of which
I don’t know the name, while the people were clapping, viva-ing and
encoring, light began to spread, and all at once the whole amphitheatre
was lit up with--the trois couleurs! the basement red fire, the two
next stories green, and the plain white of the common light at the top.
Very queer, you will say; but it was really fine, and I should think
the Colosseum never looked better than it did, if not then at least
afterwards, when the plain light was left, and the area got cleared.
The same thing was done again for the outside.

In the afternoon, I had paid my visit to Mazzini; a French envoy or
agent was with him, and I had to acknowledge the triumviral dignity by
waiting almost an hour in the ante-chamber. However, on the envoy’s
retiring, he discoursed with me for half an hour. He is a less
fanatical fixed-idea sort of man than I had expected; he appeared
shifty, and practical enough. He seemed in excellent spirits, and
generally confident and at ease. He asked me if I had seen anything of
the pillaging, which the English papers were acquainted with; he said
that any of the English residents would bear witness to the perfect
tranquillity, even greater than before, which prevailed in the city
(and certainly I see nothing to the contrary).

The ‘Times,’ he said, _must_ be dishonest, for the things it spoke of
as facts were simply not facts! émeutes where émeutes had never been
thought of; the only outbreak had been at Ascoli, near the Neapolitan
frontier, where a sort of brigandage had been headed by two or three
priests, but easily suppressed. In Rome there were plots going on
amongst some of the nobles and priests, but they were well known to
the government. The temper of the people and the Assembly alike was
clearly against the restoration of the temporal power; on that point he
believed the Right would go heartily with the Left in the Assembly, and
the people be unanimous. The object at present was rather to repress
violence against the priest-party, or Neri, to which some sections of
the populace were inclined; but this the government was careful to
do. The feeling everywhere is, he says, simply political or national.
Communism and Socialism are things undreamt of. Social changes are not
needed; there are no manufacturing masses, and in the lands there is a
métayer system. You have heard perhaps that they are going to divide
church lands amongst peasants; this is true, but only of a portion, a
surplus he called it, after provision is made for the carrying on of
the services of each establishment. They have got about 22,000 troops,
and mean to have 50,000, so as to be able to take the field, at any
rate not in mere desperation. But he expects foreign intervention
in the end, and of course thinks it likely enough that the Romana
Reppublica will fall. Still he is convinced that the separation of the
temporal and spiritual power is a thing to be, and that to restore the
Pope as before will merely breed perpetual disquiet, conspiracies,
assassinations, &c.; and he thinks it possible the Great Powers may
perceive this in time. The French envoy had asked him if he would apply
to France for protection; he said, No, but that if France or any other
power offered protection, they would welcome it.

So much for Mazzini. Meantime, Rome is very peaceable to all
appearance, rather cold, however, and very rainy: the illumination,
which you should be told was in honour of the _Palilia_, was put off
one day in consequence. I do not observe much enthusiasm for the
Romana Reppublica: but neither do I hear as much complaint as might
be expected from the shop folk and foreigners’ jackals. The religious
customs seem to thrive still; they kissed away yesterday at St. Peter’s
toe as fast as they could have done in its best days. Money, however,
is scarce; one pays 30 per cent. for silver, and Mazzini acknowledged
that the financial crisis was a great difficulty; but, as he said, it
was unavoidable in revolutions. I get on but poorly in lionising, but
have at last to-day seen the Sibyls. How much of this is restoration?
how much is really Raphael? Michael Angelo’s Moses has ‘met my views’
as much as anything I have seen. Are the two figures beside it also
by M. Angelo? And tell me what is M. Angelo’s design for St. Peter’s
exactly? do the huge inside pilasters belong to him? I think it
utterly lamentable and destructive that his plan was not carried out.

Tell Blackett he really must defend S. P. Q. R. in the ‘Globe.’ It is
a most _respectable_ republic; it really (_ipse dixit_) thought of
getting a monarch, but couldn’t find one to suit.


_To his Sister._

  Rome: April 30, 1849.

Perhaps it will amuse you hereafter to have a letter commenced while
guns are firing, and I suppose men falling dead and wounded. Such is
the case on the other side the Tiber, while I peacefully write in
my distant chamber with only the sound in my ears. I went up to the
Pincian Hill and saw the smoke and heard the occasional big cannon, and
the sharp succession of skirmishers’ volleys--bang, bang, bang--away
beyond St. Peter’s. They say the French have settled down in three
positions, and do not mean to enter till the Neapolitans arrive. And
the affair of to-day is probably only with their advanced guard: the
Romans profess to have carried off four cannon and fifty prisoners, but
who knows?


  May 2.

600 prisoners and 500 killed and wounded, they say. The French have
certainly retired. But the Neapolitans are at hand.


_To his Mother._

  Rome: May 11, 1849.

The war would seem to you very small if you saw it; and except for the
nuisance of all galleries being shut, I should be very well content.
We are all safe and comfortable, with British flags hanging out of our
windows; and Lord Napier, an attaché of the British Embassy at Naples,
has been here, and is at present, I believe, at Palo, a port between
this and Civita Vecchia, where H.M.S. ‘Bulldog’ is lying, and has
arranged with Marshal Oudinot that his troops are to behave politely
to us. Which troops came again yesterday within three miles, but have
done nothing, and are said to be retiring. The Neapolitans, _i.e._
a detachment of 7,000 men near Palestrina, are stated to have got a
severe licking from the corps of Garibaldi, about 5,000, the day before
yesterday.

The only awkward thing that has happened in the city has been the
killing of four or perhaps five priests by the mob, soon after the
news of the advance of the Neapolitan army. Some say that one of them
had fired out of a window and killed a soldier; others, that they were
found making off to the Neapolitans. However, some, I don’t know the
exact number, were killed in the street. Next day the government sent
out a proclamation, and I have heard of no more outrages of this kind.
Some plundering by the troops has given trouble, but they seem to be
suppressing it.

Meantime the gates are all shut, and the streets strongly barricaded.
The Pincian gardens, the great resort for walking, are closed and
fortified, and between the Trinità dei Monti and Sta. Maria Maggiore,
in one line of streets, you can count, I think, six barricades, besides
smaller ones in the side streets.

My great affliction is that the Vatican is shut up. I got into the
Sistine Chapel, however, and St. Peter’s of course is open. These and
the Pantheon are my resources. Many of the churches are occupied as
hospitals (the Frenchmen who were taken up wounded are very kindly
and lovingly treated there, I am told; and they have sent back their
prisoners without stipulation), and the Palaces are mostly shut up.


  May 16.

Two French commissioners arrived here yesterday, and it is understood
that France has more peaceful intentions than appeared before.


  May 17.

Hostilities are suspended between us and the French. I shall be as
greatly surprised as pleased if the two republics come to a good
understanding. The people here will not like to have the Pope except as
Head of the Church, and the French will insist on something more.


_To the same._

  May 28, 1849.

At last I have got my permit for the Vatican. Once having seen a couple
of lines from Mazzini, how the officials skipped about for me! I was
ashamed really to take all they offered me, good creatures. If I could
have got this paper before, it would have been much better; but I had
great reluctance to obtrude myself on the Dictator, as the ‘Times’
calls him, and some difficulty to get at him at last, he being, of
course, ‘moltissimo occupato.’

Bulbs from the fountain of Egeria I have no chance of getting, nor
shall I see Tivoli, Albano, or Nemi, for it requires a permit from the
Minister of War, and I cannot for shame bother the Dictator any further
with my trivial English-tourist importunities.

The Romans are content the French should remain at Civita Vecchia, or
even Viterbo (for the sake of health). They sent them the other day an
immense quantity of cigars and snuff for a present.


_To T. Arnold, Esq._

  Rome: May 24, 1849.

You will have heard of our driving back the French (April 30), and
amongst many lies would probably detect the fact that the French never
entered the town. Whether the Roman Republic will stand I don’t know,
but it has under Mazzini’s inspiration shown a wonderful courage and a
glorious generosity, and at any rate has shaken to its foundations the
Odillon-Barrot Ministry, which I trust may yet go to its own place.
‘Peace be with all such!’

I live here, studying chiefly Michael Angelo, specially in the Sistine
Chapel. I believe the engraving of his ‘Creation of Eve’ there, more
than anything else, led me to Rome. I conceive myself to understand his
superiority and Leonardo da Vinci’s to Raphael, who is only natural,
while they are intellectual: he produces with, and they out of nature.
The idea of St. Peter’s has been wholly killed out of it, partly by the
horrid internal ornaments, but still more completely by the change of
the form from a Greek to a Latin cross; the latter belonging to Gothic,
which Michael Angelo rejects, because he asserts TOTALITY. There!


_To Rev. A. P. Stanley._

  Rome: May 24, 1849.

Your historic soul shall be gratified--better late than never--with an
account of the fight of the 30th of April; fatto d’armi gloriosissimo.
‘Yes, we are fighting at last.’[12] ... ‘Meantime, the Æquians and
Volscians, quitting Algidus and concentrating their scattered forces on
Velitræ, ventured under the walls of this stronghold to give battle to
the detachment of Garibaldians which the bold temper of their leader
had brought up somewhat in advance of the main body of the Romans. The
enemy, driven after a severe conflict into the town, acknowledged his
discomfiture by a retreat during the following night in the direction
of Terracina.’

There---- to be translated into the style of Livy! However, I forbear
to proceed, for it is a fatiguing exercise, and ere this goes, our
history will have something newer to record than the fuga del Re Bomba
of Sunday, 3 A.M., 30th inst.


  May 31.

If you are interested in our politics you should study the letters to
Lesseps by Mazzini. Only a vagrant artist or two represent with me our
country. Freeborn, British Consul, abides with his flag; but Lowe, the
British grocer, is at Florence. Piale, successor to Monaldini, is a
huge republican, and stands at corners in full civica uniform, shutting
up the reading-room. The Miss Pfyffers also love their country and
hate the priests; but their betrothed lovers being of the old Guardia
Nobile, take the other line. Papa Pfyffer (my landlord) follows these,
but protests against cardinalism loudly. Priests, by the way, walk
about in great comfort--arm-in-arm with a soldier, perhaps; in cafés
and legnos and all profane places they are seen circulating as freely
at least as government paper. Confession is still administered openly
with long sticks in St. Peter’s, and the Apostle’s toe multitudinously
kissed. The Bambino also drives about to see the sick in infinite
state, and is knelt to and capped universally.

Wandering about alone and with the map I have been twice hailed by the
civicas as a ‘spione,’ but after some prattle affectionately dismissed.
The barricades are very strong. A perfect _agger Servianus_ and _fossa
Quiritium_ crosses the road between the Palatine and Aventine; and
before the Porta del Popolo there is an immense work. In the line from
the Trinità del Monte to Sta. Maria Maggiore there are five or six,
besides laterals. The soldiers, so far as one sees, are well behaved;
but the government has been scolding a good deal. It is pleasant to my
pastoral soul to see them sitting by market-women and shelling peas.
I have only seen Mazzini once, but have been up to his rooms three or
four times. Anyone can go; he is sadly ἀδορύφορος for a τύραννος, and I
wonder no spirited Jesuit has yet looked in with a pistol.


  June 1.

At this moment comes a rumour to say that the French are _combinati_
with us. But no; it proves that after getting certain conditions
accepted by the Romans, Lesseps had them refused by Oudinot, so he is
off to Paris to see about it there. Meantime, I take it, Oudinot will
only sulk without fighting.


  June 3.

On the contrary, just the reverse. They are at it, at-at-at it, with
small arms frequent and occasional cannons, at the Porta San Pancrazio.
We began at four this morning. Oudinot had said distinctly he would not
attack before Monday, but his _Parisiaca fides_ brings him here this
present blessed Sunday.


  11

After something like seventeen hours’ fighting, entirely outside in the
Villa Pamfili grounds, here we are _in statu quo_, barring a good many
morti e feriti.


_To T. Arnold, Esq._

  Sunday, 10 A.M., June 3.

This is being written while guns are going off, there--, there--,
there! For the French are attacking us again. May the Lord scatter
and confound them! For a fortnight or more they have been negotiating
and talking, and inducing the government to send off men against the
Austrians at Ancona, and now here they are with their cannon. It is
a curious affair, truly; the French Envoy Plenipotentiary makes an
accommodamento; the General repudiates it, and, without waiting even
for advice from Paris, attacks.


_To J. C. Shairp, Esq._

  Rome: June 2, 1849.

Concerning Roman politics, hath not God made great newspapers, and
appointed the ‘Times’ for certain seasons? Which even though it lie....
But briefly, for P----’s sake. Lesseps, the envoy, agreed yesterday to
four conditions with the Roman government: the French army to go into
cantonments in the healthy districts hereabouts, _but not in the city_:
guaranteeing these districts against foreign invasion, but exercising
no political power, till things should be settled. But Oudinot
repudiates. There--but for the awful lies which all the newspapers,
specially the ‘Débats,’ ‘Constitutionnel,’ and ‘Times,’ indulge in, I
would not have said a word thereupon. But they _do_ lie, indeed!


  June 3.

No; your letter won’t go to-day: for the French are attacking
us--there! there! ‘But do Thou unto them as unto the Midianites. O my
God, make them like unto a wheel.’


  10 P.M.

Seventeen blessed hours have they battled--3.30 A.M. to 8.30 P.M., and
the French, I am told, have been unable to plant their cannon against
the wall. The Villa Pamfili has been taken and retaken two or three
times. But to us only smoke and occasional flashes are visible.


  June 4, Tuesday.

They can’t get in; they banged away by moonlight most of last night;
but, as I see a French officer at Toulon says, Oudinot is not the man.


  June 5.

This is the third day, and they are still outside. The Pancrazio
untaken, and the Villa Pamfili in our hands still.


  June 18, Monday.

Going, going, and to-morrow I shall be gone. We have had a fortnight
of gunnery, and what now, heaven knows: perhaps more gunnery; but
to-day I hear hardly anything. Yes--there is one. But we have
been bombarded, think of that! It is funny to see how like any
other city a besieged city looks. Unto this has come our grand
Liberty-Equality-and-Fraternity Revolution!


_To F. T. Palgrave, Esq._

  Rome: June 21, 1849.

Shall I date one more letter from Rome? I hope to get off to-day, but
Frenchmen break down bridges. Here we are in the nineteenth day of our
siege, expecting immediate assault, of which, however, I hear as yet
no notice. In the way of cannonade or fusillade, all at this moment
is silent. But the breach is fully big enough, and the last breach
was being made, they say, two or even three days ago. Meantime all is
tranquil within. The soldiers, I think, will fight to the last, and
then retire upon the castle or into the mountains. And though I suspect
some plotting is at work, yet the whole basso popolo will fight, and
the middle classes mostly, and the ‘youth’ almost universally will
_at least_ offer a passive resistance. It is curious how much like any
other city a city under bombardment looks. One goes to the Ara Celi or
the Palatine to look at the firing; one hears places named where shells
have fallen; one sees perhaps a man carrying a bit of one.

The ‘Monitore’ this morning says that the Temple of Fortune has been
damaged, and that a ball has entered the roof exactly above the Aurora
of Guido.

The Romans have suffered heavy losses in their sorties; but they seem
to have obstructed the works a good deal. The French papers spoke of
ten days as the utmost space required for preparation; and on the 12th
Oudinot announced himself ready to enter.

Assure yourself that there is nothing to deserve the name of ‘the
Terror.’ There may be timidity in the passiveness of the Moderates, and
I will not say that if they tried resistance against the Government,
they would not be suppressed, force by force. But one sees no
intimidation. Since May 4 the worst thing I have witnessed has been a
paper in MS. put up in two places in the Corso, pointing out seven or
eight men for popular resentment. This had been done at night: before
the next evening a proclamation was posted in all the streets, from
(I am sure) Mazzini’s pen, severely and scornfully castigating such
proceedings. A young Frenchman in a café, hearing his country abused,
struck an Italian; he was of course surrounded, but escaped by the
interference of the national guard and of the British Consul. The
soldiers, so far as I see, are extremely well behaved, far more seemly
than our regulars; they are about of course in the streets and cafés,
but make no disorder. Ladies walk in the Corso till after 10 P.M.
Farewell; I must go and see about my place.

Alas! it is hopeless. I am doomed to see the burning of Rome, I
suppose. The world, perhaps in the same day, will lose the Vatican and
me! However, they won’t get in yet, I guess.


  June 22.

It may have been merry in Dunfermline grey when all the bells were
ringing; but here at Rome it is by no means so. They are sounding the
storm-alarm. Venit summa dies. During the night the French made a
general attack from the Portese south to the Popolo north, and managed
to throw a body of 500 (?) men into a solitary house within the walls,
at the south-west corner.


_To the same._

  Rome: June 28, 1849.

I wrote on the 22nd, just after the misfortune of the night of
the 21st. I was not then certain of the fact, that the passage
of the breach was effected without a shot being fired; the 600
men of the Roman line who were there were seized with a panic,
and their commanding officer is said to have told them to save
themselves--anyhow, save themselves they did, and only lost a
barricade, which these poor brutes had been working at for a month. A
very fatal go, indeed; but not so immediately fatal as was expected
when I wrote, and when all the bells were ringing. The batteries of the
new Roman line commanded the breach, and the French have had to dig a
trench to secure their advance.

In the following night (of Friday, 22nd) an immense number of bombs
were thrown; they fell chiefly in the Piazza di Venezia, Piazza Sant’
Apostoli, and Via del Gesù. I do not think much harm was done, and the
people took it coolly enough. I found a crowd assembled about 9 P.M.
in the north-east corner of the Piazza Colonna, watching these pretty
fireworks, ‘ecco un altro!’ One first saw the ‘lightning’ over the
Post-office; then came the missive itself, describing its tranquil
parabola; then the distant report of the mortar; and finally the near
explosion, which occasionally took place in the air. This went on all
night. But it has not been repeated in the same degree. The Consuls
have remonstrated with Oudinot, but he, I believe, pleads ‘orders.’
The operations meantime, till yesterday, were unimportant, _e.g._ four
cannon were got up on the breach, but the Roman batteries say that
they upset them. On Sunday night, however, the 26th, there was another
general attack, and under cover of this the French got their guns
planted on the breach, and were playing with these all yesterday upon
_our_ batteries of S. Pietro in Montorio, which I fear will not be long
tenable.

This morning I hear nothing I can rely on, and considering the bombs,
I forbore to visit my look out of the Ara Celi. As for the feelings of
the people, I can of course say little. I fancy the middle-class Romans
think it rather useless work, but they don’t feel strongly enough
on the matter to make them take steps against a government which I
believe has won their respect alike by its moderation and its energy;
perhaps, too, they are afraid of the troops, under which term however
do not understand foreigners, unless you choose to give that name to
the levies of the Papal States in general. Visiting the Monte Cavallo
hospital the other day, where there are I think 200 men, three Poles
and one Frenchman were especially pointed out to me, that I might say
some words of French to them. All the others I saw were Italians, from
Bologna, Ferrara, Ravenna, Perugia, and so forth. There was one Swiss.
Most of them had received their wounds on the 3rd. Nice fellows they
seemed, young, and mostly cheerful, spite of their hurts. One had lost
an arm and a leg; another had a ball in his hip, yet to be extracted;
‘and the like.’ On the whole I incline to think they will fight it out
to the last, but chi lo sa?

We have a General Archioni, a Milanese noble, a fine brave fellow, in
the lodgings here, with his secretary and capo del stato maggiore, and
a soldier or two. He was posted at the Villa Ludovisi, and thither two
days ago we all went--fourteen, ‘Mama’ and four daughters, and niece,
and their escort, a gay party of pleasure.


  Festa di San Pietro: Friday, 29.

I have been this morning to the Colosseum, whence you see the position
very well and securely. The French batteries are too strong for the
Romans, I think; they respond but feebly. The Secretary of the General
here detected two nights ago some people making signals; he took some
‘civicas’ and went and arrested them; there were three monks and two
‘civicas’ in open communication with the French, while it was still
daylight. A good deal of this telegraphing goes on, they tell me.

The ‘panic’ of the 21st seems to have been a good deal felt as a
disgrace; these last few days they have been fighting very bravely, I
take it. The ‘Moniteur’ this morning states the number of _foreigners_
in the Roman service to be 1,650; 800 Lombards, 300 Tuscans, 250 Poles
and French, and 300 miscellaneous in Garibaldi’s corps. The national
guard is 14,000 strong; the army, I suppose, 20,000. A bomb, I am
thankful to say, has left its mark on the façade of the Gesù. I wish it
had stirred up old Ignatius. Farewell.

  A. H. C.
  Le Citoyen malgré lui.


_To M. Arnold, Esq._

  Rome: June 23, 1849.

I advertise you that I hope to be in the Geneva country in August,
reposing in the bosom of nature from the fatigues of art and the
turmoil of war!!! _Quid Romæ faciam?_ What’s politics to he, or he to
politics? But it is impossible to get out, and if one did, Freeborn,
Vice-consul, who however is a _Caccone_, says the French avan-posti
shoot at one.


  July 3.

Well, we are taken; the battery immediately to the left (as you go out)
of St. Pancrazio was carried by assault, on the night of the 29th or
morning of the 30th, while we in this corner got bombarded by way of
feint. The Roman line in several cases has behaved ill, and certainly
gave way here rather early; afterwards, however, under Garibaldi’s
command, it seems to have fought well, at least two regiments, who are
now off with him and his free corps to the Abruzzi.

On Saturday morning (30th June) the Assembly resolved to give in;
Mazzini & Co. resigned; and a deputation went off to Oudinot. Sunday
was perfectly tranquil; yesterday evening Garibaldi withdrew his troops
from the Trastevere, and went off by the S. Giovanni. To-day they
say the French will enter. Altogether, I incline to think the Roman
population _has_ shown a good deal of ‘apathy’; they did not care about
the bombs much, but they did not care to fight _very_ hard either. The
Lombards are fine fellows, and the Bolognese too; the only pity there
were not more of them. If you put the whole lot of them together,
Poles, Lombards, Tuscans, French, they would not exceed 3,000. On the
whole, the French were not _very_ barbarous, but if we had not yielded,
I believe they meant to bombard us really; and as it was, their shells
might have done irreparable harm.

At noon to-day the Assembly proclaims the Constitution! which it had
just completed.


_To F. T. Palgrave, Esq._

  Rome: July 4, 1849.

If you should happen to read in the ‘Constitutionnel’ that ‘_on
Tuesday, July 3, our army entered Rome amidst the acclamations of the
people_,’ perhaps you will not be the worse for a commentary on the
text.

On Monday evening Garibaldi, with all the free corps except some
Lombards under Medici, and with a good many Roman troops in addition,
set off for the Abruzzi. On Tuesday at noon the Assembly proclaimed
the _Constitution_ on the Campidoglio. I went there and heard it.
There were present perhaps 800 or 900 people. This done, I presume
the deputies dispersed, the labours of the Constituent being clearly
completed. The French had already begun their entry, and occupied the
Ponte Sisto, and, I believe, the Trinità dei Monti. About half-past
four I went out, and presently saw a detachment coming up from the
Palazzo Borghese to the Condotti. I stood in the Corso with some thirty
of the people, and saw them pass. Fine working soldiers indeed, dogged
and business-like; but they looked a little awkward, while the people
screamed and hooted, and cried, ‘Viva la Reppublica Romana!’ When they
had got past some young simpleton sent a tin pail after them; four or
five faced round with bayonets presented, while my young friend cut
away up the Corso double quick. They went on. At this moment some Roman
bourgeois, as I fancy, but perhaps a foreigner, said something either
to express his sense of the folly of it, or his sympathy with the
invaders. He was surrounded, and I saw him buffeted a good deal, and
there was a sword lifted up, but I think not bare; I was told he got
off. But a priest who walked and talked publicly in the Piazza Colonna
with a Frenchman was undoubtedly killed I know his friends, and saw
one of them last night. Poor man! he was quite a liberal ecclesiastic,
they tell me, but certainly not a prudent one.

To return to my own experience. After this the column passed back by
another street into the Corso, and dispersed the crowd with the bayonet
point; they then went on and occupied, I take it, the Post-office,
which I afterwards found full of them. About six o’clock I walked
out again, and found the Monte Cavallo, the Palazzo Barberini, and
other places occupied. I thus missed the entry of Oudinot and his
staff. I got back only just to see the final dragoons; but an English
acquaintance informed me that in passing by the Café Nuovo, where an
Italian tricolor hung from the window, Oudinot plucked at it, and
bid it be removed. The French proceeded to do this, but the Romans
intervened; Cernuschi, the barricade commissioner, took it down,
kissed it, and, as I myself saw, carried it in triumph amidst cheers
to the Piazza Colonna. I did not follow, but on my bolder friend’s
authority I can state that here the French moved up with their bayonets
and took it from Cernuschi, stripping him moreover of his tricolor
scarf. One hears reports of as many as eight Romans being killed for
fraternising with the Gaul, and of some of the French themselves having
been assassinated. My friend told me two shots were fired from a café
in the Corso when the troops passed that way at half-past four. This
morning I have been to the field of battle and looked at the trenches.
I condescended to speak with two Frenchmen, consoling myself by an
occasional attempt at sarcasm. They said the Romans did nothing at all
when the batteries were assaulted; but the artillery had been well
directed. You see lots of villas, six or seven at least, in ruins. S.
Pietro in Montorio is in a sad state; balls have come in and knocked
great holes, and the east end is nearly in ruins, but the paintings are
most, if not all, quite safe--those of Sebastian del Piombo certainly;
and Bramante’s chapel is wholly untouched. My French officer said the
troops were about 25,000. Almost all are in the city. The Roman forces
are to withdraw immediately into cantonments assigned by Oudinot, and
guaranteed against the Austrians. The national guard will be disarmed,
and then all will be considered safe. On the whole, the French soldiers
seemed to me to show excellent temper. At the same time, some faces
I have seen are far more brutal than the worst Garibaldian; and we
have hitherto seen nothing so unpleasing in the female kind as the
vivandière. The Gaul is certainly the stronger animal, but assuredly
the greater beast.

The American banker tells me he was told that in the morning the
French were cheered. I rather doubt it; but I believe the bourgeoisie
in part are very glad it is over. Naturally, for there was to have
been a regular bombardment; so said my French friend. They had got a
large supply ready, just come from France. The priest is not dead,
and perhaps will survive; but another, I hear, was hewed in pieces
for shouting ‘Viva Pio Nono,’ ‘Abasso la Reppublica,’ &c. Oudinot’s
proclamation is expected every moment. They say it will declare a stage
of siege; name a military governor and commander of the garrison;
dissolve the national guard and the Assembly, and so forth.


_To the same._

  Rome: July 6, 1849.

Medium of all desirable communication with my brethren at home! you
shall receive one more despatch. I think of going off to Albano, or
some of these places, which now one supposes will be attainable.
Tivoli, they say, is dubious. Garibaldi went off that way, and the
French have sent a detachment after him, with orders, one is told, to
give no quarter.

It is a sight to make one gnash one’s very wisdom teeth to go about
the fallen Jerusalem and behold the abomination of desolation standing
where it ought not; not that the French misbehave, so far as I see,
individually. They appear to me to display considerable temper. Still
one is told that they carried off a lot of lemons, &c., the first
night without paying for them. One soldier, they say, was stabbed by a
Trasteverine woman at the Ponte Sisto for insulting her. Any way, one
sees how ‘riling’ it is to be conquered.

I am greatly rejoiced meantime that they have been obliged to proclaim
the state of siege. They make much of the adhesion of the army. I don’t
exactly know how far it has been given. Two regiments went off with
Garibaldi and one heard divers stories. However, with the alternative
of dissolution and beggary, it is no marvel that the Roman line, not
a popular body, should consent to give its service to any de-facto
government.

Last night, for the first time, ‘by order,’ we were all driven in at
half-past nine. I found a bayonet point within a few inches of me as I
came along the Corso, while the battalion was clearing it.

Has the ‘Times’ correspondent told the funny way in which they have
shown their spite, by daubing out all the French sign-boards?

The natives do not universally quit the cafés when the French come in;
at the Bon Goût in the Piazza di Spagna they appear to be treated with
polite indifference; in the Café Nuovo, such unmistakable disgust was
evinced that, considering also its size and importance, for you know
it is a whole palace, and _the_ great place of resort, they have seen
fit to shut it up and fill it with soldiers. Elsewhere the enemies feed
together, but with a pale very distinctly marked between them.

Mazzini was still here yesterday. Galetti, president of the Assembly,
and commander of the Carbineers, was taken under American protection
(as I hear); otherwise he would have been arrested; but the political
arrests have been limited to some half-dozen agitators. Ciceruacchio
got off with an American passport. You know the Assembly sat on the day
after the French entrée; Mazzini was present. They passed some three or
four decrees, and put them up in the streets. Oudinot’s proclamation
dissolving the old government came out an hour or two after.

I told you that Garibaldi lost his negro on the 3rd. ‘Il Moro,’ as they
called him, was the son of a rich negro merchant at Monte Video, who,
though married and father of a family, yet, for the love of the Italian
captain, came over to fight by his side, which they say he never
quitted. I have seen each separately, but not together. There is a Mrs.
Garibaldi; she went out with him to the Abruzzi. I hope the French
won’t cut them to pieces, but vice versâ.


  July 7.

Last night I had the pleasure of abandoning a café on the entrance of
the French. The Italians expect you to do so. It was quite composedly
done; no bravado or hurry.

Mazzini, on the 30th, after the capture of the bastion, proposed to
the Assembly that it, with the army, should quit Rome, carry off the
artillery, and occupy some stronghold. But the Assembly at first would
not; and after, when it would, could not. The course actually taken
was repugnant to Mazzini’s views, who was anxious to save Rome from
destruction, but at the same time to hold out somewhere and somehow to
the last.

The Chigi chapel, in Sta. Maria del Popolo, is a remarkable case.
Raphael’s Jonah is untouched, but the statue next it has been chipped
in two places by a ball. Nothing else is hurt.


_To the same._

  Rome: July 13, 1849.

We are all in admiration here of M. de Corcelles’ statement, that
during the twenty-six days that elapsed of the siege, not one bomb
had been thrown into the city. I dare say a large proportion of what
were thrown were grenades, but that there were bombs, in the strictest
sense, is undoubted. A military friend whom I can trust has seen
_one_, and I think I myself have. Moreover, the grenades were large.
And I presume M. de Corcelles will prefer saying plainly that he was
misinformed, to the alternative of professing not to have meant to deny
grenades. On the night of the 22nd, 150 missives of the bomb or the
grenade species are said to have been thrown into the town; 130 were
counted by an acquaintance of mine, a Roman; at the rate they were
being plied while I was looking on myself, I cannot doubt some figure
like this must be correct.

On the night of the 29th, a French officer told an English gentleman
the detachment in the Borghese grounds was ordered to fire 120 shots
into the Piazza di Spagna quarter, as a feint; they had no particular
aim, but seeing a light in a high window, they took it for their mark,
and--_hinc illæ lachrymæ_--hence those balls and bombs, or, I beg
pardon, grenades perhaps, which frightened us out of our propriety into
the primo piano.

Mazzini, through the negotiation of Mr. Cass, the American Chargé
d’affaires, received a passport in his own name from the French, and
went off viâ Civita Vecchia, with a bearer of despatches from the
same Mr. Cass, I think, on Tuesday last, the 10th. He would go into
Switzerland. This is quite positive.

On Monday I was at Albano. The French, seventy horse, came in that
afternoon at four. The Spaniards meantime had just the previous night
occupied Genzano, three miles off. One hears that the French have
turned them out of it.

Two newspapers appear in Rome besides the official gazette, called the
‘Giornale di Roma’; one of these, the ‘Costituzionale,’ belongs to the
_prete_ interest; the other, ‘La Speranza dell’ Epoca,’ to Mamiani and
coterie. They are under a military censure, but liberally exercised; a
new appointment was freely commented on _in malam partem_ yesterday by
this latter print.

The Principessa di Belgiojoso is still here, looking after her feriti
at the Monte Cavallo, who, as I think by Mr. Cass’s intercession, are
allowed to remain there; at first, orders were given that they should
be removed within a week. Garibaldi is said to have effected a junction
at Terni with Forbes, an Englishman holding rank here of colonel, I
think, and commanding a small detachment.

Add to the list of fortunate escapes, that a ball struck the façade
of the Palazzo Sciarra on the terzo piano. On the secondo in front is
the gallery, whose ample windows give light to the famous Modestia e
Vanità of Leonardo da Vinci, the Violin Player of Raphael, Titian’s
Bella Donna, and others, most of which, however, have been put into the
passage for safety.

Freeborn, the Consul, has got _one_ bomb in his bank. Do _you_ know
the difference between the two things, bomb and grenade? bomb has two
handles, and grenade is a hollow ball with a hole in it; that is all I
know. Grenades, they say, burst in the air; otherwise they are as big
as bombs, and by no means innocent things.


  July 14.

Giving the French and the ‘Times’ credit for some degree of
truth-telling, the simple truth would appear to be, that we have been
grenaded, not bombarded. It is possible that the cannon and _mortars_
were pointed merely to the breach, and that the bombs and balls that
came in were merely bad shots. But the _obus_ (singular or plural)
must certainly have been pointed against the very heart of the city,
the Pantheon and Capitol; and a discharge of 150 or more grenades
in a single night is, if not a bombardment, still---- My authority
about Mazzini’s movements is[13] Miss Fuller, an American, who was in
immediate communication with Mazzini and Mr. Cass, and who was a party
to the negotiation. She is now gone to Rieti.


_To the same._

  Geneva: August 7.

I shall go and see Mont Blanc, among other duties (for I am finishing
my education before coming to town), and move homeward by the Rhine.
I saw the French enter Rome, and then went to Naples, which I greatly
enjoyed. Thence direct by Genoa and Turin to this place, and from here
by Interlaken home. I am full of admiration of Mazzini. But, on the
whole, ‘Farewell, politics, utterly! What can I do?’ Study is much more
to the purpose.

This is a dull sky-and-water atmosphere, after the blue sweaters of the
south; and the English locust of course prevails in it.


_To T. Arnold, Esq._

  University Hall, London: October 29, 1849.

Well, here I am, and with Palgrave, who is breakfasting with me in my
hall, where we all--_i.e._ myself and my eleven undergraduates (that
should be thirty, and I hope will be some day)--breakfast and dine
daily. Here, I take it, I shall remain for some little time; though
even as you talk of coming over here, so I, believing that I shall be
kicked out for mine heresies’ sake, and doubtful of success in literary
doings, have sometimes looked at my feet and considered the antipodes,
reflecting however much on the natural conservatising character of
our years after thirty. As I say, I have no confidence in my tenure.
For intolerance, O Tom, is not confined to the cloisters of Oxford,
or the pews of the Establishment, but comes up, like the tender herb,
_partout_, and is indeed in a manner indigenous in the heart of the
family man of the middle classes.

Do we not work best by digging deepest? by avoiding polemics, and
searching to display the real thing? If only one could do the
latter!--Emerson is an example, and also Carlyle, and in his kind M.A.
Yet [Greek: ἕκαστος ἔχει τὸ ἑαυτου χάρισμα] and οὐ πάντες χωροῦσι
τοῦτον τὸν λὸγον. Let B----s delight to bark and bite, if indeed God
has made them so.

Interrupted by my one pupil--for you observe that undergraduates all
attend the University College professors, and I only keep a hall, as an
M. A. of old times did in the days of professors at Oxford--and out of
the eleven only have one pupil--I now resume to say farewell.


_To J. C. Shairp, Esq._

  University Hall: October 31, 1849.

You and Walrond may read this,[14] but don’t show it to others; nor,
therefore, name it, as if you do, they’ll importune. You are nice
discreet creatures, I know.

I wish you would come and see me on your way to Oxford. London,
generally speaking, is lonely--for evil at any rate and partly for
good. A loneliness relieved by evening parties is not delightful, but I
get on well enough in general, looking forward always to the Long. If I
do not get a pupil for the Continent, I shall come up to Scotland.

You do not perhaps enjoy at Rugby a fine yellow fog this morning. We
do.


_To F. T. Palgrave, Esq._

[On receiving a present of Goethe’s works.]

  University Hall, London: November 18, 1849.

Thanks many, specially perhaps for the note. I had a great mind
to say to you, ‘As soon as you give me the Goethe, we will cut.’
Let us suppose that done, and look forward _tout-de-suite_ to a
recommencement--‘Cut and come again’ being the true motto for all
proper intercourse. I think the best way of looking at a present is as
a thing to be much more valuable some time hereafter than just now;
it is more properly a future than a present. Cast thy Goethe upon
the waters; give with thy left hand, and let not thy right hand of
fellowship ask what thy left doeth.

And so on, whereof enough.


_To ----_

It is a good deal forgotten that we came into this world to do, not
kindness to others, but our own duty, to live soberly, righteously,
and godly, not benevolently, philanthropically, and tenderheartedly.
To earn his own bread honestly--in the strictest sense of the word
_honestly_--to do plain straightforward work or business well and
thoroughly, not with mere eye-service for the market, is really quite a
sufficient task for the ordinary mortal.


_To T. Arnold, Esq._

  University Hall, London: January 3, 1850.

Here I am, just about to recommence the crambe repetita of pædagogy
after a brief fortnight’s holiday. Of what use is pædagogy? Some, I
suppose; and as much probably as any other occupation one is in the
way of getting harnessed to. Cast, therefore, thy syntax on the waters.
But in the meantime [Greek: εἴσελθε εὶς τὸ ταμιεῖόν σου, καὶ κλείοας
την θύραν σου, κ.τ.λ.]

There is a great blessing, I sometimes think, in being set down amongst
uncongenial people, for me at least who am over-provocable. Consider
the coal upon the fireplace, how it came to blaze thus: was it not
concealed and compressed for long world-ages, never expecting to
see the light again, far less that in its own self there was light,
heat, and joyfulness, having no sort of imagination that it should be
transmuted into, or shall we say, wooed, wedded and incorporated with
the subtle atmosphere itself? Consider, I say, the long preparation
of this strange marriage of coal and oxygen air, and say, if you can,
moreover, when was there most real worthiness of existence, in the
grimy or the blazy period, in the imprisonment or deliverance of the
gases, the incarnation or apotheosis, the suppression or expression,
&c. &c. &c.?


  Sunday, January 27.

As in old times at breakfast in Oriel, so here for an afternoon walk
and dinner I am waiting for M. and, I believe, E. They tell me you like
the ‘Bothie’; it was a pleasant anticipation to me that you would,
while it was yet in swaddling-clothes. They have reprinted me at
Cambridge, Massachusetts!


_To a Friend._

[In answer to some criticisms on ‘Amours de Voyage.’]

Good heavens! don’t be afraid. You are a very gentle beast, and of
a good conscience, and roar me like any sucking-dove. _Parturiunt
montes_--you are not half trenchant enough. Yet your criticism is not
exactly what I wanted. What I want assurance of is in the way of
execution rather than conception. If I were only half as sure of the
bearableness of the former as I am of the propriety of the latter, I
would publish at once. Gott und Teufel! my friend, you don’t suppose
all that comes from myself! I assure you it is extremely _not_ so.

You’re a funny creature, my dear old fellow: if one don’t sing you a
ballant, or read you a philosophic sermonette, if one don’t talk about
the gowans or faith, you’re not pleased. However, I believe that the
execution of this is so poor, that it makes the conception a fair
subject of disgust. You cannot possibly be too severe and truculent
about the execution, and I agree quite as to the correctness (which
is the only question) of what you say; except that I am not sure that
scenes and scenery would exactly improve the matter.

But do you not, in the conception, find any final strength of mind in
the unfortunate fool of a hero? I have no intention of sticking up for
him, but certainly I did not mean him to go off into mere prostration
and defeat. Does the last part seem utterly sceptical to your sweet
faithful soul?

Your censure of the conception almost provoked me into publishing,
because it showed how washy the world is in its confidences. There is a
Roland for your Oliver, my boy. But I probably shan’t publish, for fear
of a row with my committee.


_To the same._

  June 19, 1850.

It continues to strike me how ignorant you, and I, and other young
men of our set are. Actual life is unknown to an Oxford student, even
though he is not a mere Puseyite, and goes on jolly reading parties.

Enter the arena of your brethren, and go not to your grave without
knowing what common merchants and solicitors, much more sailors
and coalheavers, are acquainted with. Ignorance is a poor kind of
innocence. The world is wiser than the wise, and as innocent as the
innocent; and it has long been found out what is the best way of taking
things. ‘The earth,’ said the great traveller, ‘is much the same
wherever we go’; and the changes of position which women and students
tremble and shilly-shally before, leave things much as they found them.
_Cœlum non animum mutant._ The winter comes and destroys all, but in
the spring the old grasses come up all the greener.

Let us not sit in a corner and mope, and think ourselves clever, for
our comfort, while the room is full of dancing and cheerfulness. The
sum of the whole matter is this. Whatsoever your hand findeth to do, do
it without fiddle-faddling; for there is no experience, nor pleasure,
nor pain, nor instruction, nor anything else in the grave whither thou
goest. When you get to the end of this life, you won’t find another
ready-made, in which you can do without effort what you were meant to
do with effort here.


_To R. W. Emerson, Esq._

  University Hall, Gordon Square: July 22, 1850.

Why I have let six months pass away without acknowledging the copy of
your ‘Representative Men,’ which I received and read so thankfully, I
do not know; unless it be that I was not willing to put an end at once
to the relation of debtor which resulted. To have a distinct claim
on one for a letter constitutes a sort of connection, even with the
Atlantic between us.

I am here at the end of my first session in London, not much the worse,
nor much the wiser. I am not sorry myself to be where I am: in very
many ways, it is a greater seclusion than the academic shades you took
pleasure in looking at, at Oxford.


_To T. Arnold, Esq._

  University Hall: July 23, 1850.

I am rejoiced to find you busy and _in mediis rebus_ so soon. Your
population of course won’t be very beautiful and attractive, but all
the truer to fact in general for having plenty of alloy, and that
is a comfort to a certain extent; earthly paradises being mostly
milk-and-watery, and not long to last. Van Diemen’s Land with its
convict basis has got at any fate something of the _tantum radice
ad Tartara_, to begin with, and _quantum vertice_ may come. In new
colonies, I suppose, no amount of bishops and archdeacons can resist
the general indifferentist tendencies of the commercial English
middle-class, to whom the world is committed for the present.

I find, meantime, even the small amount of business which I have to do
in this place beneficial to me, even the bank-books and cash-accounts.


_To J. C. Shairp, Esq._

  University Hall: March 9, 1851.

_Ex nihilo nihil._ He who does not come at all, does not come with
goose quills, and _à fortiori_ not with swan quills. Thus the logicians.

You must, therefore, correct your exercises with your own goose
feathers. But, tell me. Have you got such big boys this half-year that
the ordinary-sized instrument will not apply to their Latin prose? Why
don’t you come up here and buy them for yourself?

We are still, I believe, travelling about the sun, round and round,
and round and round, in the old foolish fashion. It is certainly a
very funny way for the _anima mundi_ to amuse itself. But chacun à son
goût. In the midst of life we are in death, for suppose the _anima
mundi_ were to take a fancy to do something else, to go backwards and
forwards, or even round the other way!

Cudwith, I am told, has an admirable disquisition on ‘A Plastic
Nature,’ in a parliamentary sense, I suppose; for otherwise, would
it not be pantheism? But indeed that is a mistake, for I hold it to
be perfectly constitutional language, entirely in the spirit of our
institutions in (Church and State, that is to say) Natural and Revealed
Religion. Consider these things; watch and pray, that is the right way,
for self and friends, among whom, believe me,

  A. H. C.


_To T. Arnold, Esq._

  University Hall, Gordon Square: March 16, 1851.

I sent you five or six copies of the poem you were so friendly as
to like so well. By the time they reached you, you would probably
have been properly disenchanted, with a view to which contingency I
fortified them by two Idylls of a truer pastoral poet or poetess. These
you may accept, for the lack of better, as my wedding-present. The
following you may accept or not, as you please:--

  On grass, on gravel, in the sun,
    And now beneath the shade,
  They went in pleasant Kensington.

Let it remind you of the ancient Kensington Gardens, Fresh from the
oven, it is, I assure you, _tibi primo confisum_. I am still resident
in Gordon Square, and very little certain whether I shall or not
continue so. The work does, however, well enough.


  May 16, 1851.

This has lingered, I believe, chiefly because I desired to add some
self-introducing phrase to your wife, the precise form of which was
difficult; so pray give what you think becoming an ancient ally of her
husband’s--best wishes--_submission_? For to a certain extent, even at
this distance, old friends have to make their graceful withdrawal. It
seems to me, at any rate on this side the water, that a wife is a sort
of natural enemy to a man’s friends.

I, like you, have jumped over a ditch for the fun of the experiment,
and would not be disinclined to be once again in a highway with my
brethren and companions. But _Spartam nactus es, hanc orna_. And you,
I should think, though amongst the poor sinful blackguards of yearly
multiplying convicts and convictidæ, may make some pretty thing out of
your Sparta.

Nothing is very good anywhere, I am afraid. I could have gone cracked
last year with one thing or another, I think, but the wheel comes round.


_To ----_

  January 1852.

I certainly am free to tell you that while I do fully think that
the Christian religion is the best, or perhaps the only really good
religion that has appeared, on the other hand, as to how it appeared,
I see all possible doubt. Whether Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John wrote
the gospels, is profoundly dubious. St. Paul wrote his epistles, I
should think, pretty certainly, but he had _seen_ next to nothing.
The religion of those epistles is very different from that of the
gospels, or of St. James’s epistle. The whole origin of Christianity
is lost in obscurity; if the facts are to be believed, it is simply on
trust, because the religion of which they profess to be the origin is
a good one. But its goodness is not proved by them; we find it out for
ourselves by the help of good people, good books, &c. &c. Such is my
present feeling, and the feeling of many. But I don’t urge it on any
one, or mention it, except when I am specially asked, and seldom then.
You remember you complained of my silence.

I mean to wait, but at present that’s what I think. A great many
intelligent and moral people think Christianity a bad religion. I
don’t, but I am not sure, as at present preached, it is quite the
truth. Meantime, ‘the kingdom of heaven cometh not of observation,’ but
‘is in ourselves.’


_To ----_

  London: January 1852.

The single life, according to the doctrine of compensation, has some
superiorities, as, for example, that of being more _painful_, which,
in a state of things that offers but little opportunity for elevated
_action_, may be considered a temptation to the aspiring temper. To
live in domestic comfort, toiling in some business not in itself of any
great use, merely for the sake of bread for the household, does look at
times a little ignoble, or at any rate unchivalrous. The Sydney project
had some little relish of chivalry in it. What I looked forward to
originally, in case of not going to Sydney, was unmarried poverty and
literary work.


_To ----_

  London: January 1852.

People who have got at all accustomed to write as authors are so
incapable of writing, or even speaking, except ‘in character,’ and
will run through a whole list of dramatis personæ as occasion occurs,
without giving you a chance of seeing what they really are off the
stage; if they try to be sincere, it often makes bad worse. There!
that is one of the mischiefs and miseries of authorship which deters
me. Ten years hence, perhaps! which would not be at all too late;
but if never, no matter. I have myself been rather spoilt by somewhat
_over_-quicksighted men, and thus have got into a perverse habit of
hiding. Have you looked at my sometime pamphlet?[15] I should not write
it now, you must know, I am wiser; but it meant something at the time.

Pictorial-ness, yes; _that_, when it becomes a wonderful vision of all
things, is the ‘Spirit of the Universe.’ The pictorial attitude is not
a good one for one’s continuous life, but for a season it transports
one out of reality.


  February 21, 1852.

I may perhaps be idle now; but when I was a boy, between fourteen and
twenty-two throughout, I may say, you don’t know how much regular
drudgery I went through. Holidays after holidays, when I was at
school, after a week or so of recreation, which very rarely came in
an enjoyable form to me, the whole remaining five or six weeks I used
to give to regular work at fixed hours. That wasn’t so very easy for
a schoolboy, spending holidays, not at home, but with uncles, aunts,
and cousins. All this, and whatever work, less rigorous through pretty
regular, that has followed since during the last ten years, has been,
so far as external results go, perhaps a mere blank and waste; nothing
very tangible has come of it; but still it is some justification to
me for being less strict with myself now. Certainly, as a boy, I had
less of boyish enjoyment of any kind whatever, either at home or at
school, than nine-tenths of boys, at any rate of boys who go to school,
college, and the like; certainly, even as a man I think I have earned
myself some title to live for some little interval, I do not say in
enjoyment, but without immediate devotion to particular objects; on
matters as it were of business.

A bad style is as bad as bad manners, and manners you admit do mean
something. Things really ill-written it does one a little harm to read.
Would you forgive bad music because it was well meant? discord because
concordantly intended?


  Sunday Morning, London: March 1852.

Shall I begin by recommending patience about all questions, moral,
mystical, &c.? It is not perhaps simply one’s business in life to
‘envisager’ the most remarkable problems of humanity and the universe
simply for the sole benefit of having so done; still we may be well
assured that only time can work out any sort of answer to them for us.
‘_Solvitur ambulando._’ Meantime, in defence of silence, I have always
an impression that what is taken to talk with is lost to act with; you
cannot speak your wisdom and have it.

It is rain, rain, rain, and universal umbrellas travelling churchward.
I meant to get another walk to Chelsea to see Mrs. Carlyle: but the
waters are covering the face of the New Road, and the omnibuses,
doubtless, would be full.

All things become clear to me by work more than by anything else.
Any kind of drudgery will help one out of the most uncommon either
sentimental or speculative perplexity; the attitude of work is the only
one in which one can see things properly. One may be afraid sometimes
of destroying the beauty of one’s dreams by doing anything, losing
sight of what perhaps one will not be able to recover; it need not be
so.

As to mysticism, to go along with it even counter to fact and to reason
may sometimes be tempting, though to do so would take me right away
off the terra firma of practicable duty and business into the limbo of
unrevealed things, the forbidden terra incognita of vague hopes and
hypothetical aspirations. But when I lose my legs, I lose my head; I am
seized with spiritual vertigo and meagrims unutterable.

                      It seems His newer will
  We should not think at all of Him, but turn,
  And of the world that He has given us make
  What best we may.

What we are we know (says the beloved Apostle, does he not?), or at any
rate, can make some sort of guess, which is much more than we can about
what we shall be: howbeit we know, or rather hope, that if we have done
something here, it will count for something there; nor will those be
nothing to each other there that have consorted faithfully here.

Lay not your hand upon the veil of the inner sanctuary, to try and lift
it up; go, thou proselyte of the gate, and do thy service where it is
permitted thee. Is it for nothing, but for the foolish souls of men
to be discontented and repine and whimper at, that He made this very
tolerably beautiful earth, with its logic and its arithmetic, and its
exact and punctual multifarious arrangements, &c. &c.? Is it the end
and object of all finite creation that sentimental human simpletons
may whine about their infinite longings? Was it ordered that twice two
should make four, simply for the intent that boys and girls should be
cut to the heart that they do not make five? Be content, when the veil
is raised, perhaps they will make five! who knows?


  April 3.

As for the objects of life, heaven knows! they differ with one’s
opportunities. (_a_) Work for others--political, mechanical, or as it
may be. (_b_) Personal relations. (_c_) Making books, pictures, music,
&c. (_d_) Living in one’s shell. ‘They also serve who only stand and
wait.’ I speak as a philosopher, otherwise fool; but you may look at
things under some such heads.

It is odd that I was myself in a most Romanizing frame of mind
yesterday, which I very rarely am. I was attracted by the spirituality
of it. But what has hitherto always come before me as the truth is
rather that--

                      It seems His newer will
  We should not think at all of Him, but turn,
  And of the world that He has given us make
  What best we can.


_To ----_

  Rugby: April 11.

I am enjoying myself here. Jowett, the great Balliol tutor, is here.
This morning I walked out into broad and breezy pasture-fields,
eastwards, looking towards Naseby, where perhaps we shall ride
to-morrow. Rugby, you know, lies not far from Naseby field, near the
source of the Shakespearian Avon; a branch railway to Peterborough runs
up through the wide pasture-slopes, pretty well past the very sources.
We are on the blue lias formation, from which, westward, you pass at
Coventry into the red sand-stone, which stretches away to Liverpool;
while eastward, within four miles, the Northamptonshire villages are
all built of their native yellow-brown oolite. The Northamptonshire
peasantry, also, in their knee-breeches and fustian gaiters, have a
yellow-brown oolitish appearance.

In the Warwickshire physiognomy I can frequently detect the dross of
Shakespeare. You have another bright, light-haired, sanguine, less
bilious type, which perhaps comes of the Northmen--for our villages all
hereabouts, Barby, Kilsby, Buckby, Naseby, including Rugby itself, have
the characteristic Danish _by_ termination.


  April 13.

Well, we went our long ride: not quite to Naseby, but to the Hemplow
Hills, a little short of it, starting at 2.30 and returning at seven.
All through fields with chains of gates, broad grassy swells, where the
Northamptonshire beef is fed, or used to be, for London markets; Shairp
on his hunter, the pride of his heart, leading the way, and opening the
gates, and commanding in chief. A party of six we were--two ladies,
Mrs. Arnold and Miss Shairp; Conington was one. At 7.30 we reassembled,
to dine with Shairp. Our course was eastward towards the sources of
Avon; the wells of Avon are just below Naseby village, I believe.
The whole country is a sheet of pasture (rather brown at present),
over which you may well imagine King Charles and his Cavaliers riding
south-westward from Leicester, to run their heads against the wall of
Cromwell’s army.

The country is singularly destitute of gentlemen’s houses, and has
a solitary unoccupied appearance, with its wide fields and its
field-roads. A railway, however, with a single line of rails, and, I
believe, three trains a day, looking quite afraid of what it is doing,
runs up through them from Rugby to Stamford.


_To ----_

  London: May 24.

The flowers are a great deal too beautiful for me, and I a great deal
too unbeautiful for them. However, here they are now standing in my
unartificial arrangement, glorifying this unfortunate apartment. I
have not failed to find out the scarlet azalea. I have put it in a
wine-glass with the lily, which, after all, is my chief friend.

How beautiful the falling leaves of flowers are! not decayed, not
even as yet decaying, but ripe, full to their fullest of growth and
adolescence. I cannot prevail upon myself to empty the wine-glass,
the surface of whose water is covered with fallen geranium petals,
though there are still buds enough opening and opened to make a
fair show. The kalmias still survive; they will perhaps last till
Thursday--sufficiently, at least, to satisfy the eyes of a lover of
falling petals.

People should not be _very_ sceptical about things in general. ‘_Wen
Gott betrügt, ist wohl betrogen._’ There are plenty of good things in
the world, and good persons. Fitness is a great deal, but truth is a
great deal more. If things are good, we ought to accept them as such;
looking at _them_, and not thinking of our own fitness.


_To R. W. Emerson, Esq._

  London: June 17, 1852.

My dear Emerson,--I hope a letter from me will not be a disagreeable
visitor, though it is to be all about business, and that entirely my
own business. The business is, that I entertain thoughts of emigrating
to your side of the water. University Hall has not flourished; I have
left it some months. I am at present merely Professor of English
Language and Literature at University College, here, the stipend for
which honourable position amounts to some 30_l._ a year. Meantime,
like the rest of mankind, I wish to be married and am as good or bad
as engaged. Is there any chance, do you think, of earning bread and
water, if not bread and flesh, anywhere between the Atlantic and the
Mississippi, by teaching Latin, Greek, or English?

I am half loath now, after nearly three years’ apprenticeship, to quit
this great town. It is almost like beginning to go down from a high
mountain top which it has taken long hours to get to. But I dare say it
would be for the best.


_To ----_

  Weybridge: July 30, 1852.

Last night I came down here with Farrer, and walked straight away
from the station to Chertsey. We went to St. Anne’s Hill, where there
is a fine view; from it you can see Richmond and Betchworth beeches:
thence across the ferry to Laleham, where Arnold lived before he went
to Rugby, and where I had never been. We found our way to the house he
used to occupy--a solidish red brick place, with a narrow turn for a
carriage in front, and a tolerable garden alongside: it is unoccupied.
We also looked in at the church window, and made out the pulpit whence
he used to fulminate, and saw four gravestones in the churchyard over
his mother, two sisters, and another, to me unknown, relation. We got
back through the meadows only about 9 P.M.

And this morning I have been to Chobham. I took the Ordnance Map, and
walked, I should say, about eight miles, by road and by common, through
sun and shade, specially the former, and about half-past twelve found
myself seated under a beech avenue, looking out over wide heathy banks
to the westward, and to the southward into a sort of wide, tolerably
rich, and treey upper valley; the avenue leading to iron gates at the
south-east end; some clumps of Scotch firs on the heath to the north,
visible through the opposite rows of beeches. Really a very pretty
place indeed. I walked down under the house, and on into the village,
and refreshed myself at a tavern called the Sun, and walked on three
miles to the railway, and so home. Certainly Chobham is a remarkably
nice place--so green and rich, close to the very edge of the wide waste
heath, and looking abroad far over all the expanse from Bagshot to
Epsom, and I know not what more. The distance was dull in the heat of
noon.

There is a letter from Emerson, with general encouragement towards
America, and urging a preliminary visit by ‘first ship.’


_To R. W. Emerson, Esq._

  London: August 6, 1852.

Your letter came, a welcome surprise to me, on Saturday last. My best
way of thanking you is, I believe, simply to accept your kind proposal.
You will, I dare say, not refuse to recognise thanks in that shape. My
‘first ship,’ however, cannot, I fear, be earlier than the very middle
of October. Come, however, I shall, and avail myself of your proffered
hospitalities.


_To ----_

  Min-y-don, Colwyn: August 1852.

I have been making farewell visits[16] to my relations. I have ridden
seven miles and back to Conway, and walked two miles and back to make a
call; all of which, however, scarcely keeps me properly awake in this
dreamy seaside place, and dreamy late summer weather. I am continually
stopping to look out at the view through the window before my table.
I look out on the Little Orme’s Head, with its rounded weather-beaten
limestone rocks. We are here half-way between Abergele and Conway,
the sea a hundred yards off, with a bit of a lawn between, ending in
a gorse hedge on the top of a steep bank going down direct upon the
shore, in which bank now runs the line of railway; the Little Orme’s
Head, four miles off, closing the view of the coast.




LETTERS.

FROM 1852 TO 1853.

AMERICA.


_To ----_

  On board the ‘Canada’: Friday, November 5, 1852.

Here you see my first written words on board H.M.S. ‘Canada,’ which is
tossing like fury against a dead-ahead wind.

Saturday night we passed Holyhead, Sunday coasted Ireland, and passed
the ‘Asia’ steamer with all her sails set. This day week we are to be
in port, spite of head wind.


  Sunday, November 7.

A very Sunday-like Sunday indeed: fair wind and bright weather; church
service in the chief cabin, read by the surgeon, with sermon by the
Rev. Dr. Cook, of the Presbyterian Established Church in Quebec:
the lieutenant in his uniform, and some ten or twelve broad-chested
sailors, in their blue woollen shirts, occupying the end of the cabin,
aft--fine fellows as need be seen. Since then, a deal of promenading
on the quarter-deck. I got sick of the publicities, however, about
two o’clock, and come down to my cabin to scribble. Lowell, who is on
board, is very friendly indeed. Thackeray and I also get on.

We have on board a Dragoon officer and a young Engineer officer, bound
for Bermuda; two American medical students; a young half-English New
York candidate for orders; a Manchester youth, on his first trip
to New Orleans; a Cambridge travelling bachelor, with his brother,
an Oxford man, knocked up with work in the University crew, going
to Montreal; a Comptroller of the Customs in Halifax, and perhaps a
well-to-do Halifax merchant, both well-bred Englishmen; a south country
merchant, also English, with an American wife; a Boston chronometer
maker; a Virginian with wife, son, and little niece. Sundry American
brokers, &c. &c., make up our party.


  November 8.

No sun to-day, and no observation; but we are running thirteen knots;
and the sea is a very gentle beast, and hardly rocks at all, and we are
all good-humoured and hungry.


  November 9.

The ship is plunging like a porpoise. Last night came on a sort of
gale, with cloud and fog, and we moreover just off Cape Race, and, I
believe, really running straight upon it, which, you know, is a great
mass of cliff 300 or 400 feet high. However, we stopped and sounded,
and stopped and sounded again, and changed our course southward, and
were safe past before bedtime, but have been going slowly, with a
strong head wind.


  November 11.

Off the coast of Nova Scotia. Last night at one o’clock we got to
Halifax. We had a very noisy night of it--boxes going out and boxes
coming in, and passengers ditto.

I have walked one lady about the deck for an hour, and talked half an
hour to another, and another half-hour with Thackeray, who was laid
up in his berth. I was called on deck to see the ‘Niagara’ steaming
away eastward from Halifax, some eight miles to the south of us. I am
perhaps a little sick of the amount of intimacy which enforces itself
upon one under the circumstances of fellow-passengership. It is to be
ended, however, to-morrow.

There was speechifying and toasting at dinner yesterday in the usual
approved style. All our healths were drunk at the lunch-dinner.
Thackeray, of course, was drunk; then Mr. Degen proposed Lowell, the
American poet; and Lowell, in returning thanks, proposed the English
poet--me!--and all the people stared at this extraordinary piece of
information, and I made my very modest speech, &c. &c.

I have been interrupted by a discourse on the Fugitive Slave Law by a
citizen of Hartford, Connecticut, who takes, _not_ the anti-slavery
view, and affirms that the North is quite satisfied. The Lowells
meantime are fervent Abolitionists.


  Tremont House, Boston: Monday, November 15, 1852.

Here I am an established Bostonian. _Friday_ arrived at sunset; found
Thackeray already at this hotel, and that I had been inquired for.
Supped with Thackeray & Co., and went to bed.

_Saturday._--Lady Lyell takes me to the Ticknors; go to Dr. Howe’s
office, close by here, and see him; presently in comes young Mr.
Norton, and afterwards Mrs. Howe. Leave letters on the Appletons and
Abbott Lawrences. In returning meet Norton, with whom I swear eternal
friendship; he takes me and introduces me at the Athenæum, and at a
Club, and we walk and talk till 2.30.

Then I dine at the hotel, at the ‘Ladies’ Ordinary,’ with Thackeray and
the Lyells; then lionise with Thackeray and his friend Crowe through
the streets, till it is time to go off to the railway, which at 6.45
carries me off to Concord, to Emerson. Mrs. Emerson is out, with her
eldest girl. Old Mrs. Emerson, called ‘Madam,’ is sitting in the
room--a small, benevolent-looking, large-eyed old lady, the original of
Ralph Waldo.

_Sunday._--Loads of talk with Emerson all morning. Breakfast at eight
displays two girls and a boy, the family. Dinner at 2.30. Walk with
Emerson to a wood with a prettyish pool. Concord is very bare (so is
the country in general); it is a small sort of village, almost entirely
of wood houses, painted white, with Venetian blinds, green outside,
with two white wooden churches--one with a stone façade of Doric
columns, however. Emerson’s ancestor brought his congregation here from
Gloucestershire (I think) in the year 1635.

There are some American elms, of a weeping kind, and sycamores,
_i.e._ planes; but the wood is mostly pine--white pine and yellow
pine--somewhat scrubby, occupying the tops of the low banks, and marshy
hay land between, very brown now. A little brook runs through to the
Concord river.

At 6.30, tea and Mr. Thoreau; and presently Mrs. Ellery Channing, Miss
Channing, and others.

This morning I came away at a quarter to nine: a hard frost. To-day I
have seen Norton, and called on Charles Sumner. To-morrow I am to dine
with Norton, to meet Felton, the Greek Professor, at the Club; and the
next day at his father’s, and to call on Longfellow, who called on me.

I like Boston. There is a sort of park, ‘the Common,’ with iron
railings, and houses something like the Piccadilly row above the Green
Park, only all residences without shops--one built by Governor Hancock,
whose name is first in the Declaration of Independence, quite an
old-fashioned George II. house; the others later, of red brick, with
balustrading and carving, many of them. It is really very tolerably
English in the town. The harbour is very pretty. It is like a very good
sort of English country town in some respects.

People dine here at 2.30 regularly, and ask you to dine then.
Fashionable dinners at five. At evening parties you are supposed to
have had tea, and to want supper.

Alas! I have not seen a garden yet in Massachusetts. Emerson’s little
girl, however, brought in some small ‘pensées,’ which she called
‘lady’s delights,’ and some other little things that did for flowers.
Edith is a very nice child, and will be eleven next Monday. ‘When I was
going to be nine years old I didn’t know how I should feel.’ ‘Well, and
how did you feel?’ ‘Oh, I didn’t feel anyhow.’

I had Abolition pretty well out with Emerson, with whom one can
talk with pleasure on the subject. His view is in the direction of
purchasing emancipation. I send a bit of bark from a birch in Emerson’s
wood lot, the white or papyra birch, from which the Indians make
canoes. I remember long years ago seeing these birches on a hill near
Lebanon Springs, up which we children were taken to look out over a
tract of country which we were told was Massachusetts.


  November 19.

I am to settle at Cambridge next Tuesday. I suppose I shall by degrees
find out the defects of the Yankee at home, but certainly they are very
kind.

Here, in Boston, I am ‘the _celebrated_ author of “The Bothie,”’ a
whole edition of which was printed and _sold_, they say, here.

Houses are sadly dear, one is told, both in Cambridge and Boston; and
things in general are said to be expensive, meat and drink excepted.
Drink, however, in the shape of wine and spirits, is actually
forbidden. Temperance is established by law. Only those who have stocks
on hand of their own can drink; a few sellers, whose licenses have not
expired, can sell. But after that there will be no selling at all. This
is called Maine Law, and is said to be of great benefit in the country
places, crime being greatly reduced. Dr. Howe gives no wine; at Mr.
Dwight’s there was sherry and Madeira, but hardly any was drunk: three
very small glasses apiece by the gentlemen--by the ladies none. Wine
and spirits are certainly not required where there is so much stimulant
in the air; even tea and coffee may be well dispensed with. The best
drink for the climate, I think, is cocoa.


  November 21.

Yesterday Emerson gave a grand dinner, in honour of my poor self
apparently, at the Tremont House, where were Longfellow, Hawthorne,
Greenough the sculptor, Charles Sumner, Theodore Parker, Ellery
Channing, Lowell, and five others--a very swell dinner, I assure you.


  November 22.

I have been up and have called on Mr. Prescott and Mr. Winthrop.
Cambridge is three miles from Boston, with omnibuses every quarter of
an hour, and also a railway. The cold increases; snow is announced, but
has not come yet here, though it has in most parts.


  Cambridge: November 24.

Here I am settled at Cambridge in my own apartments, with all but my
books about me: indoors and out-of-doors, north-west wind and hard
frost.

To-morrow, which is Thanksgiving Day, the old Puritan substitute for
Christmas Day, I have promised to go to church with the Nortons. The
Congregationalists, Baptists, and Unitarians all unite for the day, in
the Unitarian building.

A young lady, the other night, after I was introduced, told me she had
had the pleasure of _looking_ at me (the celebrated author!) at a party
a few nights before. The force of compliment could no further go. I
very much doubt, however, whether the fact of my authorship has reached
the serene nostrils of the Boston magnates, though Longfellow fully
recognises the high merit of the Pastoral.


  November 26.

In some respects this is a barren and shallow soil; but it is an
immense thing to feel that you really are in all likelihood wanted,
whereas in London one was wasted in occupying a place which some one
else wished for. I shall send you an American edition of the poor old
‘Bothie.’ People here put it on their drawing-room tables, and think
it innocent enough, which indeed, believe me, it really is: a little
boyish, of course, but really childishly innocent. I read it nearly
through the other morning, which I had not done since the time of its
first appearance; but I had heard it alluded to so much, I thought it
my duty to see what it was like.

Longfellow is a very good fellow; he gave us quite an English dinner
yesterday. He had just received a present of grouse, pheasants, and
milk-punch from some one he had been civil to, and issued immediately
his invitations: Norton, Felton, Lowell, and me.


  November 28.

Here I am with my first Anglo-American pupil, aged seventeen, at his
first day’s work. He is a descendant of the old Governor Winthrop, of
Cromwell’s times. He is to come three hours a day till July. But I
should not wonder if before that he were across the Rocky Mountains,
or filibustering in Cuba, or sowing other wild oats _à la jeune
Américaine_. Here, however, in bodily form, to the extent of six foot
one, he is, turning Greek into English, neither better nor worse,
before me at the present moment. It is agreeable after a fashion to be
at work again; and teaching Greek is a very _innocent_ trade at any
rate--as innocent, I should think, as most.

Last night I went to tea at Mrs. ----’s. I like herself very much;
not equally so some of her friends; they do the satirical and the
sarcastic, and the ill-natured and the fastidious, and the intellectual
and all that, for which one had better go back to London.


  December 5.

This winter is extraordinarily mild: to-day a little hoar frost, but
bright sunshine all the same. The difference here in general is, that
there is bright daylight from 6½ A.M. to near 6 P.M., even now just
before the shortest day. You know we are in the latitude of Rome.

Yesterday I walked, from three to six, towards the river Mystic; to-day
across the river Charles (which is close here, running under the low
bank of Cambridge), towards Brookline and Roxbury, which was rather
pretty; but everything is sadly bare--no hedges, and not many trees.
The only green trees now, of course, are the firs, which are much like
the spruce firs in England. There is a sort of juniper, which grows
high like a cypress, or even higher, and is pretty.

Yesterday I had a walk with James Lowell to a very pretty spot, Beaver
Brook. Then I dined with him, his wife, and his father, a fine old
minister, who is stone deaf, but talks to you. He began by saying that
he was born an Englishman, _i.e._ before the end of the Revolution.
Then he went on to say, ‘I have stood as near to George III. as to you
now;’ ‘I saw Napoleon crowned Emperor;’ then, ‘Old men are apt to be
garrulous, especially about themselves;’ ‘I saw the present Sultan ride
through Constantinople on assuming the throne;’ and so on--all in a
strong clear voice, and in perfect sentences, which you saw him making
beforehand. And all one could do was to bow and look expressive, for
he could only just hear when his son got up and shouted in his ear.


  December 14.

I am to read a lecture here on English literature, gratis; but if
I should read it two or three times after that, I may make it pay
something worth speaking of. One lecture may be read as much as a
hundred times. It is rather a distinction, though a barren one, to read
it, as I shall, the first time here in Cambridge; at least the other
lecturers in the same course are Professors, and it was thought it
would make me known in College.

Look here at this little incident in illustration of manners and
customs. I find, in the middle of my small breakfast, that there is no
sugar, so I ring; no one comes, and I do without. About a quarter of an
hour after comes the Irishwoman, and says, ‘Did ye want anything when
ye rang? I was sorry I couldn’t come just then. I thought it was to
take away, and I wasn’t through my breakfast. ‘I wasn’t through’ is the
universal Yankee for ‘I hadn’t done.’ ‘Are you through?’ for ‘Have you
done?’ continually occurs.

A school for boys or girls is what all the good advisers give as their
best advice--Felton, Longfellow, G. Emerson. I am content to do this
till I am forty, at any rate. I think often of the plan of joining
somebody who is in the trade already. But this seems not after Yankee
fashion; everybody is for himself. Mr. George Emerson’s school for
girls is conducted entirely by himself, with lady-teachers under him.

Last night I met Miss Sedgwick, a vigorous-looking lady of fifty,
perhaps. James Lowell, who has written the poems, is cousin to John
Lowell, whose father founded the Lowell Institution for lectures. One
of the family was the first setter up of manufactures here, and, as it
were, founded the town of Lowell. There is a town Lawrence, called
after Abbott Lawrence, in like manner.

I felt to-day as if I could be content to settle down here in America
for good and all, very fairly indeed; there is less that is wrong here,
on the whole, though less that is great. I was just reflecting that it
is better to be out here, and be away from London; and yet sometimes
when I was there, I thought it was dreadful to be torn away from what
I was learning and feeling and seeing. Now it seems as if all my time
there had been wrongly employed, and that it is an excellent thing to
have got away. However, it is more perhaps what one escapes than what
one gets.

Shall I tell you what an Old Hunker is?--a high-and-dry Tory; and
Democrats are the Radicals, the party now victorious over the Whigs,
who are the same as our Tories. Ticknor, Prescott, and Co. are Old
Hunkers; Hawthorne is a Democrat; Emerson is a Free Soiler. If I were
to be anything (on the Slavery question) I should be a Free Soiler,
which only means that you won’t have any new Slave States. I wouldn’t
interfere with existing Slave States, except to intimate that the
central Government is ready to assist in any measure any Slave State
will propose for getting rid of slavery; _i.e._ to give compensation.
I believe the Fugitive Slave Law was a piece of truckling to the
South--quite an unnecessary concession.


  January 3, 1853.

There is no _stiffness_ here, I think. The ----s do the grand a little;
and the ----s are exclusive, but not grand; and the Nortons are neither
grand nor exclusive--very kind-hearted and good. Charles Norton is the
kindest creature in the shape of a young man of twenty-five that ever
befriended an emigrant stranger anywhere.

I am not _at all_ a distinguished literary man in some eyes here,
remember; and as for poets, ‘there are four poets in Cambridge,’
said some one to me the other day--‘Mr. Longfellow, and you, and
Mr. Batcheldor, and Mr. something else.’ I had, however, to send an
autograph to Cincinnati; two hexameter verses, observe.

  Written by A. H. Clough, for a reader at Cincinnati.
  Witness his hand and seal this 26th of December.

Ladies here usually carve and bring you things, even at great suppers;
no man seems expected to carve for a lady, and they don’t get up when
the ladies leave the dining-room, nor open the door, except casually.
Only in omnibuses, and the cars--as they call railway trains--they
expect you to give your place up; some, I believe, will even ask. The
worst thing is the service. Servants are very indifferent--dirty,
uninstructed Irish, who are very slow in learning to be clean, and very
quick in learning to be independent, and ‘I’m as good as you’ in their
manners.

Some people here do manage very nicely, but mostly there is the feeling
that there is nobody to do things for you. A meal is rather a matter of
business than of enjoyment. It is transacted. They don’t sit over it
like rational beings; they do it like washing their hands, or as people
dress who have got an engagement to be down to.

Last night I read my lecture, and it seems to have done very well.
Afterwards I went to supper to James Lowell, and stayed there from 8.30
to 1 A.M. Thackeray came at ten; Longfellow, Dana, Quincy, Estes Howe,
Felton, Fields, and another. Puns chiefly, but Dana is really amusing.
Thackeray doesn’t sneer; he is really very sentimental; but he sees the
silliness sentiment runs into, and so always tempers it by a little
banter or ridicule. He is much farther into actual life than I am; I
always feel that, but one can’t be two things at once, you know.

Here’s a story--Mr. Dana of himself. Mr. Dana lectures in a country
town; walks home to sleep, after it, with the ‘President of the ----
Lyceum,’ a country farmer. Dead silence. Farmer: ‘Mr. Dana, I b’lieve
you wrote a book once?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Waal, I never read it myself; my foaks
have, though.’ Dead silence again: arrival home. The wife, an _in_valid
(accented thus in America), as farmers’ wives mostly are, hasn’t been
at lecture, and states her sorrow, &c. Farmer: ‘My dear! b’lieve you’ve
read Mr. Dana’s book.’ Wife looks deadly blank, says at last, ‘She
b’lieves she’s heard speak of it.’ They sit down, and the apples are
brought in. A little black-eyed, sharp-looking, school-frequenting
daughter comes in. Farmer: ‘Susan ’Liza! you’ve read Mr. Dana’s “Two
Years before the Mast.”’ Susan ’Liza (quickly): ‘No, sir.’ Dead silence
till bedtime.

Here are some stories which Webster told of his youth. His father was
a small farmer in New Hampshire, and had helped one of his neighbours,
who afterwards removed and went into the woods. Daniel was going in
that direction to College, and his father told him to inquire after
these people. He went, found them in a log hut, and said he would stop
Sunday with them, to which they were agreeable. At supper-time the
father of the family said to him that for the present they were living
upon grass. And grass fried with lard did actually constitute supper,
breakfast, dinner, and every meal; and, said Webster, ‘It wasn’t so
bad either.’ At parting, the man said to him, ‘Well, Daniel, what are
you going to be? A minister? they’re all hypocrites. A doctor? they’re
all impostors; and lawyers, all cheats. No honest young man would be
any of these trades. But there is a trade I can tell you of, by which
you can make your fortune. There used to be one or two in it, but I
don’t know of any in these parts now: you’d have it all to yourself.
I don’t know how it’s done, but it’s by larning, someways. You’d best
be a conjuror. When a man loses his cow, the conjuror tells him where
it is; don’t know how; by larning tho’.’ ‘Which advice,’ said Webster,
‘might have materially changed my after life.’

Another story. Webster’s father had a neighbour who was an honest,
well-behaved man, only given to drink. Once when drunk he took his
rifle and shot two friendly Indians. The Indians demanded to have him
given up, and the people put him in jail. But his friends thought it
hard he should be hung for killing Indians, and they broke open the
prison and sent him off to Canada. The Indians vowed they would be
revenged on him all the same. He lived in Canada with his wife and
children some time; but whether it was terror or conscience, at last he
made up his mind and left them, and went to the Indians and said, ‘It
was I killed your two chiefs; here am I, do what you please with me.’
So the Indians were astonished, and considered the matter, and said,
‘No, you shall be our chief.’ And there he remained with them the rest
of his days.


  January 8.

Snow and sleighing in full force. The omnibuses are all on runners in
sleigh fashion; wheels are everywhere discarded.


  January 10.

Thermometer down at 5° at sunset yesterday; so must, I think, have got
down to -5° during the night.

For me, I was taken yesterday to the College chapel, where an eminent
Unitarian preached on the parable of the prodigal son, or rather,
_against_ the said parable. To be sure there _was_ joy, because it was
so very uncommon and surprising a thing when a sinner repented. It was
a thing that _very rarely indeed_ came to pass.

I sometimes think that my course is one that must be walked alone,
and that it is altogether too unpleasant and poverty stricken for
married happiness. I sometimes, when I have heard people here talk, for
example, of Theodore Parker, as if he were the scum of the earth, think
that it will not do to keep silence. I have no particular love for
Theodore Parker; but he is so manifestly more right than the people who
despise him, I cannot, I think, in right altogether remain silent and
acquiesce. It looked to me as if orthodoxy (of the Unitarian kind) was
as bad for me as any realler orthodoxy elsewhere.

Anecdotes of the old clergy here are very rife: they were quite an
aristocracy, and could do as they pleased more than anyone else,
which now nobody can at all. They were appointed for life, with fixed
incomes; this is not the case so generally now. Religious opinions
contrary to the orthodox Unitarianism are represented as much disliked
here.

Mrs. ---- says Boston ladies suffer in their health through the endless
trouble of keeping servants doing things properly and nicely; that the
only way to live is to live rudely and simply. I think she is right.
Ornament in America is a failure. As England stands to France, so
America to England for ornamental things.


  January 20.

I have just had a new pupil; he is a very good fellow and eager to
learn, and a ‘senior,’ _i.e._ a fourth year student in the College.
I am also going to write an article on the Oxford Commission in the
‘North American Review.’ Another book matter is, that Little & Brown,
the head booksellers here, want me to help towards republishing
Langhorne’s Plutarch. I am to have discretion to do it as I like, and
$350 for the work.

My fancy at present is, if possible, to live here in a humble way,
take a few pupils, and do booksellers’ work or lecture, and so make up
an income. I think it will be less fatiguing and less hazardous than
setting up a school, which any rumour of heterodoxy might upset. And I
do think that I can teach Greek better than most Yankee Grecians.


  January 29.

Yesterday evening out in a sleigh and four horses, with seven ladies
and one youth, making nine in all, to Jamaica Plain, four miles off. I
was put into a buffalo skin, which indeed was desirable, though it was
not very cold. Sleighs, you know, are all open; some are like great
barges, carrying thirty people inside, sitting all round, drawn by
perhaps eight horses.

There is living here in Cambridge a Greek named Evangelinus Sophocles,
who was bred up in a monastery, I think, on Mount Athos, and afterwards
in a branch of it at Alexandria. What strange recollections he must
have!


  February 4.

Sleep as much as you can, eat plentifully, but don’t drink wine or
spirits much. Such is the rule they give for New England living.

I don’t think I shall ever do much work alone, not from laziness, but
really from having no proper rest to go to after it. I feel as if I had
a good deal of work in me, but it takes time to bring it out; and the
mere drudgery of the Plutarch, though not disagreeable, takes a deal of
time.

I am, I know, sometimes carried away into a world of abstraction when I
write or study, or so forth. I believe my ambition also, such as I have
(it is only lately that I have begun to believe that it exists in my
composition at all), tends in that direction. Yet I am always so glad
to come away from it. It is odd how much better I like this Plutarch
than I do anything which requires distinct statement of opinion. Yet it
bothers me a good deal, for mending up an old translation seems often
like putting new wine into old bottles. They would hardly allow time,
or else I could almost believe it would be best even for my own sake to
spend time in translating it myself.

I, I am sure, have always been inclined to believe in the good of
the world, and have always acted on that belief, except for a brief
interval (just when I was in London), and even then it was partly that
I was afraid lest I should be trusting my own vague hopefulness too
unreasonably. Turn the thing over as we will, we can’t _make_ sure; but
doubt as we will about things in particular, we can, for the whole,
_feel_ sure.

Fires of wood are the pleasantest one sees here: there is anthracite
coal and another coal, which I burn mixed. In many houses the rooms
are heated only by the furnace, which is found in almost all houses--a
great stove down below in the cellar, with pipes sent through the
various rooms, and what are called registers. What impairs the beauty
and youthfulness of the American women is, I believe, their hot fires
and furnaces, and the dryness of the heat given by the anthracite coal.
But Mrs. Longfellow looks as youthful as possible.


  February 9.

Look in the ‘Fraser’ of this month for some verses about Napoleon and
the Duke of Wellington; Napoleon’s dying words ‘Tête d’armée.’ The
Duke didn’t say anything, did he? I went on that supposition. It has
been beautifully bright and sunny here to-day: there is always that
advantage here. The thermometer is down to 6° or 7° to-night, I dare
say.

I think I must have been getting into a little mysticism lately. It
won’t do: twice two are four, all the world over, and there’s no harm
in its being so; ’tisn’t the devil’s doing that it is; il faut s’y
soumettre, and all right. Some of my companions are too much in the
religiose vein to be always quite wholesome company. This climate also
is, I think, mystical.


  February 10.

Only ten pages of Plutarch done to-day. But at twelve Emerson appeared,
and after sitting awhile with me took me off to dine in town with him.
He is just come back from the West. I go to stay Sunday with him, week
after next. I dined at his hotel, and sat in his room with him talking
till a quarter to five, and then came home to Plutarch.

  Drive deep the furrow in the sluggish soil,
  E’en to the rock force in the labouring share;
  Earth, that with starveling ears mocks niggard toil,
  To pain and strife will golden harvests bear.

This Plutarch is not a religious subject, fortunately. I have rather
the feeling that one day or other it will have to be done, whatever I
do now, and however undesirous I may be. The only thing to keep one
quiet is the perfect readiness to be unquiet at any moment that may
call for it or occasion it.


  February 18.

Two hours and a bit at an evening party. _C’en est trop._ However,
there were some few reasonable beings there. I don’t much like going to
parties, or rather do not approve of their profuse expenditure of one’s
finest spirits: however, one must harden oneself. People are cleverer,
and know more over there, though perhaps they are more unworldly and
amiable here.

Will you think it wrong if I do what I think best in itself, even if it
don’t seem the quickest way to get on? Apropos of this Plutarch, I feel
sometimes as if I must not trifle away time in anything which is not
really a work to some purpose, and that any attempt to be happy except
in doing that would be mere failure, even if apparently successful. It
sometimes seems to be said to me that I must do this, or else ‘from
him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he seemeth to
have.’ There is nothing very terrible in this, but I cannot get myself
to look at things as mere means to money-making; and yet, if I do not,
I seem in some sense guilty. It may be the sanguine atmosphere of a
new country has filled me with a vain confidence of there being really
something in me to be done beyond mere subsistence. In London I felt
myself pretty well helpless to effect anything.

‘Seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you.’ Is there any application for that, I
wonder, nowadays?


  February 21.

Just back at Cambridge after my visit to Emerson. I was rather
_sleepless_ there, but it is very good to go to him. He appears to take
things very coolly, and not to meddle with religious matters of any
kind. Since visiting him, I feel a good deal more reconciled to mere
‘subsistence’; if one can only have a little reasonable satisfactory
intercourse now and then, subsistence may be to some purpose. But to
live in a vain show of society would not do long. The Boston people
have been too well off, and don’t know the realities. Emerson is really
substantive.

Cambridge is a town or a city, or both, if you like. It is a huge
district, a parish (which here they call a _town_) of several square
miles, with roads stretching away here and there and everywhere, and
houses all along them and off them. It is called a city because it has
a Mayor and Corporation; but it is more like a big suburban district,
a sort of Clapham or Highgate. There is scarcely anything that is a
street, properly speaking; but there are acres of roads with houses
along them, and cross lanes with houses too.

The College at Cambridge consists of a collection of old red brick
buildings, with a library of modern granite. There are students’ rooms,
much in our style, only humbler. The boys at College live partly in
lodgings, partly in halls, under some little superintendence, much
like College rooms; only they don’t dine together, but all about, in
families, &c. They learn French, and history, and German, and a great
many more things than in England, but only imperfectly.


  February 23.

Just returned from dinner with the Longfellows, where I met Mrs. Stowe
and her husband; only I to meet them. She is small, and quiet, and
unobtrusive, but quick and ready-witted enough. Her husband is a very
pleasant, good-humoured country minister, with keen black eyes. He has
been in England before; she never.

I have done my article for the ‘North American’; not very well; but
that can’t be helped; it is not in a wrong style of speaking, which
is the main thing I care for. I have put a pretty good tail to a poor
body, like a squirrel. It is very cold to-night, and the wind bloweth
where it listeth in this room of mine.

Are you aware that life is very like a railway? One gets into deep
cuttings and long dark tunnels, where one sees nothing and hears twice
as much noise as usual, and one can’t read, and one shuts up the
window, and waits, and then it all comes clear again. Only in life it
sometimes feels as if one had to dig the tunnel as one goes along, all
new for oneself. Go straight on, however, and one’s sure to come out
into a new country, on the other side the hills, sunny and bright.
There’s an apologue for you!

Here is a little story about Napoleon told to me by S. C., and told
to him by some old soldier in Switzerland or France, probably a
courier. This man was one of the cuirassiers, and was in the Russian
campaign, and at his first battle was riding on to the charge, when
suddenly he found his kettle (they all carry their kettles behind them)
had dropped. So he jumped off, and was picking it up, when somebody
called out, ‘Hé; cuirassier, que fais-tu là?’ He looked up and saw the
Emperor. Touching his hat (which he did also in repeating it), ‘Ah,
votre Majesté, j’avais perdu ma chaudière.’ ‘En avant,’ replied the
Emperor, ‘les Russes en ont.’


  March 9.

Just returned from a little party, to which I went in a very bad
humour, but have returned in much better. A pleasant tiny old house,
the oldest in Cambridge, perhaps, that is really a pleasure to one’s
eyes; beams across the ceilings, and solid wood-work, and so forth. I
went at nine, and back at half-past ten; that also is the right thing.
Tea, coffee, and chocolate; that also is sensible.

I am almost persuaded to be an Abolitionist, which, how ever, is not
true; but I am a decided Free Soiler for the present, and entirely give
up the cause of the Fugitive Slave Law.

Emerson is the only profound man in this country. There are some other
nice people at Concord; but for society generally the advantage is
greatly on the side of Cambridge. Concord would be but dull, but the
walks are far prettier than here. It is nearly an hour’s journey from
Boston. People don’t the least despise one for being poor in Cambridge,
and indeed I recommend them not! There are two Miss ---- and their
mother living here; their father, now dead, was American minister for
many years at ---- and ----; and now one Miss ---- teaches French, and
the other music. My opinion is that the true position in this country
is that of comparative poverty. No sort of real superiority of breeding
or anything attaches as it does in England to the rich. The poor man
can get his children educated at the public schools, to which the rich
children go also, _for nothing_, prepared for College even. And very
few people indeed are so rich by patrimony as not to be in business.

What I mean by mysticism, is letting feelings run on without thinking
of the reality of their object, letting them out merely like water.
The plain rule in all matters is, not to think what you are thinking
about the question, but to look straight out at the things and let them
affect you; otherwise how can you judge at all? look at them at any
rate, and judge while looking. I was just now looking into a book of
verse which I brought with me, at what is called there ὔμνος ἀύμνος;
it wants a good deal of mending as it stands, but it is on the whole
in sense very satisfactory to me still. However, we shall learn more
together, I do not doubt. The only way to become really religious is to
enter into those relations and those actualities of life which demand
and create religion.

In the years 1844 and 1845 I was in very great force, and used to be
taken for an undergraduate just come up to College. I am wiser perhaps
now, but I have lost a good deal to become so.


  March 16.

Here comes a letter from Carlyle, about my coming home and about the
Council Office. I tell him I shall be very glad to come home, and
very grateful to be brought; but I don’t dwell on what must be an
uncertainty. I should like you, even if it were but for a little while,
to see this worthy Yankee-land. From the specimens I occasionally
meet with, I infer it to be a good deal the best part of the American
Republic. But I should like to see the West.


  March 30.

This morning I went for a walk of an hour and a half to Fresh Pond,
the pond where they cut the ice to go to England, India, or wherever
it may be. There are odd birds here. The rooks fly to the South, and
have just reappeared; that is, I have seen one. There is a bird about
as big as a starling, with a black head, and a slight tinge of red on
the breast; this they call the robin. There are little things they call
sparrows, more like sedge-birds, I think; and black-birds with long
tails, that hold Sunday meetings in the pines, bigger than ours. But
the prettiest bird I have seen is the blue-bird, rather less than the
robin, with blue back and wings, and a red-tinted breast, something
like a bullfinch, only larger.

The extremely-respectables of Boston attend ‘the Stone Chapel,’ an
Episcopalian church of old time, whose minister, some thirty years ago
perhaps, told his congregation that he had become a Unitarian, and
therewith resigned. So they considered and consulted, and said, Well,
they liked him very much, and they thought they would turn Unitarians
too; what was good enough for him was likely to be as much as would
do very well for them. So they took the English liturgy (for moreover
certain endowments depended on the use of the Church liturgy) and cut
off the tails of the prayers, and pruned things here and there, and
lo! they have a very handsome Common Prayer Book, quite as good as any
genuine one. And to this Stone Chapel go all the fashionable Unitarian
people of Boston, in their best dresses, just as if they were Church of
England people, and are deeply attached to their liturgy just as if it
was the real thing. Is not that curious?

Did I tell you of the aged Calvinist woman, who being asked about the
Universalists, said, ‘Yes, they expect that everybody will be saved,
but we “look for better things”?’


  April 1.

I went last night to Dana’s, where was pretty nearly all Cambridge;
and where I had some port wine, I believe the first I have seen since
I came to America. He showed us a copy of Hallam’s works handsomely
bound, received by him in gratitude for his services in their behalf
from the negroes of Boston. He defended their cause in some of the
trials about the Fugitive Law.

Before the end of this month the Nortons depart, which will reduce my
stock of sociabilities materially. They go in summer to Newport.

I have already established two decent walks, not to mention a sort of
half-hour stroll, at the end of which there is a little spot where one
can pause and be solaced. On southern slopes there is positively a
slight tinge of green. The common, however, which is level, seems to me
as brown as ever it was. Mind you tell me as soon as ever the little
ferns begin to curl up out of the ground over with you.


  April 4.

I have just had my little Ethics class, who seem to enjoy themselves
very well, and certainly relieve my inactive life of Plutarchising very
pleasantly. This sort of thing, the class of six or seven, is what
I have always got on best with. I might get on as far as twelve or
fifteen, but after that it gets disagreeable comparatively. I got on
famously with some five of the youths at University College with these
same Ethics, in the year 1851.


  April 6.

To-day is the annual Fast-day, so my little class in Ethics goes to
church instead and comes to me to-morrow. People all go to church
to-day, and it is a sort of Sunday. Thanksgiving day in November and
Fast-day in March or April are the two State religious observances in
Massachusetts.

I am going to send a bit of the Mayflower which grows chiefly about
Plymouth, where the Pilgrim Fathers landed, and it is called after
their ship, ‘The Mayflower.’ They are rare. The spring is beautiful
here also, though so slow. The American weeping elms are extremely
graceful, with their long pendent branches hung thick with buds. There
are sharpish frosts, however, at times, so that there is no appearance
of leaf as yet, except upon these Mayflowers, which I think must have
been specially sheltered or forced. I saw, by-the-by, a great bittern
at Concord; it rose from a pond, and makes an odd noise, on account of
which they call it the stake-driver. There were some Andromedas, just
budding, covering all the banks of the pond.

General Pierce’s speech is not really at all aggressive; I believe he
was forced to say something for his party, but he kept within the lines
pretty well. They say that when he read the passage about territories
that must become theirs, there was a general cheer; and when he went
on to say that under his government no movement not perfectly fair and
just should be made, there was a dead silence. Everett’s speech is made
a good deal of; but I don’t think he’s up to the mark, and I believe
the old Whigs are quite stranded. Circumstances may split the Democrats
(Pierce’s people), and they may form into parties, one aggressive and
the other conservative. Free soil, perhaps. For they say Mexico must
be dropping in soon, and then there’ll be all the old question of
Extension of Slave Area over again.

I am going to write an article in the ‘North American Review,’ on
recent English poetry. I have been interrupted in my regular quiet
Plutarch work, which suits me much better than reviewing Alexander
Smith & Co. M. Arnold’s ‘Tristram’ has been giving me pleasure.

I have been reading Mrs. Gaskell’s ‘Ruth’; it is really very good, but
it _is_ a little too timid, I think. Ruth did well, but there is also
another way, and a more hopeful way. Such at least is my feeling. I
do not think she has got the whole truth. I do not think that such
overpowering humiliation should be the result in the soul of the not
really guilty, though misguided girl, any more than it should be,
justly, in the judgment of the world.

I really am very comfortably settled, on very easy terms with the
American world in general, and have nothing to complain of, except
perhaps the fact which appears to be true everywhere, that to get
a livelihood one must do work according to other people’s fancies,
instead of one’s own, which of course are the best, but under the
circumstances must give way.

Do you know the Nortons have been so good as to offer me house-room
during their absence at Newport? so in three weeks’ time you must
conceive of me as embowered among the pines of Shady Hill, about
two-thirds of a mile from this present Mrs. Howe’s. It will be cooler
too. July, August, and the beginning of September are the hot months.


  April 28.

I have had a sort of rheumatic cold. The east winds come in, in the
midst of the warmth, with damp icy chills from the icebergs. I have
had similar sensations in Italy. This day four years I was in Rome,
witnessing the battle in which the French got beaten.


  May 12.

Last night I went to a ‘reception,’ that is the next thing after
a wedding. At seven o’clock Miss ----, daughter of a German, once
Professor, was united to a German merchant, in the presence of about
seventy friends, in their drawing-room. I went, and found the groomsman
at the door; he took me up, led me to the end of the room, where stood
the newly-married lady, holding white flowers in her hand. I made my
bow, turned to the right, and presented my congratulations to the
lady’s mother, and retired. And so the thing went on for a couple of
hours nearly. It is quite the old custom, older a great deal than ours,
which only dates from the time when the law was passed enacting that
all marriages should be performed before twelve at noon, some time in
the middle of 1700-1800.

The most agreeable part of the proceeding was the leave-taking of the
young people, who were her friends, which began towards the end of the
evening.

On the whole, I do think that pupilising and writing is my proper
vocation, and that if I could afford to stick to it, and do whatever
work is offered me really well, I should in time be well paid for it.
People talk in their sanguine way, but they don’t know how hard it is
for the unfortunate solitary schoolmaster to get through his work from
day to day: they don’t know how, with no real affection to recur to
when he is overworked, he is obliged to run no chances of overworking
himself; how he must, as it were, use only his left hand to work
with, because he has to _hold on_ with his right for fear of falling
altogether. This is not indolence, and so forth.

  Eile mit Weile: das war selbst Kaiser Augustus’ Devise.

I send some lily of the valley, which does not grow wild, however and
is not native to America.


  May 21.

A man who doesn’t go much into the kind of society where people have
the chance of going backwards and forwards, and experimenting, and
learning their own minds and other people’s minds, and correcting their
views by finding out the feelings of others, runs into mistakes more
flagrant and irretrievable than hundreds quite as bad really which
occur continually. Because he has lived quietly and done his daily
duties, and not gone into dancing and flirtation, he has known less
about feminine feelings than worse men do, less perhaps also about his
own. The mere man’s idea of a wife as a helpmate in duty is not in my
judgment an insult to womankind, though it may require modification and
correction. But if that were the worst sin committed against womankind
the world would be better than it is; and many women, it appears to me,
have been misled by their natural aversion to this into accepting worse
things. It is a sad thing for a man to feel that by his very steadiness
and self-sacrificing in doing his plain duty, he has cut himself off
from the happiness which women, alas! are often ready to accord to the
indolent and self-indulgent. Indeed, but I fear it is so, very often.

East winds and rain; such is our present not at all pleasant
dispensation. September, October, November are said to be the most
agreeable months here, and April and May the worst. People fly from
Boston in the spring, if they are at all consumptive.


  Shady Hill, Cambridge: June 4.

I woke this morning in a sort of paradise. My room here is a most
delightful change from my late narrow crib, consequently I awoke in
a sort of ecstasy; I have not been in anything like it since I left
Combe. It looks south-eastward, right away to Boston, which is full
in sight, not much above a mile and a half off; and the masts of
some shipping are visible, near where, I think, the steamers lie for
England. It is a great relief to get into a nice house, with everything
pleasant about one.

On Sunday I walked across a bit of wood and got into a bog, which was
all covered with the blue Iris. I picked also some Andromeda and Kalmia.

This climate certainly is to my somewhat rheumatic constitution
extremely trying. Think of passing without notice from 85° in the shade
to a cold icy-damp east wind of 50°. At three o’clock the thermometer
was 89° or 90° in the shade.


  June 15.

This is a blazing hot day, which makes me truly wish myself in England.
But it will pass, and indeed there is a cool breeze; but that gives one
a chill at the same time that one is melting with heat. The autumn is
said to be very pleasant, and I myself cared little for the winter. But
from the middle of March onward, God help one!

I went to Longfellow’s and had a very pleasant dinner; Emerson,
Hawthorne, and C. E. Norton. Hawthorne goes July 7. I am going to
Emerson’s next Saturday. I more and more recognise his superiority to
everybody I have seen.

Energy is a very ordinary thing; reasonableness is much less common,
and does ten times the good. Spurring and lashing is not good; one
loses quite as much in sense and sober discernment as one gains in
anything else.


  June 21.

It rained heavily in the night. To-day is pretty cool and pleasant, and
the rain-drops lie on the broad tulip-tree leaves among the flowers
which are now coming out, just through my open window. I came back
yesterday from Emerson’s, after a pleasant Sunday. I saw Hawthorne
again, and his children too, Julian and Una, and a little thing about
two years old. Concord is pretty in summer, and a good deal cooler than
Cambridge. I saw also Margaret Fuller’s mother at Emerson’s, and liked
her. There were visitors from New York, a young Englishman, and a young
German that has married a daughter of Concord, both in the artist line,
and living in New York; and there was quite a little crowd of people in
the evening.


  June 22.

The hottest day of the year, 94° or more out of doors and 86° in. But
nothing is any real harm but the east wind.


  June 23.

Quite cold again, and I have a sore throat with the change.


  June 28.

The letter advising me to come home arrived this morning. I have
telegraphed for my berth, and sail with this letter from New York.




LETTERS.

FROM 1853 TO 1861.

LONDON.


_To Charles Eliot Norton, Esq., Cambridge, Massachusetts._

  On board the ‘Asia’: July 7, 1853.

Here we are, pretty well on our way across, about 2,200 miles from New
York.

Mr. Slidell, of Louisiana, and a young man apparently his companion,
are perhaps the most unexceptionable human beings that one sees. Some
Spaniards from Mexico and Cuba are also pleasant to look at, specially
two little boys. A maiden aunt and nephew from Burlington, New Jersey,
sit near me, and are not so bad. A horrid woman from New York whines,
or rather wheines, or whaines, or even whoines just beyond, whom it
is misery even to think of. I feel convinced there is a purgatory for
vulgar people.


  Combe Hurst, Surrey: July 15.

Now I am here I find the case is altered a good deal. Still I like
America best; and, but for the greater security which one has in a
fixed salary, would give up all thought of staying here at once. At
least I might take the place for a time. It is a temptation, if I am to
live the rest of my life chez vous, to secure another year’s schooling
on this side first; πολλὰ δὲ διδασκόμενος, in short.

I like America all the better for the comparison with England on my
return. Certainly I think you are more right than I was willing to
admit about the position of the lower classes here. I hope you will
be able to get along without anything like it, and in any case you
have a great blessing in the mere chance of that. Such is my first
reimpression. However, it will wear off soon enough, I dare say; so you
must make the most of my admission. Thackeray, they tell me, is full of
the kind-heartedness and generousness of the Americans, and is faithful
to his purpose of writing no book.


  July 20, 1853.

The thing is done; and I am to try my hand in this place. I go to the
Education Office on Monday next. With the prospect of being able to
marry within the year, I could hardly do otherwise. Yet I could not
venture with any comfort without the prospect of America beyond.


_To the same._

  Council Office: August 29, 1853.

Really, I may say I am only just beginning to recover my spirits after
returning from the young, and hopeful, and humane republic, to this
cruel, unbelieving, inveterate old monarchy. There are deeper waters of
ancient knowledge and experience about one here, and one is saved from
the temptation of flying off into space, but I think you have beyond
all question the happiest and best country going. Still the political
talk of America, such as one hears it here, is not always true to the
best intentions of the country is it?

Everybody is away from town, except a few stray lawyers and newspaper
contributors. I took a long walk yesterday, calling at Highgate, on the
Horners, with a young Morning Chronicler, son of the Vicar of Conway,
a first-class man at Oxford, and Fellow of University. We went on
beyond Highgate to a place called Muswell Hill, and thence near Colney
Hatch, near the Great Northern Railway, and across the course of the
New River to Southwell, where we got some luncheon, and then came back
to Hornsey, where we got an omnibus, after walking from 12.30 to 5.

I met the other day, at the Horners’, Murray, the ci-devant American,
just come from Egypt, and starting for Berne, where he is to have
office: he is really very American. The Pulskys came in in the
evening. I have met Mr. Pulsky three times in the last twelve months
perhaps--once in England before I came away; then at Mrs. Howe’s,
Boston, with you; and again yesterday, chez Mrs. Horner. We meet with
the utmost unconcern under the oddest changes of circumstances; it is
really very cosmopolitan.

Well, I go on in the office--_operose nihil agendo_--very _operose_,
and very _nihil_ too. London is dead empty, or nearly so. The Lords are
scampering through the last bills, heaven knows how many per night. The
Commons are off grouse-wards, and scarcely any one remains to ask one
to dinner or anything else.

I am very glad to be enrolled among the φ. β. κ’s. What can I do to
express my sense of the honour done me? I assure you I am very glad
of any tie with my sometime fellow-citizens, if I may so call them.
England, we who know America agree, is more endurable because of one’s
knowledge of America as a refuge. However, my employment in England
is in one respect, namely, in its entire freedom from all spiritual
despotism or surveillance, more agreeable than what I used to have.


_To the same._

  Council Office: September 21, 1853.

I sometimes get overpowered by the burden and weight of European
metropolitan life, and am driven in spirit to the solution of
Transatlantic new life, but as to the letter of such palingenesy I
can’t say. I like the quill-driving very well. I did not know how tired
I had become of pedagogy or _boy_-driving till I learnt something of it
by the change. Beyond that mere fact, however, I do not know that there
is much interest in composing sheets of agenda.

I am very glad to hear something reasonable about American politics.
As for naturalisation, it seems to me a little cloud that must cover
a good space of the political heavens before long. I think the old
countries must abandon their present doctrine of inalienable right. It
seems fair, however, to allow some interval of time; and in case of
‘rebels,’ I should say no fully naturalised citizen, far less a man
going to be a citizen, can claim with any justice to return to his old
country and be protected by his new country. After full five years
Kossuth could not without insult go to Vienna. It would be quite enough
that he should go to Turkey or the Canton Tessin, which I _would_ claim
for him.

The old classical system by which closer ties of relationship between
this country and that, than between this and some third, seems no
bad one. Between America and England, between the British American
Colonies in particular and the United States, one would be glad if
there could exist some isopolity: that a man might be a citizen
in which he pleased, and change about as he chose. Treaties with
different countries might establish different degrees of privilege
very naturally. Had I remained with you, I would gladly have become
an American citizen; but I should not like to pledge myself to fight
against England, except in _defence_ of my new country. It seems to me
it would be well if that degree of transfer were open to one.


_To R. W. Emerson, Esq._

  London: Sunday, October 9, 1853.

People are beginning to return now to their beloved metropolis. Here
is a specimen of the sort of thing I used to try and represent to you.
I went out this morning to do civilities, this being the only day of
the week free for that object. I went first to Mr. Frank Newman, with
whom was a certain Dr. Stamm, abroad on a mission to or from a new
Religious Union or League--he delivering himself of a sort of Anima
Mundi Religion; Humanism, I think they call it; F. N. fraternising
from a Theistic distance. Thence I got to old Mr. Crabbe Robinson with
Liberalism and Abolitionism, &c. Then I went across country and made
a call in Belgravia, where presently in came two ladies, one of whom
(called by Mrs. B.’s little girl Miss Lord ----, being sister to Lord
----) is a very fair specimen of aristocratic tradition. Then I fell in
in my walk with Carlyle; and then two or three other casualties, which
I omit. However, these changes of atmosphere do not affect me as they
used to do. On the whole, I do not think there is much here you have to
envy; and there is a hopefulness and a belief-fulness, so to say, on
your side, which is a great compensation.

Your woods are in full beauty, I suppose, about this time. There is
something visible of autumnal richness even here in the Regent’s Park.

Thackeray is off to Paris. He seems restless and uneasy after his
Transatlantic travel. Europe feels small to him.


_To Charles E. Norton, Esq._

[On hearing of his father’s death.]

  London: October 13, 1853.

The news your letter brought was no surprise. The change in your father
between the day when you first brought me to Shady Hill, and that when
he bade me good-bye before going to Newport, was too great not to give
some warning. And, quite recently, the accounts which I had had made me
expect that your next letter would be to this purpose.

My own feeling is really, rather than anything else, that of your
happiness in having so long and so much enjoyed the blessing of your
father’s society. This is all the more striking to me, as I was parted
from my father at nine years old, and hardly had begun to know him
properly again before his death, soon after I had taken my degree at
Oxford. I am truly glad that my visit to America was early enough to
let me know your father.


_To the same._

  London: November 29, 1853.

It grieved me to the heart to think of my hostages being returned; and
my books, &c. (much as I want them), being already embarked. But thank
you very much for discharging that painful duty. I send you M. Arnold’s
poems. I myself think that the Gipsy Scholar is the best. It is _so_
true to the Oxford country.


  December 9, 1853.

All news from your side is very acceptable; political, personal, and
first-personal. I do a little Plutarch continually; only a very little,
I fear; but it always brings up some vision of the Common, or Shady
Hill, or the Appian Way, or the road across from your gate towards
Allen and Farnham’s. Things go on slowly and rather dismally here in
the December fog.

Tell Child not to be _too_ learned about his Chaucer, for my sake;
and, above all, to make the verses scan. I hesitate about recommending
any indications of the metre in the typography. But a set of simple
directions, emphatically and prominently given at the outset (_e.g._
for the sounding or silencing of the final e), will, I think, be
essential. People won’t read Chaucer against their ears.

There is a curious notion afloat among the German extreme Radicals,
that Russia is more hopeful than feudal Western Europe; that the life
of the Russian commune is pure democracy; and except that every member
is bound to the soil, and cannot quit it except by placing himself
under the quasi-ownership of a seigneur, I believe there is some truth
in the statement. However, I don’t think we can afford to try.

Carlyle has, like Emerson, just lost his mother; like her, I should
think, rather a remarkable woman. He left the Ashburtons’ house in
Hampshire just after I got there, to go and see her at Ecclefechan, in
Annandale.

Will you tell me, please, what is the amount of rate for schools in
Boston and Cambridge? I am right, am I not, in telling people that
children of colour attend the schools at Cambridge, but not at Boston?

For a scrap of news--

  Over-worked, over-hurried,
  Over-Crokered, over-Murrayed.

Such was the monody uttered over himself by the invalided ex-editor of
the ‘Quarterly,’ on retiring for an Italian seclusion.


_To the same._

  London: February 1854.

Here we are enjoying cool weather, with about as much light per diem
as you get in mid-winter, looking, therefore, very cheerful and sunny.
Meantime the Parliament is going to begin its parliamenteering of the
new year; and the Queen, who it was said was afraid her loyal subjects
might pelt her husband, is, it appears, not afraid, and is going to
open session in person. Many people, do you know, really believed
Prince Albert was actually sent to the Tower; and some repairs being in
operation in one of the turrets, a large number of people collected to
look on, in the belief that apartments were to be fitted up for H.R.H.

I read your article on Indian Canals with much pleasure and interest.
I think it is very well done, and I hope it is all true. I fancy the
Company have rather gained in public estimation by their late ordeal of
trial.

Bright, you see, has for the first time come out for the secular
system. It is a great accession to that cause, which, however, I think
myself cannot prevail for our country in general. For the clergy in the
country parishes are almost always the only persons who really exert
themselves, the population in general being at present too apathetic to
think of managing these matters. But in the municipal towns something
perhaps could be done. And certainly all through the land the secular
schools should receive government subsidies, from which at present they
are excluded.

Convocation, you will perhaps observe, is allowed to sit, and there
really is to be an effort to set the old church a-going again; much to
its own and other people’s alarm. The census, by which it appears that
the church people, so far as attending on Census Sunday went, are quite
a minority, has taken the world by surprise.


_To the same._

  February 20, 1854.

Many thanks for the ‘Boston Daily Express.’ I do truly hope that you
will get the North ere long thoroughly united against any further
encroachments. I don’t by any means feel that the slave system is an
intolerable crime, nor do I think that our system here is so much
better; but it is clear to me that the only safe ground to go upon is
that of your Northern States. I suppose the rich and poor difficulties
will be creeping in at New York, but one would fain hope that European
analogies will not be accepted even there.

Well, here we are going to war; and really people after their long and
dreary commercial period seem quite glad: the feeling of the war being
just is of course a great thing. The enlightened or official opinion of
the Turkish troops meantime is extremely low.

As for the poems, I really do think seriously of accepting your
benevolent offer, but I don’t think I can set to work to unravel my
weaved-up follies at the present moment. There are very few, indeed,
that I can at all find pleasure in seeing again.

Is it true, as is said, that Longfellow has resigned? If so, he will
come over here and run the gauntlet of idolising young ladies, will
he not? However, I think he is adroit enough to steer through the
Belgravian multitude without much damage.

People talk a good deal about Whewell’s book on the ‘Plurality of
Worlds.’ I recommend Fields to pirate it. It is to show that Jupiter,
Venus, Saturn, &c., are all pretty certainly uninhabitable, being
strange, washy limbos of places, where at the best only mollusks (or
in the case of Venus, salamanders) could exist. Hence we conclude that
we are the only rational creatures, which is highly satisfactory, and
what is more, quite scriptural. Other scientific people, on the other
hand, declare it a most presumptuous essay, conclusions audacious, and
reasoning fallacious, though the facts are allowed; and in that opinion
I, on the ground that there are more things in heaven and earth than
are dreamt of in the inductive philosophy, incline to concur. Meantime,
it is thought possible that Whewell may rise to the Episcopate on the
wings of the orthodox inductive philosophy.


_To the same._

  Downing Street: May 9, 1854.

You will think I am perfide Albion itself. The fact is I have been
overwhelmed with work and imaginary responsibility. Plutarch goes on,
though with huge interruptions. And I was very glad to see Felton. And
I obeyed your vermilion edict, and sent some verse by him; if you do
think it worth while to be at the trouble, I will not be ashamed. I
have some few Elegiacs and Hexameters, written at Rome during my visit
there in the time of the siege.

Politics here are rather colourless. Scotch education is thrown
overboard by a coalition between the landowners, establishmentarians,
and voluntaries, who have defeated Government by eight votes. The
Oxford Bill will pass with a few scratches in committee rather damaging
to it, but not very momentous. Gladstone, I think, has done himself
great honour by refusing to borrow for the war, but the bankers and
great capitalists have been abusing him furiously. By this time you are
all scattering to the seas and the hills, and Boston will be getting
hot and empty, and the shadow of the pines an object of exceeding
desire, but for the mosquitoes.


_To R. W. Emerson, Esq._

  Downing Street: June 10, 1854.

It is now nearly a twelvemonth since I fled in that precipitate,
half-voluntary manner from Massachusetts. Another fortnight will
complete the year: and another two days from this will, in all
probability, see me married.

You in the meantime, are in all the turmoil of a renewed slavery
contest. From this distance it almost looks as if the aggression would
be of more use in breaking down the idea of compromise than of harm in
its actual results.

I am going on here, working in the office in the ordinary routine,
which, however, after years of Greek tuition, is really a very great
relief. All education is in England, and I think in America, so mixed
up with religious matters, that it is a great difficulty.


_To C. E. Norton, Esq._

  Lea Hurst, Matlock: June 28, 1854.

Your letter of congratulation arrived, curiously enough, on the very
morning of our marriage, and was a very pleasant incident of the day.
Felton’s letter, announcing a variety of kind remembrances, came three
or four days after, and was, I assure you, a very pleasant surprise
indeed. This place strangely reminds me of Shady Hill last summer;
though it is not really very like it, being a house on a broad open
bank, a considerable height above the river Derwent, the valley of
which it looks down as it flows from Matlock to Derby. Nor have we
any of those scorching heats which had begun before I left you, now
twelve months ago exactly. I am doing Plutarch, and living in an
in-and-out-of-doors sort of way.


_To the same._

  Combe Hurst: August 19, 1854.

I have almost chosen a house, and in six weeks expect to be a
householder, with goods and chattels, and the _post_ householder
_sedens atra cura_.

Cholera is amongst us, as you see, and laying low lords even; Lord
Beaumont (but not by cholera) in the last three weeks, besides Lord
Jocelyn.

Did you see the ‘Examiner’ on Mrs. Stowe’s ‘Sunny Memories’? _quite_ a
severe article, and _quite_ unnecessarily so, I should say. The use of
quite is a peculiarity which I quite remarked myself, but I think you
have quite a right to use it as a substitute, if you please, for our
less exact ‘very,’ and in colloquial writing no one ought to object. I
don’t see that the old-country English are to have the exclusive right
of introducing new expressions.


_To R. W. Emerson, Esq._

  Council Office, Whitehall: August 22, 1854.

My dear Emerson,--Your letter about a week ago was very welcome, and
the silver candlestick which came in Felton’s box of treasures was very
much appreciated, and I am to send the kindest possible thanks for it.
I only hope fortune may indeed some day waft us over, at least for a
visit, to your Northern Vinland.

Carlyle is, I believe, ruralising at Addiscombe, a few miles out of
London, which always does him a great deal of good. I dare say we shall
not meet till London begins to consider itself alive again in October.

This country has, as you say, its concentrated civilization to hold
one to it--it seems waste of opportunity to leave such a mass of old
knowledge. But I think you are better and more happily off in America,
where the vastness of the machinery does not destroy the sense of
individual purpose. The ship here is really so big that one cannot
see that it moves, or that any one of the little petty services which
people are for the dear bread’s sake set to do, can have any effect one
way or another on its motion. If one has a place or business here, one
is only standing in some other person’s shoes, who really could very
likely do the thing as well.

You are so infinitely more plastic, again, as to opinions than, except
in talk, the English are. As for your politics, certainly they do
not look well at present, and one is afraid that New York may after
all acquiesce in the _fait accompli_, and go back to its farm and
its country-house without concerning itself further. I am afraid the
English theory is, when one has done a wrong thing, to forget it as
soon as possible. Farewell!


_To F. J. Child, Esq., of Cambridge, Massachusetts._

  Downing Street: September 2, 1854.

I hope the Chaucer is going on prosperously. I think you should
adopt means to make the metre quite obvious, at any sacrifice of
typographical prettiness. Yet I don’t like the grave accent, ‘When
Zephyrus eke with his sotè breth,’ and should almost prefer the ˘,
sotĕ, but that it seems unmeaning to use a mark of quantity. Yet
it is not a case of accent, either. I think I should in one way or
another mark every syllable that would not now be pronounced, grevĕs
and levès and Emperourè’s daughter--the most correct mark would be ë:
Emperourë’s; sotë. And I should prefix to the whole a very plain and
short statement of the usage in these points.

I suppose there is not much doubt about a few general rules, though
Chaucer did not regularly observe them, as, for example, the use of the
ĕ in adjectives after definite articles, which it seems to me he omits
occasionally, with French adjectives, as if it was a matter of ear
rather than rule. So also with such Saxon dissyllables as tymĕ, which
is not invariably a dissyllable, I think. And yet it would be worth
while giving a list of such words as are liable to be dissyllables.
However, ere this, I dare say you have settled all these preliminaries.
I don’t quite see what you should do about the Miller’s and the Reve’s
tales. I think explanation might be a little retrenched there, so
as to leave them in the ‘decent obscurity of a learned language.’
They are thoroughly English stories, but I don’t know whether they
are New English. They are just what would be relished to this day
in public-houses in farming districts, but I can’t say that I could
wish them urged upon any palate that does not already fancy them, and
I don’t much admire the element in the English character that does
relish them. It is a great thing, no doubt, to do dirty _work_, and the
English are pretty good at it; but when it ceases to be work, it is a
different thing, and I don’t see much good in it.

I think the Americans have the advantage of being less ‘farceurs’ than
the British subject is apt to be. There is a sort of servants’-hall
facetiousness which predominates in the cockney world, and finds its
way into literature, which I think deserves no sort of imitation or
admiration.

I have just been taking a house in the extreme skirts of the Regent’s
Park, not far from the Zoological Gardens, with a canal underneath
it, and some very un-Venetian gondolas, called here coal-barges,
passing to and fro upon it in the foreground, while in the distance
rise the suburban Alps of ’Ampstead and ’Ighgate--‘Oh breathe on them
softly’--and a little to one side swells the pastural eminence of
Primrose Hill.


_To C. E. Norton, Esq._

  London: September 1854.

I have never acknowledged yet, except per Professor Child, Ph.D., your
letter from Newport. Your description was somewhat amusing, as, in
point of fact, I have been in Newport, and have not been in the Isle
of Wight. I was at Newport at the age of six or seven, and passed by
it, moreover--scarcely, however, realising the scenes of my infancy--in
that swift transit commenced under your auspices, from Boston viâ Fall
River to New York and the ‘Asia’ steamer.

London is empty, of course, and only excited by the terror of cholera,
which is however, I believe, subsiding. Positively, for two or three
days last week, in the district between Leicester Square and Oxford
Street, north and south, and Soho Square and Regent Street, east and
west, there were scenes not unlike those of the old Plague. It has
often been asserted that this was one of the great burying-places of
the old 1665 Plague, and this outbreak is by some ascribed to this.
However, virulent as it was, it was as brief; and fortunately, perhaps,
it came just at the beginning of a new Health Report week, so that it
did not get into the papers till it was pretty well over.

Tell me a little about politics, as the weather gets cooler. I am at
the mercy of the ‘Times,’ and don’t believe that it knows much about
anything. Are there really any ‘Know-nothings,’ and is it really a
matter of importance? That the Whigs will not, as a body, join as yet
in political alliance with the Free Soil party, I suppose, is true.

I send a little volume, ‘Scaliger’s Poetics,’ with Johnson’s autograph
(pretty certain, I believe), for your own antiquarian appropriation, if
you will have it.


_To the same._

  Downing Street: October 24, 1854.

I went over to Calais last Saturday night, to see Florence Nightingale
so far on her way to Scutari. She has ten Sisters of Mercy proper,
eight of Miss Sellon’s, six of a sort of Via Media institution, and ten
other nurses under her charge.

According to Lord Burghersh, the aide-de-camp, who is just come home
with despatches, Lord Raglan is everything out there; neither St.
Arnaud nor Canrobert at all compare with him. His advice carried it
for landing where they did, both the Frenchmen being for other places,
which experience afterwards showed would have been impossible. His
character has risen greatly in reputation. In the middle of the
fighting, when he rode up into very dangerous places, looking after
things, his aides-de-camp remonstrated, and were answered by ‘Be quiet,
I’m busy.’ Fortunately he is so wise as to wear nothing but a plain
foraging cap, and so is scarcely observed.

You, meantime, must be thinking more of the Arctic than of the Crimea.
When I came over from New York last summer, I remember the probability
of some such calamity happening being discussed on board the ‘Asia,’
when we met the ‘Andes’ right upon our track, fortunately on a clear
day.


_To the same._

  Downing Street: November 1854.

About this time two years we were very likely walking about the streets
of Boston together; at present, I may call myself just re-established
in London. We took possession of our abode in the Regent’s Park two
nights ago.

There is an immense interest, or rather anxiety, about our little army
in the Crimea. I passed some recruits the other day, and a man looking
on said, ‘They’ll all be killed; every man Jack of them; I’m sorry for
it.’ Generally the feeling is of apprehension, or even worse, on the
arrival of untoward news.


_To ----_

  Downing Street: January 18, 1855.

Of wars and rumours of wars we have of course enough. The ‘Times’ is
blamed and believed; the Ministry is blamed and continued. I saw a
Queen’s messenger who had just come from Constantinople with one set
of despatches and was just returning with another. The journey as
performed by Queen’s messenger is, it appears, at the quickest, from
Constantinople to Marseilles, six and a half days; from Marseilles to
London, forty-seven hours.

This new Indian Civil Service scheme may, I dare say, interest you.
I rather regret that so little is made of Eastern languages. I think
Persian might be allowed as a study almost co-ordinate with Latin and
Greek, and quite with French, German, and Italian, as at present valued
in the scheme.


_To Professor F. J. Child._

  London: January 31, 1855.

Here we are with, I am just told, the Tories in once again. When they
last came in, they drove me from England into New England. I don’t know
how it will be now.

Our literature, at present, is the war column in the newspaper. The
best military reports are those of the ‘Morning Herald,’ I am told; but
Macdonald, the hospital correspondent at Constantinople, has been more
successful practically than ever newspaper correspondent yet had the
glory of being.


  February 2.

This steamer, it appears, will not quite certainly tell you ‘under
which’ Prime Minister we are to ‘do our duty,’ but Palmerston must
manage somehow we suppose. Yesterday we believed that Lord Derby would
be our king, and Disraeli our foreign minister, Palmerston holding the
war department; but that seems over altogether.


_To the same._

  London: May 3, 1855.

Last week we had Emperor and Empress passing by here under our windows,
with Queen and Prince, in the midst of applauding multitudes, and
certainly there is no denying Louis Napoleon’s courage.

Unless Sebastopol gets taken before long, it will, I think, upset the
present ministry, and perhaps the present aristocracy along with them;
and Laing, Layard, and Lowe, if they can provide themselves with a
sufficient Co., may come in as the new parliamentary firm. The war,
which the great people, lords and statesmen, thought would be unpopular
in a few months, is more likely, I think, to become a popular question
_versus_ lords and statesmen. There is no murmuring at the new taxes,
but a great deal at the old politicians.

Here is an authentic anecdote from Vienna. The French and English
Plenipotentaries urged how natural the arrangement would be that the
Euxine should, like the American lakes, be common to both nations; to
which Prince Gortschakoff answered that he should not object to that,
were there only a Niagara at the Dardanelles.


_To C. E. Norton, Esq._

  London: September 14, 1855.

So we have at last taken the besieged city. We here took it very
unconcernedly, when the great news gradually oozed out and then spread
abroad, on Monday evening last. It is, however, an immense relief,
privately as well as publicly, and I do not doubt is felt as such. I
confess to my own feeling that Russia should be let off easily. What
other power can bring North Asia into discipline? I could be thankful
to see her hold some port or have some means of exit to the Atlantic,
now that she has learnt that the maritime powers are strong enough to
check her encroachments when they please.


_To Professor F. J. Child._

  London: October 29, 1855.

I have been astonished and delighted at once to see Shady Hill reposing
itself in St. James’s Street. I had hardly faith, I confess, to expect
the removal of that mountain to this side of our common sea.

I congratulate you on having achieved Spenser. I hope I shall see the
work. Let me confess to having never yet read one quarter of the ‘Faery
Queen.’ But you are a much more literary nation that we. Few people,
I fear, will return in England to the study of Plutarch’s Lives, and
in working to the end of that attempt I can only look forward to the
readers of America. I hope it will be pretty tolerably readable and
correct when it does at last present itself. Certainly, if I had tried
to translate it myself, it would have had a more Greek tone; but I
don’t think we any of us write so idiomatically now as my friends of
Charles II.’s time.

You see that we, that is our newspapers, after considerable bluster,
mean decidedly to back out of any quarrelling with you. The ‘Times,’ I
think, decidedly feels that it took a wrong step, and is walking out of
its front position with all possible celerity.

I hear you have undertaken the kind labour of putting my ‘Reliquiæ’
through the press. If you like to add epigraphs on fly-leaves, you
might put before ‘The Bothie’:

  Pauperis et tuguri congestum cespite culmen;

or,

  Ite, meæ, felix quondam pecus, ite camenæ:

and before the Roman verses--

                      Navibus atque
  Quadrigis petimus bene vivere.


_To C. E. Norton, Esq._

  London: July 11, 1856.

There is a severe review of Macaulay in to-day’s ‘Times.’ I myself like
this better than the first pair of volumes, chiefly, perhaps, because
it has a more European subject to deal with. I have only detected
one error myself, but it is a very Macaulayesque one. He speaks of
‘the oaks of Magdalen’: they are _elms_. There was no occasion to say
anything but trees, but the temptation to say something particular
was too strong. It makes one distrust all his descriptions, and that
of Glencoe certainly is thoroughly exaggerated without being at all
characteristic.


_To Professor F. J. Child._

  London: January 16, 1856.

I hope I shall get your Spenser ballads. I am not enthusiastic, but
the Chaucer I really think you may bring to better shape than anyone
has hitherto done. I like ‘Hiawatha’; and I think it is liked here
generally, and none the worse for being Indian. Are you really, any
of you, going to fight with your ancestors, about Costa Rica, and the
Clayton-Bulwer treaty? I hope not; not even the ambitious Franklin
Pierce himself. But Palmerston is a sad haggler, and may, I dare say,
go on insisting about his Mosquito Protectorate, till he gets a warning.

I am examining among others for appointments in the Engineers and
Artillery, which are open to general competition, and the candidates
examined _inter alia_ in English composition, literature, and history.
Hence, I can more than pay my income tax, and, like the farmers,
rejoice in the war. But at present we all more than half expect peace.
Louis Napoleon is said to be pacific. For many good reasons I also am
pacific; for if the war went on even two years longer, we should kill
Turkey with our kindness, and have to encounter all the difficulties
and disgrace of a partition of her. The sick man is really very sick
after all, and doesn’t get at all better, but rather worse.


_To R. W. Emerson, Esq._

  Council Office, Downing Street: September 12, 1856.

My dear Emerson,--_Your_ copy of the ‘English Traits’ has just reached
me. I am very glad to have it, for it is a far prettier book than Mr.
Routledge’s, not to mention any other circumstances. I think you praise
us too highly. I was anxious for more rebuke and profitable reprimand.

I don’t think your friend who said that no ill-dressed person ever
came to church spoke within proper bounds. The labouring country
population do to a certain extent come to church, and you may see
old beggar-looking people in the cathedrals on week-days. The rural
population in agricultural parts belongs to the Church and attends ‘at
times.’ It is the town church that is so entirely abandoned to the
upper and middle people.

Charles Norton showed me ‘Leaves of Grass,’ which certainly seems
remarkable, but is it not rather a waste of power and observation? The
tree is tapped, and not left to bear flower and fruit in perfect form
as it should. This standing aside and looking on does not seem to me to
be the thing that really produces.


_To Professor F. J. Child._

  London: November 13, 1856.

I must send a few lines to thank you for the Spenser, which I am very
much pleased to have. I am only sorry that the notes are so very
unobtrusive.

How is Cambridge? which Lowell reports so changed that he should not
have known it. I still retain a dollar note, with the portraiture of
the college buildings, flanked by the faces of Judge Story and some
other eminence; but all this I suppose, eminences included, will have
become obsolete by this time.

Here there is nothing very new, nor anything particularly true, to
tell. Until the next French revolution all things will continue.
Meantime, _omnes omnia mala dicere_, we anticipate no good. Charles
Norton dines with us this evening, valedictorily.

I have been reading pretty nearly through Crabbe lately. Have you
republished Crabbe? If not, you ought to do so. There is no one more
purely English (in the Dutch manner), no one who better represents
the general result through the country of the last century. His
descriptions remind even me of things I used to see and hear of in my
boyhood. And sometimes, though rarely, he has really the highest merit,
_e.g._ Ruth, in the ‘Tales of the Hall.’


_To Charles Norton, Esq._

  London: January 22, 1857.

We are here going on much as usual, occupied with nothing else but
commerce and the money market. I do not think anyone is thinking
audibly of anything else. Some disaster, perhaps, in the realm of Dost
Mahomed may startle us out of our mercantile composure, but at present
the only danger we care to think about is that of being garotted,
and the main business of the new Parliament will be to see about
transportation of possible garotters.

I have read with more pleasure than anything I have seen lately
Kane’s ‘Arctic Explorations,’ which is certainly a wonderful story,
and the book, moreover, very well got up at Philadelphia. I think
I did see Kane at Boston in the spring before he started; I have
a distinct image of his figure. The whole narrative is, I think,
very characteristic of the difference between the English and the
American-English habits of command and obedience.

The first volume of Plutarch is to appear next month. I think the later
volumes are much better, or at least less open to criticism. The life
of Pericles was wretchedly done in the Dryden, and ought to have been
rewritten. Plutarch’s best life is Antony, I think.


_To the same._

  London: August 1857.

I hope you really did arrive in Boston safe and sound. Our parliament
is at last going away. Indian news appears to create no sort of alarm,
scarcely so much as anxiety; for one reason, people _must_ take their
holiday even from their anxieties. The atrocities are of course felt
pretty strongly.

This town is hot, dusty, and of ill-odour, and very different from
Westmoreland, where we were together last.


  September 3.

News from India, I think, is getting to be felt more seriously.


  October 31.

Well, Delhi is taken, which is a happy thing, though one dreads to hear
of the details. Captures of cities are horrible at the best, and this
cannot have been at the best, with wild Sikhs, and no quarter, and a
wealthy and luxurious metropolis.

If you have read the letters in the ‘Times,’ you will have noticed
Indophilus, _i.e._ Sir Charles Trevelyan (who ought, in proper Greek,
to call himself Philindus; Indophilus would be more properly ‘beloved
of the Hindoos’). Leadenhall Street is full of the humane feeling, and
would back up Lord Canning’s proclamation, and Mr. Grant’s Allahabad
releases, with all its influence. It may be right, but it is not
discreet; it is not possible yet to enforce clemency. They should have
waited till Delhi had fallen, and Lucknow been relieved. So, at least,
we think here. The Company, however, is sadly at a discount, and will
have hard work to maintain any of its power. The War Department, I
believe, is very hard upon it. Sir Robert Vivian, who commanded the
Turkish Contingent, and who is one of the directors appointed by the
Crown, spoke the other day of the outbreak at Meerut and Delhi as a
thing that ought to have been put down at once. He believes there was
no sort of general conspiracy on foot, and urges the irregular and
utterly indiscreet way in which the regiments have mutinied, here
and there, and at the worst chosen times and places. Neill commanded
a brigade under him in the Crimea. He quite disapproved of Neill’s
outrages on the caste feeling at Cawnpore. I confess I don’t. I think
we may break down caste one way or other, and ally ourselves with the
Sikhs and the Buddhists of Nepaul, &c., whose religions are reasonable
and comparatively unceremonial.

I don’t believe Christianity can spread far in Asia unless it
will allow men more than one wife, which isn’t likely yet, out of
Utah. But I believe the old Brahmin touch-not-and-taste-not, and
I-am-holier-than-thou-because-I-don’t-touch-and-taste, may be got rid
of. As for Mahometanism, it is a crystallised theism, out of which no
vegetation can come. I doubt its being good even for the central negro.


_To J. R. Lowell, Esq., Cambridge._

  Downing Street: January 5, 1858.

You have just got half the ‘Amours de Voyage’ (for the ‘Atlantic
Monthly’); there will be two more reports, and then all will end in
smoke. The poem has been suppressed to the orthodox maturity of the
ninth year, but, like poor wine, it is, I fear, only the worse for not
having been drunk and forgotten long ago.

The ‘Atlantic Monthly,’ I hope, makes its way. I am glad to see it
so national, so little characterised by any mercantile importations
from our side. I have a great distaste to the prevalent professional
literature of the metropolis, a fungoid vegetation springing up on the
rotting remains of the giants of the old literary forest, whose honours
are no more.


_To C. E. Norton, Esq._

  London: March 26, 1858.

Many thanks for your kind inquiries after my wife and family: they are
very well, especially the ‘family.’

Things have been tolerably eventful over here of late, have they not?
I confess myself a sort of admirer of Orsini, though I do not consider
assassination good policy, and therefore consider it wrong.

A Tory government, meantime, is a strange dispensation to live under;
happily it is only on sufferance. Lord Palmerston, we consider, fell
chiefly through his appointment of Lord Clanricarde.

The days of the Company you will, of course, have felt to be numbered,
on seeing Lord Ellenborough gazetted as President of the Board of
Control.


_To Professor F. J. Child._

  April 10, 1858.

I am very glad there is a prospect of your coming over here; but
doubtless you will transform yourself into a worm, and be during
your whole visit lost to sight in the MSS. of the British Museum.
Nevertheless, even so, pray do not fail to come over. Charles Norton, I
hope, is well through the winter. By this time the snows are beginning,
I suppose, to disappear in your parts: in a month or so the Common will
begin to exchange its brown for its green suit; there will be buds
in the Washington elm; frogs will again be vocal, and double-robins
visible.

Do you see that the Frenchman who translated the ‘Canterbury Tales’ has
found at Paris the original of the ‘Squire’s Tale,’ 30,000 lines? I
wonder if it is like Spenser’s, in any respect.

The great literary success of the last twelve months has been Buckle’s
‘History of Civilisation.’ Really, it is wonderful what numbers of
people have read this thick volume, and what a reputation its author
has gained by it. High and low--and high quite as much as low--write in
its praise. Are you Buckle-bewitched in Boston, or do you retain a sane
mind?

I do not suppose that anybody finds much natural pleasure in my
five-act epistolary tragi-comedy, or comi-tragedy. I like Part III.
rather better than its predecessors myself; but other people, I dare
say, will not. I think it will have some merit in its conclusion; but
to that also, I dare say, there will be no affirmation but my own.
However, so it was, and no otherwise could be. So much for keeping
poems nine years, instead of burning them at once.

Tennyson’s two unpublished Arthur poems gave me pleasure, and I am
sorry they do not appear. Otherwise England seems as unpoetical as
between Chaucer and Spenser.


_To C. E. Norton, Esq._

  London: April 17, 1858.

Perhaps the beginning of May will find you once more at Shady Hill, for
the brief North American interval between the two penal fierce extremes
of heat and cold.

Between the two Indian Bills, the Directors, it is thought, will escape
for the present, and survive a little longer. I myself was not so
absolutely unfavourable to the Ellenborough Bill as the English world
in general. I desire much to see a franchise given to those who have
served. That offered to the five towns is perhaps impracticable. My
notion is to make a great Council of all who have served in certain
offices, and give them the appointment of half the Executive Council.
But our people hate all refinements of this sort.

Politics are almost at a dead lock with us. Palmerston cannot come back
with his own party alone to back him. Lord John Russell has joined
Milner Gibson, and has formed a sufficient body of opponents in the
Liberal part of the House to make it impossible for Palmerston to get
sufficient support there. So that for the present the Derby people
stay, and are almost ashamed and indignant to stay, by the help of Lord
John and his Manchester allies.


_To the same._

  London: May 17, 1858.

Things here are in sad confusion. Lord Ellenborough, who is really
competent, has thrown himself overboard, and cannot be by his best
friends acquitted of a great indiscretion. In India the enemy all
abroad again, and a hot weather campaign before us. Not, however, it
seems by Sir Colin’s fault; for he was bid to clear all the other
districts first, and not till then to attack Lucknow, but was overruled
by Lord Canning. John Mill, it is said, does not consider Lord
Canning’s proclamation wrong; but is very sorry, on general grounds, to
lose Lord Ellenborough.

Pray read Hogg’s ‘Life of Shelley.’ It is a great pleasure to see
Shelley really alive, and treading the vulgar earth--Hogg’s transparent
absurdity being the only intervening impediment.

I am reading, too, Gladstone’s ‘Homer’: it is very direct and
plain-sailing, and in that respect is an agreeable contrast to German
annotation. The working out of his theory about Danaans, Achæans,
Argives, and Hellenes was to me satisfactory; but at the end he goes
off all at once out of his depth into general ethnology. Gladstone’s
uncompromising belief in Homer and the heroes, as real people, gives
the book a solidity and substance which is acceptable. Carlyle said
he read carefully Homer and the controversy some years ago, and was
quite convinced that ‘Iliad’ and ‘Odyssey’ were written at different
ages--the ‘Odyssey’ by one man, the ‘Iliad’ not; and he likes the
‘Odyssey’ best. He thinks anyone mad who holds the ‘Iliad’ and
‘Odyssey’ to be written by one man.

While I wrote came a rumour, not from a private secretary, that news
had come from India that the proclamation had been stopped at the
last moment, at the _entreaty_ of Sir C. Campbell, Sir John Lawrence,
Outram, and Mansfield, who went on their knees to Lord Canning, and
besought him, in the name of England’s honour, no less than for the
sake of present security. So that, if this be true, Lord Ellenborough
is right after all.


_To the same._

  Cowley House, Oxford: May 21, 1858.

Hither we came on the 19th on a visit. Yesterday we went about walking,
and seeing things and people--new things and old people; heard a
lecture from Max Müller on the origin of the French language; thence
to the new Museum in the Venetian style, by Woodward. I think Venetian
windows, whose beauty is their deep setting, might do for you who have
some sun to keep out; for us, not. We want light, and must place the
glass too near the outer plane of the walls to allow the proper effect
to the tracery.

The M.P.s meet to-night for their great decision. Already, perhaps,
the new evidence of the government despatches is in their hands.
A proclamation, it is clear, has been issued, and an _altered_
proclamation. A private letter tells us that the Ministry may possibly
have a majority of five or six--a different story from that which
prevailed when I began this letter. Wednesday, the day of our coming
here, intervened, with the absorbing interests of the Derby. To be
winner of the Derby while in office as Prime Minister was, it is
said, Lord Derby’s ambition, but would be, it was thought, too high a
felicity for any simply human Earl. Toxophilite’s defeat may, it is
presumed, be the inevitable sacrifice that may avert the parliamentary
catastrophe.


_To the same._

  Downing Street: June 23, 1858.

I have had, _mirabile dictu_, a letter from Emerson, who reprimanded
me strongly for the termination of the ‘Amours de Voyage,’ in which he
may be right, and I may be wrong; and all my defence can only be, that
I always meant it to be so, and began it with the full intention of its
ending so; but very likely I was wrong all the same.

I cannot help wishing to preserve some Corporate Body or Privy Council
for India, to elect half the Ministers’ Council, though I have no
liking for the constituency of 7,000 or 8,000 to whom Lord Stanley did
propose to give this power.

Last night I heard Tennyson read a third Arthur poem: the detection of
Guenevere and the last interview with Arthur. These poems all appear to
me to be maturer and better than any he has written hitherto.

As for wars and rumours of wars, I trust we need not alarm ourselves
at present. I hope the French are at heart pacific; they cannot well
afford the money for a war, and though I believe they might inflict,
if the chances favoured them, immense damage upon us, in the end they
would find themselves the weaker vessels. Their population, it is said
by the statistical authorities, is decreasing, and they ought to nurse
their vitality carefully. It has not yet recovered the losses of the
wars of 1812-15.


_To the same._

  Downing Street: July 30, 1858.

We are cooler and less odorous than we were, and I begin to hope that
we may get to the end of August without any terrible outbreak of
cholera. Time has often been compared to a river; if the Thames at
London represent the stream of traditional wisdom, the comparison will
indeed be of an ill savour. The accumulated wisdom of the past will
be proved upon analogy to be, as it were, the collected sewage of the
centuries, and the great problem, how to get rid of it.

In a commercial point of view, the publication of the ‘Amours’ has
been a great event to me. This is the first money I ever received for
verse-making, and it is really a very handsome sum.


  October 1.

I have just read the ‘Courtship of Miles Standish’ with much pleasure.
I think in one or two points the story should have been differently
managed; but it is a very pleasant poem.

A perversion, as the Anglican people call it, seems to me a very sad
thing; it is, according to all experience, so irrevocable a change.
I have known one or two instances of a return out of the Babylonish
Captivity, but they seem rarely to happen.

The only remarkable phenomenon of the time is a continuous one, viz.
the comet, which is a really wonderful, portentous-looking, historical
sort of comet, with a tail sweeping a considerable space in the
northern skies. It sets at 9 P.M., but leaves its streamer behind it
for some time.

Another continuous study with me is Barth’s ‘Africa,’ which is really
worth reading, laborious though it be, and needlessly filled up with
daily records. Barth is, I believe, gone back to Hamburg, his native
place; a little disappointed, perhaps, with finding so little come of
his long toil. Livingstone published just after him, and took the wind
out of his sails. Yet there is more permanently valuable and curious
information in Barth, though Livingstone will do more himself in a
practical way, we will hope.

There is as yet but a very slight ripple on the face of our political
waters. The interest taken in these matters by the nation seems to grow
less and less. People will not mind if the other party come in, but
they don’t want Lord Palmerston again; and if these men don’t play the
fool in some way, they may stay in. Your matters are more serious.

India, I suppose, will keep us at the military boiling point for some
time to come (more’s the pity, perhaps, if only France were safely
pacific!), and improvements in organisation will slowly creep in: they
are certainly much wanted. In the medical department a good deal has
been effected this year.

I am greatly ashamed of our English proceedings in this
France-bullying-Portugal case. So far as I can see, it has been sheer
timidity; terror of being taken undefended while India is still
unsettled, and ought to disgrace us in the eyes of all European
nations. But there may be diplomatic explanations proving France in the
technical right.

Bright and his speech at Birmingham deserve notice. But I doubt whether
he can rouse the towns; and people in general, _i.e._ the people who
are more or less represented, care little about it. I believe that
a Reform would give us a better and more rational House of Commons;
but many things press. Reform takes up so much time, and gives so
much trouble; how is the Government to be carried on meantime, the
government of India included?


_To the same._

  London: January 26, 1859.

Child brought me your present of Emerson’s picture, which is really,
I think, without any question, the best portrait of any living and
known-to-me man that I have ever seen. It is a great pleasure to
possess it.

Bright’s agitation will bear fruits. The Ministerial Bill would
have been very different without this. Bright is scoffed at in the
metropolitan papers, and at all clubs. But his hold on the country is
such as no M.P. whatever, except himself, possesses; and in the main,
the course he has taken is right, I think. Lord Stanley seems to be a
present guarantee for the tolerable government of India; but he, of
course, may go any day. I wish the Council were on a surer basis: the
self-electing plan can hardly be permanent.


  February 9.

They say it is to be peace. France is utterly indisposed to fight;
so much so as to praise ‘la sagesse Anglaise’ for discrediting the
sentimental Imperial oratory, and holding fast to treaties as they are,
and peace, with or without good-will, upon earth. Moreover, the sinews
of war are wanting. Rothschild will not lend money to Austria, and only
acts as commission agent for the loan.

People are a little agog about the Bible-in-India question. Old Indians
seem to be pretty tolerably unanimous against having it read in the
schools.


_To the same._

  London: April 1, 1859.

I am getting on with ‘The Bothie,’ acting on a criticism which appeared
to me correct, that the letters and sermonising parts were too long
and least to the point. I believe I may have cut out something which
for old acquaintance you may regret, but the general effect to a new
reader will, I think, be improved; and a reduction in the amount of
disquisition was certainly required.

Excuse this letter all about my own concerns. I am pretty busy, and
have time for little else; such is our fate after forty. My figure
forty stands nearly three months behind me on the roadway, unwept,
unhonoured, and unsung; an _octavum lustrum_ bound up and laid on the
shelf. ‘So-and-so is dead,’ said a friend to Lord Melbourne, of some
author. ‘Dear me, how glad I am! Now I can bind him up.’

Here is a jest of Lord Derby’s to a friend who told him he was in a
great mess. ‘Yes,’ replied he, ‘but Benjamin’s mess is five times
greater than those of his brethren.’

We have been having deaths lately for our news, as for example that of
William Arnold, who, after lying ill for some time at Cairo, started
and sailed from Alexandria just as one of his brothers was coming in
to see him; just set his foot on Europe, and died, at St. Roque, a few
miles from Gibraltar; a great loss, I think, public and private.


_To the same._

  May 27, 1859.

As for the war, alas! to whom can we desire success? Garibaldi is the
only person I sympathise with. I hope he will do something. But how can
it end otherwise than ill?

Here is the dictum of the Duc de Malakhoff: ‘Nous les battrons, nous
leur offrirons des conditions bien douces. Ils les refuseront. _Puis_,
nous les battrons encore, et nous leur offrirons des conditions bien
dures. Ils les accepteront.’ Meantime, the French feeling has become,
it appears, universally warlike; and the wise people think that the
dynasty, which must have fallen otherwise, will, unless the Austrians
drive all before them, be secured.

I have never thanked you for your article on Sleeman’s ‘Oude,’ which
came safely to hand, and which I fear is only too favourable to British
rule. Let us, however, hope for the best, though the climate is so
sadly against any fair development of English qualities, and the war
has left behind it a fierce and insulting spirit.

Disraeli, in answer to some friendly regrets at his fall, said it
could only be a check for a time. But I think Palmerston may regain
the general confidence of the country, as he has in a great measure
of the Liberal members, or at any rate the Liberal statesmen, and may
perhaps maintain himself, even if Lord John secede. The new Ministry
will be strongly Italian in composition; Lord John and Gladstone in
addition to Palmerston. It is almost to be feared that they will outrun
the national feeling, and go too much in the track of Louis Napoleon.
We who live nearer to Louis Napoleon, with only the Channel, and not
the whole Atlantic to divide and protect us from him, do not feel
quite the same liberty to indulge the natural feelings of enthusiasm
in witnessing his aggrandisement in Europe, though it be merely as a
liberator that he affects it at present. One thing I devoutly hope;
that, with French influence predominating in Italy, the Pope will go to
the dogs, with all his canaille accompanying. Evidently the conclave
fear this, and there is no doubt at all that instructions came from
Rome to the Roman Catholic leaders that they should support Lord Derby,
who would support Austria. It has not been uniformly obeyed, but that
the order was issued is, I believe, certain.


_To the same._

  London: July 22, 1859.

I shall be very glad indeed of your notice of Plutarch in the ‘North
American.’ I hope the Lives will be readable to the young public of
your most reading country. Meantime Plutarch has arrived here, and
certainly looks very well; but they have not put in all the errata I
sent. I hope the young America will read it. Young England, I fear, is
too critical, and thinks Plutarch an old fool.

Here we are reading the last bulletin of that wonderful melodramatic
genius Napoleon III., of which what can be said? ‘L’Empire, c’est la
paix?’ Certainly one did not desire the enfranchisement of Italy to be
effected by his means; and one may hope, also, that the general result
will be to damage him and his dynasty.

Mill’s ‘Dissertations’ and Tennyson’s ‘Idylls of the King’ are also
before an admiring public. I certainly think these Idylls are the best
thing that Tennyson has done.

We are having a burning July, and the length of our day makes it in
some respects worse than it would be in a more southern latitude. But,
after all, 90° in the shade was not, I think, what we endured when
I lived with you at Shady Hill, six years ago. You should come here
again soon, and we will try and sweeten the Thames for you ‘during the
current year.’

I think Louis Napoleon less formidable since the Italian war, unless
the army prove to have tasted blood and to be greedy for more, in which
case of course he must let them have it. But I don’t much believe in
the love of the French soldier for war; he wants to go to his _pays_
again.

Dana has sent his book on Cuba, which is very pleasant reading. And is
he really gone off again to circumnavigate the _orbis veteribus notus_?
I have always felt an instinctive desire to go round, and have coveted
the sensation of having ascertained the fact by one’s own bodily
locomotion.


_To the same._

  September 9.

I begin a sheet just to say that we are leaving the house in which you
saw us, near the Regent’s Park, and have taken one on Campden Hill,
Kensington, far to the west. It is just under Macaulay’s.


  October 13.

Plutarch is too dear for the English; however, a favourable article,
and really I think a good article, in the ‘Athenæum,’ has put a little
wind in its sails. Plutarch is not sought for here as a library book;
indeed, he is quite put out of fashion by Thirlwall, Grote, and Co.,
and some effort is needed to recall attention to him.

The French Emperor’s ‘allocution’ to the Cardinal at Bordeaux is a
slight improvement on his doings lately; perhaps a feeler to the
country, for if he were not afraid of the popular adherence to the Pope
and clergy in France, I suppose he would certainly take the holy father
by the temporal beard in Bologna.


  Council Office: December 5.

We are here in a state of rifle fever, which I do not think will be
allayed by the imperial smooth words. Palmerston is not to go to the
Congress, and France, I fear, will do as she pleases.

I was glad to have your account of Brown. His behaviour before his
death struck me quite in the way in which you regard it: nothing could
be plainer, and more composed and upright.


_To the same._

  Hastings: December 29, 1859.

I have been sent here for ventilation, after an attack of scarlatina,
which made me an inconvenient neighbour to a little boy just born to
us, who arrived on the 16th of this month. This is dull enough, the old
town with the old churches in the hollow between the East Hill and the
West Hill, the latter crowned by remnants of the castle, the new town
stretching along the shore for nearly a couple of miles, one row deep,
with a handsome sea terrace all along.

Here my chief discovery has been a cottage improvement society, so
successful as to pay yearly dividends of 6 per cent. The working man
is my doctor--Dr. Greenhill--who is secretary. Most of these societies
have been quite failures as regards finance. The principles here are
(1) Repairing, not building; (2) Rigorous collection of rents. There is
a benevolent society attached to the cottage society, but it acts quite
separately. Rent is rent, and charity, charity.


_To the same._

  January 26, 1860.

Your artist friend, Stillman, has presented his credentials; he called
at Campden Hill, and of course I was out; but we hope to see him on
Sunday, to dinner, in the ‘native American’ manner, at 2 P.M.


  March 3.

Stillman has commenced operations on my face, and returns to the
charge on Monday. He is making many friends. We dined with him at
Robert Mackintosh’s a week ago, which much reminded me of Longfellow’s
dinner-table. I have read your critique on Plutarch in the ‘Atlantic
Monthly’ carefully since I wrote, and find it very satisfactory. The
early lives are certainly faulty. I did not feel as if it was done
rightly till I was doing Otho and Galba. The life which is most mine is
that of Demetrius, which is really almost mine. Dion, however, is just
about an average specimen.

When is Rowse coming over? Will you give him a letter to me? I continue
to think his picture of Emerson the best portrait I know of anyone I
know.

How unsatisfactory the world in general is just now! The French having
made a ‘belle guerre’ for an idea, are now bent on _realising_ their
ideas. The Pope, after all, won’t be sent a begging. Austria will yet
bully Hungary with the help of her big brother further east, and the
big brother, with the help of the smaller one, will have his own bad
way in Turkey, probably.


_To the same._

  21 Campden Hill Road: July 13, 1860.

I had your letter, heaping coals of fire on my head, last Monday. I
enclose a fragment of the past, in token of my having contributed
somewhat to the pavement below in respect of you.

To break one’s toe is no fair reason against using one’s fingers, but
it prevents one’s walking, and impairs one’s energies in general. Rowse
has done me very nearly. You will, I hope, have a photograph, and I
hope he won’t spoil it before he finishes. He has done Owen, and seems
well pleased with his work, but is sadly afflicted with Heimweh.


_To the same._

  July 20, 1860.

To-day I was at a breakfast party of statisticians, attending the
International Statistical Congress, and met Dr. Jervis from your parts.
Quetelet, the divine statistician, I have also seen. He is getting
rather feeble with age, and complains of forgetting names. A certain
Swede, un nommé Berg, is said to be the _aureus alter_ who will succeed
to the primacy.

Shall you see that Oxford traveller, the Prince of Wales? He is my
grand-pupil. His Oxford tutor was my pupil. We are lingering on here
sadly, waiting for the end of Parliament, and having no summer. People
talk of a grand fusion of the Conservative and Liberal-Conservative
parties, modern Tories and modern Whigs making one solid national
defence against Bright and the Radicals. Things tend a good deal that
way, but unless Bright and the Radicals become formidable indeed,
personal jealousies will keep the aristocratic parties in a state
of separation. They have, however, acted together this session, and
have succeeded in staving off Parliamentary Reform, and in some other
things. The future is quite obscure. I don’t think, however, that any
Ministry will venture on an unliberal foreign policy, though there may
be some quiet rapprochement to the Germans, Austrians even included.
The nation generally holds, I think, to alliance with the French in
general, and to support of Italy with or without the French.

Rowse went off yesterday for Southampton. His picture of Owen is very
good; that of me is less successful. He was interrupted in the midst of
it, was delayed by sore eyes, and then had to go to Owen; but still it
is a very good likeness.


_To the same._

  Granton House, Edinburgh: October 11, 1860.

Your letter of the 24th came to me two days ago at Glasgow, and was a
very pleasant surprise. We were passing through, and I had not thought
of receiving anything. We have been spending a more than usual length
of time in holidays. We had a visit to Fryston in Yorkshire, and after
passing through the Highlands to Oban, made a three weeks’ stay in
Morven (the Morven of Ossian or Macpherson), a very out-of-the-way
district, whence we had some difficulty in effecting a return; the
equinoctial gales having delayed the steamer and broken up the roads.

We are staying here with Sir John MacNeill, the Crimean Commissioner
and sometime Envoy in Persia; he has the charge of the administration
of the Poor Laws in Scotland. The Highland population is passing
through the stage of decrease. Emigration has been going on pretty
actively since the famine of 1846 and 1847, and Iona, for example,
which had 500, has now 250 inhabitants. The emigrants send back money
to bring out their friends, and this will continue. Sir John MacNeill,
however, who has had a great deal to do with it, expects that the
population will recover when the new methods of cultivation (or using)
the soil are established. Such has been the case in many formerly
Highland and now really Lowland places.

I am glad to hear of Rowse’s restoration to life and happiness in his
native land.


_To the same._

  Council Office: October 25, 1860.

I have just sent off the corrected ‘Bothie’ and two copies of all the
little poems. We have been here in town for about ten days, but I think
very likely we shall go to Malvern for a week to complete our holiday,
and for a little gentle water-cure for me, who am a little out of
order, and not quite in vigour for the ten months’ campaign shortly to
commence.

Louis Napoleon is said to be very cross, having offered his company at
Warsaw, and had it declined; however, if he is cross _that_ way, all
the better. But why does he keep his paw on the patrimony of St. Peter,
and exclude the lawful heir, Victor Emmanuel? The popular feeling in
France is said to be very strong for Garibaldi, but there is some
considerable jealousy in the army, where Lamoricière’s disgrace touches
professional vanity, and where Garibaldi is, I suppose, not acceptable
in himself.

Was not the Duke of Newcastle quite wrong to take our young Prince to
Richmond, where it is well known there is a blackguard population?
They say here it is his fault. However, it is no great harm, specially
as it happened in a proud slave state. Just now you will be thinking
about Presidents, not Princes; eight years ago, I think, you were busy
electing Pierce, and I was just starting per ‘Canada’ to visit you.


_To the same._

  Freshwater, Isle of Wight: March 10, 1861.

I hope your being at home may be understood to prove that you are a
good deal stronger. I am a good deal better myself, and have no very
good excuse for not writing beyond the advice which is given me to
indulge in laziness. Had I had six months’ leave proclaimed to me from
beforehand, I should have naturally thought of going over to see you
in America; but what with water-cure and other things I don’t think I
shall even go abroad to the Continent for more than a month.

I am glad to hear you speak so hopefully of your future; much, however,
will I suppose in any case depend on the good sense and character of
your new President and his advisers. I for my part should suppose that
an attempt to retake the federal forts would be unwise. You are strong
enough not to need it.

Emerson’s new essays were to me quite as good as, if not better than,
any former volume. The reviews are no great index of public interest
unless you collect a good number. There are now so many local reviews,
and people with us depend so very little on Athenæums and Literary
Gazettes, or even Saturday Reviews. An article in the ‘Times’ is the
really important thing for a book to get with a view to sale, but even
that proves little as to people’s interest. There is a vast deal of
anti-mysticism, and of a dense, supercilious, narrow-minded common
sense, which of course speaks pretty loudly.


_To his Wife._

  Athens: April 24, 1861.

This morning about six I got up, and found we had just passed Cerigo,
and had turned upnorth-eastward along the Peloponnesian coast. By
half-past nine we had passed Hydra and seen Calaurea, and were in sight
of Ægina right before us, and of Sunium on the right in the distance.
Coming up from breakfast (half-past nine) we presently came in sight of
a low set of petty hills rising from a little plain, and on one of the
lowest saw the Parthenon. Passing Ægina and advancing towards Salamis
we have this right before us, Hymettus on the right, Pentelicus more
distant, Parnes beyond the plain, the bay stretching towards Corinth
on the left, Salamis hiding all the coast left of Athens, and all very
bright and sunny. We landed in Piræus about twelve, and came on shore
in a boat and up here in a vettura. I’m two pairs up, looking towards
the Acropolis.


  April 28.

On Friday we went to Eleusis, through the pass of Daphne; there is
scarcely anything left; the little village just about occupies the site
of the great temple. There is a little quay like a sickle running out
into the water, and in one spot some lesser ruins have been opened out.
The bay, which is completely shut in by Salamis, is beautiful, and so
is the plain, now green with young corn, and the mountains of Parnes
behind it. Dark poppies and small camomile flowers abound everywhere
instead of grass, and a good many flowers quite strange to me.


  April 29.

Last night I dined at the Wyses’, and met General Church, Mr. Finlay,
Mr. Elliot, Secretary of Legation, Captain Lambert, R.N. (of the
‘Scylla,’ which lies in the Piræus), who was at Marsala when Garibaldi
landed, and seems a fine hearty gallant sort of officer. An Austrian
Secretary of Legation and an Attaché made up the party. Captain Lambert
spoke of the harbour. Phalerum they say is the right harbour, it is so
hard to tack into Piræus. General Church spoke of seventeen tacks. But
there is no trade at the back. Patras, said Sir T. Wyse, is the only
place with a _back_ to it; _i.e._ currants.

The weather has become perfectly fine, the sun hot, but a fresh breeze
blowing. In a fortnight, they say, all will be brown. Just now the land
is green with barley, into which they turn the horses, partly cutting
it, partly leaving them to feed on as it stands, only shackling them.

This place is very pleasant to stay at, in the lounging way. I walked
to Colonus and the Academy, about a mile and a half away, going
north-east towards the Cephissus and the ‘Olive Grove.’ You are let
into a farm-house garden, with all sorts of fruits and vegetables,
quince-trees, pomegranate-trees, orange-trees, &c.; and here also are a
few remains. I suppose the trees have never grown well up again since
Sylla cut them down.[17] There are a few old olives, and about the farm
newer trees, planes chiefly. Then you cross a bare field to the bare
hill or mound of Colonus, where are two marble monuments to Ottfried
Müller and to Lenormant. The view of the Acropolis is very good.

In the evening I rambled about, along the Ilissus, picked some
maiden-hair from the rocks over the springs of Calirrhoë, where we
found women washing and donkeys drinking, and so through some beer and
wine gardens along the water-side to the Stadium, a great hollow in the
hill-side where the foot-races were.


  Tuesday, April 30.

Yesterday I went to Phyle, up on the hills of Parnes; took four hours
on horseback to get there, and nearly four hours back. This is Greek
Passion Week, and horses are not easy to get; my guide had a very poor
one. Phyle is romantic enough; a very steep, rough horse-way leads to
it, and on one side of it, to Thebes. It is a fort with three sides
remaining, and two towers, and from the plateau you see Hymettus and
the plain with the Acropolis far below. The road up rounds a shoulder
of Ægialus, and then gets wilder. You see goats about, nearly all
black. The whole of the mountains are pine-wooded--a light-green with
a stone-pine head; they spring from the bare rock. There is a thin
herbage in places, with bare shrubs; the biggest is the πρῑνος, with
little prickly holly-leaves, quite red when young as now, and very
close; numerous flowers at Phyle, cistus, thyme in blossom. The young
pines look soft of foliage: I mistook them for deciduous trees.

To-day Mr. Finlay called, and took me to the University Library, and
to the βουλευτήριον, where the βουλή were sitting, and apparently at
work. There are fifty βουλευταί. Also we saw the Chamber, who seemed
wholly idle. Thence to the new Cathedral, not yet finished, and very
gorgeous (for so small a place) inside; thence to his house, where the
visit ended by some Scotch marmalade, of which one takes a spoonful and
a glass of water.

At the library I saw a new Greek translation of Plutarch, and of Homer,
in verse. I also saw Mr. Finlay’s Attic coins, from the στατήρ to the
lowest.


  May 1.

This morning I was called at ten minutes to four; got some café-au-lait
and went down to Piræus, and embarked on a Greek steamer, which at six
started for Kalamaki, a little landing-place on the Isthmus, whence the
road runs over, four miles long, to New Corinth. As I started, on the
road to Piræus, the light of sunrise (about 5.20) came over Lycabettus,
the sun actually rising over Hymettus with the Parthenon between.
People were then in the fields. Acrocorinthus was visible pretty nearly
all the way, and latterly the mountains of Phocis, clouded, over the
low Isthmus; Megara just beyond, and Salamis very noticeable. Old
Corinth, or New Corinth the elder, nearly on the site of the antique,
was wholly destroyed by earthquake in 1857. To New Corinth, which
is on the sea-side of the Gulf of Corinth, the passengers are taken
by omnibus and cart, and embark for Patras. At Kalamaki I mounted a
horse with a Greek saddle, the most dreadful invention in the world,
which made it hopeless to reach Corinth and return before the steamer
returned to Athens; however, we went on as well as the saddle allowed,
some way up towards Acrocorinthus, a wild country, with a great deal of
low pine about, and with old quarries, and saw from the higher part[18]
the Gulf of Corinth stretching away to the mountains of Phocis, heavily
clouded, to the northern side of it. When we got back it was just
beginning to rain, and it has rained hard ever since. I was fain to go
into the cabin, where I found however a resource in a Greek army doctor
(in full uniform, I only found out that he was a doctor afterwards).
He spoke French well enough. This rain is said to be very unusual.
The morning from five o’clock was delightful. Kalamaki is just at the
north-east extremity of the low level of the Isthmus, out of which
Acrocorinthus rises, almost by itself, and which is filled up, north
and south, as the space widens, by high mountains.


  May 2.

The town is full of people buying and selling for πάσχα, _e.g._ lambs;
there are flocks all about, on the Areopagus, and also the outskirts.
Wax candles also, beside the usual marketings.


  May 4.

Yesterday was Friday, in Greek παρασκυή, and yesterday in particular,
Good Friday, ἡ μεγάλη παρασκευή, a great fast, and everybody buying his
lamb for the Pascha of Sunday.

On Thursday I went up Pentelicus; left this at eight, got up by
twelve. The view was clouded to the west and north-west, but Eubœa and
the Euripus and Marathon lay like a map below, also South Attica, with
Andros, Tenos, Ceos, and over Eubœa, less distinct, Scyros. The upper
slopes of the mountain are clad with arbutus chiefly, just going out of
flower. There are marble quarries for a great part of the way up, and
one with a great grotto or cave richly adorned with the common English
maiden-hair, and with a little of the true Capillus veneris.

Coming down I stopped to lunch beside the monastery of the Pan-agia;
bread and cheese and oranges, by a beautiful gushing water in a sort
of cup out of a wall, tall white poplars overhead, olives, and also
large dwarf oaks (fifteen feet high or more), the first I have seen.
I looked into the monastery court, in the middle of which is a huge
bay-tree. Mr. Psyllis, a Greek gentleman, a senator, whom Mr. Finlay
had introduced me to, happened to be there; he was spending his holiday
there with some of his family, so he talked to me, and presently gave
me coffee, which Miss Victoria, his daughter, presented on a tray
to us, retiring after so doing. Then he took me up a little outside
staircase to a little set of rooms, and presented me to his relation,
the abbot or ἡγούμενος, Cyrillus Δελγέριος, a fine-looking elderly
man, who lives there in two small rooms; one a sort of reception-room,
where sometimes the king and queen come, and therefore adorned with
their pictures (two common engravings); the other his bedroom and
sitting-room, where he had a little wood fire. He also asked me to take
coffee, so presently his domestic made it at this fire, and presented
it, with that well-known Turkish sweetmeat, but made at Syra, and much
nicer, and with a glass of water. You take first sweetmeat; secondly,
coffee; thirdly, water. The monastery is very rich.

Last night (May 3) was a great night. The people at eight crowd to the
churches. In every church a bier is laid out with a great cloth over
it, and a figure or representation (sometimes a little embroidered map)
of the Crucifixion. The people all come in (in the chief church between
files of soldiers) and kiss the figure, and then perhaps go out. About
half-past nine the priests take up the bier and carry it out, and the
people follow after with lighted candles (stéariques), and go all about
the streets. The chief procession had a band of military music at the
head, and lots of soldiers, then some banners and crosses, and then, a
little way behind, the priests and the bier. All the streets are filled
with the people carrying lighted stéariques, and blue and red lights
were let off.

To-day is pretty quiet, only they are still buying lambs, which are all
to be killed, poor things, this evening.


  Sunday, May 5.

The paschal lambs were very generally sacrificed in the course of
yesterday afternoon. About 4 P.M. I met their skins walking about on
the backs of sundry collectors of lambskins here, as of hareskins with
you, and on the doors of the houses one might see here and there in the
byeways a skin ready for delivery.

In the afternoon I went up to the Parthenon; the effect of interval
and depth in the columniation is far greater than in any picture or
imitation; then out on a road towards Phalerum with very good views
of the Parthenon. Coming back I met the lambskins on the backs of
skin-collectors, and hanging at doors, in the byeways by the Lantern of
Demosthenes.

I was tired and a little out of sorts at night, and so did not sit
up to see the hullabaloo at 12 P.M., when the king and queen, after
attending divine service, come out upon a platform and show themselves,
in honour of the great event, and in token that ὁ Χριστὸς ἀνέστη. This
morning I was disturbed by worse than heathen Greeks howling away under
my window in a yard, and looking forth beheld four paschal lambs over
the embers, stuck through with poles, and the heathen turning them,
and singing strange words, among which I thought I could occasionally
detect ‘Yesous.’


  Wednesday, May 8.

The weather continues uncertain. Yesterday I went in a boat from Piræus
out into Salamis Bay, past Psyttalea, and then back and round the whole
headland of Piræus, to see the little harbour on the other side, and
the walls, of which very nearly all the circuit can be traced by blocks
still remaining. The two harbours, Munychia and Zea, are pretty little
coves, both very small, Munychia extremely so, with jetties of stone
closing its mouth; it is shallow and deserted. The rain came on, so I
came up by omnibus to the ἄστι, where the dances that should have been,
round the Temple of Theseus, were much interrupted.


  Thursday, May 9.

In the afternoon, yesterday, I went to the Acropolis from three to six,
and looked at the sculptures on the left hand as you go in. Note the
minute comparative size of the Erechtheum, which is also a good deal
lower in site than the Parthenon. I suppose the figures are perhaps
seven feet high. This small size shows very well from the terrace under
Lycabettus, where you see both.

I and two other gentlemen have agreed to go to Nauplia by steamer on
the 12th, and to ride thence to Corinth, returning by steamer from the
Isthmus on the 15th. The weather is now beautiful, and seems to promise
favourably. New snow seems to have fallen on some of the hills near the
Isthmus. We are to go with Spiro Adamopulos, a well-known trustworthy
guide.

Pray can you guess what a φεσοπωλεῖον is, or a καπνοπωλεῖον or finally,
a πνενματοπωλεῖον? there are a great many in Athens, but there are even
more καφφενεῖα. You know of course a ὑποδηματάποιος, but what is a
ῥαπτής? and should you know an omnibus as a λεωφορεῖον?


  Saturday, May 11.

I dined yesterday at the Hills’, at three, meeting Miss Bremer, who has
been living here three years. She is a little shrunk old lady, very
quiet. In the evening I went to a mixed soirée, consisting chiefly
of Greeks, from nine to near twelve; music, with two professionals,
Italians. I talked a little to Miss Bremer, and to a Mr. and Mrs. and
Miss Dragoumi. Mrs. and Miss Dragoumi had come with us in the boat: he
conducts a Greek review. The music was good, I think; they get pianos
from Vienna, and have some good masters. They say the Greek girls marry
at seventeen; they learn French and music very well. Everybody learns
French; a good many, English, to read; everybody, old Greek, to read a
little.


  Thursday, May 16.

I have got back, a little tired, but no worse. We had a beautiful sail
by steamer to Nauplia on Sunday; it is a filthy place, and we left it
gladly at six on Monday, on horseback; saw the ruins of Tiryns, Τίρυνθά
τε τειχιόεσσαν, and stopped half an hour at Argos, after a ride of
seven miles. It was by this time nine o’clock, and very hot; and we
didn’t go up the Acropolis, but rode off, and in about an hour and a
half reached our halting-place below Mycenæ, remains of walls on some
bare rocky ground a mile above being visible as we rode up. We lunched
under a tree, almost the only tree visible, and then went up, riding.
The Tomb,[19] or Treasury, is _extremely_ remarkable, so also are the
other ruins, the Gate and the Wall. Thence back by another course to
the road, and shortly into a pass, the τρητός, which became wooded,
with shrubs, and had a pleasant stream. So into a fine upland among
hills, then down into an open valley, or plain among hills, where we
saw the three columns of Nemea; then down to them, and back over the
hill-side, lower down to our former line, and so down a water-course to
another little plain, to four houses among some willows--one a small
barrack for some ten soldiers; one a little cook and coffee shop; one,
I suppose, a little farm, and a sort of granary place behind the shop,
with a room fitted up over one part of the granary for strangers. Here
we lodged, and next day went on to Corinth; but here rain came on, and
we saw no view. We slept at Kalamaki on the east side of the Isthmus,
and came on yesterday. I go to-day to Constantinople, and shall return
on the 31st.


_To the same._

  Constantinople: Sunday, May 19, 10 A.M.

We arrived here this morning at half-past four, and landed between six
and seven; it was raining all the time, so that the far-famed first
view was nil for us. But our voyage otherwise was prosperous, fair and
fine all the way; the moon and stars bright over the isles of Marmora
when we went to bed last night.

The steamer only left Piræus at 3 P.M. on Friday. We passed under Cape
Colonna, and saw the temple very well about 5.30 P.M.; passed then
through the strait between the southern point of Eubœa and the northern
point of Andros: the former is known as Capo d’Oro, _i.e._ Caphareus,
where Minerva drowned Ajax the Lesser. Night fell as we left Eubœa; and
when I came on deck at 6.30 A.M. yesterday, we had Lesbos, a long range
of mountains, on the immediate right; and the coast of Asia, south of
the Troad, on the right bow. An aged modern Greek pointed out to me
a small thing on the horizon, almost straight ahead, a little to the
left of our course, which he said was Tenetho, ‘bello paese, buon vino,
buon’ e forte.’ Some little after we passed it, and several French
savans began to quote, ‘Est in conspectu,’ rather reminding one of ‘As
in præsenti.’ We went in between Tenedos or Tenetho (a desert-looking
island still, but with one little corner occupied by a little town,
with a fort and three minarets) and the Troad, and at this crisis were
summoned to breakfast, but recovered (most of us) the deck in time to
see the actual plain of Troy, and the entrance of the Dardanelles.
There should have appeared three tumuli at the turn, but I could not
well make them out. The embouchure of the Simois, just above the town,
lets you look up into the plain, backed, many miles off, by Mount Ida.

And so up the Dardanelles, which were crowded with vessels taking
advantage of the south wind, and so to Dardanelles (the Turkish town
so called), where we stop, to obtain permission to go on. Here are the
castles and the consuls, and H.M.S. ‘Melpomene,’ having just, as I
now learn, brought Lord Dufferin from Beyrout; and one hears that the
Sultan is very ill and likely to die, which on arriving here one learns
is all a lie. Then past Sestos and Abydos, and the strait gradually
widens till at Gallipoli, where the French and English armies encamped,
it opens into the Sea of Marmora. Lampsacus is on the right, a little
before Gallipoli on the left. Ægospotami I couldn’t quite make out.
The Sea of Marmora, also, was full of shipping, most in full sail for
Constantinople, some also beating down, outward bound.


  May 20.

Another wet day! Was there ever such a disaster? We are to have
the firman to see St. Sophia on Wednesday; to-morrow we are to do
the walls; Thursday, Scutari; Friday, Sweet-Waters; Saturday, the
Bosphorus. But the place is one requiring blue sky and bright sun, and
there is no promise of either. The hotel is costly, but comfortable in
its way, if one only had not to stay in it altogether.


  May 21, 6.30 P.M.

We waited because of heavy clouds this morning for more than an hour,
and then mounted our horses, and set out just in time for a heavy
shower, but before getting quite wet we were across the bridge of
boats, and under shelter in the bazaar, through whose covered arcades
we paced on horseback, between silks and shawls, &c., with great
imperturbability. When we got to the end, the shower was over, and
passing the Mosque of Sultan Bajazet, and under the Seraskierat tower,
we went right ahead through strange Turkish lanes with pavements worse
than execrable, and in about two hours from starting reached the
ancient citadel of the Seven Towers, still all entire. There, under
some trees, we dismounted, and with some trouble got admittance into
the court, full of trees and shrubs of natural growth. The trees are
here more northern than in Greece--ashes, a sort of lime, planes not
abundant, wild figs, and the cypresses, which I suppose are almost all
planted; the cemeteries, of course, are perfect forests of them. So up
to the parapet, and up a tower for the view; the Sea of Marmora here,
the city there--a very fine view; then out and along the outside of
the ancient walls, for a long way, to a café at the Adrianople gate;
then inside to Belisarius’s castle, and on foot through a house full of
Jews (seven or eight girls pulling at us for baksheesh) to a parapet,
for another view of the Golden Horn. Thence through a horrible Jews’
quarter, and a not much better Greek quarter, across to the Patriarchal
Church, and so along the Golden Horn shore, but separated from it by
houses, to our former bridge, and so across to Pera and home, 11 A.M.
to 6 P.M.


  May 23.

Yesterday, with some rain and some fatigue, we did the Seraglio (French
engravings and French goût), Kiosk of Amurath II. (better), St. Irene,
St. Sophia, the Mosque of Ahmed (all white, except some blue China
tiles, beautiful courtyard and fountains), the Hippodrome, and a Tomb
of Sultan Mahmoud--all this under the protection of the firman, and
in a party of nearly twenty strangers. Sultan Mahmoud’s is a sort of
conservatory tomb--large windows all round, with white curtains, light
and airy, and high-domed roof. The Sultan is buried there, with his
wife, sister, and four daughters.

The Seraglio was a good deal below one’s expectations; St. Sophia
certainly beyond mine. The amplitude of the dome is very impressive; it
is a sort of Pantheon exalted into a Monotheon. Michael Angelo ought to
have seen it.

How many times in the course of the day’s work we had to pull off
boots and shoes and put on slippers, I can’t dare to say. The weather
is still unsettled. The Bithynian Olympus is one long range of
snow-covered Alp. Till yesterday we had a fire in the sitting-room, and
yesterday we missed it. I have found great solace from a terrace on
the roof, which gives a tolerable view of the Strait, and the Seraglio
point, and Scutari, and the hills across the end of the Sea of Marmora,
and the snowy Olympus overtopping them.


  May 24, 10 A.M.

This, you know, is the Mahometan Sunday, and the Sultan goes to mosque,
and we are to go and stare at him on his way. Mosque is at twelve
o’clock, and we start at eleven.

I dined yesterday with Dr. Beretta, who is a most amiable kind man,
but first I went with him to see Elizabeth Kondaxaky, the Cretan
sibyl, who prophesies, fortunately in English, as well as Greek, and
other tongues, whereof she has the gift. I have not exactly summed
up the result of her prophecies, but she seems to be for England and
Turkey--the latter as ‘a necessary evil,’ and the former as the natural
protector of necessary evils.


  May 26.

On Friday we went to see the Sultan go to mosque, which he did in his
caïque of twenty oars or more. We were received into the house of Halil
Bey, a profane Frank-mannered Turk, with windows looking, some upon
the Bosphorus, where the caïque passed by, and some upon the court of
the mosque, where the Sultan disembarked, so we saw the poor creature
admirably; he looks quite ‘the sick man.’ When he got on shore, a sort
of chant was set up, interpreted to us, as ‘O Sultan! trust not in
yourself; there is God above, who is greater than you,’ which was not
saying very much.

Then I left my companions and went back to the hotel, and then over
to Scutari with Dr. Pincoff, and saw all Scutari, Barrack and General
Hospitals, and F. N.’s own tower, and rooms, and everything, of which
you shall hear when I return.

We went by steamer up the Bosphorus, to Buyukdere, and up a hill to see
the Black Sea.


  Sunday, 5 P.M.

We have been to see the dancing dervishes, really not an unedifying
spectacle in the way of a divine service. ‘O God, what a wonderful
Creator Thou art! Thou hast made so many thousand human beings, black
and white; and whom Thou pleasest, black or white, Thou canst raise to
be distinguished.’ To such words and other such, chanted with musical
instruments accompanying, twenty men, in presence of their chief, in
solemn silence, go twirling about with extended arms and spinning long
petticoats. ‘O God, what a wonderful Creator Thou art!’ &c., &c. Adieu.


_To C. E. Norton, Esq._

  London: July 4, 1861.

On coming back from abroad ten days ago I received two letters from
you, one of which I had received by copy from my wife at Athens.
Many thanks for them; they were very interesting, and I hope you
will not be discouraged by my brief acknowledgments from writing
further. I am still invalided, and am to go abroad again the day after
to-morrow. I have achieved a good deal already, having seen Athens
and Constantinople. I was half tempted to come over to pay you the
visit you so kindly proposed, but I should have had to return early in
September, and I hope some year to spend a September on your side. I
have just made a call on a former acquaintance in America, Miss E. H.,
of Concord, who brought me a letter from Emerson moreover. She tells
me that in New England, she believes, people do not expect that the
Southern States will ever be brought back into the Union, and that it
is not the object simply to make them return; it being indeed hardly
possible that the States, North and South, should ever again live
together in union, but that the war is rather in vindication of the
North and its rights, which have been trampled upon by the South. Is
this true, in your judgment? Certainly it does seem hardly conceivable
that South Carolina should ever return. On what terms then would the
North be willing to make peace, and what conditions would it require
_in limine_ before entering upon the question of separation?

As for the feeling here, you must always expect statesmen to be cold
in their language, and the newspapers impertinent and often brutal.
Beyond this, I think people here had been led to suppose at the outset
that the Northern feeling was strong against civil war (and so it
was, I suppose), and that the principle of separation was conceded;
the indignation being merely at the mode adopted for obtaining it.
And the attack on Fort Sumter, which caused so sudden a revulsion of
feeling with you, was naturally attended with no such change here. But
coexisting with all this, I believe there is a great amount of strong
feeling in favour of the North.

Technically we are wrong, I suppose, and as a matter of feeling, we are
guilty of an outrage in recognising the South as a belligerent power,
but as a matter of convenience between your Government and ours, I
suppose the thing is best as it is.

Miss H. will take to Emerson four photographs of Rowse’s picture of me;
one for you: it may be better than nothing.

My nervous energy is pretty well spent for to-day, so I must come to a
stop. I have leave till November, and by that time I hope I shall be
strong again for another good spell of work.

Lord Campbell’s death is rather the characteristic death of the English
political man. In the cabinet, on the bench, and at a dinner party,
busy, animated, and full of effort to-day, and in the early morning
a vessel has burst. It is a wonder they last so long. I shall resign
if it proves much of a strain to me to go on at this official work.
Farewell.


_To his Wife_

  Mont Dore-les-Bains, Auvergne: July 16, 1861.

This is a queer place, a French watering-place, a village, scarcely
even a village, metamorphosed by having a square of hotels on three
sides and a bath establishment on one side, with a sort of terrace or
esplanade stuck down into it. The place is some 3,000 feet above the
sea, a green Swiss-like valley, right in the mountains, with fir-trees
standing out from the green mountain sides, just as in Switzerland.
There is a hot spring, or rather a quantity of hot springs, issuing
from the volcanic rock, known and used by the Romans, and re-discovered
or re-established for use under the first Napoleon, to whose time the
buildings seem to belong. They are about sufficient for the 500 or 600
people who come. We were fifty, I think, at dinner yesterday, in one of
the hotels.

The journey here in the diligence was agreeable, right over the chain
of hills, of which Puy de Dôme is the highest, from the valley of
the Allier (flowing to the Loire) to the valley here flowing to the
Gironde. We mounted to about 3,300 or 3,400 feet above the sea, and
descended 300 or 400 to this place; the high land was a green pastoral
district with rounded hills mostly; no very distinct craters on the
route; a lake a little way off was one, I suppose.

This is really an odd enough place to be in; déjeuner at ten, dinner at
half-past five; two tables of about twenty-five people, all French; we
also have a drawing-room where we meet before meals, and sit generally
(only I don’t); gentlemen unbeknown to ladies give their arms to
ladies aforesaid, to conduct them into dinner, and occasionally out
from dinner. I sit near some pleasant people at dinner, a Parisian
of the Parisians on one hand, and a Marseilles opulent-seeming
seeming-merchant with a wife, a sister and some children, on the other.
Last night, from eight to half-past nine, was a soirée magicale, things
coming out of hats, &c., followed by a divertissement of a poet and
improvisatore, who did _boutrimé_. The company supplied him for his
last _épreuve_ with about fourteen or sixteen words, rhymes masculine
and feminine, mitraille, canaille, volcan, encan, ending with baigneur
and bonheur, which gave him the opportunity (the subject by the way
being also given him after the rhymes, viz. vin de champagne) to wish
in conclusion to _chaque aimable baigneur_ I don’t know how much
_bonheur_, which of course drew the house. The poet’s face was a great
round simple-looking piece of countenance, and he was fat but alert,
and knew more tricks than one, I dare say.


  July 19.

Went to Lac Guéry and the Plateau with Jean. Wages three francs a day,
and for harvest three francs and victuals: the same as at Marseilles.
The schoolmaster has 600 francs.


  July 20.

Talked with M. Chabuy. He is percepteur of all taxes. They are
impérial, départemental, communal. (There are three classes of
percepteurs, the third, viz. of communes de canton, is named by the
préfet.) He is bound within a certain time to pay all to the trésor.
His accounts are verified by the préfecture, and inspectors come
every now and then--one every year into each department--who have the
right of looking into the accounts, examining the caisse communale.
It would not do to leave it to the conseil and maire. There is very
little malversation. The church payments for chaires, burials, &c., are
regulated by the bishop. Government pays all the ministers--Catholic,
Protestant, and Jews. If a place of worship of any kind is to be built,
the commune pays, and everybody is _contribuable_, of whatever religion.


_To the same._

  Mont Dore-les-Bains: July 21.

My plans are changed. This morning about 8.30, going across the place
to the café, whom should I see but Tennyson. They are all here. They
go to the Pyrenees, and I am to follow them. I want to come home in
September, and see no sufficient reason yet for not returning to work
in November. I don’t at all want to spend a winter abroad away from
the children, and were I to be brought to do so, I should want to come
home first. Coming home did me good. I now propose to go to some place
in the Pyrenees and ride about. Bagnères de Luchon will be the first
trial, as the Tennysons will be there.


_To the same._

  Bagnères de Luchon, Pyrénées: July 30.

I came on here yesterday; a ten hours’ drive in the banquette of
a diligence, but it was a fine day and not excessively hot. The
place is exceedingly crowded, a sort of mountain Brighton. This
Franco-Gallo-cockney-Chamouni is, however, not unbearable, if taken
in the right way. It is in a rich valley, an almost perfect level
here of corn, maize especially, and vegetables, running in like an
estuary among the mountains. At the head of it, between sides of wooded
mountains, you see the rocky peaks with snow in their clefts, filling
up the gap. But there are no Alpine eternal-snowy peaks visible here.


  August 4.

On Friday I went in a sort of public conveyance some six or eight
miles up the valley to the Hospice, and thence walked with my
fellow-passengers up the Port de Venasque into Spain. You see the whole
Maladetta, and it’s the principal thing to do here. Yesterday I went
up into the Vallée de Lys, full of waterfalls; and to-day I have been
a longish ride, starting at 6 A.M., to the Lac d’Oo, really a very
beautiful mountain lake, the lowest of four or five; the others are a
good way higher up.


  August 6.

I have been my ride, five hours over hills, looking out upon the
glaciers of the main chain; these hills are called the Super Bagnères,
and rise right above here. Then down about eleven o’clock to the châlet
of the Vallée de Lys, where I stayed about three hours, breakfasting,
going up to some waterfalls, and sheltering from a brief storm, and so
home.


  August 8.

Providence overruled my mind not to go out riding to-day as I had
intended, so I got the letter telling of the new little daughter in
good time. I think you must call the little girl Blanche Athena.

The Tennysons are at Bigorre. I am very glad to have the prospect
of joining them, for it is rather too solitary work going about
Pyreneeing with a horse and a guide, or even say _two_ horses and a
guide. However, the two men I have had here have been good company
in their way--two cousins, both having served as soldiers, one six
years, the other eight or nine. One was in the Crimea, and all through
the campaign in Italy, and means to be a soldier again. He had just
finished his time when his brother was drawn in the conscription. His
brother had just married, so he said he would serve two years for him,
and when the two years were ended and he came home, somehow or other
the brother was let off. Eighteen went from Luchon to the Crimea, ten
or twelve of them cousins; thirteen came back, and they are, I think,
all here as baigneurs, guides, &c. This fine young fellow was a hussar,
and went out straight to Algiers, where he set to work and ate so many
figs and oranges that he had a fever at once, and was in the hospital
for three months. He was wounded just at the end of the Crimean war,
a fortnight before the peace, and was in hospital at Constantinople
for three months. He made great friends with the English, apparently.
So much for Pierre Redonnet, with whom I rode on Tuesday over Super
Bagnères to the Vallée de Lys. The day before I had his cousin Jean,
who is a family man, and unambitious of military service.

I have seen here a certain Comte de ----, an Italian, a Tuscan, who
knew some friends of yours at Rome. He is a Confederation man, and
declaims against this premature attempt at a united Italy. I met him
at the Lac d’Oo. He has just been here, and all but embraced me in his
obscurantist arms, and has bidden me adieu, ‘God bless you.’ He talks
English, which he mixes a little with German, and I mix my English with
a little Italian. Who can he be? and why has he so nearly embraced me?

Luchon is a very Parisian place; people flaunt about, and wear strange
Parisian mountain-costumes, ‘tours-de-tête’ of all kinds. The French
upper classes seem to me to be strongly possessed with the feeling that
the Italian kingdom is very much against French interests; and partly
also with the feeling that the Emperor is driven into it by England,
who knows it to be bad for France. Sardinia would pacify them, no
doubt. But after Ricasoli’s declaration, can he, and after Lord John’s
speech, can he, assent? All things perhaps are possible.


  August 9.

To-day comes a note to say that the Tennysons are all coming here this
evening, and I have already taken my place for Luz, _viâ_ Bigorre! Go I
must, and start early to-morrow morning.


_To the same._

  Luz, St. Sauveur: August 13.

This (Luz) is the place where all the Barèges things are made. The
old women are all busy with distaff and spindle. The things are made
not at Barèges, but here and at Bigorre. The old women go about in
scarlet hoods; the men all wear light-blue caps: the younger women
handkerchiefs, brown, with yellow stripes. I have nothing to relate, so
I send you some verses made this morning, called ‘Currente Calamo.’[20]


  August 17.

I have been laid up for some days, but am well again, and this morning
walked up to Barèges, four miles up a high valley east of this. It
is a regular pool of Bethesda, only the diseased and impotent people
seem to have learnt to play at cards; a desolate place with a staring
_établissement_ and a soldiers’ hospital, and everybody on crutches,
and the only apparent enjoyment playing at cards in shabby cafés. A
high road with electric telegraph leads up to it and ends with it.


  August 18.

To-day, as soon as I got the letters, I set off for Gavarnie; the
horses were waiting at the door for the postman. We got away at 7.20
A.M., and riding up the Gave, or riverside, reached Gavarnie village
in two hours; here there is a hotel of a quiet kind. Soon after
passing through this, you come in fair sight of the Cirque. The ground
is mostly level, except a rise at the end, which brings you to the
platform of the Cirque itself, and to the cottage which is the end of
the riding. A little beyond it there is snow, forming a bridge over the
stream, and you have the vast cascade in full sight, but far off. One
waits till noon for the sun to get on the cascade and turn it into a
white cloud. It is the finest thing, certainly, that I have seen in the
Pyrenees.


  August 19.

Yesterday was very hot, cloudless, though not without air. To-day there
is a ‘brouillard sec’ all over the hill-tops, a north wind blowing, and
no sunshine.


  August 20.

To-day again is the blessed brouillard, keeping all the world cool, but
preventing the ascent of hills.


  August 23.

I have been to Cauterets by diligence two days ago. Yesterday at 6
A.M. went to Lac de Gaube, which is very good, returned to Cauterets
and lounged about the rest of the day, and this morning at 6.30 came
back on horseback over the hills and got here at eleven. Cauterets is
certainly beautiful, more beautiful than this, only it is a busyish
water-place, which this is not; the water-place here, St. Sauveur,
being a mile off, and very little frequented. Cauterets is right in the
real granite, and the stream is absolutely clear, which no other large
stream yet seen by me in these parts is.


  August 31.

I have been over to Luchon to see the Tennysons, whom I found very
comfortably established in pleasant lodgings out of the town, in
maize fields, not far from the river. These places are beginning to
lose their beau monde. It was a two days’ journey. I rode on Saturday
through Barèges, up to the Tourmalet Pass, and down to Grip, up again
to Col d’Aspin, and so down to Arreau. Next day left Arreau at 6.30
A.M., and came up a long valley to the top of another col, and so down
to Luchon before half-past eleven. It was agreeable enough to be worth
doing twice, so I came back on horseback the same way, leaving Luchon
on Tuesday. I rode to Arreau in the afternoon, then reascended the Col
d’Aspin, when the view this time was complete and much finer; from
Maladetta east to the Pic du Midi de Bigorre west; saw, with a slight
haze in the air, Maladetta and Port de Venasque perfectly, the glaciers
about the Vallée de Lys, the Lac d’Oo, the Pic du Midi, and the Barèges
mountains, all quite clear. I reached Luz about six on Wednesday.

I did one new thing yesterday, and went up the Pic des Bergons, whence
there is really a fine view of Pic du Midi on the one hand, and Mont
Perdu and Brèche de Roland on the other. I send you another Pyrenean
fragment:--

  She fed her cows, the mountain-peaks between.[21]


  September 1.

The Tennysons arrived at 6.30 yesterday. Tennyson was here, with Arthur
Hallam, thirty-one years ago, and really finds great pleasure in the
place; they stayed here and at Cauterets. ‘Ænone,’ he said, was written
on the inspiration of the Pyrenees, which stood for Ida.


  September 6.

Yesterday we went up the Pic du Midi, which proved fully equal to all
expectations, though there was haze over the plain and over the remoter
ends of the chain. It is a very complete view of the chain as we saw
it, only from the Maladetta to the Pic du Midi d’Ossau; our Pic du
Midi lying detached, or only tacked-to by the thin Col de Tourmalet,
some way to the north.

Tennyson and ---- have walked on to Cauterets, and I and the family
follow in a calèche at two.


  Cauterets: September 7.

To-day is heavy brouillard down to the feet, or at any rate ankles, of
the hills, and little to be done. I have been out for a walk with A. T.
to a sort of island between two waterfalls, with pines on it, of which
he retained a recollection from his visit of thirty-one years ago, and
which, moreover, furnished a simile to ‘The Princess.’ He is very fond
of this place, evidently, and it is more in the mountains than any
other, and so far superior.




  A CONSIDERATION OF OBJECTIONS

  AGAINST THE

  RETRENCHMENT ASSOCIATION AT OXFORD

  DURING THE IRISH FAMINE IN 1847.


The first obvious, and, if sound, obviously fatal, objection to this
Association, is directed not against the intention, but against the
means employed. Why _associate_? Cannot we be temperate without joining
a temperance society? cannot we give alms without printing our names?

To those who think and speak thus, may it not be said, If you think
thus, and speak thus, then do thus? It is by no means the object to
form a great joint-stock charity-doing monopoly: the more numerous
and the more active those are whose names do not appear, the better
satisfied, I am sure, will be those whose names do appear. If you do
not like charity by association, see that private charity is energetic;
and those you complain of will not complain of you.

But I think they will flatter themselves that at the same time your
private efforts will be powerfully seconded by the organisation
you dislike. Will it not be easier for you to retrench now that
retrenchment is not likely to be mistaken? Breakfast parties, and wine
parties, &c., &c., are as it were the currency of hospitality: you
cannot alter this ‘coin of the realm’ of entertainments without coming
to some common understanding. And to come to that common understanding
some degree of undesirable publicity may surely be endured.

A second objection, of a different kind, rests upon the statement
that a great number of undergraduates receive no fixed allowance from
home: what they do not spend, they do not receive. Of course in those
cases, where all that can be saved is welcome at home, nothing further
can be said: no retrenchment can be urged, because it is presumed no
retrenchment can be made. In all others may it not be asked, Is it true
that you have not, in point of fact, what comes to the same thing as an
allowance? a sum of money which you are expected to call for, beyond
which you are expected not to go, and up to which you would think
yourself justified in spending for your own gratification? The sum
which last year the paternal purse would have freely given for ices,
will it this year refuse for almsgiving? What with a safe conscience
you would have asked for then, will not your conscience suffer you to
petition for now? But be this as it may--for economy is a duty towards
friends and parents sadly enough neglected in Oxford--one thing may
and must be said. Do not, in the name of common sense, first refuse
to give, because the money is not yours, and then go and spend on
yourself, because it is your father’s.

You are not called upon, you think, to be your father’s almoner: he
is his own almoner: let it be so. But may it not be at this season
permitted you to strengthen his hands in this capacity? Will not the
money which your economy here will leave at his disposal, find its
way, think you, into the hands and mouths and hungry stomachs, if not
of Irish, yet of English labourers? We shall find, I think, soon, some
reason to believe that for the sake of all it is at this present time
most incumbent on all, if not to give, at any rate not to consume. Why
are operatives out of work in Yorkshire and Lancashire? Why are farm
labourers receiving in these midland and southern counties wages at
all times small, at this time and with these prices of corn, barely
enough to keep soul and body together? why is not work, more and
more than enough, provided, as was expected, by railways? _Pendent
opera interrupta._ Why--why is it, or how? Not because there is no
useful work to be done; no orders from abroad for cotton goods; no
agricultural improvements possible; no lines of railway worth the
making. No. Why indeed, or how, but because there is not money to
pay the expenses of the working; to buy cotton for the operatives to
turn into calicoes; to buy tiles for draining; or iron and bricks and
mortar for railways. God, by a sudden visitation, has withdrawn from
the income He yearly sends us in the fruits of His earth, sixteen
millions sterling. Withdrawn it, and from whom? On whom falls the loss?
Not on the rich and luxurious, but on those whose labour makes the
rich man rich and gives the luxurious his luxury. Shall not we then,
the affluent and indulgent, spare somewhat of our affluence, curtail
somewhat of our indulgence, that these (for our wealth too and our
indulgence in the end) may have food while they work, and have work to
gain them food? He who at this moment saves money (I say not to send to
Skibbereen, but) to lay out in some profitable investment, to lend to
master manufacturers for buying cotton, or landlords for draining, or
railway companies for excavating--yes, he who but buys into the funds,
does more a great deal--yea, more, as something is more than nothing,
as _plus_ is more than _minus_, than he who spends, albeit for the
benefit of the trade, in wines, and ices, and waistcoats.

So is it, as a general rule, and must be; he who eats his cake cannot
have it; he who saves it may change it for bread, and that bread
may maintain men at work. So is it as a general rule: yet there are
surely modifications. And here we come to the great objection, ‘the
tradesman’s’ objection I may call it, which is the most important by
far of all that have been urged against this system of retrenchment.
You are taking the bread out of the mouths not of ‘wealthy tradesmen’
only, but ‘wealthy tradesmen’s’ far-from-wealthy work-people. Do you
think all that tailoring, and man-millinery making, that cooking, and
that horse-tending, that serving and waiting was done by nobody? Will
nobody stand idle and hungry, because you have changed your mind?
Had you not, as it were, rung your bell for them, and now when they
wait your commands have you nothing to say? Had you not, in point of
fact, engaged their service, and now do you, without warning, dismiss
them? If they suffer by it, are you not in the wrong? If they starve,
is not yours the guilt? Doubtless, indeed, if in this country any
man in any place starve, a verdict of guilt, less or greater, must I
fear be brought, not, as in Irish juries, against Lord John Russell,
but against the wealthy and luxurious of this wealthy and luxurious
land. ‘We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the
anguish of his soul when he besought us and we would not hear.’ Their
suffering is on our heads. But the question is, Who had best suffer?
those who are working to bring things right, or those whom we could not
save from suffering without crippling our means for all? Which must be
put on shortest allowance, the able soldier or the camp-follower? Which
must be dismissed, in this household that must be reduced, the farm
labourers or the valets and lady’s-maids?

Surely Irish newspapers long ere this should have made us see how
reproductive labour differs from unreproductive. Most true it is
that the indulgences of Members of this University are the means
of providing a livelihood for a large staff of shopkeepers and
shopkeepers’ work-people, tailors and confectioners, ostlers and
waiters. Most true it is. Yet except for the mere enjoyment so
received by us, the customers, our money is a mere waste. We are
employing for our enjoyments men who might, by devoting their skill and
their strength to the farm, the factory, the ship, and the railway,
increase our stock of food, and our facilities for obtaining and
transmitting it. Or, ultimately, if useful employment fail here, we
should have money in our hands for removing superfluous labourers to a
field where not labourers but land is superfluous.

At no time whatever, I believe, can our large expenditure upon objects
of luxury be justified: at a time like this, when we know that wages
paid to those who work in the farm and the factory will bring us corn,
while wages paid to Oxford tradesmen will only increase our own useless
consumption, I see not how any doubt can be felt.

The ship is stranded and short of provisions, but a port full of
supplies is at hand; and they who control the matter will not victual
the boat’s crew that should go to obtain them, because forsooth it
would straiten the allowance of their cabin boys, and cooks, and
waiters. And that these forsooth may earn their food, and their masters
have an excuse for feeding them, these masters bid them continue their
functions--consume precious flour in pies and pasties--precious meats
in wasteful made dishes--for their own over-eating. Alas, that _mutato
nomine de nobis fabula narratur_.

You will say, I am pleading the cause not of Irish peasants, but of
English factory people and excavators. I am pleading the cause of both.
Is it not English labour that has this year kept Ireland alive? What is
to do the kind office in the next year? Mainly, I fear, English labour
again. Yet may we not hope, too, that if we keep alive Irishmen in
their wretched Skibbereens, we shall preserve not only hungry mouths,
but also strong hands that in the end will do work? But it is true; I
plead for both.

And for the tradesmen and the tradesmen’s work-people, what can be
done? Surely it is idle to keep up an unnatural and vicious demand
which finds no better means of feeding one set of men than wasting
food on another. We are guilty, I think, in having brought this state
of things upon ourselves, that many families depend for their present
sustenance on the continuance of such a system. One thing however there
is, which will relieve at any rate the tradesmen, and through them
perhaps do something for their dependants: and that is, paying bills. I
for my part urge no man to give alms at this time, till he has paid his
debts. It is not, I think, due to the tradesmen to go on spending; but
to pay for what has been received, I think is due.

Here then we come to another objection, the soundness of which I have
at once admitted. It is said, If I save at all, I must save to pay my
debts; we must be just before we are generous. It is said, and said
most fairly. But is it never added (how fairly I will not ask), I will
therefore not save at all? Why should I, this year more than last year?
My savings will not go to the Irish; why need I have savings at all?
And therefore while others starve I will surfeit; while others cry out
for husks, and submit if they cannot have them, I, no less loudly, will
clamour for a new pleasure, and be indignant if it is not found me. And
therefore if this affliction should be, as in some degree it surely
will be, continued into another year, or extended, no unlikely event,
in some form or other into England itself, I shall still be helpless,
still have the same ready plea for doing nothing, the same happy excuse
for self-indulgence. Verily it is to be feared there are some who, with
money in their pockets, will refuse to give to the Irish, because they
owe sums to tradesmen; neglect to pay their tradesmen, because paying
tradesmen is not giving to Ireland; and so in the end will do neither,
will let their bills go on increasing, and spend their ready money
on extra amusements not to be had without it. It is not impossible
there are men who will say, What money I have I owe to Bennett, or
Bickerstaff; however, as Bennett and Bickerstaff are not famishing,
they may as well wait; and then I shall have my money to take me up
to town, to carry me to the opera, to pay my way in my long vacation
continental excursion.

What then! truly, indeed, if Bennett and Bickerstaff are not famishing
and may as well wait, why you may as well not go to the opera, and pay
your opera’s price to keep your countrymen alive. But do not suppose it
is I who so advise. Pay your debts by all means. Surprise Bennett with
bank-notes, and gratify Bickerstaff with gold. There is need, as we
saw just now. I ask you not to be generous before you are just; I only
bid you make haste and be just that you may be generous the sooner. I
only beseech you not to say (they are indeed ‘vain words’) I cannot
be generous, and as for being just, that will do a year hence. Pay if
you can; if you cannot, why, cripple not at any rate your means for
generosity alike and justice in years to come. In any case and every
case, let not the sky which in Ireland looks upon famishment and fever,
see us here at Oxford in the midst of health and strength over-eating,
over-drinking, and over-enjoying. Let us not scoff at eternal justice
with our champagne and our claret, our breakfasts and suppers, our
club-dinners, and desserts, wasteful even to the worst taste, luxurious
even to unwholesomeness--or yet again by our silly and fantastic
frippery of dandyism, in the hazardous elaboration of which the hundred
who fail are sneered at, and the one who succeeds is smiled at.

I know not if there be any who venture on the bold declaration, The
money is mine, and I will have the good of it; I have got, and I
will spend; the Irish have not, and they must do without. Something
however too much approaching to this feeling undoubtedly does exist. In
the ravelled and tangled skein, of which is constituted the content
and quietness of conscience enjoyed by us, the purse-aristocracy of
England, this thread, I think, may here and there be detected even
by unskilful fingers. To these sticklers for the rights of property
it is worth while putting one question. If you had been wrecked the
other day in the ‘Tweed’ steamer, and had been successful in reaching
the place of safety in the rocks, would you, if the articles of food
secured there from the waters had happened to belong to your own
peculiar private stores--would you, I ask, have entertained a thought
that to you exclusively belonged the right to enjoy them? This barrel
of biscuits is marked with my letters, and was always known to be mine;
did I not pay for it? mine has come, all the better for me, yours has
not, all the worse for you.

O ye, born to be rich, or at least born not to be poor; ye young men
of Oxford, who gallop your horses over Bullingdon, and ventilate your
fopperies arm-in-arm up the High Street, abuse if you will to the full
that other plea of the spirits and thoughtlessness of youth, but let
me advise you to hesitate ere you venture the question, May I not do
what I like with my own? ere you meddle with such edge-tools as the
subject of property. Some one, I fear, might be found to look up your
title-deeds, and to quote inconvenient Scriptures.

The Institution of Property, he might urge, is all well enough as
a human expedient to secure its reward to industry, and protect
the provident labourer against the careless and idle. But for
half-million-per-annum fortunes, fifty-mile-long estates, and
may-I-not-do-what-I-please-with-my-own proprietors, some other
justification, it would seem, must be sought. Sought and found. Found
it must be by owners, or looked for it will be by others.

For consider it, he might say, a little more closely. How come you
to have money? It comes from your father. Then your father or your
father’s father, we hope--(for by begging, stealing, or serving, all
men live, said Mirabeau)--your ancestor, we hope, in time past, did
service to receive it; worked for it; earned it. And who gave him that
work to do? Many a strong man have we known in our days begging for
work, no matter what, to save him from starving. The will to work,
plain enough, is not all: Archimedes must have his ποῦ στῶ: the workman
his somewhat to work at: man labours not ‘as one that beateth the air.’
Who was it then, who, when your father or father’s father asked for
work, gave it him? Ultimately you most likely will find it was He who
gave us the earth. Ultimately it is the earth that forms our wealth and
our subsistence. Philosophers and merchants, poets and shopkeepers,
soldiers, sailors, tinkers, tailors--in our most spiritual, as in our
most material productions, we all alike start in this, in the earth
have our ποῦ στῶ and πόθεν ἐσθίω, our work to work at.

And ‘the earth hath He given to the children of men.’

Not, says the Scripture, to the children of the rich, or of the
noble, or of those who have had it hitherto; not to the well-bred and
well-educated--rather, it might seem, to the children of those by the
sweat of whose brow it is subdued.

So might some one put it. And far more near to the truth do I deem it
would be to declare, that whoever is born into the world has a just
claim to demand therein and therefrom work and wages for work; is bound
to do his part in the labour, and entitled to expect his proportion in
the fruits; even as in some Alacran shipwreck; each newcomer, _sævis
projectus ab undis_ (it is the old Lucretian image), may be called
upon to share in the toils, and may demand to share in the food; and
no old citizen of the rocks shall dare to say, We may monopolise the
work alike and the pay; we have hands enough for the work, and we will
have no new mouth for the victuals;--far truer, though not the whole
truth, I think would this be than the fairest human-law theory of
sacred indefeasible monopoly vested in hereditary lords of creation.
We have heard of the old oppression of ‘the lord’s mill.’ Even so,
if a capitalist now should buy all the cotton factories of the land,
and then say, ‘I have you in my power, and you must pay me what price
I will,’ would modern society bear it? How much more when, not for
cotton-twist, but for meat and drink and all things, there is one
sole machine, not made with hands, not capable of duplication, this
terraqueous globe that moves incommunicably tied to one unchanging
orbit?

Nor need we fear to acknowledge this principle freely. There is
enough sense of fairness in the world to let the sacred institution
of property find itself a basis secure and unassailed in that other
great principle, ‘If a man will not work, neither let him eat.’ Let
that apostolic limitation of that primitive-Christian state of things
where ‘they had all things common’ be our guide and interpreter. Let
us find in it the Christian exposition of the old covenant eighth
commandment. So far, as without encouraging present idleness and
improvidence, without encroaching unduly on provisions for posterity,
it were possible to equalise the distribution of labour, so far were
that equalisation a duty. And, as it is, when we punish the starving
man who steals the loaf, it is not because either the baker or we have
an exclusive right to it, but because society at all hazards must avoid
putting a premium on laziness.

It is of course utterly foreign to my meaning to do anything but find
a secure basis for the rights of property; to impugn them were idle.
But as legal justice must be corrected by equity, so must justice as
administered by the laws of property be modified by the equity of a
higher though less definite rule; and as the distinction between legal
and equitable justice was considered worthy of observation, so too let
not this be despised. Let it be fairly felt that what we call bounty
and charity is not, as we fain would persuade ourselves, a matter of
gratuitous uncalled-for condescension--as of God to men, or men to
meaner animals, as of children feeding the robins, or ladies watering
their flowers, but on the contrary a supplementary but integral part
of fair dealing; the payment of a debt of honour. Let however this
conviction be treated as it may, it cannot at least be denied that
in great calamities a higher law, ‘a law within the law,’ steps in
to supersede that of property. What we should feel to be right on an
Alacran reef is, in its measure, applicable to a Skibbereen famine;
to appropriate is to steal. As a matter of pure justice and not of
generosity, England is bound to share her last crust with Ireland, and
the rich men to fare as the poor.

Some things perhaps might be found to modify this: of that anon:
meantime have we not a nearer objection in the fact of Irish idleness
and Irish improvidence? To this I shall only answer that the failure
of the potato crop was surely a matter beyond the province of human
foresight, and that with respect to the labouring classes it may be
greatly questioned whether they have ever yet been any thing like
fairly tried.

And now then some one will tell us--that society has higher objects
than the preservation of the lives of individual members. A great
heritage of civilisation, of law, and thought, and religion has come to
our hands: shame upon this generation, if for the sake of prolonging
to some wretched and short-lived beings their brief tenure of misery,
we sacrifice our father’s hard-won gains. Better that many perish
than that the nation lose a Bacon, a Burke, or a Shakspeare. There
are things worse than starving. True indeed it is, and in this, or
something like this, is founded the justification of inequality of
ranks. True indeed, and truly well worth the knowing. As ignorant and
unrefined parents stint themselves to secure knowledge and refinement
for their children, so the laborious poor of the land support, at
their painful cost, the aristocracy of the rich and educated. And so
long as it is indeed an aristocracy--forgetful though it may be and
unfilial too--they do it, and do it with joy, as of a parent. But if
cultivation be so great a thing, has it no such ingredients as mercy
and justice? Enjoyment is good; and refined enjoyment better than
coarse. Wine is better than gin; and the ale-house inferior to the
opera: _vilius argentum est auro_, but also _virtutibus aurum_. As it
is the pure service of God, so may it not be also the true cultivation
of man, ‘to visit the orphans and widows in their affliction, and to
keep himself unspotted from the world’? If there are things worse than
starving, there are also things better than eating and drinking.

And as this our English aristocracy draws its recruits almost
exclusively from the newly rich, what, may we ask, is the most fitting
lesson it should inculcate upon them, what discipline and what drill
should it place them under? Shall it meet them half-way with the
precept of, Expense and ostentation? Shall it say, Your business as a
member of the best part of the English nation is to entertain, to give
good dinners, and see the world, to have houses larger than you want,
servants more than you want, carriages more than you use, horses more
than you have work for? Is this to be the talismanic tradition handed
down from chivalrous days to the new generation; is this the torch of
wisdom and honour which our feudal aristocracy transmits to the new one
that succeeds it? Is this all which they can give us whose boast it is
to belong to the historic being of England--to be the conducting medium
through which the past sends its electric power into the present,
Eating and drinking, and (we must remember that, I suppose) a dash of
gentlemanly manner?

To what result then do we come? To something like this.

First of all, that the welfare of the nation does undoubtedly require
the existence of a class free for the most part to follow their own
devices; that it is right that there should be men with time at their
disposal, and money in their purses, and large liberty in public
opinion; men who, though thousands and tens of thousands perish by
starvation, stoically meanwhile in books and in study, in reading,
and thinking, and travelling, and--it would seem too, enjoying, in
hunting, videlicet, and shooting, in duets, and dancing, by ball-going
and grousing, by déjeuners and deer-stalking, by foie-gras and
Johannisberger, by February strawberries and December green peas, by
turbot, and turtle, and venison, should pioneer the route of the armies
of mankind; should, an intrepid forlorn hope, lead the way up the
breach of human destiny to the citadel of truth; and, devoted priests
and prophets, solve some more than ‘Asian mystery’ by pilgrimage to
the Palestine of Cockaigne! But that however essential be these higher
classes, still there remains the question, Is there not a holier land
than Cockaigne; is not temperance as efficient a sapper and miner as
wine of Burgundy; is not labour better than enjoyment; is it not higher
cultivation ‘to do justice and mercy, and walk humbly,’ than to ‘eat
and drink and be drunken’; and though thought and study be glorious,
may we not combine ‘plain living and high thinking’; though science,
and art, and philosophy be divine, is not charity ‘yet a more excellent
way’?

In the second place, looking backward through our discussion, we
recur to the thought that property is scarcely, by law or gospel,
that inalienable personal, individual thing, which we that have it
would believe it to be. As in the dangers and distresses of society
great characters are for the first time seen, and as soon as seen are
recognised, while rank, and wealth, and titles are forgotten; even so
in calamities and horrors the old laws of _meum_ and _tuum_ shrink to
nothing, while a loftier principle reveals itself and no man gainsays
it.

The sons of deceased public servants--yea, the living workers
themselves--possess no indefeasible title to those lands, and goods,
and monies, which they call their earnings. Their lands come to them
saddled with indefinite rent-charges, reservations, and reversional
interests--the poor and the needy that are, and that shall be, have
a lien on their monies and their chattels. Beyond the reach of all
statutes of limitation there are bills that must be liquidated,
creditors that must not be deferred. Many yet shall come in from the
highways and hedges, and join in the meal with us that came early: a
posthumous brother is yet to be born, to share and share alike in our
father’s bequests.

  Terraque _mancipio nulli datur, omnibus usu_.

He from whom came man’s primal raw material--that Pharaoh, who fed
while the harvest yet was lacking; He retains, and to those whom He
shall send is due, in their proportion, that which hath come of it.
Without Him we could not have laboured: that which His gift was to us,
it is His will our labour should be found to others. ‘The earth hath He
given to the children of men.’

No such thing can there be as a right to do what you will with
your own. The property is not your own: scarcely your own at any
time; during times of calamity in no wise, except to do good with
and distribute. Neither again can you plead the good it does you:
who made thee to differ? you cannot even plead the good which your
cultivation, so obtained, does the nation; that cultivation could be
better obtained without it. Nor yet that you are patronising arts and
sciences; genius, and skill, and knowledge. You are so, no doubt--but
the thing could be done as well and better if you employed painters
and architects--engravers and jewellers--builders and engineers--not
upon your own dining-rooms and drawing-rooms; but upon churches, and
schools, and hospitals, public works and public institutions. And that
patronage would be as superior to the present as the patronage of
painting, properly so called, to that of the painting of portraits. Yet
even for that higher kind this is hardly the season. Neither, again,
can you defend yourselves on the ground of the ‘benefit of trade.’ Burn
your candles, if you please, at both ends--to make your blanket longer
cut off from the top to piece on at the bottom: but this is too serious
a matter for playing with transparent fallacies.

But I am running into idle repetitions, and telling a twicetold tale:
what is it then that I call upon you to do? Join the Association? Not
I. Do as you please about that. But about one thing you must not do as
you please. You must not insult God alike and man with the spectacle
of your sublime indifference. The angels of heaven, one might believe,
as they pass above those devoted shores, in gazing on that ordained
destruction let fall untasted from their immortal lips the morsel of
ambrosial sustenance. If we, as they, were nurtured on other food than
our brothers, if no gift of ours could help to allay those pangs of
famine, still methinks this undisturbed, unrestrained fruition were
not wholly free of guilt. How much more when every crumb we touch is
abstracted from that common stock, which in the eternal registers is
set down, I fear, as scarcely less theirs than ours?

If then it is really the case that past extravagance has brought upon
you present helplessness, if all you have and all you can this year
expect is forfeit, ere it come to your hands, to the purveyors of
past indulgence, wherefore, I beseech you, go on in that same foolish
course? You need not, you ought not, you must not. Pay if you can: it
is the tradesman’s due; he too has his difficulties, he too has his
duties of charity: pay if you can; if you cannot retrench in any wise;
let no childish fear of alarming suspicions, of awakening unpleasant
importunities, withhold you; in the end it will surely be the best for
creditor alike and debtor. Let not duns or imagination of duns frighten
you into folly redoubled. Join, if you please, the Association: it
professes no more than retrenchment for the sake of the Irish: you
need not, in my judgment, pay one farthing to the box, you are serving
its purposes otherwise. And it may perhaps be some assistance to your
purposes of economy, it may give you a sort of vantage-ground of joint
recognition, to place your name, either in manuscript or print, among
its members. But about this I profess a most supreme incuriousness.
Only, for Ireland’s sake, and England’s, and your own--abstain, be
temperate, and save.

Will you tell me that the little we can do is too little to be worth
doing at all? Surely for our own satisfaction simply it should be done.
But further: do you not know that through increase of consumption in
the year before last, the returns of customs and duties were raised by
hundreds of thousands of pounds? I say, the mere customs and duties
upon the increase. What is true of increase in the one way, will I
think be admitted true of decrease in the other. If by the mere tax on
our increased eating and drinking the exchequer filled so fast, will
the total decrease amount to so very small a trifle?

Will you tell me finally that all this is the hot fume of a distempered
imagination? that I am rather letting my fancy rest on what one saw
in Oxford during last summer term, than looking steadily on what
is occurring in this? that I am haunted by the ghosts of forgotten
champagne bottles, the spectra of long-worn-out waistcoats, the
simulacra of the fruits and the ices of Whitsuntide ‘46?

The shopkeepers, I am told, profess to feel a difference. Surely they
did not count on exactly the same thing again! I trust indeed there
_is_ a difference. But then the weather has been so bad. Who wants
ices with the wind N.N.E.; who likes Nuneham or Godstowe in the rain?
When all the watering-pots of heaven are playing upon High Street,
there will hardly be a quorum for examining one’s toilet. I only wish
one could feel any sort of security that five or six fine warm suns
would not make a great difference the other way; would not provoke the
same exuberance of extravagant pleasure-hunting which shot up with such
rank vegetation in the heats of last June. With the roses and the May
will come out, I greatly fear, the champagne and the claret. For my own
part, if the corn could only ripen in it, I could wish for rain and
cold to the end of the chapter.

Or will you say this is all rhetoric and declamation? There is, I dare
say, something too much in that kind. What with criticising style and
correcting exercises, we college tutors perhaps may be likely, in the
heat of composition, to lose sight of realities, and pass into the
limbo of the factitious. Especially when the thing must be done at odd
times, in any case, and if at all, quickly. The term is half over;
while I write, the barometer rises; ere I correct the proof sheet, the
hot weather may be here. But if I have been obliged to write hurriedly,
believe me, I have obliged myself to think not hastily. And believe me
too, though I have desired to succeed in putting vividly and forcibly
that which vividly and forcibly I felt and saw, still the graces and
splendours of composition were thoughts far less present to my mind
than Irish poor men’s miseries, English poor men’s hardships, and your
unthinking indifference. Shocking enough the first and the second,
almost more shocking the third.

One word more. Nothing that is said here is intended to go against
enjoyment, as such. It is perhaps scarcely natural for young men to
feel strongly that which they do not see. It were absurd to affect
a gloom which does not exist. But it is not absurd to avoid in our
enjoyments that which a little reflection can show us to be wrong,
to be hurtful or unfitting: it is not absurd to lay down a few rules
beforehand which will keep up in our minds the general impression that
those unseen miseries are, though unseen, not unreal: it is not absurd
to do, with or without sensation and sentiment, those acts which tend
to their alleviation; to avoid, simply because it has been shown to be
the right course, expensive and ostentatious gratifications. And simple
enjoyments are, if not the most voluptuous and delicately refined,
assuredly the manliest and healthiest, the most honest and rational and
permanent.

I may as well end by copying a document which shows that an example
has been set for us in high places. It is an order issued by the Lord
Steward of the Queen’s household.


  ‘Board of Green Cloth, May 12, 1847.

    ‘Her Majesty, taking into consideration the present high and
    increasing price of provisions, and especially of all kinds
    of bread and flour, has been graciously pleased to command
    that from the date of the order, no description of flour
    except seconds shall be used for any purpose in her Majesty’s
    household; and that the daily allowance of bread shall be
    restricted to one pound per head for every person dieted in the
    palace.

  ‘By her Majesty’s command, FORTESCUE.’

    It may simplify the subject of ‘benefit of trade,’ to observe
    the following distinctions. If I buy old books or pictures from
    a friend, the money is merely transferred: the country suffers
    no loss, and may indeed be the gainer, if my friend is more
    economical and a better distributer than I. If I give a man a
    shilling for holding my horse, the country suffers in case
    the man could have been doing something else; for instance,
    if I have called him off from mowing or reaping. Thirdly, if
    I give a confectioner half a crown for sweetmeats, which I
    could have done without, I have wasted the substance of the
    country, certainly in one way, by consuming without requiring
    it; perhaps in two, that is, if the confectioner’s work could
    have been spent upon somebody who did require it. All that is
    gone into my stomach is a pure waste, and the paltry percentage
    which goes to the vendor as profit is very likely waste also.
    He might have got the same for doing what was really wanted.




  LECTURE

  ON THE

  POETRY OF WORDSWORTH.


William Wordsworth was born in April 1770, at Cockermouth, in
Cumberland; his father, of a family which came originally from
Yorkshire, was a solicitor in the town. Left an orphan early in
life, his recollections attach themselves less to his home than to
the neighbourhood in which he was placed at school. Hawkshead, an
antique village, the centre of one of the large straggling parishes
of the North country, possessing an ancient and once famous grammar
foundation, stands a little way from the west side of Windermere,
beside a small lake of its own. Here, lodged in a country cottage, he
spent most of his time from 1778 to 1787--nine years.

His reminiscences of this period and this locality form the most
beautiful part of his biographical poem, ‘The Prelude’; and a
considerable number of his most pleasing minor poems refer to the
same years and place. It was then and there, beyond a doubt, that the
substantive Wordsworth was formed; it was then and there that the tall
rock and sounding cataract became his passion and his appetite, and
his genius and whole being united and identified itself with external
nature.

From this provincial, primitive seclusion, he passed, in October 1787,
to St. John’s College, Cambridge, where his three years of academical
residence, not much improved by attention to the studies of the
place, were happily broken for him by visits to his own country, to
Hawkshead, amongst his mother’s relations, and more remarkably by a
bold pedestrian tour (almost wholly and literally pedestrian) through
France, Switzerland, and the districts of the Italian lakes--regions
which the revolutionary wars almost immediately afterwards closed to
all English, and which were before comparatively unknown. The account
of the journey is again one of the fine points of ‘The Prelude,’ and in
particular the description of the passage of the Simplon, and of night
on the shores of Lago Maggiore.

Taking his degree at Cambridge in January 1791, he again went over to
France, led, it would seem, by enthusiasm for the political changes
then at work there. He remained there, at Orleans and at Paris, about
fifteen months, during which he was a witness of the culmination of
the revolutionary tumult, and beheld the commencement of its period of
bloodshed and terror. It gives a feeling of strange contrast to the
after tranquillity of his life, to hear him speaking of the desire he
then felt to enter himself as an actor into that terrible arena, and
seriously seeming to consider it a thing, at the time, likely enough to
happen, and from which chance, rather than his own wish, diverted him.

Chance, however, carried him back to England. Sympathising strongly
with the original revolutionary movement, and continuing long, in
spite of its crimes and horrors, to cling to republican feelings, he
showed, to the mortification of his friends, no disposition to carry
out their views by taking orders in the Church. He loitered, living in
a desultory manner, partly alone in London, partly among his friends
in the country, and was, at one time, on the point of engaging in
the drudgery of writing for the newspapers. At last, in 1795, his
twenty-sixth year, he found himself made what he considered to be
independent, by a bequest of 900_l._, left him by a young friend in
the faith of his vocation to literary achievement. He now settled down
into domesticity with his sister in a country place in Somersetshire.
This sister was one of the two persons whose minds, he said, had been
most operative upon his. The other was Coleridge, whom he met for the
first time in June 1797.

Coleridge, youngest son of a clergyman and schoolmaster at Ottery St.
Mary, Devon, born two years after Wordsworth, bred up at Christ’s
Hospital and at Cambridge--which Wordsworth, when he came up, was just
quitting--had for the last three years been engaged with Southey, a
young Oxford student, in wild schemes for a Pantisocratic settlement on
the banks of the Susquehanna (a situation selected for the sweetness
of the sound); had been publishing poems, lecturing and neglecting to
lecture, preaching in a blue coat and yellow waistcoat, here and there
and everywhere, especially at Bristol. Finally he had run into the
most imprudent of marriages, and had settled himself at the village of
Nether Stowey. Here, during more than a year, Wordsworth had continual
intercourse with him, residing at a beautiful spot not far from
it--Allfoxden.

Some years before 1793 he had published verses, not particularly
promising, written in the established metre and manner--that of Pope
and Dryden. But if Hawkshead had made the inner Wordsworth, Allfoxden,
Coleridge, and his own sister gave us the expressed Wordsworth. The
effect of this time on Coleridge was remarkable: his high poetic period
is just this of his intercourse with Wordsworth; but to Wordsworth it
was more distinctly an epoch.

His first characteristic poems were published, together with
Coleridge’s ‘Ancient Mariner,’ under the title of ‘Lyrical Ballads,’ in
1798. They obtained considerable notice, and made his name well known;
but that notice was not favourable, and his name was known rather for
ridicule and censure than praise.

The following winter he spent in Germany, where Coleridge was
proceeding to lose himself in metaphysics; Wordsworth returned, and,
after some little wandering in Yorkshire, he and his sister finally
settled, with their petty income, in a cottage at Grasmere, in December
1799.

In 1800, a new volume of Lyrical Ballads, containing some of his best
poems, was published. Quite undaunted by their want of popularity
and the adverse judgment of the highest critics, relying on his own
feelings and perceptions, he worked in his mountain retirement steadily
on, devoting himself chiefly at this time to the biographical poem
which, with the name of ‘The Prelude,’ was published, for the first
time, after his death in July 1850.

So ends his story before he was thirty years old. After his settlement
at Grasmere we do not imagine that his mind or genius developed or grew
at all. It grew perhaps in bulk, we may say, but never altered its form
or character, attaining merely more and more what he himself calls
‘the monumental pomp of age.’ In 1803 he made a tour in Scotland, of
which a very pleasing record remains, not only in the occasional poems
suggested by its incidents, but in the journal of his companion--his
sister. Returning southward, they paid a visit, on September 17, to
Mr. and Mrs. Scott, at their cottage at Lasswade, near Edinburgh.
They received a promise that their host would join them again at
Melrose, and, stopping on their way thither at the inn of Clovenford,
were assured by the landlady that Mr. Scott was a very clever man. At
Melrose they met and spent the evening together. The landlady here,
says Miss Wordsworth, made some difficulty about beds, and refused to
settle anything till she ascertained from the sheriff himself, _i.e._
Scott, that he had no objection to sleeping in the same room with
William, _i.e._ Wordsworth.

Mr. Scott was already known in the literary world as a translator of
German, and an editor of Scottish ballad poetry. But he had published
nothing original; and it was not till two years after this, that (as
it stands recorded) nothing in the history of British poetry ever
equalled the demand for the ‘Lay of the Last Minstrel,’ the first four
cantos of which Wordsworth and his sister had heard their author read
during their visit at the cottage of Lasswade. In the same year, 1803,
Wordsworth married, without, however, any great internal or domestic
revolution. In 1832 Scott died. This is also the date of the collected
edition, in four volumes, of ‘Wordsworth’s Poems,’ including ‘The
Excursion,’ which, under general unpopularity, he had steadily gone on
writing and publishing.

In 1839, in the theatre at Oxford, he received an honorary degree with
unusual acclamation.

In 1840, on the death of Southey, he was, with a general feeling that
it was his due, made Poet Laureate: 1850 conveyed his body to the quiet
churchyard of Grasmere.

We have presented this bare biographical outline as preliminary to all
remark and criticism. But this meagre chronological table is not to be
dismissed without some attention. The array of mere names and figures,
dry as they may look, are really full of curious significance, and
pregnant with many thoughts and conjectures.

Let us consider, for example, upon what sort of reading the youthful
period of Wordworth’s life was cast. The English literature of the
then closing eighteenth century, as deficient, perhaps, in force and
fertility as it is remarkable for justness and propriety and elegance
of diction, was attaining its completion in Cowper, who, born in 1731,
and dying in 1800, published his one great poem, ‘The Task,’ in 1785.

As we now read Scott’s novels and poems, Byron, and Southey, and
Wordsworth, so they in Wordsworth’s boyhood read the series from Pope
to Johnson, read Fielding, and Richardson, and Sterne, and Gray, and
Collins, and Goldsmith.

What effect upon the minds of young men of this time had Burns--or, to
turn to foreign literature, the works of Rousseau?

To proceed lower down. The curious meeting of Wordsworth, Coleridge,
and Southey deserves special notice. In proximity to Wordsworth,
Coleridge blazed forth in a stream of poetic brilliancy, which
his after years never, in any sort or kind, repeated; in no after
moments did he ever create an ‘Ancient Mariner’ or a ‘Christabel.’
Wordsworth, also, was elevated and enkindled by the more vivid and
radiating genius of Coleridge. Notice again how completely anterior
and antecedent to Scott, and Moore, and Byron, are those Lake Poets,
whose nascent influence and popularity they so completely overpowered.
But without ‘Christabel’ the ‘Lay of the Last Minstrel’ would never
have been written. Without Scott’s stories we should scarcely have
had Byron’s; without Wordsworth’s, and the reminiscences of Hawkshead
village-school, we should never have had the third and fourth cantos of
‘Childe Harold’; we should have lost, very probably, half the beauty of
Byron alike and Scott.

Like the runners in the torch race, they hand along the flame. Who
shall say, in these spiritual and subtle exchanges and interchanges,
This is mine, and that is thine? We cannot indeed, I think, assert that
Wordsworth derived anything directly from Byron, or even from Scott
(the ‘White Doe of Rylstone,’ so far as it follows Scott at all, so
far is a failure); but without that antagonism, and without the severe
lessons their popularity taught him, he probably would not either have
escaped his natural faults, nor exerted his natural strength.

Out of Wordsworth and Byron came forth Shelley; nor is Keats (there
is no such thing) an independent genius. We may remark also how, as
the brief career of Byron encloses within itself the yet briefer life
of Shelley, and Keats’s briefest of all, so is Byron himself included
in the larger arc of Scott, and the yet larger arc of Wordsworth.
Wordsworth, gradually working his way to reputation, was displaced by
the sudden glory of Scott. Scott, as a poet, presently has to resign
the field to Byron, and to compete against his Corsairs and Beppos with
the new phenomenon of the ‘Waverley’ novels. When Byron had died in
early manhood, and Scott in premature age; when the furor for the poet
had passed away, and the charm of the novelist had begun to decline,
Wordsworth first tasted the sweets of popular acceptance, and received
in his turn, at the end of his laborious and honourable life, the
reward which his rivals had almost outlived.

It is a curious and yet an undeniable fact that Wordsworth, who began
his poetical course with what was, at any rate, understood by most
readers to be a disclaimer and entire repudiation of the ornament of
style and poetic diction, really derives from his style and his diction
his chief and special charm. I shall not venture categorically to
assert that his practice is in positive opposition to the doctrine he
maintains in the prefaces, and supplementary remarks, which accompanied
his Lyrical Ballads, and which, calling down upon him and them the
hostility of reviews and the ridicule of satirists, made him notorious
as one

  Who both by precept and example shows
  That prose is verse, and verse is merely prose.

Certain it is, however, that he did bestow infinite toil and labour
upon his poetic style; that in the nice and exquisite felicities of
poetic diction he specially surpassed his contemporaries; that his
scrupulous and painstaking spirit, in this particular, constitutes one
of his special virtues as a poet. The moving accident, as he says, was
not his trade; of event and of action his compositions are perfectly
destitute; a lyrical and didactic almost exclusively, scarcely ever in
any sense a dramatic writer, it is upon beauty of expression that by
the very necessity of his position he has to depend. Scott and Byron
are mere negligent schoolboys compared with him. The anecdote has
often been told that Wordsworth said to Mr. Landor, or Mr. Landor to
Wordsworth, that there was but one good line in all Scott. To which
assertion of the one the other at once assented, and said that there
was no doubt which it was:--

  As the wind waved his garment, how oft did he start.

Wordsworth’s practice, in all probability, was far more just than
his theory. His theory, indeed, as directed not against style in
general, but against the then prevalent vices of style, was a very
tolerably justifiable and useful theory, but his practice was
extremely meritorious; his patience and conscientious labour deserve
all praise. He has not, indeed (Nature had not bestowed on him), the
vigour and heartiness of Scott, or the force and the sweep and the
fervour of Byron; but his poems do more perfectly and exquisitely and
unintermittedly express his real meaning and significance and character
than do the poems of either Scott or Byron. Lyrical verse is by its
nature more fugitive than drama and story; yet I incline to believe
that there are passages of Wordsworth which, from the mere perfection
of their language, will survive when the Marmions and the Laras are
deep in dust. As writers for their age, as orators, so to say, as
addressing themselves personally to their contemporaries, Byron and
Scott, one cannot hesitate to say, were far more influential men, _are_
far greater names. They had more, it may be, to say to their fellows;
they entered deeper, perhaps, into the feelings and life of their time;
they received a larger and livelier recognition, and a more immediate
and tangible reward of popular enthusiasm and praise. It may be, too,
that they had something not for their own generation only, but for all
ages, which quite as well deserved a permanent record as anything in
the mind of Wordsworth.

But that permanent beauty of expression, that harmony between thought
and word, which is the condition of ‘_immortal_ verse,’ they did not,
I think--and Wordsworth did--take pains to attain. There is hardly
anything in Byron and Scott which in another generation people will
not think they can say over again quite as well, and more agreeably
and familiarly for themselves; there is nothing which, it will be
plain, has, in Scott’s or Byron’s way of putting it, attained the one
form which of all others truly belongs to it; which any new attempt
will, at the very utmost, merely successfully repeat. For poetry, like
science, has its final precision; and there are expressions of poetic
knowledge which can no more be rewritten than could the elements of
geometry. There are pieces of poetic language which, try as men will,
they will simply have to recur to, and confess that it has been done
before them. I do not say that there is in Wordsworth anything like the
same quantity of this supreme result which you find in Shakspeare or
in Virgil; there is far less of the highest poetry than in Shakspeare,
there is far more admixture of the unpoetic than in Virgil. But
there is in him a good deal more truly complete and finished poetic
attainment than in his other English contemporaries.

And this is no light thing. People talk about style as if it were a
mere accessory, the unneeded but pleasing ornament, the mere put-on
dress of the substantial being, who without it is much the same as with
it. Yet is it not intelligible that by a change of intonation, accent,
or it may be mere accompanying gesture, the same words may be made to
bear most different meanings? What is the difference between good and
bad acting but style? and yet how different good acting is from bad. On
the contrary, it may really be affirmed that some of the highest truths
are only expressible to us by style, only appreciable as indicated by
manner.

That Raphael paints a Virgin and Child is not a very significant fact:
half a thousand other painters have painted the same; but painted _as_
Raphael--not one. It is as though you should suppose that to each
poetic thought some particular geometric figure, or curve, it might be,
specially appertained: just as to a particular definition the circle
appertains, and no figure but the circle.

Those who write ill draw the figures half-right, half-wrong,
imperfectly and incorrectly; their circle is not a true circle, not
a circle all round; its radii would, many of them, be equal, but not
all; no one will dare therefore to keep it as the model and pattern. To
draw the figure which may truly stand as the model and the pattern, the
unmisleading, safe representative--this is the gift and the excellence
of style.

In Milton, the gems of pure poetry lie embedded in the rock of
scholastic pomp. And in Wordsworth, you must traverse waste acres of
dull verse, that had better far have been, if anything, plain prose, to
seek out the rich felicitous spots of fragrance and pure beauty. There
is no doubt, I think, that he wrote over much. Posterity, we must hope,
will have an instinct to cast away the dross and keep the good metal,
and judiciously to reduce his seven volumes to one. Setting himself
laboriously and painstakingly to work, and being by nature, moreover,
a little cumbrous and heavy, he sometimes measured his result, we
cannot doubt it, by quantity, and fell into the not unnatural mistake
of counting a great deal of silver to be worth a great deal more than
one quarter the quantity of gold. Where a man has himself at once to
produce and to judge of his production, it is certainly natural, it may
be even desirable, that the judgment should not be exact; it cannot,
perhaps, well be so without the accompanying evil of an excessive and
vitiating introspection and self-consideration.

Had Wordsworth been more capable of discerning his bad from his good,
there would, it is likely enough, have been far less of the bad; but
the good, perhaps, would have been very far less good. The consequence
is, however, that to prove him a true poet, you have to hunt down a
bit here and a bit there, a few lines in a book of the ‘Prelude on the
Excursion,’ one sonnet, perhaps, amongst eighty or ninety, one stanza
in a series of Memorials of Tours in Scotland, or on the Continent;
only very occasionally finding the reward of a complete poem, good
throughout, and good as a whole.

What is meant when people complain of him as mawkish is a different
matter. It is, I believe, that instead of looking directly at an
object, and considering it as a thing in itself, and allowing it to
operate upon him as a fact in itself, he takes the sentiment produced
by it in his own mind as the thing, as the important and really real
fact. The real things cease to be real; the world no longer exists;
all that exists is the feeling, somehow generated in the poet’s
sensibility. This sentimentalising over sentiment, this sensibility
about sensibility, has been carried, I grant, by the Wordsworthians
to a far more than Wordsworthian excess. But he has something of it
surely. He is apt to wind up his short pieces with reflections upon
the way in which, hereafter, he expects to reflect upon his present
reflections. Nevertheless, this is not by any means attributable to all
his writings.

Here then, even in this defect, is indicated one great praise
attaching to Wordsworth, alike as a poet and as a man. He set himself
manfully and courageously to his work, and through good report and
evil, especially the latter, patiently and perseveringly kept to it,
reminding one, with his hardy, unflinching, north-country spirit, of
the story told of the Lancashire workman, who, when the easy looker-on
took occasion to observe that he had a hard day’s work, simply rejoined
that he was paid for a hard day’s work. Paid, I dare say, however, not
very largely, any more than, till late in life, was Wordsworth.

Wordsworth, we have said, succeeded beyond the other poets of the time
in giving a perfect expression to his meaning, in making his verse
permanently true to his genius and his moral frame. Let us now proceed
to inquire the worth of that genius and moral frame, the sum of the
real significance of his character and view of life.

          Unless above himself he can
  Erect himself, how poor a thing is Man,

are words which he himself adopts from the Elizabethan poet Daniel,
translated by him from Seneca, and introduces into that part of ‘The
Excursion’ which gives us what I might call his creed, the statement
of those substantive enduring convictions upon which after a certain
amount of fluctuation and tossing about in the world he found himself
or got himself anchored.

A certain elevation and fixity characterise Wordsworth everywhere. You
will not find, as in Byron, an ebullient overflowing life, refusing all
existing restrictions, and seeking in vain to create any for itself,
to own in itself any permanent law or rule. To have attained a law, to
exercise a lordship by right divine over passions and desires--this is
Wordsworth’s pre-eminence.

Nor do we find, as in Scott, a free vigorous animal nature ready to
accept whatever things earth has to offer, eating and drinking and
enjoying heartily; like charity, hoping all things, believing all
things, and never failing; a certain withdrawal and separation, a
moral and almost religious selectiveness, a rigid refusal and a nice
picking and choosing, are essential to Wordsworth’s being. It has been
not inaptly said by a French critic that you may trace in him, as in
Addison, Richardson, Cowper, a spiritual descent from the Puritans.

Into what Byron might have remade himself in that new and more hopeful
era of his life upon which, when death cut him down at Missolonghi,
he appeared to be entering, it would be over bold to conjecture. But
assuredly (without passing judgment on a human soul simply according
to the errors of those thirty-six years which may claim perhaps the
name and palliation of an unusually protracted youth)--assuredly, to
be whirled away by the force of mere arbitrary will, whose only law
was its own wilfulness, to follow passion for passion’s sake, and be
capricious for the love of one’s own caprice--this is not the honour or
the excellence of a being breathing thoughtful breath, looking before
and after.

The profounder tones of Walter Scott’s soul were never truly sounded
until adversity and grief fell upon his latter days, and those old
enjoyments in which he seemed to live, and move, and have his being,
his natural and as it were predestined vocation, fell from him and
were no more. The constancy, courage, and clear manly sense which,
amid broken fortunes, severed ties, and failing health, spirits, and
intellect, the extracts from his journals given in Mr. Lockhart’s life
evince, constitute a picture, I think, far more affecting than any to
be found in ‘Kenilworth’ or the ‘Bride of Lammermoor.’ But the sports
and amusements of Abbotsford, the riding and coursing and fishing, and
feasting, and entertaining of guests, &c. &c., these, it appears to
me, a little disappoint, dissatisfy, displease us; and make us really
thankful, while we read, for the foreknowledge that so strong and
capable a soul was ere the end to have some nobler work allotted it, if
not in the way of action, at any rate in that of endurance.

More rational certainly, either than Byron’s hot career of wilfulness,
or Scott’s active but easy existence amidst animal spirits and
out-of-door enjoyments, more dignified, elevated, serious, significant,
and truly human, was Wordsworth’s homely and frugal life in the
cottage at Grasmere. While wandering with his dear waggoners round
his dearer lakes, talking with shepherds, watching hills and stars,
studying the poets, and fashioning verses, amidst all this there was
really something higher than either wildly crying out to have things
as one chose, or cheerfully taking the world’s good things as one
found them, working to gain the means and the relish for amusement.
He did not, it is true, sweep away with him the exulting hearts of
youth, ‘o’er the glad waters of the dark blue sea’; he did not win
the eager and attentive ear of high and low, at home and abroad, with
the entertainment of immortal Waverley novels; but to strive not
unsuccessfully to build the lofty rhyme, to lay slowly the ponderous
foundations of pillars to sustain man’s moral fabric, to fix a centre
around which the chaotic elements of human impulse and desire might
take solid form and move in their ordered ellipses, to originate a
spiritual vitality, this was perhaps greater than sweeping over glad
blue waters or inditing immortal novels.

          Unless above himself he can
  Erect himself, how poor a thing is Man.

Unless above himself, how poor a thing; yet, if beyond and outside
of his world, how useless and purposeless a thing. This also must be
remembered. And I cannot help thinking that there is in Wordsworth’s
poems something of a spirit of withdrawal and seclusion from, and even
evasion of, the actual world. In his own quiet rural sphere it is true
he did fairly enough look at things as they were; he did not belie his
own senses, nor pretend to recognise in outward things what really
was not in them. But his sphere was a small one; the objects he lived
among unimportant and petty. Retiring early from all conflict and
even contact with the busy world, he shut himself from the elements
which it was his business to encounter and to master. This gives to
his writings, compared with those of Scott and of Byron, an appearance
of sterility and unreality. He cannot, indeed, be said, like Cowper,
to be an indoors poet; but he is a poet rather of a country-house or a
picturesque tour, not of life and business, action and fact.

This also sadly lessens the value which we must put on that high moral
tone which we have been hitherto extolling. To live in a quiet village,
out of the road of all trouble and temptation, in a pure, elevated,
high moral sort of manner, is after all no such very great a feat. It
is something, indeed, anywhere. But I fear it cannot quite truly be
said of him, as he has himself finely said of Burns--

  In busiest street and loneliest glen
  Are felt the flashes of his pen;
  He lives ’mid winter snows, and when
      Bees fill their hives;
  Deep in the general heart of men
      His power survives.

People in busy streets are inclined, I fear, a little to contemn the
mild precepts of the rural moralist. They will tell you that he rather
reminds them of the achievements of that celebrated French sea-captain,

      Who fled full soon
      On the first of June,
  But bade the rest keep fighting.

Perhaps it is only those that are themselves engaged in the thick of
the struggle and conflict that rightly can cheer on, or fitly can
admonish, their fellows, or to any good purpose assume the high moral
tone. Yet it must be confessed that even in a country village it still
is something.

Nor was Wordsworth in the earlier years of his life by any means of a
timid or valetudinarian virtue. A man who was in Paris in the heat of
the first Revolution was not without experiences. And the poems, it may
be observed, which follow closest upon this youthful period of living
experience, are of far higher value than the later ones, which ensued
upon his prolonged and unbroken retirement.

There may be, moreover, a further fault in Wordsworth’s high morality,
consequent on this same evil of premature seclusion, which I shall
characterise by the name of false or arbitrary positiveness. There
is such a thing in morals, as well as in science, as drawing your
conclusion before you have properly got your premises. It is desirable
to attain a fixed point; but it is essential that the fixed point be a
right one. We ought to hold fast by what is true; but because we hold
wilfully fast, it does not follow that what we hold fast to is true. If
you have got the truth, be as positive as you please; but because you
choose to be positive, do not therefore be sure you have the truth.

Another evil consequence is the triviality in many places of his
imagery, and the mawkishness, as people say, of his sentiment. I cannot
myself heartily sympathise with the ‘Ode to the Smaller Celandine,’ or
repeated poems to the daisy. I find myself a little recoil from the
statement that--

  To me the meanest flower that blows doth give
  Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.

These phenomena of external nature, which in the old and great poets
come forward simply as analogies and similitudes of what is truly
great--namely, human nature, and as expressions of curious and
wonderful relations, are in Wordsworth themselves the truly great,
all-important, and pre-eminently wonderful things of the universe. Blue
sky and white clouds, larks and linnets, daisies and celandines--these
it appears are ‘the proper subject of mankind’; not, as we used to
think, the wrath of Achilles, the guilt and remorse of Macbeth, the
love and despair of Othello.

This tendency to exaggerate the importance of flowers and fields,
lakes, waterfalls, and scenery, I remember myself, when a boy of
eighteen, to have heard, not without a shock of mild surprise, the
venerable poet correct. People come to the lakes, he said, and are
charmed with a particular spot, and build a house, and find themselves
discontented, forgetting that these things are only the _sauce and
garnish_ of life. Nevertheless, we fear that the exclusive student
of Wordsworth may go away with the strange persuasion that it is his
business to walk about this world of life and action, and, avoiding
life and action, have his gentle thoughts excited by flowers and
running waters and shadows on mountain sides.

This we conceive is a grievous inherent error in Wordsworth. The poet
of Nature he may perhaps be; but this sort of writing does justice to
the proper worth and dignity neither of man _nor_ of Nature.




  ON

  THE FORMATION OF CLASSICAL ENGLISH:

  AN EXTRACT FROM

  A LECTURE ON DRYDEN.


Dryden, a true littérateur, simply reflects his epoch; the revolution
he was intent upon, and which we are especially bound to consider,
was that of English verse composition. While Newton was balancing
the earth, and Locke weighing the intellect, Dryden was measuring
syllables. While Penn and Locke were venturing experiments in
government, he was making them in prosody. Political movements
and agitations--the plot and the new plot--dissolutions and
elections--falls of ministries and impeachments and deaths were to him
chiefly of interest because he must mould the subject of his verse
accordingly. To please the King as laureate he is in duty bound; and to
serve his cause with rhyme to the purpose. Also prose.

Yet what side _should_ a littérateur of real excellence take if not
that of the King and the court? who certainly had the best taste, were
the most judicious critics as well as the most likely paymasters.
Settle and Shadwell might suit the Aldermen and the Exclusionists, who
knew no better. And nothing, I imagine, more completely suited Dryden,
more exactly met his feelings, and gave freer scope to his talents,
than the revolution in literature which the new King and court sought
to naturalise in England. To guide the process of that change and
to elevate a matter of mere passing court fashion into a permanent
reformation of English literature; to dignify a mere slipslop aversion
of pedantry by converting it into an appreciation of elegance and
propriety of writing--this was his vocation. He devoted himself to it
for forty years with infinite zeal and perseverance, laborious study,
and patient carefulness. And certainly with some considerable success.

During the whole of the next century I suppose it was considered that
our language first was written, so to speak, by him. For models of
composition no one was recommended anterior to him. In English poetry
he is for them the earliest name. Into Johnson’s collection Cowley
and Butler, and one or two others coëval with Dryden, are admitted,
but not Spenser. So too in prose it is only in our time that people
have begun to talk of Jeremy Taylor and Milton as legitimate standards
of English prose composition. Dryden was supposed to have commenced
in the two kinds of writing what Pope and Addison made perfect. For
style Shakespeare was dangerous and Hooker pernicious reading; Ben
Jonson’s wit was ponderous and the wisdom of Bacon pedantic; the mirth
of Fletcher was rude and vulgar, the elegance of Sidney formal and
factitious.

Maxims of this kind prevailed from the days of Dryden to those of Byron
and Scott. There are circles where they are still current, and there
are possibilities of their again finding a more general acceptation.
I incline to believe that there is a great deal of truth in them.
Our language before the Restoration certainly was for the most part
bookish, academical, and stiff. You perceive that our writers have
first learnt to compose in Latin; and you feel as if they were now
doing so in English. Their composition is not a harmonious development
of spoken words, but a copy of written words. We are set to study
ornate and learned periods; but we are not charmed by finding our
ordinary everyday speech rounded into grace and smoothed into polish,
chastened to simplicity and brevity without losing its expressiveness,
and raised into dignity and force without ceasing to be familiar;
saying once for all what we in our rambling talk try over and over in
vain to say; and saying it simply and fully, exactly and perfectly.

This scholastic and constrained manner of men who had read more than
they talked, and had (of necessity) read more Latin than English; of
men who passed from the study to the pulpit, and from the pulpit back
to the study--this elevated and elaborated diction of learned and
religious men was doomed at the Restoration. Its learning was pedantry,
and its elevation pretence. It was no way suited to the wants of
the court, nor the wishes of the people. It was not likely that the
courtiers would impede the free motions of their limbs with the folds
of the cumbrous theological vesture; and the nation in general was
rather weary of being preached to. The royalist party, crowding back
from French banishment, brought their French tastes and distastes.
James I. loved Latin and even Greek, but Charles II. liked French
better even than English. In one of Dryden’s plays is a famous scene,
in which he ridicules the fashionable jargon of the day, which seems to
have been a sort of slipshod English, continually helped out with the
newest French phrases.

Dryden then has the merit of converting this corruption and dissolution
of our old language into a new birth and renovation. And not only must
we thank him for making the best of the inevitable circumstances and
tendencies of the time, but also praise him absolutely for definitely
improving our language. It is true that he sacrificed a great deal of
the old beauty of English writing, but that sacrifice was inevitable;
he retained all that it was practicable to save, and he added at the
same time all the new excellence of which the time was capable.

You may call it, if you please, a democratic movement in the language.
It was easier henceforth both to write and to read. To understand
written English, it was not necessary first to understand Latin; and
yet written English was little less instructive than it had been, or if
it was less elevating, it was on the other hand more refining.

For the first time, you may say, people found themselves reading words
easy at once and graceful; fluent, yet dignified; familiar, yet full of
meaning. To have organised the dissolving and separating elements of
our tongue into a new and living instrument, perfectly adapted to the
requirements and more than meeting the desires and aspirations of the
age, this is our author’s praise. But it is not fully expressed until
you add that this same instrument was found, with no very material
modification, sufficient for the wants and purposes of the English
people for more than a century. The new diction conquered, which the
old one had never done, Scotland and Ireland, and called out American
England into articulation. Hume and Robertson learnt it; Allan Ramsay
and Burns studied it; Grattan spoke it; Franklin wrote it. You will
observe that our most popular works in prose belong to it. So do our
greatest orators. A new taste and a new feeling for the classics grew
up with it. It translated, to the satisfaction of its time, Homer and
Virgil.

Our present tongue, so far as it differs from this, cannot profess to
have done nearly so much. Homer and Virgil no longer content us in Pope
and Dryden, but we have not been able to get anything to content us.
The English diction of the nineteenth century has no Burke or Chatham
to boast of, nor any Hume or Johnson.

There may be some superiority in matter. We have had a good deal of new
experience, both in study and in action--new books and new events have
come before us. But we have not yet in England, I imagine, had any one
to give us a manner suitable to our new matter. There has been a kind
of dissolution of English, but no one writer has come to re-unite and
re-vivify the escaping components. We have something new to say, but do
not know how to say it. The language has been popularised, but has not
yet vindicated itself from being vulgarised. A democratic revolution is
effecting itself in it, without that aristocratic reconstruction which
pertains to every good democratic revolution. Everybody can write, and
nobody writes well. We can all speak, and none of us know how. We have
forgotten or rejected the old diction of our grandfathers, and shall
leave, it seems likely, no new diction for our grandchildren. With some
difficulty we make each other understand what we mean, but, unassisted
by personal explanations and comment, it is to be feared our mere words
will not go far. Our grandfathers read and wrote books: our fathers
reviews: and we newspapers; will our children and grandchildren read
our old newspapers? Have we any one who speaks for our day as justly
and appropriately as Dryden did for his? Have we anything that will
stand wear and tear, and will be as bright and un-obsolete a hundred
and fifty years hence, as ‘Alexander’s Feast’ is to-day?




  LECTURE

  ON THE

  DEVELOPMENT OF ENGLISH LITERATURE

  FROM CHAUCER TO WORDSWORTH.

  (1852.)


The subject of my lecture is the Development of English Literature. It
were idle for me to attempt, and would be foolish in me to desire, to
say anything strikingly new upon it. Anything strikingly original could
be striking only because incorrect; and would in the end most likely be
found not even original.

Some novelty indeed there would be--the novelty of a rarely attained
success--could I, while passing in review the literature of our
country, treat of every part in proper place and due proportion,
without undervaluing, without overcolouring, without either omission or
exaggeration.

Something interesting too, if not striking, there might be, could I,
in following the development of English literature, indicate to you
truly its connection with the development of English character, point
out correctly why it was natural at particular epochs that particular
things should be said; how the times affected the writers, and the
writers express the times; and what sequence of changing words and
deeds has brought down the England of history to the modern England of
our own times in the East and in the West.

In commencing such a conspectus, I can have no hesitation in selecting
the first name: English literature begins with Chaucer. The most
substantive and dominant element in our blood and in our language
is, it may be perfectly true, the Anglo-Saxon. But it cannot be said
that either in our blood or language this element had established its
permanent relations to other--to Celtic, Danish, Norman, immigrant,
invasive, and rebellious elements--had taken amidst these and
communicated to these a distinct direction of its own, before the
era of King Edward III. and the close of the fourteenth century. The
same (and this is much more important) may be affirmed of the English
national mind. In the age of Chaucer it may be said that the English
people, such as ever since then it has been (and such never it had
been till then), had, for good or for evil, or more truly for both,
entered in various ways--in religion, in morals, in domestic habits,
in government, in social relations, in relations to other members of
the European body--upon a definite and positive course. The position
which we still hold as a northern, part Scandinavian, part German
people, ever resisting and yet ever submitting most largely to accept
the subtle influences of Southern civilisation and refinement--our
position, too, of antagonism, in particular to the other great mixed
nation, England’s immediate neighbour, was ours in the era of the
first French wars. And the picture of all that pertains to those first
exhibitions (for good or for evil, or for both) of our English genius
and temper you may see surviving unfaded in the lively colouring of the
‘Canterbury Tales’; exhibitions, I have said, of genius and temper; of
dispositions, inclinations, tendencies, it is true, rather than of any
formed and rigidly fixed determination. It is our boyhood; but the man
in looking back to it is conscious that that boyhood was his:--folded
and compressed within the bud we detect the petals of the coming
flower, the rudiment of the future fruit. What, for example, can be
truer to permanent English likings and dislikings, what more exact to
the nation’s habitual views and preferences in life, than these lines
in the description of the monk? Let me premise that St. Maure, and St.
Benett or Benedict, St. Austin or Augustin, are the great monastic
legislators: that _wood_, as in Scotch, still means crazy, and _swink_,
as in Shakespeare, _toil_:--

  The rule of Saint Maure and of Saint Benett
  Because that it was old and some deal straight,
  This ilkĕ monk let oldĕ thinges pace,
  And held after the newĕ world the trace.
  He gave not for that text a pulled hen,
  That saith that hunters be not holy men.


  And I say his opinion was good.
  What should he studie and make himselven wood,
  Upon a book in cloistre alway to pore,
  Or swinken with his handes and laboure,
  As Austin bid? _How shall the world be served?_
  Let Austin have his swink to him reserved.

I do not think that our countrymen in this generation have lost their
distaste to devout seclusion and associate task-work, or their passion
for individual enterprise; the hearty acceptance, so only indeed they
do exist, of all existing things, good, bad, and indifferent; the
desire to grapple with common facts, and the feeling, that some way
or other the question--How shall the world be served? must receive an
answer.

Certainly we may still find in Old England ladies--I quote
Chaucer--paining themselves to counterfeit cheer of court, and be
estately of manere, and to be held worthy of reverence; busy or
busy-seeming lawyers:--

  No where so busy a man as he, as he there n’was,
  And yet he seemed busier than he was;

country gentlemen, great at the sessions, and greater at the dinner
table; the tried soldier, silent and unpretending; the young soldier,
much the reverse; the merchant, so discreet and stedfast,

  There wistĕ no man that he was in debt;

religious and laborious parish-clergymen, and church dignitaries, not
very religious, and not at all laborious. Such is the picture given
by Chaucer of his fellow-travellers on the highway from London to
Canterbury in the year 1383, as the old tradition of the Tabard Inn in
Southwark records, as it might be any present Englishman’s description
of his in the year 1852.

From boyhood we step to early manhood; from Chaucer pass to
Shakespeare, and behold now, not temper, and tendency, and disposition,
but thought, contemplation, doubt. In language less easy far and
natural, but infinitely more pregnant, significant, and profound, in
a style abounding in faults as in beauties, we hear, not, as from
Chaucer, all that Englishmen in his time were like, but all that man
in all times may be. As on the mount of vision, from whose secret
summit were seen the kingdoms of the world and the glory thereof,
so on the elevation of his own poised intellect stood the spirit of
the Elizabethan dramatist, sweeping slowly the horizon of human will
and action--all the possible varieties of which were delivered into
its power, ‘to be or not to be.’ So shone concentrated in the being
of one man, as into the form of some irradiant star, the collective
intelligence of centuries gone by,--

                        the prophetic soul
  Of the great world dreaming o’er things to come.

Into details of critical remark on Shakespeare I do not now purpose
to carry you. Let me but mark one point. It is impossible, I should
suppose, for any reader who does not come to the plays of Shakespeare
with a judgment overborne by the weight of authority or the force
of general sentiment--it is impossible, I should imagine, for any
ingenuous, dispassionate reader not to find himself surprised, checked,
disappointed, shocked, even revolted, by what in any other author--in
an author of modern times--he would call gross defects in point of
plot, flagrant inconsistencies of character. In ‘As You Like It,’ for
example, who is not astounded to meet in Act V. the unnatural brother
of Act I., by the rehabilitation of a most cursory _Deus-ex-machinâ_
sort of penitence, or shall I call it regret, qualified for the love,
wedlock, and happiness which honest people had been working up to
through the whole long drama? Whom does the marriage of Angelo and
Mariana leave quite easy in his mind? Whose moral sensibilities are not
a little ruffled by a strange phantasmagoria of good people becoming
bad of a sudden, and all of a sudden good again; good and happy,
too, after every sort of misconduct, after the wickedest and foulest
actions, with one touch of the wand all made right; guilt converted to
innocence, with not a stain left behind--long-suffering virtue shall
wed quick repentant vice--and all, it would seem, simply to bring the
play to a happy ending?

For the explanation of these apparent blemishes--these obvious
incongruities in the comedies (for that is their region) of our great
poet, I might refer you to M. Guizot’s criticism on Shakespeare.
One element in it consists in the fact, which we are pretty safe in
assuming, that with the story Shakespeare had little or nothing to do;
he simply took what was given him, and made of it what he could--what
he had occasion or time for. And yet that the taste of the time, and
that he himself should acquiesce in such a representation, is a matter,
I think, in some degree appertaining to that balanced, speculative
character which I attempted but now to describe, natural to the age and
characteristic of the writer.

Free and serene in youth, newly emancipated from teachers and
directors, unfettered any longer by precept or injunction of others,
unbound as yet by any self-imposed restriction, or even any formed
determination--in the richness of a reflectiveness which even now is
all but a malady, in the fulness of an almost premature maturity of
thought--in a distant preconception or presentiment wandering undecided
in the garden of the infinite choices; free as yet to select, loving
much rather as yet to forbear; with a tranquil wistfulness, with a
far-sighted consciousness, looking down those unnumbered, diverging,
far-reaching avenues of future actuality, each one of which, but, if
any _one_, then not any other, he may follow--such I venture to picture
to myself the second poet of the English series--the second and the
greatest--the creator of Othello and of Falstaff, of Hotspur and of
Hamlet.

Not uncompromised, not uncommitted any longer, self-committed,
strongly, deliberately, seriously, irreversibly committed; walking
as in the sight of God, as in the profound, almost rigid conviction
that this one, and no other of all those many paths is, or can be, for
the just and upright spirit possible, self-predestined as it were,
of his own will and foreknowledge, to a single moral and religious
aim--such, I think, are we to imagine the writer of ‘Paradise Lost’
and of ‘Samson Agonistes,’ the third of the English poets. To what
purpose these myriad phenomena, entering and traversing the field of
that mighty object-glass of the speculative intellect? Is it life to
observe? Is it a man’s service to know? As if it was a thing possible
for us to forbear to act; as though there were not in God’s world,
amidst ten thousand wrongs, one right, amidst the false choices that
offend Him, the one that is His will. And yet, though in 1623, when
the players put out the first collected edition, the first folio of
the tragedies, comedies, and histories of William Shakespeare, Milton,
aged sixteen, was translating psalms, to the second of these folios,
in 1632, were prefixed the verses by John Milton, ‘What needs my
Shakespeare.’ And among the productions of that pure protracted youth,
ending, we may say, only in his thirty-third year, and devoted to books
and letters,--though ‘Comus,’ it is true, seems prophetic of the stern
and religious virtues of the after-manhood and old age--‘L’Allegro’
meantime, ‘Il Penseroso,’ and parts of ‘Comus’ itself show lineaments
of a gentler and less positive, more natural and less merely moral
character. Is there not here in these earlier poems, lingering still,
and as yet undismissed, a little of that poetic hesitance, that
meditative reluctance to take a part which I attributed but now as his
characteristic to Shakespeare? Does not the youthful Milton, while
in this immature period, pondering, examining, testing, as it were,
upon his spiritual palate the viands of life, approximate, I will not
determine how closely, to that personal undramatic Shakespeare, who
sadly and almost remorsefully could say of himself?--

  Alas! ’tis true, I have gone here and there,
  And made myself a motley to the view.
  Gored my own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear.

Or again,--

  Oh! for my sake, do you with fortune chide,
  The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds.

Or in a graver tone still,--

  Poor soul, the centre of my sinful Earth,
  Fooled by those rebel powers that thee array.

Upon the broad brows and in the deep eyes of Shakespeare I could
believe myself to see, during the inditing of records such as this,
a mournful expression which might pass with ease into the fixed
pure look of Milton, and could identify, under circumstances of no
violent transmutation, the lips which uttered, ‘What! because thou art
virtuous, shall there be no cakes and ale? aye, and ginger be hot in
the mouth?’ with those of him who closed _his_ drama with the sentence
that

        If virtue feeble were,
  Heaven itself would stoop to her.

But such a fleeting similarity of transition, if there were, in
the thoughtful countenance of the youthful Milton, was soon and
totally effaced. _He_ is a man of far different genius and character
whom we see in the seventeen succeeding years of his prime, from
his thirty-third to his fiftieth, teaching scholars and reforming
education; married, and deserted, and propounding a new doctrine of
divorce; taking a side in the great Civil War, joining in controversy
with bishops and archbishops, acting as secretary to a republican
government, and--

  In Liberty’s defence, my noble task,
  With which all Europe rings from side to side--

justifying the death of kings.

Or he again, who, blind and anon impoverished, neglected, imprisoned,
persecuted in another and concluding space of seventeen years, bated
nevertheless not one jot of heart and hope, and

  On evil days though fallen, and evil tongues,
  In darkness and with danger compassed round,

found in his lowest estate his highest inspiration, and converted his
season of endurance and affliction into his period of most perfect and
permanent achievement.

The spirit of Milton, no less than the spirit of Shakespeare, still
lives and breathes in our native air; we imbibe it in the earliest and
commonest influences that environ us; it has entered, for good, for
evil, or for both, into the constituents of our national character.

Nevertheless, the proper manhood of the English nation dates,
I believe, from the generation which rejected Milton. The
Counter-Revolution of 1660 and the final Revolution of 1688 are the two
critical convulsions which restored us to our proper natural course.
It is impossible, after all, not to recognise in those seemingly
senseless acclamations which welcomed back the exiled Stuart a real and
important significance. It is impossible not to sympathise with the joy
and exultation of people at throwing off the yoke of an iron system of
morals, proved by experience not coextensive with facts, not true to
the necessary exigencies and experiences of life.

Fain to return to that larger range from which for a while we had
remained self-excluded, but incapable any longer of sustaining
ourselves upon the unsupported elevation of speculative vision; eager
again to see what in Shakespeare we had viewed, to feel ourselves
again within the circle of those infinitely various relations, but too
far engaged in actual things to be competent now of seeing merely,
of feeling only; eager, were it possible--which it no longer is--to
find satisfaction to adult impulses in the gratification of those old
boyish instincts, dispositions, tempers, tendencies, left behind so
far away as Chaucer; resolute, however, in any case, come what would
or might, to face and confront, to acknowledge and accept the facts of
that living palpable world which cannot for any long time be disowned
or evaded, with the vision of the universe departed, with innocence and
the untroubled conscience forfeited, behold us here at the close of the
seventeenth century, embarking, in whose name we know not, and profess
to ourselves that we care not, upon the seas of actual and positive
existence.

You will observe that in the period commencing with the Restoration
and continuing through the eighteenth century, literature, though
gaining infinitely in variety, loses in elevation; its predominant and
characteristic form is not, as hitherto, the highest, the _poetical_.
What poetry does exist is by no means of the highest order, nor
aims at the highest objects; it is rather as a source of elegant
amusement, as an efficacious means towards refinement and polish, as
an ally and auxiliary of carriage and high breeding, as an emollient
of manners and antidote to brutality, that we are taught to regard it.
What indeed the really instructive, the serious and significant form
of literature is, were hard to say: it seems even doubtful at times
whether it possesses at all any form deserving any such high-sounding
epithets; at times we cannot refrain from the belief that the whole
energy, moral, intellectual, and vital, of the nation has passed off
into the common business, the ordinary hard work of individual everyday
life; that what we see in the name of literature is but a mere dead
and mechanical repetition, an aimless and meaningless observance of
traditional habits. At times again, on the other hand, the abundance,
and the variety, and the broad substantive character of what the
Englishmen of this period wrote and have left for us, fill us with
admiration while we contrast it with the poverty, narrowness, and
uniformity of our preceding literature. The complexity of the picture
is enhanced, and the embarrassment and doubt of our judgments and
feelings aggravated, while we further observe how our national mind
and literature begin to enter more now than ever before into intimate
relations with the other great personal, national forces which have in
the last hundred years sprung up into life and vigour on the Continent.
Chaucer, it is true--and it is his praise--gave the final completion,
by copious admissions of Norman-French vocables and phrases, to the
transformation, shall I say, or new creation, of our homely, meagre,
inarticulate semi-Saxon into a civilised and living speech, fit for the
harmonious repetition to English ears of graceful Italian or classic
story, and the enduring utterance of native thought and sentiment. By
Italian cadence and rhythm Spenser tuned his docile ear, and learnt to
remodulate, after an age of disuse, the language in which Shakespeare
was to delineate the traditions of Verona and Venice, and give
immortality to Florentine romances. The soul of Milton had dieted on
‘immortal notes and Tuscan airs,’ and been imbued with Italian scenes
and Italian friendships, and had learnt in that converse to

  Feed on thoughts that voluntary move
  Harmonious numbers,

ere he thought them worthy to arise ‘to the height of that great
argument.’

Nevertheless, this culture in classic grace, and this schooling in
the nice accomplishment of verse which the English poets had sought
with submission and deference from the descendants of Livy and Virgil,
cannot, in any sort, be paralleled with that encounter and fusion which
is now to come to pass with a national mind, single and original as
our own, proved, chastened, and fortified by a long course of thought,
action, and suffering. The French nation, marked from its original
development, shall we say, in the era of the first and second Crusades,
by a peculiar and distinct character, mingling in a wonderful compound
the fervour of the south and the vigour of the north, heirs direct of
an older civilisation, scene of the earliest resuscitation of thought,
taking, in the later ages of religious contention, a separate and
special position between the old, as in Italy and Spain, and the new,
as in England and North Germany; with a readier understanding, with a
more rapid and more immediate and seizing intellect; working out, by
a logic of its own, conclusions, distinct from those of _any_, yet in
relation to those of _every_ European community; free-thinking from
the first in Montaigne, sceptically devout in Pascal, embellishing the
ancient faith in Bossuet, and scaling the summit of the latest doubt in
Descartes, the French nation obviously had much to communicate to its
insular neighbours--the Puritan, or all-but Puritan, English people.

Yet, on the other hand, to pass into the region of mere imitation, to
sit at the feet even of writers as great as Racine and Molière, to owe
fealty to the dicta of Boileau, to fit on the literary court-costume of
Louis XIV., and pick up the fine language of the Regency, would appear
to carry somewhat of indignity to men that

                    Speak the tongue
  That Shakspeare spoke; the faith and morals hold
  That Milton held.

From this dangerous communion it may be said that the English mind
returned with little loss of originality, and with a large accession of
ideas and perceptions; it had offered as freely, if not as copiously,
as it had taken; in the mass of imitation the native genius is still to
be discerned, surviving and subsisting; in the prostration of ancient
tenets and habits the old character remains upright, unoverthrown
and unsubdued. One could really believe that we might have consented
to learn yet more and got no harm by it. And, reappearing strangely
disguised and metamorphosed, we shall still find the spirit of
the Elizabethan age and of the Puritan; the high functions which
Shakespeare and Milton performed will be performed in the new era less
splendidly but more effectually by smaller men and humbler agencies.

Dryden, born in 1631 and dying in 1700, and Cowper, born and dying
in the corresponding years of the following century, we may make the
limits of our new period.

After the age of Shakespeare, Milton, and the translation of the Bible,
that of Addison, Swift, and the translations of Homer and Virgil
may seem degenerate. Dryden, who heads the list, after commencing
panegyrist under Oliver Cromwell, and showing his good-will in the
same capacity under the restored Charles II., presently proceeds as
playwright, political satirist, theological controversialist, critical
essayist, classical translator. We may take him as an earnest of what
is to follow. Playwrights, in Dryden and Otway, Congreve, Vanbrugh,
Farquhar, assume first the pre-eminence. Classical translation, and
almost at the same time the Essay, aspire next to supremacy, and claim
Augustan honours in Pope and Addison. From 1740 to 1770 may be called
the culmination of the novelists: from 1750 to 1790 is the period of
the historians. The last decade of the century finds us restored to
other and different poetry in Cowper and in Bums.

The items in the list may appear somewhat trivial. Yet you cannot fail
to observe that they consist of names extremely well known; well known
not there only or here, but wherever the English language is spoken
or studied. It is to these that foreigners desirous of learning our
language most naturally recur. They constitute our ordinary standard
literature, and for models in English writing the tradition, not yet
obsolete, of our fathers refers us imperatively hither. We cannot,
with any safety, follow examples anterior to them; nor easily find any
amongst their successors. Our own age is notorious for slovenly or
misdirected habits of composition, while the seventeenth century wasted
itself in the excesses of scholastic effort. English prose, before the
age of Dryden, was in the hands, for the most part, of men who read and
preached more than they talked, and had learnt to compose Latin before
they set themselves to write the vernacular. But Latin is, by the
inherent nature of its grammar and construction, a language singularly
alien to the genius of a natural English style. French, which was the
chief reading of the English writers after the Restoration, both as a
living and as a modern language, was a far more useful auxiliary. And
at their coffee-houses and clubs, the wits of our Augustan age were,
even Addison included, fairly accustomed to lively conversation. And
the study of French tended to save from vulgarity and meanness diction
which conversational habits made thoroughly idiomatic. For manner,
and for the subtle and potent impressions conveyed by manner, you may
assuredly consult with great benefit the majority of these unpretending
items.

I may further raise your estimate of these names if I remind you
of their connection, at least in time, with workings of the human
intellect not exactly included in the name of literature. The period
of discoveries in Natural Philosophy begins with the reign of that
restored Stuart whose picture looks down still, if I mistake not, with
the title of founder on the meetings of the Royal Society. Newton’s
‘Principia’ is not, perhaps, a book pertaining to Belles Lettres; yet
Newton and his fellow-discoverers have a good deal to do with the
character of the age of Dryden. If I introduce, by the side of the
translation of Virgil, the name of Locke on the ‘Human Understanding,’
I shall add, I suppose, some specific gravity to the close of the
degenerate seventeenth century; and it will not be without some effect
that I intercalate between Thomson’s ‘Seasons’ and Richardson’s
‘Pamela,’ at the date 1736, the title of Butler’s ‘Analogy of
Religion.’ The advance of the century which presents us with the great
histories of Hume, Robertson, and Gibbon, gains additional seriousness
also from Hume’s philosophical as from Johnson’s moral writing. And
certainly, though the apparent results were less brilliant, our respect
and attention are claimed quite as strongly by the mental and moral as
by the natural or physical philosophy of this age.

The subject belongs properly to profounder lecturers; I shall merely
touch upon it in connection with that literature which it serves more
than could anything else to explain. It was our mental philosophy
which, far more than our ordinary Belles Lettres, drew upon us the
attention of Europe in general. Voltaire was indeed acquainted with
Pope, Dryden, and Swift, but he declared himself openly the student of
Newton and the pupil of Locke; and professed the mission of an apostle
to his countrymen of the doctrines of the English philosophy; and in
that philosophy only we can expect to find the fundamental convictions
upon which, when the worst came to the worst, Englishmen of that age
conceived they could retreat: it therefore must be considered as
the substantial reality upon which the fleeting phenomena of plays,
poetry, and novels are sustained. Its temper was, I suppose, narrow
and material: bent upon the examination of phenomena, it admitted only
such as present themselves to the lower and grosser senses; to the
notices of the higher and purer it peremptorily refused its attention.
We cannot live without the impalpable air which we breathe, any more
than without the solid earth which we tread upon; the intimations of
a spiritual world of which we cannot be rigidly, and, as it were, by
all our senses, certified, constitute for our inner life an element
as essential as the plain matter of fact without which nothing can be
done. But it is certain also that without that matter of fact nothing
can be done, and, moreover, very little can be thought: palpable
things, by divine right, by inevitable necessity, and intelligent
ordinance, claim our habitual attention; we are more concerned with our
steps upon the ground than our inhalation of the atmosphere; stories of
the apparition of ghosts may very likely be true, but even if they are
it matters extremely little.

This austere love of truth; this righteous abhorrence of illusion;
this rigorous, uncompromising rejection of the vague, the untestified,
the merely probable; this stern conscientious determination without
paltering and prevarication to admit, _if_ things are bad, that they
are so; this resolute, upright purpose, as of some transcendental man
of business, to go thoroughly into the accounts of the world and make
out once for all how they stand: such a spirit as this, I may say, I
think, claims more than our attention--claims our reverence.

We must not lose it--we must hold fast by it, precious to us as
Shakespeare’s intellectual or Milton’s moral sublimities; while our
eyes look up with them, our feet must stay themselves firmly here.
Such, I believe, is the strong feeling of the English nation; the
spirit of Newton and of Locke possesses us at least in as full measure
as that of any one of their predecessors.

To trace that spirit working in the minds and morals of our fathers
of the last century would be curiously instructive. Pure intellectual
action is apt, no doubt, to be for the time so absorbing as to draw
to itself all the agencies of our nature, as to suspend the just
and fitting exercise of other, and it may be nobler, functions.
Philosophers are frequently dim of sight for the phenomena of everyday
life, a little hard of hearing for the calls of plain humanity. Let
that moral purpose which should first embark, and through the whole
voyage should accompany, the true philosopher be his justification. It
is a special service that he undertakes, and he may be excused if, to
execute it, he does not act wholly as others do, or as in itself would
be best.

Such a pervading moral purpose is in England exhibited by the chief
philosophers of the eighteenth century. Such a moral purpose, perhaps,
we may claim for the century itself in general; admitting, however,
at the same time, whether it be the fault of philosophy or of that
particular style of philosophy which then prevailed, that, at any rate
amongst the upper and more educated classes, both morality and religion
seem to have held disadvantageous and precarious ground, to have
maintained or struggled to maintain themselves in a position only just
tenable. The maxim of the time appears to be that it is man’s duty to
sustain himself upon a minimum of moral assumption; in point of fact,
to strive to solve the problem of habituation to living on nothing.
Morality survives, we know not well how, in Hume. Religion appears
to be driven to its inmost line of defences, to be fighting from its
encincture of fortification, in Butler’s analogical argument. And
Johnson, in the last resort, can but confute Hume, as Berkeley--with a
stamp upon the ground.

Of what dubious cogency, compared with ancient doctrine, is the
morality implied in the summary of character with which Mary Queen
of Scots is dismissed from the English History. How different from
the idea of a religion meeting all the otherwise disappointed hopes,
fulfilling all the profoundest and most secret needs of our spiritual
nature, is the great argument of the ‘Analogy,’ which, nakedly stated,
would seem to run, that we have no right to claim a religion according
to our own fancies, that as the world of ordinary facts is full of
difficulties, so also it is to be expected will be religion also. How
matter-of-fact, and, as good people now would say, how low is the
morality of Johnson; how indiscriminate, moreover, he is obliged,
in his extreme need, to be in his religious faith and devotional
observances.

Nevertheless, there is a cogency in this resting upon only the lowest
grounds; the winter-vitality of the moral convictions of Hume is worth
more than any summer exuberance of sentiment. Butler’s argument does
hold water: Johnson’s character does prove something.

But by this time we are seeming to hear a sound as of very different
voices, and it is well that we should begin to break off. Religious
enthusiasm, wholly unconscious that amongst the upper classes it had
been proved a chimera, awakening in all the extravagant force of youth
at the touch of Wesley and Whitfield, had this long time, amongst the
despised and neglected, been extending its dominions and augmenting its
powers. Methodism, long plebeian, is attaining its literary patriciate
in Cowper. We must listen, too, while in homely Scots vernacular we are
told by an Ayrshire ploughman authentic tidings of living instincts, of
spontaneous belief, which not all the philosophy in the brain of the
intellectual can banish from the breast of the human being.

In France, also, even Parisian dilettanti are neglecting the persiflage
of Voltaire for the sentiment of Rousseau, and the common people are
‘hearing him gladly.’

As men after long abstraction or too careful self-introspection
need some sudden change to replace them in their ordinary attitude
of life and action; or, as in the ancient Roman Empire, when the
old civilisation, with its laws, its government, its intellectual
superiority, its literary upper classes, was gradually sinking more
and more into a sort of paralytic incapacity, the emergence from below
of a plebeian, unintellectual, unrefined religion, and the inroad from
without of Northern barbarian races, gave back life to the world--even
so in England from the elements representable by Wesley and Burns, in
France from what spoke by the mouth of the watchmaker’s son of Geneva,
came strange renovation.

You observe, upon referring to a table of chronology, how as the stars,
whose courses we have been contemplating, begin to disappear below,
so already above the horizon there may be seen showing themselves
the lights of a new generation. Before Johnson had left the world
you see Coleridge, Wordsworth, Scott, Southey already entered upon
it; entering it much about the time that Hume and Goldsmith quit it.
Gibbon sees that last volume, which in his garden at Lausanne he
rejoiced to lay down completed, issue from the press; and Byron is
already born. The men whom we ourselves have seen, some of whom still
survive--the men of whose careers some in this room may have been
immediate witnesses, the impress from whose spirit is more immediately
set upon us all, are already alive and even at work. Were I to pass
over the momentous barrier of the great French Revolution, and look
into the last decade of the eighteenth century, we should see there,
while the light of Burns suddenly goes out, and the feeble spark which
testifies to the existence of Cowper expires sadly with the expiring
centenary, we should see there Coleridge and Wordsworth and Southey
busy, and before the public, Coleridge and Southey planning as in a
dream a Pantisocratic community on the banks of the smooth-sounding
Susquehanna, Coleridge and Wordsworth presently writing in country
seclusion together poems which the former never, the latter scarcely
ever, improved upon.

But I shall be doing wrong, I feel and see, in overstepping this
magic limit of the century. I am leading you unawares from a gallery
of portraits of the dead through a door that opens upon a meeting of
living, moving, and acting men. From history I am seducing you to
self-observation; from the ripe and gathered sheaves I am diverting you
to the field where good and bad, by no rash hand to be sundered, must
grow together to an harvest which is not yet. Of the characteristics of
this new epoch, of its purport and significance, let us not dream of
seeking any analysis or giving any representation.

Twenty years hence, when the hot blood of Byron shall have cooled in
the veins of the generation he addressed, and when Scott’s mountain
excursions shall seem an exploded amusement, and Wordsworth’s evening
walks a faded reverie, twenty years hence it will be time enough to
meet together and discuss our past selves and the literature of the
commencement of the nineteenth century.




  REVIEW OF SOME POEMS

  BY

  ALEXANDER SMITH AND MATTHEW ARNOLD.

  (Published in the ‘North American Review’ for July 1853,
  Vol. lxxvii., No. 160.)


Poems by Alexander Smith, a volume recently published in London, and by
this time reprinted in Boston, deserve attention. They have obtained in
England a good deal more notice than is usually accorded there to first
volumes of verse; nor is this by any means to be ascribed to the mere
fact that the writer is, as we are told, a mechanic; though undoubtedly
that does add to their external interest, and perhaps also enhances
their intrinsic merit. It is to this, perhaps, that they owe a force
of purpose and character which makes them a grateful contrast to the
ordinary languid collectanea published by young men of literary habits;
and which, on the whole, may be accepted as more than compensation for
many imperfections of style and taste.

The models whom this young poet has followed have been, it would
appear, predominantly, if not exclusively, the writers of his own
immediate time, _plus_ Shakspeare. The antecedents of the ‘Life-Drama,’
the one long poem which occupies almost the whole of his volume, are to
be found in the ‘Princess,’ in parts of Mrs. Browning, in the love of
Keats, and the _habit_ of Shakspeare. There is no Pope, or Dryden,[22]
or even Milton; no Wordsworth, Scott, or even Byron to speak of.
We have before us, we may say, the latest disciple of the school of
Keats, who was indeed no well of English undefiled, though doubtless
the fountain-head of a true poetic stream. Alexander Smith is young
enough to free himself from his present manner, which does not seem his
simple and natural own. He has given us, so to say, his Endymion; it
is certainly as imperfect, and as mere a promise of something wholly
different, as was that of the master he has followed.

We are not sorry, in the meantime, that this Endymion is not upon
Mount Latmos. The natural man does pant within us after _flumina
silvasque_; yet really, and truth to tell, is it not, upon the whole,
an easy matter to sit under a green tree by a purling brook, and indite
pleasing stanzas on the beauties of Nature and fresh air? Or is it,
we incline to ask, so very great an exploit to wander out into the
pleasant field of Greek or Latin mythology, and reproduce, with more or
less of modern adaptation--

                                              the shadows
  Faded and pale, yet immortal, of Faunus, the Nymphs, and the Graces?

Studies of the literature of any distant age or country; all the
imitations and _quasi_-translations which help to bring together into
a single focus the scattered rays of human intelligence; poems after
classical models, poems from Oriental sources, and the like, have
undoubtedly a great literary value. Yet there is no question, it is
plain and patent enough, that people much prefer ‘Vanity Fair’ and
‘Bleak House.’ Why so? Is it simply because we have grown prudent and
prosaic, and should not welcome, as our fathers did, the Marmions and
the Rokebys, the Childe Harolds and the Corsairs? Or is it, that to be
widely popular, to gain the ear of multitudes, to shake the hearts of
men, poetry should deal, more than at present it usually does, with
general wants, ordinary feelings, the obvious rather than the rare
facts of human nature? Could it not attempt to convert into beauty
and thankfulness, or at least into some form and shape, some feeling,
at any rate, of content--the actual, palpable things with which our
everyday life is concerned; introduce into business and weary task-work
a character and a soul of purpose and reality; intimate to us relations
which, in our unchosen, peremptorily appointed posts, in our grievously
narrow and limited spheres of action, we still, in and through all,
retain to some central, celestial fact? Could it not console us with
a sense of significance, if not of dignity, in that often dirty, or
at least dingy, work which it is the lot of so many of us to have to
do, and which some one or other, after all, must do? Might it not
divinely condescend to all infirmities; be in all points tempted as we
are; exclude nothing, least of all guilt and distress, from its wide
fraternisation; not content itself merely with talking of what may be
better elsewhere, but seek also to deal with what _is_ here? We could
each one of us, alas, be so much that somehow we find we are not; we
have all of us fallen away from so much that we still long to call
ours. Cannot the Divine Song in some way indicate to us our unity,
though from a great way off, with those happier things; inform us, and
prove to us, that though we are what we are, we may yet, in some way,
even in our abasement, even by and through our daily work, be related
to the purer existence?

The modern novel is preferred to the modern poem, because we do here
feel an attempt to include these indispensable latest addenda--these
phenomena which, if we forget on Sunday, we must remember on
Monday--these positive matters of fact, which people, who are not
verse-writers, are obliged to have to do with.

                  Et fortasse cupressum
  Scis simulare; quid hoc, si fractis enatat exspes
  Navibus, ære dato qui pingitur?

The novelist does try to build us a real house to be lived in; and this
common builder, with no notion of the orders, is more to our purpose
than the student of ancient art who proposes to lodge us under an
Ionic portico. We are, unhappily, not gods, nor even marble statues.
While the poets, like the architects, are--a good thing enough in its
way--studying ancient art, comparing, thinking, theorising, the common
novelist tells a plain tale, often trivial enough, about this, that,
and the other, and obtains one reading at any rate; is thrown away
indeed to-morrow, but is devoured to-day.

We do not at all mean to prepare the reader for finding the great
poetic desideratum in this present Life-Drama. But it has at least the
advantage, such as it is, of not showing much of the _littérateur_ or
connoisseur, or indeed the student; nor is it, as we have said, mere
pastoral sweet piping from the country. These poems were not written
among books and busts, nor yet

  By shallow rivers, to whose falls
  Melodious birds sing madrigals.

They have something substantive and lifelike, immediate and first-hand,
about them. There is a charm, for example, in finding, as we do,
continual images drawn from the busy seats of industry; it seems to
satisfy a want that we have long been conscious of, when we see the
black streams that welter out of factories, the dreary lengths of urban
and suburban dustiness,

      The squares and streets,
  And the faces that one meets,

irradiated with a gleam of divine purity.

There are moods when one is prone to believe that, in these last days,
no longer by ‘clear spring or shady grove,’ no more upon any Pindus
or Parnassus, or by the side of any Castaly, are the true and lawful
haunts of the poetic powers; but, we could believe it, if anywhere,
in the blank and desolate streets, and upon the solitary bridges of
the midnight city, where Guilt is, and wild Temptation, and the dire
Compulsion of what has once been done--there, with these tragic sisters
around him, and with pity also, and pure Compassion, and pale Hope,
that looks like despair, and Faith in the garb of doubt, there walks
the discrowned Apollo, with unstrung lyre; nay, and could he sound it,
those mournful Muses would scarcely be able, as of old, to respond and
‘sing in turn with their beautiful voices.’

To such moods, and in such states of feeling, this ‘Life-Drama’
will be an acceptable poem. Under the guise of a different story,
a story unskilful enough in its construction, we have seemed
continually to recognise the ingenious, yet passionate, youthful
spirit, struggling after something like right and purity amidst the
unnumbered difficulties, contradictions, and corruptions of the heated
and crowded, busy, vicious, and inhuman town. Eager for action,
incapable of action without some support, yet knowing not on what arm
to dare to lean; not untainted; hard pressed; in some sort, at times,
overcome--still we seem to see the young combatant, half combatant,
half martyr, resolute to fight it out, and not to quit this for some
easier field of battle--one way or other to make something of it.

The story, such as we have it, is inartificial enough. Walter, a
boy of poetic temperament and endowment, has, it appears, in the
society of a poet friend now deceased, grown up with the ambition of
achieving something great in the highest form of human speech. Unable
to find or make a way, he is diverted from his lofty purposes by a
romantic love-adventure, obscurely told, with a ‘Lady’ who finds him
asleep, Endymion-like, under a tree. The fervour and force of youth
wastes itself here in vain; a quick disappointment--for the lady
is betrothed to another--sends him back enfeebled, exhausted, and
embittered, to essay once again his task. Disappointed affections,
and baffled ambition, contending henceforward in unequal strife with
the temptations of scepticism, indifference, apathetic submission,
base indulgence, and the like; the sickened and defeated, yet only too
strong, too powerful man, turning desperately off, and recklessly at
last plunging in mid-unbelief into joys to which only belief and moral
purpose can give reality; out of horror-stricken guilt, the new birth
of clearer and surer, though humbler, conviction, trust, resolution;
these happy changes met, perhaps a little prematurely and almost more
than half-way, by success in the aims of a purified ambition, and
crowned too, at last, by the blessings of a regenerate affection--such
is the argument of the latter half of the poem; and there is something
of a current and tide, so to say, of poetic intention in it, which
carries on the reader (after the first few scenes), perforce, in spite
of criticism and himself, through faulty imagery, turgid periods,
occasional bad versification and even grammar, to the close. Certainly,
there is something of a real flesh-and-blood heart and soul in the
case, or this could not be so.

We quote from the later portion, when Walter returns to the home of his
childhood:--

  ’Twas here I spent my youth, as far removed
  From the great heavings, hopes, and fears of man,
  As unknown isle asleep in unknown seas.
  Gone my pure heart, and with it happy days;
  No manna falls around me from on high,
  Barely from off the desert of my life
  I gather patience and severe content.
  God is a worker. He has thickly strewn
  Infinity with grandeur. God is Love;
  He yet shall wipe away creation’s tears,
  And all the worlds shall summer in his smile.
  Why work I not. The veriest mote that sports
  Its one-day life within the sunny beam
  Has its stern duties. Wherefore have I none?
  I will throw off this dead and useless past,
  As a strong runner, straining for his life,
  Unclasps a mantle to the hungry winds.
  A mighty purpose rises large and slow
  From out the fluctuations of my soul,
  As ghostlike from the dim and trembling sea
  Starts the completed moon.

Here, in this determination, he writes his poem--attains in this spirit
the object which had formerly been his ambition. And here, in the last
scene, we find him happy, or peaceful at least, with Violet:--

                          Thou noble soul,
  Teach me, if thou art nearer God than I!
  My life was one long dream; when I awoke,
  Duty stood like an angel in my path,
  And seemed so terrible, I could have turned
  Into my yesterdays, and wandered back
  To distant childhood, and gone out to God
  By the gate of birth, not death. Lift, lift me up
  By thy sweet inspiration, as the tide
  Lifts up a stranded boat upon the beach.
  I will go forth ’mong men, not mailed in scorn,
  But in the armour of a pure intent,
  Great duties are before me, and great songs,
  And whether crowned or crownless, when I fall,
  It matters not, so as God’s work is done.
  I’ve learned to prize the quiet lightning deed,
  Not the applauding thunder at its heels,
  Which men call Fame. Our night is past;
  We stand in precious sunrise; and beyond,
  A long day stretches to the very end.

So be it, O young Poet; Poet, perhaps it is early to affirm; but so be
it, at any rate, O young man. While you go forth in that ‘armour of
pure intent,’ the hearts of some readers, be assured, will go with you.

‘Empedocles on Etna, and other Poems,’ with its earlier companion
volume, ‘The Strayed Reveller, and other Poems,’ are, it would seem,
the productions (as is, or was, the English phrase) of a scholar
and a gentleman; a man who has received a refined education, seen
refined ‘society,’ and been more, we dare say, in the world, which
is called the world, than in all likelihood has a Glasgow mechanic.
More refined, therefore, and more highly educated sensibilities--too
delicate, are they, for common service?--a calmer judgment also, a
more poised and steady intellect, the _siccum lumen_ of the soul;
a finer and rarer aim, perhaps, and certainly a keener sense of
difficulty, in life--these are the characteristics of him whom we
are to call ‘A.’ Empedocles, the sublime Sicilian philosopher, the
fragments of whose moral and philosophic poems testify to his genius
and character--Empedocles, in the poem before us, weary of misdirected
effort, weary of imperfect thought, impatient of a life which appears
to him a miserable failure, and incapable, as he conceives, of doing
anything that shall be true to that proper interior self--

  Being one with which we are one with the whole world,

wandering forth, with no determined purpose, into the mountain
solitudes, followed for a while by Pausanias, the eager and laborious
physician, and at a distance by Callicles, the boy-musician, flings
himself at last, upon a sudden impulse and apparent inspiration of
the intellect, into the boiling crater of Etna; rejoins there the
elements. The music of the boy Callicles, to which he chants his happy
mythic stories somewhat frigidly perhaps, relieves, as it sounds in the
distance, the gloomy catastrophe.

Tristram and Iseult (these names form the title of the next and
only other considerable poem) are, in the old romantic cycle of
North-France and Germany, the hero and the heroine of a mournful tale.
Tristram of Lyonness, the famed companion of King Arthur, received in
youth a commission to bring from across the sea the Princess Iseult
of Ireland, the destined bride of the King of Cornwall. The mother of
the beautiful princess gave her, as a parting gift, a cup of a magic
wine, which she and her royal husband should drink together on their
marriage-day in their palace at Tyntagil; so they should love each
other perfectly and for ever.

On the dreamy seas it so befell, that Iseult and Tristram drank
together of the golden cup. Tristram, therefore, and Iseult should
love each other perfectly and for ever. Yet nothing the less for this
must Iseult be wedded to the King of Cornwall; and Tristram, vainly
lingering, fly and go forth upon his way.

But it so chanced that, after long and weary years of passion vainly
contended with, years of travel and hard fighting, Tristram, lying
wounded in Brittany, was tended by another, a youthful, innocent
Iseult, in whose face he seemed to see the look of that Iseult of
the past, that was, and yet could not be, his. Weary, and in his sad
despondency, Tristram wedded Iseult of Brittany, whose heart, in his
stately deep distress, he had moved to a sweet and tender affection.
The modern poem opens with the wedded knight come home again, after
other long years, and other wars, in which he had fought at King
Arthur’s side with the Roman emperor, and subdued the heathen Saxons on
the Rhine, lying once more sick and sad at heart, upon what ere long he
feels shall be his death-bed. Ere he die, he would see, once yet again,
her with whom in his youth he drank of that fatal cup:--

    _Tristram._ Is she not come? the messenger was sure.
  Prop me upon the pillows once again--
  Raise me, my page: this cannot long endure.
  Christ! what a night! how the sleet whips the pane!
  What lights will those out to the northward be?

    _The Page._ The lanterns of the fishing-boats at sea.

And so through the whole of Part I. of our poem lies the sick and weary
knight upon his bed, reviewing sadly, while sadly near him stands his
timid and loving younger Iseult, reviewing, half sleeping, half awake,
those old times, that hapless voyage, and all that thence ensued; and
still in all his thought recurring to the proud Cornish Queen, who, it
seems, will let him die unsolaced. He speaks again, now broad awake:--

  Is my page here? Come, turn me to the fire.
  Upon the window panes the moon shines bright;
  The wind is down; but she’ll not come to-night.
  Ah no,--she is asleep in Tyntagil----


  My princess, art thou there? Sweet, ’tis too late.
  To bed and sleep; my fever is gone by;
  To-night my page shall keep me company.
  Where do the children sleep? Kiss them for me.
  Poor child, thou art almost as pale as I;
  This comes of nursing long and watching late.
  To bed--good night.

And so (our poet passing without notice from Tristram’s semidramatic
musings and talkings to his own not more coherent narrative)--

  She left the gleam-lit fireplace,
  She came to the bed-side;
  She took his hands in hers; her tears
  Down on her slender fingers rained.
  She raised her eyes upon his face--
  Not with a look of wounded pride--
  A look as if the heart complained;
  Her look was like a sad embrace;
  The gaze of one who can divine
  A grief, and sympathise.
  Sweet flower, thy children’s eyes
  Are not more innocent than thine.

Sleeping with her little ones, and, it may be, dreaming too, though
less happily than they, lies Iseult of Brittany. And now--

  What voices are those on the clear night air?
  What lights in the courts? what steps on the stair?

PART II.

    _Tristram._ Raise the light, my page, that I may see her.
  --Thou art come at last, then, haughty Queen!
  Long I’ve waited, long have fought my fever,
  Late thou comest, cruel thou hast been.

    _Iseult._ Blame me not, poor sufferer, that I tarried.
  I was bound; I could not break the band.
  Chide not with the past, but feel the present;
  I am here--we meet--I hold thy hand.

Yes, the Queen Iseult of Cornwall, Iseult that was of Ireland, of the
ship upon the dreamy seas long since, has crossed these stormy seas
to-night, is here, holds his hand. And so proceeds, through some six or
seven pages of Part II., the fine colloquy of the two sad, world-worn,
late-reunited lovers. When we open upon Part III.,

  A year had flown, and in the chapel old
  Lay Tristram and Queen Iseult dead and cold.

Beautiful, simple, old mediæval story! We have followed it, led on as
much by its own intrinsic charm as by the form and colouring--beautiful
too, but indistinct--which our modern poet has given it. He is obscure
at times, and hesitates and falters in it; the knights and dames,
we fear, of old North-France and Western Germany would have been
grievously put to it to make him out. Only upon a fourth re-reading,
and by the grace of a happy moment, did we satisfy our critical
conscience that, when the two lovers have sunk together in death, the
knight on his pillows, and Queen Iseult kneeling at his side, the
poet, after passing to the Cornish court where she was yesternight,
returns to address himself to a hunter with his dogs, worked in the
tapestry of the chamber here, whom he conceives to be pausing in the
pictured chase, and staring, with eyes of wonder, on the real scene of
the pale knight on the pillows and the kneeling lady fair. But

  Cheer, cheer thy dogs into the brake,
  Oh hunter! and without a fear
  Thy golden-tasselled bugle blow,
  And through the glade thy pastime take
  For thou wilt rouse no sleepers here,
  For these thou seest are unmoved;
  Cold, cold as those who lived and loved
  A thousand years ago.

Fortunately, indeed, with the commencement of Part III., the most
matter-of-fact Quarterly conscience may feel itself pretty well set at
ease by the unusually explicit statements that

  A year had fled; and in the chapel old
  Lay Tristram and Queen Iseult dead and cold.
  The young surviving Iseult, one bright day
  Had wandered forth; her children were at play
  In a green circular hollow in the heath
  Which borders the sea shore; a country path
  Creeps over it from the tilled fields behind.

Yet anon, again and thicker now perhaps than ever, the mist of more
than poetic dubiousness closes over and around us. And as he sings
to us about the widowed lady Iseult, sitting upon the sea-banks
of Brittany, watching her bright-eyed children, talking with them
and telling them old Breton stories, while still, in all her talk
and her story, her own dreamy memories of the past, and perplexed
thought of the present, mournfully mingle, it is really all but
impossible to ascertain her, or rather his, real meanings. We listen,
indeed, not quite unpleased, to a sort of faint musical mumble,
conveying at times a kind of subdued half-sense, or intimating,
perhaps a three-quarters-implied question; is anything real?--is love
anything?--what is anything?--is there substance enough even in sorrow
to mark the lapse of time?--is not passion a diseased unrest?--did not
the fairy Vivian, when the wise Merlin forgot his craft to fall in love
with her, wave her wimple over her sleeping adorer?

  Nine times she waved the fluttering wimple round,
  And made a little plot of magic ground;
  And in that daisied circle, as men say,
  Is Merlin prisoner to the judgment-day,
  But she herself whither she will can rove,
  For she was passing weary of his love.

Why or wherefore, or with what purport, who will venture exactly to
say?--but such, however, was the tale which, while Tristram and his
first Iseult lay in their graves, the second Iseult, on the sea-banks
of Brittany, told her little ones.

And yet, dim and faint as is the sound of it, we still prefer this
dreamy patience, the soft submissive endurance of the Breton lady,
and the human passions and sorrows of the Knight and the Queen, to
the high, and shall we say, pseudo Greek inflation of the philosopher
musing above the crater, and the boy Callicles singing myths upon the
mountain.

Does the reader require morals and meanings to these stories?
What shall they be, then?--the deceitfulness of knowledge and the
illusiveness of the affections, the hardness and roughness and
contrariousness of the world, the difficulty of living at all, the
impossibility of doing anything--_voilà tout_? A charitable and patient
reader, we believe (such as is the present reviewer), will find in the
minor poems that accompany these pieces, intimations--what more can
reader or reviewer ask?--of some better and further thing than these;
some approximations to a kind of confidence; some incipiences of a
degree of hope; some roots, retaining some vitality, of conviction and
moral purpose:--

  And though we wear out life, alas,
  Distracted as a homeless wind,
  In beating where we must not pass,
  And seeking what we shall not find,

  Yet shall we one day gain, life past,
  Clear prospect o’er our being’s whole,
  Shall see ourselves, and learn at last
  Our true affinities of soul.

  We shall not then deny a course
  To every thought the mass ignore,
  We shall not then call hardness force,
  Nor lightness wisdom any more.

In the future, it seems, there is something for us; and for the present
also, which is more germane to our matter, we have discovered some
precepts about ‘hope, light, and _persistence_,’ which we intend to
make the most of. Meantime, it is one promising point in our author of
the initial, that his second is certainly on the whole an improvement
upon his first volume. There is less obvious study of effect; upon the
whole, a plainer and simpler and less factitious manner and method
of treatment. This, he may be sure, is the only safe course. Not by
turning and twisting his eyes, in the hope of seeing things as Homer,
Sophocles, Virgil, or Milton saw them; but by seeing them, by accepting
them as he sees them, and faithfully depicting accordingly, will he
attain the object he desires.

In the earlier volume, one of the most generally admired pieces was
‘The Forsaken Merman.’

  Come, dear children, let us away
    Down, and away below,

says the Merman, standing upon the seashore, whither he and his
children came up to call back the human Margaret, their mother, who had
left them to go, for one day--for Easter-day--to say her prayers with
her kinsfolk in the little gray church on the shore:--

  ’Twill be Easter time in the world--ah me,
  And I lose my poor soul, Merman, here with thee.

And when she stayed, and stayed on, and it seemed a long while, and
the little ones began to moan, at last, up went the Merman with the
little ones to the shore, and so on into the town, and to the little
gray church, and there looked in through the small leaded panes of the
window. There she sits in the aisle; but she does not look up, her
eyes are fixed upon the holy page; it is in vain we try to catch her
attention:--

  Come away, children, call no more,
  Come away, come down, call no more.

Down, down to the depths of the sea. She will live up there and be
happy, among the things she had known before. Yet sometimes a thought
will come across her; there will be times when she will

    Steal to the window and look at the sand;
    And over the sand at the sea;
    And anon there breaks a sigh,
    And anon there drops a tear,
    From a sorrow-clouded eye,
    And a heart sorrow-laden,
        A long, long sigh,
  For the cold strange eyes of a little mermaiden,
    And the gleam of her golden hair.

Come away, children, come down. We will be happy in our bright home
under the sea--happy, though the cruel one leaves us lonely for ever.
Yet we too, sometimes at midnight, when winds blow softly, and the
moonlight falls clear,

  Up the still glistening beaches,
  Up the creeks we will hie,
  Over banks of bright sea-weed
  The ebb-tide leaves dry.
  We will gaze from the sand hills
  At the white sleeping town,
  At the church on the hill-side;
      And then come back down,--
  Singing, ‘There dwells a loved one,
  But cruel is she,
  She left lonely for ever
  The Kings of the sea.’

It is a beautiful poem, certainly; and deserves to have been given at
full length. ‘The Strayed Reveller’ itself is more ambitious, perhaps a
little strained. It is a pleasing and significant imagination, however,
to present to us Circe and Ulysses in colloquy with a stray youth from
the train of Bacchus, who drinks eagerly the cup of the enchantress,
not as did the sailors of the Ithacan king, for gross pleasure, but
for the sake of the glorious and superhuman vision and knowledge it
imparts:--

  But I, Ulysses,
  Sitting on the warm steps,
  Looking over the valley,
  All day long have seen,
  Without pain, without labour,
  Sometimes a wild-haired mænad,
  Sometimes a Faun with torches.

But now, we are fain to ask, where are we, and whither are we
unconsciously come? Were we not going forth to battle in the armour
of a righteous purpose, with our first friend, with Alexander Smith?
How is it we find ourselves here, reflecting, pondering, hesitating,
musing, complaining, with ‘A’? As the wanderer at night, standing under
a stormy sky, listening to the wild harmonies of winds, and watching
the wild movements of the clouds, the tree-tops, or possibly the waves,
may, with a few steps, very likely, pass into a lighted sitting-room,
and a family circle, with pictures and books, and literary leisure,
and ornaments, and elegant small employments--a scene how dissimilar
to that other, and yet how entirely natural also--so it often happens
too with books. You have been reading Burns, and you take up Cowper.
You feel at home, how strangely! in both of them. Can both be the true
thing? and if so, in what new form can we express the relation, the
harmony, between them? Such a discrepancy there certainly does exist
between the two books that have been before us here. We close the one
and open the other, and feel ourselves moving to and fro between two
totally different, repugnant, and hostile theories of life. Are we to
try and reconcile them, or judge between them?

May we escape from all the difficulty by a mere quotation, and
pronounce with the shepherd of Virgil,

  Non nostrum inter vos tantas componere lites:
  Et vitulâ tu dignus, et hic.

Or will the reader be content to bow down with us in this place, and
acknowledge the presence of that highest object of worship among the
modern Germans, an _antinomy_? (That is, O unlearned reader, ignorant,
not impossibly, of Kant and the modern German religion--in brief, a
contradiction in terms, the ordinary _phenomenal_ form of a _noumenal_
Verity; as, for example, _the world must have had a beginning_, and,
_the world cannot have had a beginning_, in the transcendental fusion
or confusion of which consists the Intelligible or unintelligible
truth.) Will you be content, O reader, to plod in German manner over
miles of a straight road, that seems to lead somewhere, with the
prospect of arriving at last at some point where it will divide at
equal angles, and lead equally in two opposite directions, where you
may therefore safely pause, and thankfully set up your rest, and adore
in sacred doubt the Supreme Bifurcation? Or do you hold, with Voltaire,
who said (_à propos_ of the question then debated among the French
wits, whether there were or were not a God) that ‘after all, one must
take a side?’

With all respect for the Antinomies and Germans, and ‘most
distinguished consideration’ for Voltaire and Parisian persiflage,
still, it may not be quite necessary for us, on the present occasion,
either to stand still in transcendental doubt, or toss up, as it were,
for our side. Individuals differ in character, capacity, and positions;
and, according to their circumstances, will combine, in every possible
variety of degree, the two elements of thoughtful discriminating
selection and rejection, and frank and bold acceptance of what lies
around them. Between the extremes of ascetic and timid self-culture,
and of unquestioning, unhesitating confidence, we may consent to see
and tolerate every kind and gradation of intermixture. Nevertheless,
upon the whole, for the present age, the lessons of reflectiveness
and the maxims of caution do not appear to be more needful or more
appropriate than exhortations to steady courage and calls to action.
There is something certainly of an over-educated weakness of purpose in
Western Europe--not in Germany only, or France, but also in more busy
England. There is a disposition to press too far the finer and subtler
intellectual and moral susceptibilities; to insist upon following out,
as they say, to their logical consequences, the notices of some organ
of the spiritual nature; a proceeding which perhaps is hardly more
sensible in the grown man than it would be in the infant to refuse
to correct the sensations of sight by those of the touch. Upon the
whole, we are disposed to follow out, if we must follow out at all,
the analogy of the bodily senses; we are inclined to accept rather
than investigate; and to put our confidence less in arithmetic and
antinomies than in

  A few strong instincts and a few plain rules.

Let us remark also in the minor Poems, which accompany ‘Empedocles,’
a disposition, perhaps, to assign too high a place to what is called
Nature. It may indeed be true, as the astronomers say, though after
all it is no very great piece of knowledge, that the heavenly bodies
describe ellipses; and go on, from and to all the ages, performing that
self-repeating, unattaining curve. But does it, therefore, of necessity
follow that human souls do something analogous in the spiritual
spaces? Number is a wonderful thing, and the laws of Nature sublime;
nevertheless, have we not a sort of intuition of the existence, even in
our own poor human selves, of something akin to a Power superior to,
and transcending, all manifestations of Nature, all intelligible forms
of Number and Law? We quote one set of verses, entitled ‘Morality,’ in
which our author does appear to have escaped for once from the dismal
cycle of his rehabilitated Hindoo-Greek theosophy:--


MORALITY.

  We cannot kindle when we will
  The fire that in the heart resides,
  The spirit bloweth and is still,
  In mystery our soul abides;--
    But tasks, in hours of insight willed,
  Can be through hours of gloom fulfilled.

  With aching hands and bleeding feet
  We dig and heap, lay stone on stone;
  We bear the burden and the heat
  Of the long day, and wish ’twere done.
    Not till the hours of light return,
  All we have built do we discern.

  Then when the clouds are off the soul,
  When thou dost look in Nature’s eye,
  Ask how _she_ viewed thy self-control,
  Thy struggling tasked morality--
    Nature whose free, light, cheerful air,
  Oft made thee, in thy gloom, despair.

  And she, whose censure thou dost dread,
  Whose eye thou wert afraid to seek,--
  See, on her face a glow is spread,
  A strong emotion on her cheek.
    ‘Ah child,’ she cries, ‘that strife divine
  Whence was it, for it is not mine?

  There is no effort on my brow--
  I do not strive, I do not weep;
  I rush with the swift spheres, and glow
  In joy, and when I will, I sleep,--
    Yet that severe, that earnest air,
  I saw, I felt it once, but where?

  I knew not yet the gauge of Time,
  Nor wore the manacles of space,--
  I felt it in some other clime,
  I saw it in some other place.
    ’Twas when the heavenly house I trod,
  And lay upon the breast of God.

It is wonderful what stores of really valuable thought may lie
neglected in a book, simply because they are not put in that form
which serves our present occasions. But if we have been inclined to
yield to a preference for the picture of simple, strong, and certain,
rather than of subtle, shifting, and dubious feelings, and in point
of tone and matter to go along with the young mechanic, in point of
diction and manner, we must certainly assign the palm to ‘A,’ in spite
of a straining after the rounded Greek form, such as, to some extent,
vitiates even the style of Milton. Alexander Smith lies open to much
graver critical carping. He writes, it would almost seem, under the
impression that the one business of the poet is to coin metaphors and
similes. He tells them out as a clerk might sovereigns at the Bank
of England. So many comparisons, so much poetry; it is the sterling
currency of the realm. Yet he is most pleased, perhaps, when he can
double or treble a similitude; speaking of A, he will call it a B,
which is, as it were, the C of a D. By some maturer effort we may
expect to be thus conducted even to Z. But simile within simile, after
the manner of Chinese boxes, are more curious than beautiful; nor is it
the true aim of the poet, as of the Italian boy in the street, to poise
upon his head, for public exhibition, a board crowded as thick as they
can stand with images, big and little, black and white, of anybody and
everybody, in any possible order of disorder, as they happen to pack.
_Tanquam scopulum, insolens verbum_, says the precept of ancient taste,
which our author seems to accept freely, with the modern comment of--

  In youth from rock to rock I went
  With pleasure high and turbulent,--
      Most pleased when most uneasy.

The movement of his poem is indeed rapid enough; there is a sufficient
impetus to carry us over a good deal of rough and ‘rocky’ ground; there
is a real continuity of poetic purpose;--but it is so perpetually
presumed upon; the attention, which the reader desires to devote to the
pursuit of the main drift of what calls itself a single poem, _simplex
et unum_, is so incessantly called off to look at this and look at
that; when, for example, we would fain follow the thought and feeling
of Violet and of Walter, we are with such peremptory and frequent
eagerness summoned to observe how like the sky is to _x_ and the stars
are to _y_, that on the whole, though there _is_ a real continuity
of purpose, we cannot be surprised that the critic of the ‘London
Examiner’ failed to detect it. Keats and Shelley, and Coleridge,
perhaps, before them, with their extravagant love for Elizabethan
phraseology, have led to this mischief. Has not Tennyson followed
a little too much in their train? Coleridge, we suppose, would have
maintained it to be an excellence in the ‘myriad-minded’ dramatist,
that he so often diverts us from the natural course of thought,
feeling, and narrative, to see how curiously two trifles resemble each
other, or that, in a passage of deep pathos, he still finds time to
apprise us of a paronomasia. But faults which disfigure Shakspeare are
not beauties in a modern volume.

  I rot upon the waters when my prow
  Should _grate_ the golden isles,

may be a very Elizabethan, but is certainly rather a vicious
expression. Force and condensation are good, but it is possible
to combine them with purity of phrase. One of the most successful
delineations in the whole poem is contained in the following passage,
which introduces Scene VII.:--

    [_A balcony overlooking the sea._]

  The lark is singing in the blinding sky,--
  Hedges are white with May. The bridegroom sea
  Is toying with the shore, his wedded bride,
  And in the fulness of his marriage joy,
  He decorates her tawny front with shells--
  Retires a space to see how fair she looks,
  Then proud, runs up to kiss her. All is fair,--
  All glad, from grass to sun. Yet more I love
  Than this, the shrinking day that sometimes comes
  In winter’s front, so fair ’mongst its dark peers,
  It seems a straggler from the files of June,
  Which in its wanderings had lost its wits,
  And half its beauty, and when it returned,
  Finding its old companions gone away,
  It joined November’s troop, then marching past;
  And so the frail thing comes, and greets the world
  With a thin crazy smile, then bursts in tears--
  And all the while it holds within its hand
  A few half-withered flowers;--I love and pity it.


It may be the fault of our point of view; but certainly we do not find
even here that happy, unimpeded sequence which is the charm of really
good writers. Is there not something incongruous in the effect of the
immediate juxtaposition of these two images? We have lost, it may be,
that impetuosity, that _élan_, which lifts the young reader over hedge
and ditch at flying leaps, across country, or we should not perhaps
entertain any offence, or even surprise, at being transferred _per
saltum_ from the one field to the other. But we could almost ask, was
the passage, so beautiful, though perhaps a little prolonged, about the
June day in November, written consecutively, and in one flow with the
previous, and also beautiful, one about ocean and his bride? We dare
say it was: but it does not read, somehow, in the same straight line
with it--

  Tantum series juncturaque pollet.

We venture, too, to record a perhaps hypercritical objection to ‘the
_blinding_ sky’ in this particular collocation. Perhaps in the first
line of a scene, while the reader has not yet warmed to his duty,
simplicity should be especially observed--a single image, without any
repeated reflection, so to speak, in a second mirror, should suffice.
The following, which open Scene XI., are better:--

  Summer hath murmured with her leafy lips
  Around my home, and I have heard her not;
  I’ve missed the process of three several years
  From shaking wind flowers to the tarnished gold
  That rustles sere on Autumn’s aged limbs.

Except the two last lines. Our author will not keep his eye steady
upon the thing before him; he goes off, and distracts us, and breaks
the impression he had begun to succeed in giving, by bidding us look
now at something else. Some simpler epithets than _shaking_, and some
plainer language than _tarnished gold_ or _aged limbs_, would have
done the work better. We are quite prepared to believe that these
faults and these _disagreeables_ have personally been necessities to
the writer, are awkwardnesses of growth, of which the full stature
may show no trace. He should be assured, however, that though the
rude vigour of the style of his Life-Drama may attract upon the first
reading, yet in any case, it is not the sort of writing which people
recur to with pleasure and fall back upon with satisfaction. It may be
a groundless fancy, yet we do fancy, that there is a whole hemisphere,
so to say, of the English language which he has left unvisited. His
diction feels to us as if between Milton and Burns he had not read,
and between Shakspeare and Keats had seldom admired. Certainly there
is but little inspiration in the compositions of the last century;
yet English was really best and most naturally written when there
was, perhaps, least to write about. To obtain a real command of the
language, some familiarity with the prose writers, at any rate, of that
period, is almost essential; and to write out, as a mere daily task,
passages, for example, of Goldsmith, would do a verse-composer of the
nineteenth century as much good, we believe, as the study of Beaumont
and Fletcher.




  TWO LETTERS

  OF

  PAREPIDEMUS.

  (Published in ‘Putnam’s Monthly,’ New York, for July and
  August 1853.)


I.

MY DEAR SIR,--I left this country as nearly as possible (next June,
I believe, will complete it) one quarter of a century back, to go to
school. I was sent ‘home,’ as they called it--that is, away from home,
to the land which my parents, and, I presume, yours also, long ago
belonged to--to be educated.

Does one get educated in twenty-five years, I wonder? The wisest of the
seven wise men of Greece describes to us how that he

  Each day grew older and learnt something new.

And, since the something new may possibly contradict, and will
assuredly modify, the everything not so new before it, at what age may
one consider oneself entitled, for example, to write letters in print
to the editor of a magazine? At what figure does one attain one’s
real majority and right of speech? How soon may one venture to affirm
anything which everybody else does not already know and believe? And,
in the meantime, is there any good in talking merely to be assented to?
Is it so agreeable an exercise on the part of the reader to express
mentally to himself that assent? If agreeable, is it therefore useful?
‘Were it not better done as others use?’ to follow the plough or the
ledger, to find a Neæra in agriculture, or an Amaryllis in commerce?
‘What boots it, with incessant care, to tend the slighted’ bookmaker’s
trade, ‘and strictly meditate the thankless muse’ of magazines? Will
posterity know anything of our miserably imperfect, impotent fugitive
verses, or contemporaneity be none the worse for them? Are we not most
likely corrupting the pure taste which would otherwise turn with a
natural appetite to Shakspeare and Milton, to Addison and Goldsmith, to
Virgil and Homer? Goethe, I have heard, said not long before his death,
that had he known ere he began writing how many good books there were
in the world before, he would never have written a word.

There is one thing, indeed, I think one might do, could one only
believe that one could. No so certain a way of learning the merit of
a great picture as an attempt to copy it or represent something like
it. And as we, if we look to it and take pains, may by our indifferent
writing learn to appreciate the worth and merit of great writers,
whom before we thought but little of, so it is also possible that our
faithful, though small attempts, may help people to appreciate the
great originals.

Every new age has something new in it--takes up a new position; the
view presented by the writers of an anterior age is not readily
seized, or adopted by those born in a later century. It may, I think,
be one good work attainable to the efforts of the humble, modern
_littérateur_, to elevate and direct to the noblest objects the tastes
and enjoyments of his contemporaries. He holds a position common
with them: he may avail himself of this for their edification. As
the traveller who knows the country will show his less experienced
companion at each new stage, each further remove, under changed
aspects, the high mountain points they are retiring from; will point
out the Mont Blanc whose shadow they stood in at Chamouni, in its
full magnificent outline at Sallanches, and again, far distant, yet
not less rose-tinged, at sunset from Geneva, so the writers (that is,
or should be, the more instructed readers) of each new century may
successively restore each successive generation to connection with the
teachers of the past. Such is a possible function for a writer. Do
twenty-five years educate one, I wonder, for this--twenty-five years of
the universal slovenly habits of writing, speaking, hearing, thinking,
remembering, which pervade our time? ‘Twenty-five years have I spent
in learning,’ said the young man to the old. ‘Return,’ said the sage,
‘and spend another twenty-five in unlearning.’ ‘Each day grow older
and _un_learn something’--is this to be our other reading of Solon’s
maxim? Alas! it would seem there is need of it. We submit ourselves for
instruction to teachers, and they teach us (or is it our awkwardness
that we learn from them?) their faults and mistakes. Each new age and
each new year has its new direction; and we go to the well-informed
of the season before ours, to be put by them in the direction which,
because right for their time, is therefore not quite right for ours.

  Upon the water in a boat,
  I sit and sketch as there we float;
  The scene is fair, the stream is strong,
  I sketch it as we float along.

  The stream is strong, and as I sit
  And view the picture that we quit,
  It flows and flows, and bears the boat,
  And I sit sketching as we float.

  Still as we go, the things I see,
  E’en as I see them, cease to be,
  The angles shift, and with the boat
  The whole perspective seems to float.

  Each pointed height, each wavy line,
  To new and other forms combine;
  Proportions change and colours fade,
  And all the landscape is remade.

  Depicted--neither far nor near,
  And larger there and smaller here,
  And partly old, and partly new,
  E’en I can hardly think it true.

  Yet still I look, and still I sit,
  Adjusting, shaping, altering it;
  And still the current bears the boat
  And me, still sketching as we float.

Did I really read or only dream somewhere that anecdote of an elderly
painter, who, going over one day, with a friend of his youth, who
had known him in his prime and promise, a series of his popular and
most admired pieces, said mournfully, ‘All these poor, unmeaning,
ill-designed, half-executed things, I have made to earn bread and time
to do _that_,’ pointing to a chaotic, unfinished canvas at the end of
the room, ‘and _that_, after all, is as bad as any of them.’ ‘This
also,’ saith the Preacher, ‘is a sore evil that I have seen under the
sun.’

To grow old, therefore, learning and unlearning, is such the
conclusion? Conclusion or no conclusion, such, alas! appears to be our
inevitable lot, the fixed ordinance of the life we live. The cruel
king Tarchetius gave his daughters a web to weave, upon the completion
of which he said they should get married; and what these involuntary
Penelopes did in the daytime, servants by his orders undid at night. A
hopeless and a weary work, indeed, especially for young people desirous
to get married.

Weaving and unweaving, learning and unlearning, learning painfully,
painfully unlearning, under the orders of the cruel king Tarchetius,
behold--are we to say, ‘our life’? ‘Every new lesson,’ saith the
Oriental proverb, ‘is another grey hair; and time will pluck out this
also.’ And what saith the Preacher? ‘I, the Preacher, was King over
Israel in Jerusalem. And I gave my heart to seek and search out by
wisdom concerning all things that are done under the heavens; this sore
travail hath God given to the sons of men to be exercised therewith.’
_Perchè pensa? Pensando s’invecchia_,’ said the young, unthinking
Italian to the grave German sitting by him in the diligence, whose name
was Goethe. Is it true?

  To spend uncounted years of pain
  Again, again, and yet again,
  In working out in heart and brain
    The problem of our being here;
  To gather facts from far and near;
  Upon the mind to hold them clear,
  And, knowing more may yet appear,
  Unto one’s latest breath to fear
  The premature result to draw,--
  Is this the object, end, and law
    And purpose of our being here?

Nevertheless, to say something, to talk to one’s fellow-creatures, to
relieve oneself by a little exchange of ideas, is there no good, is
there no harm, in that? Prove to the utmost the imperfection of our
views, our thoughts, our conclusions; yet you will not have established
the uselessness of writing.

Most true, indeed, by writing we relieve ourselves, we unlearn; it is
the one best recipe for facilitating that needful process.

  Each day write something, and unlearn it so.

Most true, indeed! The observations that we can make nothing of, the
maxims that have ceased to be serviceable to us, our spent theories,
our discarded hypotheses, the wit that has become stale to us, the
wisdom that has grown fusty with us, the imaginations that molest us,
the illhumours that fret us, our follies, fancies, falsities; oh,
happy relief!--away with them to the magazine!

Yes, methinks I see it so, through the long series of ages. The ‘Iliad’
is but the scum of the mind of Homer, and Plato’s dialogues the refuse
of his thought. Who that reads the ‘Odyssey’ perceives not that it is
an act of penitence for the ‘Iliad,’ and feels not that, had the poet
lived, the ‘Odyssey’ also would have had its Palinode? In the divine
eloquence of Plato there are intonations in which I hear him saying to
me, ‘You know I don’t quite _mean_ all this.’

  Alas! ’tis true I have gone here and there,
  And made myself a motley to the view,

is the Great Dramatist’s profoundest feeling about himself, his doings,
his sayings, his writings. Virgil bade his ‘Æneid’ be burnt; and
what we read as his is not his deliberate word, but that of Varius
and Tucca. As Rousseau, it is said, in his old age, smiled sadly at
the fervent disciples of the ‘Social Contract,’ the ‘Émile,’ and the
‘Julie’; so, doubt it not, did greater than Rousseau. So felt Raphael
of his paintings, and Phidias of his sculptures; Michael Angelo, also,
of his Pantheon suspended in the heavens. Dante, from some strange
region of the spiritual spaces, looks down, half scorn, half remorse,
on the worshippers of the Divine Comedy of his human spleen and
bitterness. Cervantes laughs aloud to hear philosophers discriminate
the pure reason in Don Quixote and the understanding in Sancho; and
Montaigne, with open eyes of more than mortal wonder, repeats his
‘_Que sçais-je?_’ at the sight of grave worshippers of his levities.
May it not be true that when I quote from Milton, a shade of severe
vexation darkens his spiritual features, and when I repeat the wisdom
of Ecclesiastes, an ethereal frown contracts the immortal forehead of
the Preacher?

You are feeding, oh you students of Greek and lovers of Latin, you
that add to your German, French, and to your French, Italian and
Spanish, you inquirers afar off into Persian and Sanscrit, you devotees
of Chaucer and votaries of Shakspeare and Milton--you are feeding upon
that, precisely, which was tried by these wise men of old and found
wanting. You stand picking up the dross where those before you have
carried away the gold; you are swallowing as truth what they put away
from them--_expressed_, because it was false or insufficient.

Or is this, peradventure, confined to our own weaker selves, our more
impatient, irretentive, unthoughtful age? For, certainly, my dear
sir, what you and I and the young people read in any modern page is,
in the manner aforestated, ‘the thing that is not.’ Each striking new
novel does but reveal a theory of life and action which its writer is
anxious to be rid of; each enthusiastic address or oration is but that
which its speaker is just beginning to feel disgusted with. Oh! happy
and happy again, and thrice happy relief to the writer; but to the
reader----?

Said the Tree to the Children, ‘How can you go and pick up those dirty
dead leaves I have thrown away?’ Said the Children to the Tree, ‘Will
you grow us any better next year?’ Said the Tree to the Children,
‘What! are you positively going to put into your mouths those horrid
things (fruit, do you call it?) that have fallen from my branches?’
Said the Children to the Tree, ‘Why, they are very nice.’ Said the
Tree then to itself, ‘Suppose I were to restrain myself next spring,
and not grow any leaves, and to suppress, ascetically, all tendencies
to blossom? Should I not then produce something better? By all that is
wise and moral I will try.’ Said the Springtime six months after to the
Tree, ‘My dear Tree, that is out of the question.’ The Children came
again the next fall, and the Tree made no remark.

An illustration, however, is not the same thing as an argument; though
sometimes, indeed, it may be better. It is a game, in any case, for two
to play at. For it is also told of the Phœnix, that, having reached its
term of years it proceeded to Arabia, and built up carefully its pyre
of odoriferous combustibles, and sat down to expect the new birth. But
when the fire began to kindle, and the odoriferous sticks crackled, the
odours indeed were beautiful (ornithologists, however, are uncertain
whether the Phœnix has any sense of smell), the flame meantime was most
undoubtedly painful in the extreme when it got within the feathers
(the Phœnix, there is no question, has the sense of touch). The
Phœnix started up and exclaimed to itself, ‘Oh! surely, surely, I am
young again now!’ ‘Sit still, sit still, poor Phœnix; not till pain
has deprived thee of the very sense of pain, not until thought and
self-consciousness are burnt out and out of thee--not, by many pangs,
yet--is the new creature born in thee!’ with which exhortation the
story concludes.

And with which illustration, upon which side, my dear sir, is the
truth, or the most of the truth? ‘As the leaves are, so are the lives
of men;’ and so also their writings? Shall we yield to the promptings
of nature, and let the eager sap aspire forth in germination, and
the leaflets open out, and display themselves, to fall from us dead
and uncomely in November? Or shall we burn slowly, in silence, that
hereafter something better may be born of us? _Quien sabe?_

Was it the silence or the speech of previous ages that formed the more
perfect writers? Was Perugino necessary to Raphael, or had Raphael
been more himself without him? Some function, indeed, higher than that
of mere self-relief, we must conceive of for the writer. To sum up
the large experience of ages, to lay the finger on yet unobserved, or
undiscovered, phenomena of the inner universe, something we can detect
of these in the spheric architecture of St. Peter’s, in the creative
touches of the ‘Tempest.’

Imperfect, no doubt, both this and that is; short of the better
thing to come--the real thing that is. Yet not impotent, not wholly
unavailing.

In conclusion, will you let me offer you the last ‘modern invocation’
to the poet--shall we say in modern phrase--of the future? ‘Come, poet,
come’--no, I will trouble you only with a few verses at the end:--

  In vain I seem to call, and yet
  Think not the living years forget:
  Ages of heroes fought and fell,
  That Homer, in the end, might tell;
  O’er grovelling generations past
  The Doric column rose at last.
  A thousand hearts on thousand years
  Had wasted labour, hopes, and fears,
  Knells, laughters, and unmeaning tears,
  Ere England Shakspeare saw, or Rome,
  The pure perfection of her dome.
  Others, I doubt not, if not we,
  The issue of our toils shall see;
  Young children gather as their own
  The harvest that the dead have sown--
  The dead, forgotten and unknown.

Let me sign myself, my dear sir (as we are all ‘strangers and
pilgrims,’ so myself in an especial sense),

  Your faithful and obliged

  PAREPIDEMUS.


II.

MY DEAR SIR,--Do people in general, upon this side of the great water,
read Homer? Virgil, I know, in some parts of the Union, is a lady’s
book; nor is there, I think, any ancient author that better deserves
the honour. But the man’s book, Homer? It is not every boy that learns
Greek; and not all who learn Greek read through the whole forty-eight
books of the ‘Iliad’ and the ‘Odyssey.’ Is Pope much studied? I should
fancy not: and, indeed, though one is glad to hear any one say that he
has, in the past tense, read that ingenious composition, it is not easy
to bid any one, in the future, go and read it. And, if not Pope, whom
can we recommend? Chapman is barbarous, dissonant, obsolete, incorrect.
In Hobbes there are two good lines, well known, but they cannot be
repeated too often--

  And like a star upon her bosom, lay
  His beautiful and shining golden head.

(They are of Astyanax in the arms of his mother; and how that first
of English prosaists was inspired with them remains a problem to all
generations.) Cowper, who could read, however much enjoined to it? In
short there neither is, nor has been, nor in all probability ever will
be, anything like a translation. And the whole Anglo-Saxon world of
the future will, it is greatly to be feared, go forth upon its way,
clearing forests, building clippers, weaving calicoes, and annexing
Mexicos, accomplishing its natural manifest destiny, and subsiding into
its primitive aboriginal ignorance. Accomplishing our manifest destiny!
to be, that is, the ‘hewers of wood and drawers of water’ to the human
race in general; and then, peradventure, when the wood has all been
hewn, and the water drawn, to cease to exist, to be effaced from the
earth we have subdued--

  Fear no more the heat of the sun,
    Nor the furious winter’s rages,
  Thou thine earthly task hast done,
    Homeward gone, and ta’en thy wages.

To cease to exist, to vanish, to give place, in short, to some nobler
kind of men, in whose melodious and flexible form of speech the old
Homer will have a chance of reappearing unimpaired, or possibly some
new Homer singing the wrath of another Achilles and the wanderings of a
wiser Ulysses.

_Fiat voluntas!_ Let us go forward to our manifest destiny with
content, or at least resignation, and bravely fill up the trench, which
our nobler successors may thus be able to pass.

In the meantime, various attempts in ‘Blackwood’s Magazine,’ and
elsewhere, have been made in the last few years at rendering Homer
in modern English hexameter verse. We venture to pronounce them
unsuccessful. It is not an easy thing to make readable English
hexameters at all; not an easy thing even in the freedom of original
composition, but a very hard one, indeed, amid the restrictions of
faithful translation. Mr. Longfellow has gained, and has charmed, has
instructed in some degree, and attuned the ears of his countrymen and
countrywomen (in literature we may be allowed to say), upon both sides
of the Atlantic, to the flow and cadence of this hitherto unacceptable
measure. Yet the success of ‘Evangeline’ was owing not more, we think,
to the author’s practised skill in versification than to his judgment
in the choice of his material. Even his powers, we believe, would fail
to obtain a wide popularity for a translation even from a language
so nearly akin to our own as the German. In Greek, where grammar,
inflection, intonation, idiom, habit, character, and genius are all
most alien, the task is very much more hopeless.

Moreover, in another point, it may be right to turn the ‘Louise’ of
Voss and the ‘Herman and Dorothea’ of Goethe into corresponding modern
so-called hexameters. If the verse is clumsy in our rendering, so was
it to begin with in the original. If no high degree of elegance is
attained, no high degree of elegance was there to be lost.

But in Greek there seems really hardly a reason for selecting this in
preference to some readier, more native, and popular form of verse.
Certainly the easy flowing couplets of Chaucer, the melodious blank
verse of Shakspeare, or some improved variety of ballad metre, such as
Mr. Frere used in translating the ‘Cid,’ would be, on the whole, not
less like the original music of the ‘Iliad’ and ‘Odyssey’ than that
which we listen to with pleasure in ‘Evangeline,’ and read without
much trouble in the ‘Herman and Dorothea.’ Homer’s rounded line, and
Virgil’s smooth verse, were both of them (after more puzzling about it
than the matter deserves, I have convinced myself) totally unlike those
lengthy, straggling, irregular, uncertain slips of _prose mesurée_
which we find it so hard to measure, so easy to read in half a dozen
ways, without any assurance of the right one, and which, since the days
of Voss, the Gothic nations consider analogous to classic hexameter.

Lend me, if you can spare them for a moment or two my dear sir, your
ears, and tell me, honour bright, is

  Conticuere omnes, intentique ora tenebant

the same thing as

  Hab’ich den Markt und die Strasse doch nicht so einsam gesehen

Were I to interpolate in a smooth passage of ‘Evangeline’ a verse from
the ‘Georgies’ or the ‘Æneid,’ would they go together?

Is the following a metrical sequence?

  Thus, in the ancient time the smooth Virgilian verses
  Fell on the listening ear of the Roman princes and people.
  Ut belli signum Laurenti Turnus ab arce.

There is one line, one example of the smooth Virgilian verses, which
perhaps Mr. Longfellow would have allowed himself to use, and his
readers consented to accept, as a real hexameter.

  Spargens humida mella soporiferumque papaver,

might, perhaps have been no more objected to than

  Tous les Bourgeois de Chartres et le carillon de Dunkerque.

Yet even this most exceptionable form, with its special aim at
expressing, by an adaptation of sound to sense, the

  Scattering of liquid honeys and soporiferous poppy,

is a model of condensation, brevity, smoothness, and _netteté_,
compared with that sprawling bit of rhythmical prose into which I have
turned it.

But we are going to be learned, my dear sir; so I release your kind
ears, and beg you will no longer trouble either yourself or them--but,
some one, I foresee, of the numerous well-instructed future readers of
this private correspondence will interpose with his or her objection,
and will tell me, You read your Latin verse wrongly, you don’t put the
stress upon the _ictus_--you should pronounce Virgil like Evangeline,
Evangeline is the true hexameter; in Virgil the colloquial accent which
you follow was lost in the accent of verse. The Romans of old read it,
not

  Ut bélli signum Laurénti Túrnus ab árce.

but

  Ut belli signúm.

O dear! and can you, courteous and well-instructed reader, positively
read your ‘Georgics’ or ‘Æneid’ in that way? Do you, as a habit, scan
as you go along? Do you not feel it _very_ awkward, must not the
Romans also have felt it _rather_ awkward, to pass so continually and
violently from the ordinary to the sing-song accentuation? And if, as I
think you must allow, there was some awkwardness in it, why is it that
Virgil, and the other good versifiers, so constantly prefer that form
of verse in which this awkwardness most appears? Why is

  Spárgens húmida mélla, soporíférúmque papáver,

where there is no such difficulty, a rare form, and ‘Ut bélli
sígnum,’ where there is, a common and favourite one? Do you know,
I shall venture to assert, that in the Latin language the system of
accentuation was this, which enjoined the awkwardness you complain
of; the separation, in general, of the colloquial and the metrical
accent, the very opposite of that which we observe, who, unless the two
coincide, think the verse bad. Enough of this, however.

Return, Alpheus, the dread voice is past--come back, my dear sir,
we will talk no more prosody--only just allow me to recite to you a
few verses of _metaphrase_, as they used to say, from the ‘Odyssey’;
constructed as nearly as may be upon the ancient principle; quantity,
so far as, in our forward-rushing, consonant-crushing, Anglo-savage
enunciation--long and short can in any kind be detected, quantity
attended to in the first place, and care also bestowed, in the second,
to have the natural accents very frequently laid upon syllables which
the metrical reading depresses.

The aged Nestor, sitting among his sons at Pylos, is telling
Telemachus, who has come from Ithaca to ask tidings of his father, how,
after the taking of Troy, the insolence and violence of the Achæans
called down upon them the displeasure of the Father of the Gods and the
stern blue-eyed virgin, his daughter. Agamemnon and Meneläus, flushed
with wine, quarrelled openly in an assembly held at sunset, which broke
up in disorder and tumult; the leaders, some of them, staying behind to
please Agamemnon; others, drawing down their ships without delay and
sailing off with Ulysses, came as far as Tenedos, and then turned again
back. But I, says Nestor--

  But I, with my ships in a body, the whole that obeyed me,
  Fled, well perceiving that wrath was rising against us;
  Tydides also fled with me, his company calling;
  Later, upon our track followed the yellow Meneläus;
  In Lesbos found us, debating there of the long voyage,
  Were we to sail, to wit, by this side of rocky Chios,
  Making for Psyrie-isle, Chios being kept to the larboard,
  Or to the far side Chios along by the windy Mimante.

Will this sort of thing please the modern ear? It is to be feared
not. It is too late a day in this nineteenth century to introduce a
new principle, however good, into modern European verse. We must be
content, perhaps, in this, as in other and higher matters, to take
things as we find them, and make the best we can of them. You, I dare
say, my dear sir, though perhaps no great lover of hexameters at all,
will prefer to my laboured Homerics the rough-and-ready Anglo-savage
lines that follow. They render the prayer of Achilles when he is
sending out Patroclus with the Myrmidons to check the victory of the
Trojans.

  Dodonëan, Pelasgican Zeus, up in heaven above us,
  King of Dodona, the stormy and cold, where thy Selli attend thee,
  Barefoot, that wash not their feet, whose bed is the earth,
      thy expounders--
  Once when I prayed thee before, thou gavest me all my petition,
  Gavest me honour, and greatly afflicted the host of Achaia;
  Even so now too, Zeus, fulfil my prayer and petition;
  I am myself staying here, alone in the midst of my vessels.
  But I am sending my friend, and the Myrmidon people about him,
  Into the battle: O Zeus, Wide-Seër, accord to him honour,
  Strengthen, embolden the heart in his breast; that Hector to-day may
  See whether my companion has skill of his own for the battle,
  Or is invincible only, when I too enter the onset.
  And when the might of his hand shall have driven the war from the
      galleys,
  Then let him come back safe to me by the side of my vessels,
  Unhurt bringing me home my arms and all my companions.
  So in his prayer he spoke; and the Zeus, the Counsellor, heard him:
  Granted him half his desire; but half the Father denied him;
  Granted him that his friend should drive the war and the onset
  Back from the galleys; denied him his safe return from the battle.

Here, in a milder mood, the poet, for the conclusion of his first book,
describes the ‘easy living’ gods:--

  So the live-long day they thus were unto the sunset
  Feasting; neither did heart lack ever a portion of banquet,
  Nor lack ever the lyre, sweet-toned, in the hand of Apollo,
  Nor the muses, in turn singing sweetly with beautiful voices.
  But as soon as the shining light of the sun had descended,
  They, to lay them down, went every one to his chamber,
  Where for each one a house the far-famed Worker with both hands,
  Even Hephœstus, had made with the skill of his understanding.
  Zeus also to his bed, the Olympian flasher of lightning,
  Where he was wont before, when slumber sweet came upon him--
  Thither gone-up was sleeping, the white-armed Heera beside him.

The best translations of Homer into this verse which I am acquainted
with are those by Mr. Lockhart and Dr. Hawtrey, in the little
oblong-quarto collection of English Hexameters. Yet, after all----!

At any rate--

  My dear sir, here is a chapter, which, be it for better or worse is
  From beginning to end about hexameter verses;
  Could they but jingle a little, ’twere better, perhaps; but the trouble
  Really is endless, of hunting for rhymes that have all to be double.
  Adieu, till the next time, when either in prose or in rhyme I
  Haply may find something better to gossip about in a letter.
  In the meanwhile, my dear sir, till writing again may beseem us,
  I am, your faithful, obliged, and obedient,

  PAREPIDEMUS.




  A PASSAGE UPON OXFORD STUDIES:

  EXTRACTED FROM

  A REVIEW OF THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY

  COMMISSIONERS’ REPORT, 1852.

  (Published in the ‘North American Review’ for April 1853,
  Vol. lxxvi., No 159.)


‘I went to Oxford from the sixth form (the highest class) of a public
school. I had at that time read all Thucydides, except the sixth and
seventh books; the six first books of Herodotus; the early books of
each author I had done at least three times over. I had read five
plays, I think, of Sophocles, four of Æschylus--several of these two or
three times over; four, perhaps, or five, of Euripides; considerable
portions of Aristophanes; nearly all the “Odyssey”; only about a third
of the “Iliad,” but that several times over; one or two dialogues
of Plato--the “Phædo,” I remember, was one; not quite all Virgil;
all Horace; a good deal of Livy and Tacitus; a considerable portion
of Aristotle’s “Rhetoric,” and two or three books of his “Ethics”;
besides, of course, other things. I mention these, because they have
to do with Oxford. I had been used to do my very best in translating
in the class. We were not marked; but expressions of approbation,
graduated carefully, and invariably given by the rule so formed,
were quite sure to let every boy know how he had done his part. The
more diligent used to listen with eagerness for note and comment;
the idlest amongst us were considerably afraid of reprimand. We were
wont, moreover, to do three long original exercises every week, out of
school. These were looked over with us singly, and marked by a regular
scale. To fall below 26 I used to consider latterly a disgrace; to
attain 28, a very great piece of honour. I knew perfectly well when I
did ill, and when I did well.

‘No words, not even those of Mr. Lowe, can express the amount of
the change which I experienced on entering the lecture-rooms of my
college--though confessedly one of the very best in Oxford--and on
embarking upon the course of University study. Had I not read pretty
nearly all the books? Was I to go on, keeping up my Latin prose
writers, for three years more? Logic and Ethics had some little
novelty; there was a little extra scholarship to be obtained in some
of the college lectures. But that was the utmost. I should have
wished to take to Mathematics, which I had hitherto rather neglected;
but Mathematics alone would not lead to a Fellowship, and I did
not feel any certainty that I could stand the strain of work for a
“Double-First.” I had been pretty well sated of distinctions and
competitions at school; I would gladly have dispensed with anything
more of success in this kind, always excepting the 200_l._ a year of
the Fellowship. What I wanted was to sit down to happy, unimpeded
prosecution of some new subject or subjects; surely, there was more
in the domain of knowledge than that Latin and Greek which I had been
wandering about in for the last ten years. Surely, there were other
accomplishments to be mastered, besides the composition of Iambics and
Ciceronian prose. If there were, however, they existed not for me.
There were the daily lectures in the morning, which I did not like to
miss (and, indeed, could hardly have missed to any profitable extent);
nor yet, if I attended them, to neglect to prepare for them. The daily
lectures now, and the weary re-examination in classics three years
ahead! An infinite lassitude and impatience, which I saw reflected
in the faces of others, quickly began to infect me. _Quousque_ Latin
prose? Though we should gain by it prizes and honours academical,
beyond all academical example, it would not the less certainly be
a mere shame and waste of strength to make the effort. I did go on,
for duty’s sake, and for discipline and docility, sadly doing Latin
prose; but, except in docility, profiting but little. Could I only
have hoped to get through the whole business in a year or a year and a
half’s time, and then to be free to do what, before that is over, one
never does, _study_! Some pleasure, too, there would have been, even
in that old Greek and Latin, could one but have been free to pasture
freely, following a natural instinct, upon its fairly extensive field.
But no; if one did anything, one must “get up” the books for the
schools, and they were--three years ahead. Even the present alteration
in the statute, by which the suffering pilgrim is allowed to lay down
a portion of his classical burden at the feet of the examiners, at
the end of the second year, appears to me insufficient; ever so much
classics and theology still remain behind, to be carried on, as before,
to the end of the third year. No proper emancipation, no true admission
to the rights of manly reading, is given, until the moment when, for
most, it comes too late.

‘The masters of the public schools have, it is true, been in fault;
they have pushed on their pupils too hastily; have prepared them
prematurely for the ultimate honours of the degree; have neglected the
“Æneid” and the “Iliad” for the sake of Aristophanes and the Ethics.
Yet it is true, nevertheless, that this very examination in Ethics,
&c., used to be passed, not so many years ago, by young men not a bit
older than the boys at the top of the public schools. Arnold took his
First at nineteen, Peel his “Double-First” at twenty. Surely, after the
age of nineteen or twenty, it is really time that this schoolboy love
of racing, this empty competition, should be checked. There is less,
a great deal, at Oxford than at Cambridge; but there is a great deal
too much at Oxford. For the preliminary discipline of boys, I grant
it to be needful; to carry it forward into the very years of legal
manhood, appears to me a most foolish and ill-advised innovation. The
existing change I cannot account sufficient; every one, as before, must
do his _literæ humaniores_. Still, if four substantial departments
were once really and fairly established for the third year, I am happy
in the belief that no one would think so very much of high honours
in any one of them. Examinations are useful things, and the stricter
they are the better; and the results, I suppose, can hardly be made
public without some honour attending them. But by the great principle,
“_divide et impera_,” we shall, I hope, over-power much of this
pernicious distinction. We shall be able to prove to young men whether
they really know what they think they know, without declaring them (_dî
meliora!_), to themselves and all the world, to be the cleverest men
in Oxford. Examinations, I repeat, are essential; but no examinations
will do much good unless there be, independent and irrespective of
them, a real inward taste, and liking, and passion, shall I say, not
for competitive effort and distinction, but for study, and the subjects
themselves of study. Examinations are sadly apt to impair this spring
of happy spontaneity; _honos_, indeed, _alít artes_, but not that
honour which attends the success of the race-horse; which testifies
to a mere personal and comparative superiority. Far more grateful and
of far higher value than any such popular plaudit, is to the faithful
student, the strictly plain and severely true ascertainment, not of
whom he has beat, but of what he has done: the real desideratum for him
is the exact and well-considered verdict of an accomplished judge of
details; to details and separate branches, therefore--not to aggregates
of studies, but to distinct studies--should examinations be applied.
_Quot homines, tot studia; quot studia, tot examinationes_: Have as
many as you please; the more they are in number, the less imposing they
are singly; multiply them indefinitely. Only, of all Senior Wranglers,
Medallists, and even “Double-First,” let us be fairly and finally rid.’




  EXTRACTS FROM A REVIEW

  OF A WORK ENTITLED

  ‘CONSIDERATIONS ON SOME RECENT

  SOCIAL THEORIES.’

  (Published in the ‘North American Review’ for July 1853,
  Vol. lxxvii., No. 160.)


Our author begins with the vague declamations, rather than positions,
which have lately been current in Europe--‘Liberty, Equality, and
Fraternity,’ ‘God and the People,’ ‘Direct Popular Government,’ ‘The
Universal Republic,’ and the like. Several of these he sums up in the
old formula, _Vox populi vox Dei_, and devotes his first chapter to
the question of its correctness. The high doctrine proclaimed by the
fervid Italian leader, of the supreme ‘authority of the people as the
collective perpetual interpreter of the will of God,’ finds but little
favour with him. Who and what, he asks, is this ‘Royal priesthood,’
this ‘Peculiar people’?

We cannot, indeed, any more than our author, soar to the high modern
Mazzinian acceptation of the ancient maxim. Those who use it should, at
any rate, we think, temper it in application by the rule,

  Nec deus intersit nisi dignus vindice nodus;

and may, perhaps, find their advantage in collating it with another
significant dictum which tells us that at times

  Sua cuique deus fit dira cupido;

a people can be the slave of cupidity and resentment; a people can be
pusillanimous, dastardly, and base; a people can be also fiendishly
inhuman; the fears and passions of a people, when once excited,
are more hopelessly irrational, more wildly uncontrollable, more
extensively ruinous, more appallingly terrible, than those of councils
and kings. Nevertheless, depravation and barbarism apart, in an average
state of society, a state such as we hope and believe in for the
future, it may be true that the common impulses and plain feelings of
the people may be expected to be honest and good. Great questions, that
must go back for their solution to natural instincts and unconscious
first principles, may refer themselves to the popular voice. In such
cases the love of routine, the narrow and rigid views, the personal
interest, ambition, or indolence of officials and representatives, are
likely enough to impede and retard, to mislead, pervert, and corrupt
the national action. In executive details, meantime, what choice have
we but to trust to individuals? A crowd of voters cannot easily study,
cannot readily appreciate, the subtle and intricate circumstances
which embarrass the application of principles. A complex question in
arithmetic is better submitted to the computation of an accountant
than to the suffrage of a town meeting. Accountants and auditors may
combine to deceive, but the chances of their telling the truth are
greater than those of our carrying it by acclamation. A people also, we
conceive, however generous and well meaning, is apt to be a little too
rough-handed to deal properly with nice points of fairness and honour
and delicate questions of feeling.

A second chapter, on Liberty, the supposed principle, is followed by
a third, on the projected perfect practice of it in the Universal
Republic. The writer urges, with reason, that the existence of
government at all presupposes a certain surrender of some portion of
their freedom to do whatever they please, upon the part of those who
live under it. Upon any other theory, how strange and anomalous, for
example, is that constraint which, in the freest of all politics,
restricts the freewill of the citizen, by requiring his submission
to the vote of a majority. This regulation, he argues, all political
regulations, all institutions and constitutions whatever, are not
in themselves principles; they are, at their very best, extremely
imperfect human expedients for attaining, in a rough way, some amount,
often a very small one, of practicable common benefit. Universal
suffrage is one social method, monarchy is another; as the former is
sometimes best, so also sometimes is the latter. Universal suffrage
would hardly do on shipboard, the rule of one is unsuitable for a
club. There are times when a state is very much like a club; there are
occasions when it may fitly be compared to a ship.

Before quitting these chapters we must add a few words on _Liberty_.

The dream and aspiration of the ardent and generous spirits of our time
is for a certain royal road to human happiness. Disappointed a thousand
times, they still persist in their exalted creed that there must and
will be here on earth, if not now, in some future and approaching time,
a state of social arrangement in which the spontaneous action and
free development of each individual constituent member will combine
to form ‘a vast and solemn harmony,’ the ultimate perfect movement
of collective humanity. There beautiful thoughts will distil as the
dew, and fair actions spring up as the green herb; there, without
constraint, we shall all be good, and without trouble, happy; there,
what in its imperfect form is vice, shall gently and naturally flower
out into virtue; there contention and contest, control and commandment,
will be the obsolete terms of a dead language, with no modern
equivalents to explain them. A divine interior instinct will intimate
to each single human being his fittest and highest vocation, and will
prompt and inspire and guide him to fulfil it; while in the pursuit of
his own free choice and in the fulfilment of his own strongest desires,
he will, by the blessing of the presiding genius of humanity, best
serve the true interests of society and the race.

Was it thus not long ago? For,

  Ante etiam sceptrum Dictæi regis, et ante
  Impia quam cæsis gens est epulata juvencis,
  Aureus hanc vitam in terris Saturnus agebat.

O blessed ages of pure, spontaneous, unconscious, unthinking,
unreasoning life and action, to you, either in the past or the future,
the human heart is still fain to recur--still must dream, even though
it be but a dream, of how sweet it were to grow as the green herb, and
bloom as the spring flowers, to be good because we cannot be otherwise,
and happy because we cannot help it. O blessed ages, indeed! But have
such, since men were men, ever been? Or are such, while men are men,
ever likely to come? Alas, the rude earth itself affords us admonition--

                        Pater ipse colendi
  Haud facilem esse viam voluit, primusque per artem,
  Movit agros, _curis acuens mortalia corda_,
  _Nec torpere gravi passus sua regna veterno_.

And, strange as it may seem--how charming soever be spontaneity, still
those who have endured coercion find a good deal also to say in favour
of it.

  O life! without thy chequered scene
  Of right and wrong, of weal and woe,
  Success and failure--could a ground
  For magnanimity be found,
  For faith, mid ruined hopes serene?
    Or whence could virtue flow?

There are many, surely, who, looking back into their past lives, feel
most thankful for those acts which came least from their own mere
natural volition--can see that what did them most good was what they
themselves would least have chosen; that things which, in fact, they
were forced to, were, after all, the best things that ever happened
to them. There are some, surely, who have had reason to bless a
wholesome compulsion; there are some who prefer doing right under a
master to doing nothing but enjoy themselves as their own masters; who,
rather than be left to their own unaided feebleness, hesitation, and
indolence, would voluntarily, for their own and the common good, enter
a condition of what thenceforth would be ‘involuntary servitude.’ The
mature freewill of the grown man looks back, undoubtedly, with some
little regret, but also with no little scorn, upon the bygone puerile
spontaneities of the time when he did as he liked.

There are periods, it is true, in the life of the individual human
being, and perhaps of the collective human race, when expansion is
the first of necessities. Such, it is possible, may be the present.
But because we would be rid of existing restrictions, it does not
follow that restriction of all kinds is an evil; because our present
house is too small for us, it is not to be inferred that we shall live
henceforth in the open air.

As a general rule of life and conduct, we see as yet no reason to
believe that _liberty_, if this be its meaning, is better than service.
It does not seem to be established that the system on which the things
we live amongst were arranged, is that of spontaneous development,
rather than of coercion met by a mixture of resistance and submission.
The latter hypothesis seems intrinsically as much more elevating as
the other does more agreeable. Meantime, as a matter of language,
we should be inclined to reject altogether this modern sense of our
old-established word Liberty. If the new theory wants a name, let
it find a new one. It will but perplex and cheat us by claiming one
already otherwise appropriated. When we hear people demanding liberty,
we shall consider them to express their desire, not for the golden
age, but either for release from some particular form of restriction,
or, it may be, for a less degree of restriction in general. Liberty
for us will mean either _more_ liberty--just as, in the Black Hole
of Calcutta, ‘air’ meant ‘_more_ air’--or distinct emancipation, for
example, from personal slavery, or from foreign rule. Liberty in itself
is but the power of doing what we please; a power which, for all human
beings, has its natural limits. We may easily, indeed, have too much
or too little of it; we can only have it in degree, but without some
degree of it we cannot exist.

       *       *       *       *       *

The crying evil, as it appears to us, of the present system of
unrestricted competition, is not so much the distress of the workmen
as the extreme slovenliness and badness of their work. The joy and
satisfaction of making really good things is destroyed by the criminal
eagerness to make them to suit the market. The love of art, which,
quite as much as virtue, is its own reward, used in the old times to
penetrate down as far as to the meanest manufacture, of kettles, for
example, and pots. With us, on the contrary, the miserable truckling
to the bad taste of the multitude has gradually stolen up to the very
regions of the highest art--into architecture, sculpture, painting,
music, literature. Nay, has it not infected even morality and religion?
And do we never hear spiritual advice, which in fact bids us do as
little good, and get as much applause for it, as we can; and, above all
things, know the state of the market?

So far as co-operative societies or guilds would remove this evil,
they would be of great use. But let it not be forgotten that the
object of human society is not the mere ‘culinary’ one of securing
equal apportionments of meat and drink to all its members. Men combine
for some higher object; and to that higher object it is, in their
social capacity, the _privilege_ and real happiness of individuals to
sacrifice themselves. The highest political watchword is not Liberty,
Equality, Fraternity, nor yet Solidarity, but _Service_.

The true comfort to the soldiers, serving in the great industrial army
of arts, commerce, and manufactures, is neither to tell them, with the
Utopians, that a good time is coming, when they will have plenty of
victuals and not so much to do; nor yet, with the Economists, to hold
out to them the prospect of making their fortune; but to show them that
what they are now doing is good and useful service to the community;
to call upon them to do it well and thoroughly; and to teach them how
they may; and all this quite irrespectively of any prospects either of
making a fortune or living on into a good time.

We are not sure that our author would quite coincide with us in a
comparative disregard of physical discomfort, privation, and suffering.
Yet we think he would join us in the belief that the real want of the
present time is, above all things, the distinct recognition and steady
observance of a few plain, and not wholly modern, rules of morality.

It is very fine, perhaps not very difficult, to do every now and then
some noble or generous act. But what is wanted of us is to do no wrong
ones. It may be, for instance, in many eyes, a laudable thing to amass
a colossal fortune by acts not in all cases of quite unimpeachable
integrity, and then to expend it in magnificent benevolence. But the
really good thing is _not_ to make the fortune. Thorough honesty
and plain undeviating integrity--these are our real needs; on these
substructions only can the fabric of individual or national well-being
safely be reared. ‘Other foundation can no man lay.’ Common men, who,
in their petty daily acts, maintain these ordinary unostentatious
truths, are the real benefactors of mankind, the real pillars of the
State, are the apostles and champions of--something not to be named
within a few pages of Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity, the Solidarity
of the Peoples, and the Universal Republic.




  NOTES

  ON

  THE RELIGIOUS TRADITION.[23]


It is impossible for any scholar to have read, and studied, and
reflected without forming a strong impression of the entire uncertainty
of history in general, and of the history of Christianity in particular.

It is equally impossible for any man to live, act, and reflect without
feeling the significance and depth of the moral and religious teaching
which passes amongst us by the name of Christianity.

The more a man feels the value, the true import of this, the more
will he hesitate to base it upon those foundations which as a scholar
he feels to be unstable. Manuscripts are doubtful, records may be
unauthentic, criticism is feeble, historical facts must be left
uncertain.

Even in like manner my own personal experience is most limited,
perhaps even most delusive: what have I seen, what do I know? Nor
is my personal judgment a thing which I feel any great satisfaction
in trusting. My reasoning powers are weak; my memory doubtful and
confused; my conscience, it may be, callous or vitiated.

I see not how it is possible for a man disinclined to adopt arbitrarily
the watchword of a party to the sacrifice of truth--indisposed to set
up for himself, and vehemently urge some one point--I see not what
other alternative any sane and humble-minded man can have but to throw
himself upon the great religious tradition.

But I see not either how any upright and strict dealer with
himself--how any man not merely a slave to spiritual appetites,
affections, and wants--any man of intellectual as well as moral
honesty--and without the former the latter is but a vain thing--I see
not how any one who will not tell lies to himself, can dare to affirm
that the narrative of the four Gospels is an essential integral part of
that tradition. I do not see that it is a great and noble thing, a very
needful or very worthy service, to go about proclaiming that Mark is
inconsistent with Luke, that the first Gospel is not really Matthew’s,
nor the last with any certainty John’s, that Paul is not Jesus, &c. &c.
&c. It is at the utmost a commendable piece of honesty; but it is no
new gospel to tell us that the old one is of dubious authenticity.

I do not see either, on the other hand, that it can be lawful for
me, for the sake of the moral guidance and the spiritual comfort, to
ignore all scientific or historic doubts, or if pressed with them to
the utmost, to take refuge in Romish infallibility, and, to avoid
sacrificing the four Gospels, consent to accept the legends of the
saints and the tales of modern miracles.

I believe that I may without any such perversion of my reason, without
any such mortal sin against my own soul, which is identical with
reason, and against the Supreme Giver of that soul and reason, still
abide by the real religious tradition.

It is indeed just conceivable that the Divine Orderer of the universe,
and Father of our spirits, should have so created these and ordered
that, as that the one should be directly contradictory to the other. It
may be that the facts which we, by the best force of our intellects,
discern, are by His ordinance delusions, intended of a set purpose
to tempt us from our highest path, that of His love and the worship
of Him. It is conceivable that he has subtly arranged that two and
two should be four (by delusion) everywhere, that our faith (the
one reality) may be tried when we propose to harmonise it with this
fallacy. It is possible that as our senses and appetites would make
us believe bad things, because pleasant, therefore good, so also our
reason may cheat us to believe wrong things, because reasonable,
therefore right. The rule which He has placed to measure all things by,
and bid us trust in them implicitly, may be, by His special purpose,
false for the highest things. What in our solemn courts of justice we
should call false witness, may be in the Church to decide our verdict;
what in the exchange would be imposture, may be in the sanctuary pure
truth. I say, this thing is conceivable, yet it is conceivable also
that sense and mind, that intellect and religion, things without and
things within, are in harmony with each other. If it is conceivable
that the earth in the natural world goes round the sun, delusively
to tempt us from the revealed act of the supernatural world that the
sun goes round the earth, it is also conceivable that the heavens, as
astronomically discerned, declare the glory of God, and the firmament
showeth His handywork.

It is conceivable that religious truths of the highest import may grow
up naturally, and appear before us involved in uncertain traditions,
with every sort of mere accessory legend and story attached to them and
entangled with them.

It may be true that as the physical bread has to be digested and the
nutritive portion separated from the innutritive, so may it also be
with the spiritual. It may be true that man has fallen, though Adam and
Eve are legendary. It may be a divine fact that God is a person, and
not a sort of natural force; and it may have happened that the tales of
His personal appearance to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were the means
of sustaining and conveying down to posterity that belief, and yet that
He never sat in the tent on the plains of Mamre, nor wrestled with
Jacob by night, nor spoke with Moses in the mount.

Where then, since neither in Rationalism nor in Rome is our refuge,
where then shall we seek for the Religious Tradition?

Everywhere; but above all in our own work: in life, in action, in
submission, so far as action goes, in service, in experience, in
patience, and in confidence. I would scarcely have any man dare to
say that he has found it, till that moment when death removes his
power of telling it. Let no young man presume to talk to us vainly and
confidently about it. Ignorant, as said Aristotle, of the real actions
of life, and ready to follow all impressions and passions, he is hardly
fitted as yet even to listen to practical directions couched in the
language of religion. But this apart--everywhere.

The Religious Tradition--as found everywhere--as found not only among
clergymen and religious people, but among all who have really tried to
order their lives by the highest action of the reasonable and spiritual
will. I will go to Johnson; I will go to Hume, as well as to Bishop
Butler. The precepts with which our parents often startle our religious
instincts, and our companions revolt our young moral convictions, these
also are in some sense to be considered in the religious and moral
tradition. Every rule of conduct, every maxim, every usage of life
and society, must be admitted, like Ecclesiastes of old in the Old
Testament, so in each new age to each new age’s Bible.

Everywhere--to India, if you will, and the ancient Bhagvad Gita and
the laws of Menu; to Persia and Hafiz; to China and Confucius; to the
Vedas and the Shasters; to the Koran; to pagan Greece and Rome; to
Homer; to Socrates and Plato; to Lucretius, to Virgil, to Tacitus. Try
all things, I do not imagine that any spiritual doctrine or precept of
life found in all that travel from east to west and north to south will
disqualify us to return to what _prima facie_ does appear to be, not
indeed the religion of the majority of mankind, but the religion of the
best, so far as we can judge in past history, and despite of professed
infidelity of the most enlightened of our own time.

Whether Christ died upon the Cross, I cannot tell; yet I am prepared to
find some spiritual truth in the doctrine of the Atonement. Purgatory
is not in the Bible; I do not therefore think it incredible.

There is only one theory or precept which must be noticed ere I end.
It is said that each of us is born with a peculiar nature of his own,
a constitution as it were for one form of truth to the exclusion
of others; that we must each look for what will suit us, and not
be over-solicitous for wide and comprehensive attainments. What is
one man’s food is another’s poison. Climate, parentage, and other
circumstances are too strong for us; it is impossible for the Italian
to be Protestant, or for the sons of New England Puritans to turn Roman
Catholics to any great extent.

I do not doubt that the Protestant has excluded himself (necessary
perhaps it was that he should so do) from large religious experience
which the Roman Catholic preserves. I am convinced again that the
Unitarian is morally and religiously only half educated compared with
the Episcopalian. Modern Unitarianism is, I conceive, unfortunate
on the one hand in refusing to allow its legitimate force to the
exercise of reason and criticism; on the other hand, in having by its
past exercise of reason and criticism thrown aside treasures of pure
religious tradition because of their dogmatic exterior.

I do acquiesce in this humble doctrine; I do believe that, strive as
I will, I am restricted, and grasp as I may, I can never hold the
complete truth. But that does not the least imply that I am justified
in shutting the eyes of my understanding to the facts of science, or
its ears to the criticisms of history, nor yet in neglecting those
pulsations of spiritual instinct which come to me from association at
one time with Unitarians, at another with Calvinists, or again with
Episcopalians and Roman Catholics.

I cannot see beyond the horizon; but within the natural horizon am I to
make an unnatural new horizon for myself? I cannot be in two places at
once; shall I therefore refuse to visit them at different times?

This doctrine may indeed lead to one conclusion; but it can lead justly
to one only, and that I think is a very harmless one--namely, that when
we have done all, we are unprofitable servants; when we have tried all
things, what we held fast is not the entire truth; when we have seen
all we can, there is still more that we cannot do.

Thus far I am most content to accept it. But it is no excuse to the
Italian for refusing to study the religious views of Englishmen, nor to
the Unitarian for believing that Calvinism is nonsense; nor to any one
for refusing to think.

It is very true that, speaking generally, to a certain extent, we must
all of us be of the religion of our fathers; we are so whether we
like it or not; whether we say we are, or say we are not. It is very
true, nevertheless, that we cannot refuse to know, when we are told on
good authority that there are many more Buddhists in the world than
Christians.

And it appears to me that it is much more the apparent dispensation of
things that we should gradually widen, than that we should narrow and
individualise our creeds. Why are we daily coming more and more into
communication with each other, if it be not that we learn each other’s
knowledge and combine all into one? I feel more inclined to put faith
in the currents of the river of things, than because it runs one way to
think I must therefore pull hard against it to go the other.


  PRINTED BY
  SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
  LONDON




MESSRS. MACMILLAN & CO.’S PUBLICATIONS.


=THE POEMS OF ARTHUR HUGH CLOUGH=, sometime Fellow of Oriel College,
Oxford. New and Enlarged Edition. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

THE BRITISH QUARTERLY REVIEW says: ‘The most successful writer of
original poetry in English hexameters.... Clough’s poem has all the
Homeric qualities ascribed to it by Mr. Matthew Arnold ... out-of-doors
freshness, life, naturalness, buoyant rapidity.’


Now publishing, in Monthly Volumes (Vol I. January 1888), price 5_s._
each.

NEW EDITION OF LORD TENNYSON’S WORKS.

=THE WORKS OF LORD TENNYSON.= LIBRARY EDITION.

    New and Complete Edition in Eight Volumes, Globe 8vo. price
    5_s._ each. Each Volume may be had separately, and they are
    published as follows:--

  POEMS. Vol.  I.
  POEMS. Vol. II.
  IDYLLS OF THE KING.
  THE PRINCESS: and MAUD.
  ENOCH ARDEN: and IN MEMORIA.
  BALLADS: and other Poems.
  QUEEN MARY: and HAROLD.
  BECKET: and other Plays.


COLLECTED EDITION OF DEAN CHURCH’S MISCELLANEOUS WRITINGS.

Uniform with the ‘Collected Works of Ralph Waldo Emerson’ &c. In Five
Volumes. Globe 8vo. 5_s._ each. To be published in Monthly Volumes. VOL
I. March 1888.

  Vol.   I. MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS.
  Vol.  II. DANTE: and other Essays.
  Vol. III. ST. ANSELM.
  Vol.  IV. SPENCER.
  Vol.   V. BACON.


CHARLES LAMB’S COLLECTED WORKS.

Edited, with Introduction and Notes, by the Rev. ALFRED AINGER, M.A.,
Canon of Bristol. Globe 8vo. 5_s._ each volume.

    I. Essays of Elia. II. Plays, Poems, and Miscellaneous Essays.
    III. Mrs. Leicester’s School; The Adventures of Ulysses; and
    other Essays. IV. Tales from Shakspeare. V. and VI. Letters,
    newly arranged, with Additions. 2 vols.


THE COLLECTED WORKS OF RALPH WALDO EMERSON.

In Six Volumes. Globe 8vo. 5_s._ each.

    1. Miscellanies. With an Introductory Essay by JOHN MORLEY. 2.
    Essays. 3. Poems. 4. English Traits: and Representative Men.
    5. Conduct of Life: and Society and Solitude. 6. Letters: and
    Social Aims, &c.


MR. MATTHEW ARNOLD’S COMPLETE POETICAL WORKS.

New Edition, with additional Poems. Three Vols. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._
each.

  Vol.   I. EARLY POEMS, NARRATIVE POEMS, and SONNETS.
  Vol.  II. LYRIC & ELEGIAC POEMS.
  Vol. III. DRAMATIC and later Poems.


    =MODERN GUIDES OF ENGLISH THOUGHT IN MATTERS OF FAITH, ESSAYS
    ON SOME OF THE.= By RICHARD HOLT HUTTON. Globe 8vo. 6_s._

    =ESSAYS CHIEFLY ON POETRY.= By AUBREY DE VERE. 2 vols. Globe
    8vo. 12_s._ Vol. I. CRITICISMS ON CERTAIN POETS. Vol. II.
    ESSAYS, LITERARY AND ETHICAL.

    =THE CHOICE OF BOOKS; and other Literary Pieces.= By FREDERIC
    HARRISON. Fourth Edition. Globe 8vo. 6_s._

    =ESSAYS.= 2 vols. I. CLASSICAL. II. MODERN. By F. W. H. MYERS,
    M.A. Crown 8vo. 4_s._ 6_d._ each.

    =ESSAYS AND ADDRESSES.= An Attempt to Treat some Religious
    Questions in a Scientific Spirit. By the Rev. J. M. WILSON,
    Head-Master of Clifton College. Crown 8vo. 4_s._ 6_d._

    =THE PLEASURES OF LIFE.= By Sir JOHN LUBBOCK, Bart., M.P.,
    F.R.S., LL.D., D.C.L. 8th and Popular Edition. Fcp. 8vo. 1_s._


THE WORKS OF THOMAS GRAY.

Edited by EDMUND GOSSE, Clark Lecturer on English Literature in the
University of Cambridge. In Four Vols. Globe 8vo. 20_s._

  Vol.   I. POEMS, JOURNALS AND ESSAYS.
  Vol.  II. LETTERS.
  Vol. III. LETTERS.
  Vol.  IV. NOTES ON ARISTOPHANES AND PLATO.


MR. JOHN MORLEY’S WRITINGS.

A New Edition. In Ten Volumes. Globe 8vo. 5_s._ each.

  VOLTAIRE. 1 vol.
  DIDEROT AND THE ENCYCLOPÆDISTS. 2 vols.
  ROUSSEAU. 2 vols.
  ON COMPROMISE. 1 vol.
  MISCELLANIES. 3 vols.
  BURKE. 1 vol.

    =ON THE STUDY OF LITERATURE.= By JOHN MORLEY. Being the Annual
    Address to the Students of the London Society for the Extension
    of University Teaching. Delivered at the Mansion House,
    February 26, 1887. Crown 8vo. 1_s._ 6_d._

    =APHORISMS.= By JOHN MORLEY. Being an Address delivered before
    the Philosophical Society of Edinburgh, November 11, 1887.
    Globe 8vo. 1_s._ 6_d._


_Eversley Edition._

CHARLES KINGSLEY’S NOVELS AND POEMS.

Twelve Volumes. Globe 8vo. 5_s._ each.

  WESTWARD-HO. 2 vols.
  TWO YEARS AGO. 2 vols.
  HYPATIA. 2 vols.
  ALTON LOCKE. 2 vols.
  HEREWARD THE WAKE. 2 vols.
  POEMS. 2 vols.


MACMILLAN & CO., LONDON.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] Head of St. John’s, and at that time Vice-chancellor.

[2] Afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury, at that time fellow and tutor
of Balliol College.

[3] Meaning the day of Lawrence Sheriffe, which is the foundation day
of the school.

[4] Near Conway, a house on the seashore belonging to an uncle.

[5] The Rugby bookseller.

[6] Clough at this time was with a reading party, which furnished him
with many of the scenes and characters afterwards reproduced in his
poem of the _Bothie_.

[7] This was the scene of another reading party--

  ‘Up on the side of Loch Ness, in the beautiful valley of Urquhart.’

[8]

            ‘The inn by the Foyers Fall, where
  Over the loch looks at you the summit of Mealfourvonie.’

  _The Bothie_, Part iii.

[9] This volume appeared in 1849, under the name of _Ambarvalia_.

[10] After resigning his Fellowship and Tutorship at Oriel, Clough had
accepted the Headship of University Hall in London, and this letter
was written in consequence of a request which had been made him by the
authorities.

[11] The following letters from Rome were written during a tour he took
in Italy before settling at University Hall. It was in the course of
this tour that he wrote _Amours de Voyage_ and _Easter Day_.

[12] _Amours de Voyage_, canto ii. letter v.

[13] Afterwards best known as Margaret Fuller Ossoli.

[14] _Amours de Voyage._

[15] On Retrenchment at Oxford.

[16] Before going to America, in October 1852.

[17] Clough’s _Plutarch_. _Life of Sylla_, vol. iii. p. 157.

[18]

  From the Acrocorinth watched the day
  Light the eastern and the western bay.--_Mari Magno._

[19]

  With wonder in the spacious gloom
  Stood of the Mycenæan tomb.--_Mari Magno._

[20] _Mari Magno: My Tale._

[21] _Mari Magno: My Tale._

[22] The word _spoom_, which Dryden uses as the verb of the substantive
_spume_, occurs also in ‘Beaumont and Fletcher.’ Has Keats employed it?
It seems hardly to deserve reimpatriation.

[23] In the MS. Mr. Clough has written the first five stanzas of the
poem entitled ‘Through a Glass darkly’ (ii. 93), at the head of the
fragment. Though there is no date to the MS., it may with safety be
referred to the last period of his life.




Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation and accents have been standardised but all other
spelling and punctuation remains unchanged.

Italics are represented thus _italic_.


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROSE REMAINS OF ARTHUR HUGH
CLOUGH WITH A SELECTION FROM HIS LETTERS AND A MEMOIR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
