
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 73721 ***






[Illustration: I remain as ever looking for the Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal life.

Wm. Miller.]




LIFE OF WILLIAM MILLER.




                                 SKETCHES
                                    OF
                            THE CHRISTIAN LIFE
                                   AND
                              PUBLIC LABORS
                                    OF
                             WILLIAM MILLER,

              GATHERED FROM HIS MEMOIR BY THE LATE SYLVESTER
                      BLISS, AND FROM OTHER SOURCES.

                          BY ELDER JAMES WHITE.

                               STEAM PRESS
           OF THE SEVENTH-DAY ADVENTIST PUBLISHING ASSOCIATION,
                           BATTLE CREEK, MICH.
                                  1875.




INTRODUCTION.


Before us is a plain volume, the title page of which reads, “Memoir of
William Miller generally known as a Lecturer on the Prophecies and the
Second Coming of Christ, by Sylvester Bliss, author of Analysis of Sacred
Chronology, a brief Commentary on the Apocalypse,” etc.

Mr. Bliss was for more than twenty years the local and able conductor of
the _Advent Herald_, which sustained the leading doctrines promulgated
by Mr. Miller, published at Boston, Mass. The publisher of this volume,
Elder Joshua V. Himes, Mr. Miller’s intimate fellow-laborer and friend,
in his preface says:—

“The name of William Miller, of Low Hampton, N. Y., is too well known
to require an extended introduction; but while well known, few men have
been more diversely regarded than he. Those who have only heard his name
associated with all that is hateful in fanaticism, have necessarily
formed opinions respecting him anything but complimentary to his
intelligence and sanity; but those who knew him better, esteemed him as
a man of more than ordinary mental power, a cool, sagacious, and honest
reasoner, a humble and devout Christian, a kind and affectionate friend,
a man of great moral and social worth.

“However his public labors may be regarded by a majority of the
community, it will be seen, by a perusal of his life, that these were
by no means unproductive of great good. The revivals of religion which
attended his labors are testified to by those who participated in them;
and hundreds of souls will ever refer to him as a means, under God, of
their awakening and conversion.”

“As the public learn to discriminate between the actual position of Mr.
Miller and that which prejudice has conceived that he occupied, his
conservativeness, and his disapprobation of every fanatical practice will
be admitted, and a much more just estimate will be had of him.”

We hold that the great movement upon the second advent question, which
commenced with the writings and public lectures of William Miller, has
been, in its leading features, in fulfillment of prophecy. Consistent
with this view, we also hold that in the providence of God Mr. Miller
was raised up to do a specific work; therefore to us the history of the
important events in his Christian life and public labors possess peculiar
interest.

It is true that Mr. Miller and his associates and numerous friends were
disappointed in the definite time of the second coming of Christ. And
as might be expected from the nature of the case, those who have not
sufficient interest to investigate the subject, especially those who are
opposed to the doctrine of the soon coming of the Redeemer, conclude that
the second advent movement has been a fanatical mistake.

But we take a more favorable view of this matter. We hold that Mr. Miller
was correct in three of the four fundamental points of Adventism, while
on the fourth he was mistaken. But even this one mistake, viewed in the
light of Scripture and reason, does not in the least affect his general
position.

1. Mr. Miller was correct in his views of the pre-millennial second
appearing of Christ. No doctrine is more plainly stated and more fully
sustained by the sacred Scriptures than the personal appearing and reign
of Jesus Christ. And whatever may be said of the views and labors of
Mr. Miller, this fact will not be denied, that very many ministers of
the different denominations changed their views upon the millennium,
renouncing the popular view of the conversion of the world, and the
spiritual coming and reign of Jesus Christ.

2. Mr. Miller was correct in his application of the prophetic symbols
of Daniel and John. In this he is sustained by Protestant expositors
generally.

3. He was also correct in his exposition and application of the prophetic
periods. The dates fixed upon have stood the test of the most rigid
criticism. And those Adventists who have changed to other dates have done
so simply because of the passing by of the first periods of expectation.

4. But Mr. Miller was mistaken in the event to occur at the close of the
prophetic periods, hence his disappointment. In the case of the 2300 days
of Dan. 8, which period was the main pillar in his calculations, his
error was in supposing the earth to be the sanctuary of that prophecy,
and that it was to be cleansed by the fires of the last day.

The primary signification of the word sanctuary is “a sacred place.”
Neither the earth, nor any portion of it, has been such a place since the
fall of man, and the reign of Satan and of death began. The apostle’s
commentary upon the typical system, in his epistle to the Hebrews, points
to two sacred places as the sanctuary of Jehovah; first, the typical
tabernacle of the Jews; and, second, the greater and more perfect
tabernacle of which Christ is now minister in Heaven.[1]

But other great men have made as grave mistakes relative to the event to
occur at the close of the great periods of Daniel as Mr. Miller. These,
however, are soon forgotten, while that of Mr. Miller is ever fresh in
the public mind. The learned late Geo. Bush, Prof. of Hebrew and Oriental
Literature in the New York City University, in a letter addressed to Mr.
Miller, and published in the _Advent Herald_ for March, 1844, made some
very important admissions relative to his calculations of the prophetic
times. Mr. Bush says:—

“Neither is it to be objected, as I conceive, to yourself or your
friends, that you have devoted much time and attention to the study of
the _chronology_ of prophecy, and have labored much to determine the
commencing and closing dates of its great periods. If these periods are
actually given by the Holy Ghost in the prophetic books, it was doubtless
with the design that they _should_ be studied, and probably, in the end,
fully understood; and no man is to be charged with presumptuous folly who
reverently makes the attempt to do this. On this point, I have myself
no charges to bring against you. Nay, I am even ready to go so far as
to say that I do not conceive your errors on the subject of chronology
to be at all of a serious nature, or, in fact, to be _very_ wide of the
truth. In taking a _day_ as the prophetical term for a _year_, I believe
you are sustained by the soundest exegesis, as well as fortified by the
high names of Mede, Sir Isaac Newton, Bishop Newton, Kirby, Scott,
Keith, and a host of others, who have long since come to _substantially_
your conclusions on this head. They all agree that the leading periods
mentioned by Daniel and John do actually expire _about this age of the
world_, and it would be a strange logic that would convict you of heresy
for holding in effect the same views which stand forth so prominent in
the notices of these eminent divines. Your error, as I apprehend, lies in
another direction than your _chronology_.”

Here Prof. Bush speaks frankly and truthfully, and his words of candor
and wisdom sustain the Adventists in that feature of their faith most
objectionable to their opponents. But what was the event for which Mr.
Bush looked to mark the termination of the 2300 days? Let the following
extract from the same letter to Mr. Miller answer:—

“You have entirely mistaken _the nature of the events_ which are to
occur when those periods have expired. This is the head and front of
your expository offending. You have _assumed_ that the close of the
2300 days of Daniel, for instance, is also the close of the period of
human probation, that it is the epoch of the visible and personal second
coming of Christ—of the resurrection of the righteous dead, and of the
dissolution of the present mundane system. The great event before the
world is not its _physical conflagration_, but its _moral regeneration_.
Although there is doubtless a sense in which Christ may be said to come
in connection with the passing away of the fourth empire and of the
Ottoman power, and his kingdom to be illustriously established, yet that
will be found to be a _spiritual coming_ in the power of his gospel, in
the ample outpouring of his Spirit, and the glorious administration of
his providence.”

Evidently, Mr. Bush looked for the conversion of the world as the event
to mark the termination of the 2300 days. Both Mr. Miller and Mr. Bush
were right on the time question, and both were mistaken in the event to
occur at the close of the great periods. Mr. Miller held that the world
would be regenerated by fire, and Mr. Bush, by the gospel, at the end of
the 2300 days. The conversion-of-the-world theory of Mr. Bush has had
the terrible test of the last thirty-two years of apostasy, spiritual
darkness, and crime. This period has been noted by departures from
the faith of the gospel, and apostasies from the Christian religion.
Infidelity in various forms, especially in the name of spiritualism, has
spread over the Christian world with fearful rapidity, while the dark
record of crime has been blackening since Prof. Bush addressed his letter
to Wm. Miller. If this be the commencement of the temporal millennium,
may the Lord save us from the balance. Both these great men mistook the
event to terminate the 2300 days. And why should Mr. Miller be condemned
for his mistake, and Mr. Bush be excused for his unscriptural conclusion?
In the name of reason and justice we plead that, while the Christian
world excuses Prof. Bush for his mistake, professedly pious men and women
will not too severely censure Mr. Miller for his.

If it be objected that the second advent movement, as introduced in our
country by Mr. Miller, could not have been in harmony with Providence,
in fulfillment of prophecy, because those who engaged in it were
disappointed, then we suggest that, if God’s people never have been
disappointed on the very point of their expectation when prophecy was
being fulfilled in their experience and history, then it may be that
prophecy has not been fulfilled in the advent movement. But if one
instance can be shown in Sacred History where prophecy was fulfilled by
those who were entirely incorrect on the vital point of their confident
expectation, then, after all, prophecy may have been fulfilled in the
great second advent movement of 1840-4. This matter should be fully
tested.

The prophet of God had uttered these words about five hundred years
before their fulfillment: “Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout,
O daughter of Jerusalem; behold, thy King cometh unto thee; he is just,
and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass.” Zech. 9:9. In
fulfillment of this prophecy, while Christ was riding into Jerusalem in
the very humble manner expressed by the prophet, the chosen twelve, and
the shouting multitude, cried, “Hosanna to the son of David! Blessed is
he that cometh in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!” Matt.
21:9. The people, and even the disciples, did not as yet understand the
nature of Christ’s kingdom; and they verily thought that Jesus would
on that occasion claim his right to the throne of David, and then, and
there, be crowned king of Israel.

And when Jesus was requested to rebuke his disciples, he replied, “I tell
you that, if these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately
cry out.” Prophecy had gone forth, and must be fulfilled, if the Spirit
of God from necessity should call hosannas from the very stones.

But the people did not understand the nature of prophetic fulfillment of
their time; and their disappointment was complete. In a few days they
witnessed the dying agonies of the Son of God upon the cross, and as
Christ died, their hopes in him died also. Nevertheless, prophecy was
fulfilled in the ardent hopes and triumphant hosannas of those who were
so soon overwhelmed with bitterest disappointment.

In gathering material for this work, we have copied very largely from
Mr. Bliss, especially from the correspondence and writings of Mr. Miller
which are incorporated into his Memoir. And we have thought best to
introduce matter from the pen of Mr. Miller, not found in his Memoir, as
his writings, probably, better represent the advent movement and cause
than those of any other. And as the best means by which the people may
learn the real sentiments, the candor, and the true piety of this humble
servant of Jesus Christ, we would let his writings testify.

The introduction into this small volume of so large an amount of
matter from Mr. Miller makes it necessary to omit a large portion of
his Memoir that is devoted to his earlier life, as we hasten to his
deeply interesting Christian experience. But in necessarily omitting
portions, we hope not to appear to do Mr. Miller and his biographer
injustice, while we content ourself with little more than space for this
introduction, and foot notes.

In the preparation of this work, we have been greatly edified and
refreshed in spirit, as we have necessarily read very much from the
able, candid, and godly pen of Mr. Miller; and we heartily wish the same
blessing upon the candid reader.

                                                              JAMES WHITE.

_Battle Creek, January, 1875._




WILLIAM MILLER.




CHAPTER I.

    ANCESTRY AND EARLY LIFE—MARRIAGE—DEISTICAL SENTIMENTS—MILITARY
    LIFE.


William Miller was born at Pittsfield, Mass., February 15, 1782. He was
the eldest of sixteen children, five of whom were sons, and eleven were
daughters. His grandfather, William Miller, moved from West Springfield,
Mass., about 1747, and settled on the place in Pittsfield, now familiarly
known as the Miller farm. His father, William Miller, was born December
15, 1757, and remained on the farm taken up by his father until he moved
to Low Hampton, N. Y., in 1786. At the time of this removal the subject
of this sketch was four years old. His biographer says:—

“In his early childhood, marks of more than ordinary intellectual
strength and activity were manifested. A few years made these marks more
and more noticeable to all who fell into his society. But where were the
powers of the inner man to find the nutriment to satisfy their cravings,
and the field for their exercise? Besides the natural elements of
education, the objects, the scenes, and the changes of the natural world,
which have ever furnished to all truly great minds their noblest aliment,
the inspiring historical recollections associated with well-known
localities of the neighboring country, and the society of domestic life,
there was nothing within William’s reach but the Bible, the psalter, and
prayer-book, till he had resided at Low Hampton several years.”

“In a newly settled country, the public means of education must
necessarily be very limited. This was the case, at the time here referred
to, in a much greater degree than it usually is with the new settlements
of the present day. The school-house was not erected in season to afford
the children of Low Hampton but three months’ schooling in winter, during
William’s school-boy days. His mother taught him to read, so that he soon
mastered the few books belonging to the family; and this prepared him
to enter the ‘senior class’ when the district school opened. But if the
terms were short, the winter nights were long. Pine knots could be made
to supply the want of candles, lamps, and gas. And the spacious fireplace
in the log house was ample enough as a substitute for the school-house
and lecture-room. But even the enjoyment of these literary advantages
subjected the zealous student to a somewhat severe discipline.”

“As soon as William’s age and strength rendered him able to assist
his father about the farm, it was feared that his reading by night
might interfere with his efficiency in the work of the day. His father
insisted, therefore, that he should retire to bed when he retired
himself. But the boy could not be kept in bed. When the other members
of the family were all asleep, William would leave his bed, then find
his way to the pitch-wood, go to the fireplace, cast himself down flat
on the hearth, with his book before him, thrust his pitch-wood into the
embers till it blazed well, and there spend the hours of midnight in
reading. If the blaze grew dim, he would hold the stick in the embers
till the heat fried the pitch out of the wood, which renewed the blaze.
And when he had read as long as he dared to, or finished his book, he
would find his way back to bed again, with as little noise as possible.”

“He possessed a strong physical constitution, an active and naturally
well-developed intellect, and an irreproachable moral character. He had
appropriated to his use and amusement the small stock of literature
afforded by the family, while a child. He had enjoyed the limited
advantages of the district school but a few years before it was generally
admitted that his attainments exceeded those of the teachers usually
employed. He had drunk in the inspiration of the natural world around
him, and of the most exciting events in his country’s history. His
imagination had been quickened, and his heart warmed, by the adventures
and gallantries of fiction, and his intellect enriched by history. And
some of his earliest efforts with the pen, as well as the testimony
of his associates, show that his mind and heart were ennobled by the
lessons, if not by the spirit and power of religion.

“What, now, would have been the effect of what is called a regular
course of education? Would it have perverted him, as it has thousands?
or would it have made him instrumental of greater good in the cause of
God? Would it have performed its appropriate work, that of disciplining,
enlarging, and furnishing the mind, leaving unimpaired by the process
its natural energies, its sense of self-dependence as to man, and its
sense of dependence and accountability as to God? or would it have placed
him in the crowded ranks of those who are content to share in the honor
of repeating the twaddle, true or false, which passes for truth in the
school or sect which has ‘made them what they are’?

“We think it would have been difficult to pervert him; but where so
many who have been regarded as highly promising have been marred by the
operation, he would have been in great danger. He might have become
externally a better subject for the artist; but we doubt if he would have
been a better subject to be used as an instrument of Providence. There
are those who survive the regular course uninjured. There are those who
are benefited by it so far as to be raised to a level with people of
ordinary capacity, which they never could attain without special aid. And
there is a third class, who are a stereotype representation of what the
course makes them; if they raise a fellow-man out of the mire, they never
get him nearer to Heaven than the school where they were educated.

“Whatever might have been the result of any established course of
education, in the case of William Miller, such a course was beyond his
reach; he was deprived of the benefit, he has escaped the perversion.
Let us be satisfied. But still we must record the fact that it would
have been extremely gratifying if something of the kind could have been
placed at his command. He desired it. He longed for it with an intensity
of feeling that approached to agony. He pondered the question over and
over, whether it was possible to accomplish what appeared to him to be
not only a desirable gratification and honor, but almost essential to his
existence.

“It should be noticed, however, that his circumstances became somewhat
relieved as he advanced in years. The log house had given place to
a comfortable frame house; and, in this, William had a room he was
permitted to call his own. He had means to provide himself with a new
book, occasionally, and with candles to read at night, so that he could
enjoy his chosen luxury, during his leisure hours, in comparative comfort.

“It was on one of these times of leisure that an incident occurred which
marked a new era in his history, though it did not introduce fully such
an era as he desired. There was a medical gentleman in the vicinity of
his residence, by the name of Smith, who possessed an ample fortune, and
was known to be very liberal. In the plans which had passed through the
mind of William, to secure the means of maturing his education, he had
thought of Dr. Smith. At any rate it could do no harm to apply to him.
The plan was carried so far as to write a letter, setting forth to that
gentleman his intense desires, his want of means to gratify them, his
hopes and his prospects, if successful.

“The letter was nearly ready to be sent to its destination, when
William’s father entered the room, which we may properly call his son’s
study. Perhaps it had not occurred to the son to consult his father in
the matter; and to have it come to his notice in so unexpected a manner
somewhat disturbed him for the moment. But there was the letter in his
father’s presence. He took it, and read it. It affected him deeply.
For the first time, he seemed to feel his worldly condition to be
uncomfortable, on his son’s account. He wanted to be rich then, for the
gratification of his son, more than for any other human being.

“There were the irrepressible yearnings of his first-born, which he had
treated in their childish development as an annoyance, now spread out in
manly but impassioned pleadings to a comparative stranger to afford him
help! There were plans and hopes for the future, marked by an exhibition
of judgment and honor that could not fail of commanding attention! All
that was tender in that father’s heart, all that was generous in the
soldier, and all that could make him ambitious of a worthy successor, was
moved by that letter. The tears fell, and words of sympathy were spoken;
but the plan was impossible.

“The letter of William’s was never sent. It had the effect, however, of
changing his father’s course toward him, so that he was rather encouraged
than hindered in his favorite pursuits. By this time, the natural genius
and attainments of young William Miller had distinguished him among his
associates. To the young folks, he became a sort of scribbler-general.
If any one wanted ‘verses made,’ a letter to send, some ornamental and
symbolic design to be interpreted by ‘the tender passion,’ or anything
which required extra taste and fancy in the use of the pen, it was pretty
sure to be planned, if not executed, by him. Some of these first-fruits
of his genius are still in existence; and, although it requires no critic
to discover that he had never received lessons of any of the ‘great
masters,’ still these productions would compare very favorably with
similar efforts by those whose advantages have been far superior to his.

“The facts connected with the early life of Mr. Miller, and the incidents
in his personal history, now spread before the readers of this work,
will enable them to see, in the boy, a type of the future man. The
most embarrassing circumstances of his condition could not master his
perseverance. And if he could not accomplish all he desired to, the
success which attended his efforts, in spite of great discouragements,
was truly surprising. The position he had won opened to him a fairer
prospect, though still surrounded with serious dangers.”

William Miller was happily married in 1803, and settled in Poultney, Vt.
His biographer continues:—

“One of the first objects of his interest, after he had become settled,
was the village library. His constant use of its volumes brought him into
the society of a superior class of men. His wife took a deep interest in
his improvement and promotion; and made it her pleasure and business to
relieve him as much as possible from all the family cares which might
call him away from his books. She felt very sure that it would not be
lost time on his part, or lost labor on her own part. Still, the time he
could devote to books, on the best possible arrangement, was not so much
as he desired; for he had been trained to the farming business, and he
made that his employment, for some years, in Poultney.

“One effort of genius, though trifling in itself, which attracted toward
him the public attention of the village and its vicinity, was a poetic
effusion, the inspiration of his patriotic ardor. Preparations were
going on, at the time, for the public celebration of the anniversary of
our national independence; and the inspiration of that memorable day
seized Mr. Miller while he was hoeing corn in the field. He had written
poetry before; and so, after the labor of the field was done, he put his
thoughts into a written form, to be adapted to the familiar old tune,
called ‘Delight.’

“The appointed marshal, or manager, of the services of the day, was
Esquire Ashley, who was then a neighbor of Mr. Miller, and afterward
became an intimate friend. But the poet of the day, as he became, was
too reserved to offer his tribute, though there is reason to believe it
would have been thankfully accepted; for the business of the manager
hardly afforded him time to write poetry for the occasion, if he had the
ability, or even to select it. Mr. Miller was willing to have his piece
seen and used if it was thought to be suitable, but he could not announce
himself as its author. So he took the manuscript and walked as usual to
Esquire Ashley’s house. He seated himself leisurely below the chamber
window, where that gentleman was making his preparations for the great
celebration. Then, taking an opportunity to place it near where Mrs.
Ashley was at work, he shortly after withdrew. As soon as Mrs. Ashley
discovered the paper, she took it to her husband, supposing it was one
of his papers which had fallen from the window. He took it and read the
hymn; it struck him as being just what was wanted; but he knew nothing of
its origin. It was carried to several others, who were thought of as its
author, but no author or owner of it could be found. ‘Perhaps an angel
from Heaven had sent it.’ So they talked at any rate.

“However, the hymn was copied with the pen, and the sheets multiplied to
supply all who wished for one. The day came, and the hymn was sung with
the greatest enthusiasm to the favorite old tune, ‘Delight’! But among
those who distributed the copies, there was a worthy Baptist minister,
by the name of Kendrick, who had taken a warm interest in Mr. Miller.
His suspicions had pointed him to the author of the piece; and when
Mr. Miller came, with others, to get a copy, his appearance and manner
confirmed Elder Kendrick’s suspicions. Further inquiry brought forth
a confession of authorship. To use the phrase of the old folks, ‘it
was a great feather in his cap.’ He had touched the right chord in the
right way. The pious and patriotic emotions of the aged were revived;
the ardent responses of the young to these patriotic emotions found
expression in the new hymn; and nothing more was needed to make its
author the popular favorite.

“It is not known that an entire copy of the hymn is now in existence.
A sister of its author has repeated to us a few of the stanzas, which
we give, more for the purpose of exhibiting his religious and patriotic
sentiments than from an expectation that our readers will be affected
as were those who first heard it. Its style and meter were strictly in
accordance with the standard contained in the hymn book used on Sundays,
doubtless the only standard the writer of it was familiar with; and the
effect arose from the natural force and simplicity of the versified
thoughts, and the perfect ease of the musical execution. But to the
fragments of the hymn:—

    ...

    “‘Our Independence dear,
    Bought with the price of blood,
    Let us receive with care,
    And trust our Maker, God.
      For he’s the tower
        To which we fly;
        His grace is nigh
      In every hour!

    “‘Nor shall Columbia’s sons
      Forget the price it cost,
    As long as water runs,
      Or leaves are nipped by frost.
        Freedom is thine;
          Let millions rise,
          Defend the prize
        Through rolling time!

    ...

    “‘There was a Washington,
      A man of noble fame,
    Who led Columbia’s sons
      To battle on the plain;
        With skill they fought;
          The British host,
          With all their boast,
        Soon came to nought!

    ...

    “‘Let traitors hide their heads,
      And party quarrels cease;
    Our foes are struck with dread,
      When we declare for peace.
        Firm let us be,
          And rally round
          The glorious sound
        Of liberty!’

“The reader will see that the piece was designed for home consumption.
It was exactly suited to the occasion; and was marked throughout, in
spirit, style, and thought, with the elements of his education. And this
production, with others in prose and poetry, made him at once a notable
in the community; secured to him a wide circle of friends, and opened the
way for his promotion to office and honor. The old men were all ready to
give him a lift, almost without distinction of ‘party.’ The young folks
made his house a place of common resort, to which they gathered to spend
their leisure hours; while himself and wife became the central unit which
drew them together and kept all in motion.”

“In his political sentiments, he was decidedly democratic. But he had
intelligence enough to see that the practical patriotism of men did not
depend so much on the party name they took as on their common sense and
integrity. He knew that there were bad men enough in either party to
ruin the country, if they had the power to do it; and good men enough in
the same parties to promote the public prosperity to the best of their
ability. His position, therefore, was taken in view of the tendency of
different political principles and public measures, in their ultimate
bearing on the established institutions of the country. He enjoyed, in a
remarkable degree, the confidence of both the political parties of the
day.”

“In the case of most men of the world, with the avenues to honor, wealth,
and domestic happiness wide open before them, it is not often that a
public station so commanding would be voluntarily left for the hardships,
privations, and dangers, of the camp. What strong impulses could have
turned him off in that direction? Already the business of his office had
placed him in easy circumstances. Such was the amount of his business
that he kept two horses, one of which he drove, while the other was
kept up to rest, week by week, alternately. He enjoyed the respect and
unbounded confidence of the public; and he only needed to make himself
still as worthy of public favor as he had been hitherto, and then with
life and health, all that this world could afford was within his reach.
His preference for the army, so far as we know, sprang from these two
motives: First, he desired to participate in the glory which rested on
the memory of those he held the most dear, in the history of his country
and of his family. Second, he hoped to enjoy a more inviting exhibition
of human nature in the scenes of military life than experience or books
had afforded in civil life.

“His desire for something noble in character was greater than that for
wealth or unsubstantial fame. He was satisfied with the trial of what was
around him, and wished to try a new field. This is stated by himself in
his published memoir: ‘In the meantime, I continued my studies, storing
my mind with historical knowledge. The more I read, the more dreadfully
corrupt did the character of man appear. I could discern no bright spot
in the history of the past. Those conquerors of the world, and heroes
of history, were apparently but demons in human form. All the sorrow,
suffering, and misery in the world, seemed to be increased in proportion
to the power they obtained over their fellows. I began to feel very
distrustful of all men. In this state of mind, I entered the service of
my country. I fondly cherished the idea that I should find one bright
spot at least in the human character, as a star of hope—_a love of
country_—PATRIOTISM.’

“Happy, indeed, should we consider ourselves if there were no drawback
to this apparent prosperity to be noted. Rarely is it the case that the
honor of God and the honor of man are coincident. If Mr. Miller was not
puffed up by the latter, he had lost much of his regard for the former.
In his worldly advancement, there was a serious and dangerous departure
from the Christian sentiments which were instilled into his mind during
his early life. Still there was no defect in his character which the
most rigid worldly standard of external morality could detect. He was
perfectly upright and honorable in all his dealings. He was generous,
almost to a fault, with his friends, compassionate and liberal to the
poor, and he held in the highest contempt every act that could tarnish
a man’s personal and private honor. He was not profane, even to the
extent that too many are who pass for gentlemen. He was not intemperate,
although he was very much exposed to this ruinous habit from the example
of those into whose company his business called him—a habit which had
broken down some of his predecessors in office, by rendering them
incapable of attending to their business. He escaped from it without the
least stain.

“It could be shown, from sentiments embodied in some of his essays, in
addresses delivered before societies existing at the time, and in his
poetic effusions, that his moral and religious views were of a type that
would pass with the world as philosophical, pure, and sublime. But the
men with whom he associated from the time of his removal to Poultney,
and to whom he was considerably indebted for his worldly favors, were
deeply affected with skeptical principles and deistical theories. They
were not immoral men; but, as a class, were good citizens, and generally
of serious deportment, humane and benevolent. However, they rejected the
Bible as the standard of religious truth, and endeavored to make its
rejection plausible by such aid as could be obtained from the writings
of Voltaire, Hume, Volney, Paine, Ethan Allen, and others. Mr. Miller
studied these works closely, and at length avowed himself a deist. As
he has stated the period of his deistical life to have been twelve
years, that period must have begun in 1804; for he embraced or returned
to the Christian faith in 1816. It may fairly be doubted, however,
notwithstanding his known thoroughness and consistency, whether Mr.
Miller ever was fully settled in that form of deism which reduces man to
a level with the brutes, as to the supposed duration of their existence.
And the question is worthy of a little inquiry, To what extent was he a
deist?

“Robert Hall, with his usual comprehensiveness and truth, has remarked
that ‘infidelity is the offspring of corrupt Christianity.’ It is much
more successful in the discovery of supposed arguments against the
existence of the Deity of the Scriptures, in the perversion of that which
is divine, than in its institution and appointed use. Voltaire chose the
ruins of human nature, in their most perverted and blighted condition,
and Volney chose the ‘ruins’ of human habitations, for the theater on
which to display their mighty but evil genius. And they conjured forth
the same evil spirit which had instigated or caused the ruin, in each
case, to utter a false testimony, in reference both to ruined man and
his ruined habitations. These men became the oracles of that falsehood to
the world! But it was never the intention of God, that man, or the world
fitted up for his habitation, should be in this ruined condition; it is
the work of rebellion and sin!—of sin against the greatest displays of
love and goodness that were possible, and against the purest and most
reasonable law that could be given; of rebellion that was marked by
contempt of the universal Sovereign, and of authority enforced by the
lightest test of submission. And God has spoken to us, to inform us that
he has made provision for the restoration of all men, and that it is his
purpose to restore all who become interested in that provision, with the
world now in ruins, to a condition which no history but the Bible has
made known.

“Paine could rail and belie the supernaturalism of the Bible, like an
incarnate demon, and then indorse all the supernaturalism of the most
stupid pagan mythology, in his patriotic and poetic productions, which he
published to the world. And that mind must be strangely out of balance
naturally, or wretchedly perverted, which could bow to the authority of
Volney’s ‘specter,’ or Paine’s paganism,—the pure creations of fictions
and superstition,—and then reject the Bible because it demands faith in
that which is not familiar to the senses.

“It is generally true that those who become decided skeptics take that
most hopeless position, because they have become so depraved or perverted
that they feel the want of an infidel theory to afford them a license and
quiet, in their chosen course. It was not so with Mr. Miller. In the days
of his greatest devotion to deistical sentiments, he desired something
better. He had his difficulties with the Bible under its current
interpretations, and he tells us what these difficulties were. But a man
like him could never be made to believe it consistent or safe to abandon
the Bible, unless something more worthy of his trust were first put in
its place. And such a condition must secure to that matchless book a
certain and permanent supremacy. This was Mr. Miller’s safety.

“But if the poison which had infused its taint into the system did not
appear as a loathsome blotch upon the surface, its victim was not only
kept away from the sole remedy, but that remedy was treated by him with
an afflicting and dangerous levity. This was now the painful feature of
his case. Once it was not so. When he was a mere boy—‘between the years
of seven and ten’—as he tells us, a sense of the plague of his heart
and of his lost condition caused the deepest concern in reference to
his future prospects. He spent much time in trying to invent some plan
whereby he might find acceptance with God. He tried the common and most
natural course, in such a state of mind, that of being ‘very good.’ ‘I
will do nothing wrong, tell no lies, and obey my parents,’ he thought.
But his mind was still unsettled and unhappy.

“Good works are very proper, but they can never be accepted as the price
of pardon and redemption. He thought, too, as all do in the same state
of feeling, that something might be effected by sacrifice. ‘I will give
up the most cherished objects I possess.’ But this also failed. There
is only ‘one offering’ that can avail. In that, every sinner must rest
his hope and plea, or remain without peace with God. The experience of
Mr. Miller’s childhood made him thoughtful and serious, if it did not
result in the attainment of this inward sense of peace. Under his inward
conflicts and apprehensions of worldly sorrow, when a young man (in
1803), he poured out his soul to ‘religion’ in this touching strain:—

    “‘Come, blest religion, with thy angel’s face,
    Dispel this gloom, and brighten all the place;
    Drive this destructive passion from my breast;
    Compose my sorrows, and restore my rest;
    Show me the path that Christian heroes trod,
    Wean me from earth, and raise my soul to God!’

“‘Two things,’ says D’Aubigne, ‘are essential to sound Christian
experience. The first is a knowledge of our condition as sinners; the
second is a knowledge of the grace of God, in its manifestations to the
soul.’ Mr. Miller, like most if not all others, had learned the first
in his early life; but he had evidently not then attained the second
of these elements of a true religious life. And, by not attaining
that important position in the process of deliverance from our fallen
condition, he became wearied of a sense of his need, if he did not lose
it entirely. In the chosen employment of his intellect, with a more
ample supply of books at command; in the midst of an admiring and merry
social circle; in receiving the honors of the world from the hand of
his superiors, and in reaping an honorable portion of the treasures of
the world, why should he desire any other source of enjoyment—and one
altogether unknown, unappreciated and unpopular, in the circle where he
moved? What use had he for that religion he had seen verified and felt
the need of, in the less cultivated family circle at Low Hampton?

“If those who never become acquainted with the lessons of truth may be
satisfied without the consolation of which its lessons speak, with those
who are made familiar with these lessons, it is generally very different.
They can seldom feel satisfied with themselves without making a hearty
surrender of life, and all God has given them, to his service. As they
know this is their reasonable service, anything short of this, they know,
must be unreasonable. But how few take this narrow path! How many turn
away to join the multitude! The talent, however, is in their hands. They
must dispose of that, if they will not submit themselves to the disposal
of its Giver. Some make it the reason for entertaining and venting a more
malignant and blasphemous form of hatred against everything which bears
the name of God. This quiets all fear of being reproached as religious,
and it is the awful snare into which many are led by the fear of man.
Another class of these unfaithful recipients of the talent of truth
try to get along with a popular external expression of respect for its
claims; and thus they escape the dreaded reproach.

“A third class, naturally too frank even to appear to venerate what they
do not heartily respect, and too deeply impressed with the goodness
of the Deity to become blasphemers, but still too fearful of man to
encounter his frown, seek to save themselves from it by making the
defects of the humble but unpopular representatives of truth a subject
of merriment. This course was taken by Mr. Miller. This is the class to
which he then belonged. He banished from his memory the impressions of
his early life, and must silence all fear of reproach on account of them;
so he gave to his skeptical associates an assurance that he had mastered
his superstition, as they deemed it, by performing, for their sport, the
devotions of the worship to which he had been accustomed, and especially
by mimicking the devotional peculiarities of some of his own family
relatives.

“Among these pious relatives there were two, in particular, whose
presence or names were calculated to remind him of his repudiated
obligations, and whose influence over him he labored to repel, by making
them the theme of his mirth. One of these was his grandfather Phelps,
pastor of the Baptist church at Orwell; the other was his uncle, Elihu
Miller, who was settled as the pastor of the Baptist church at Low
Hampton, in 1812. These were men of unpolished exterior, but of decided
character, strong voice, and ardent devotion. Men whose features were
so strongly marked would make fine subjects for striking portraits; and
if all their traits could be brought out, there would be found a large
bestowment of the treasure of heavenly wisdom and virtue in the earthen
vessels. It was the excellence of the heavenly traits, and the roughness
of the earthly, which made them so desirable and so ready subjects of
caricature.

“These humble ambassadors of Christ, and other pious relatives, often
visited Mr. Miller’s house at Poultney; and, although he received them
with affection and respect, and entertained them in the most generous
manner, he was in the habit of imitating, with the most ludicrous
gravity, their words, tones of voice, gestures, fervency, and even
the grief they might manifest for such as himself, to afford a kind of
entertainment for his skeptical associates, which they seemed to enjoy
with peculiar relish.

“Little did he then think that he was measuring to these faithful men
what was to be measured to him again, pressed down, shaken together, and
running over. And probably it was not known to him that these praying men
had already expressed the hope—almost a prophecy—that their prayers would
be answered, and that he would some day be engaged in perpetuating the
work they were endeavoring to advance.

“There was more than one heart that was almost inconsolably afflicted
by this conduct of Mr. Miller. His mother knew of it, and it was as the
bitterness of death to her. Some of his pious sisters witnessed, with
tears, his improprieties. And when his mother spoke of the affliction
to her father Phelps, he would console her by saying, ‘Don’t afflict
yourself too deeply about William. There is something for him to do yet
in the cause of God!’

“Although Mr. Miller avowed himself a deist, and was recognized as such
by deists, this offense against all propriety, in trifling with what his
dearest relatives regarded as most sacred, this thoughtless trifling
with the humble messengers of the gospel was the darkest feature in his
character. To him it was the most natural course which the circumstances
of his position could suggest, and, undoubtedly, appeared to be the
least violation of former convictions and educational proprieties which
would allow him to stand as he did, in the favor and confidence of his
unbelieving associates. He had not then become acquainted with the
Source of strength by which he might have been sustained before the
enemies of the Christian faith; he was unprepared to take the Christian
position, and he became what the influence around him naturally
determined. To give the true state of the case, the darker shades must
appear with the lighter. He took the position of an unbeliever. But that
he was not a deist of a rank type will appear more fully from his own
statements.

“We have thus stated Mr. Miller’s social and public position, his
worldly prospects, and his religious state. The longsuffering of God was
still to be exercised toward him. He was to become satisfied with the
insufficiency of the world. Then the light which had become darkness was
to be revived within him; the breath of life from God would disclose the
all-sufficient portion, and he would go forth to build again the faith he
had destroyed.

“Many were the prayers that ascended in his behalf; and some of those
who were the most deeply interested for him would pass away before their
prayers would be answered. But the great lessons of longsuffering, of
faithfulness, and of the power to deliver out of the most artful snare
of the adversary, would be the more magnified, on the part of God; the
praying, who were yet alive, would hail the answer with greater joy, and
the delivered one would be the better prepared to take others, in the
same fearful condition, by the hand, and lead them to Him who came to
seek and save the lost!”

William Miller received a captain’s commission and entered the army
in 1812. His biographer gives more than thirty pages relative to his
military life, in which those whose hearts are fired by reading of
victories gained by the use of carnal weapons can see much to admire in
him as a patriotic soldier. But as our principal object is to bring him
before the public as an intelligent Bible Christian, a bold soldier of
Jesus Christ, and an able and sound expositor of the word of life, we
pass over his military career, giving only one incident, which will be of
interest to the Christian reader.

“A few reflections on this period of Mr. Miller’s life and the mention of
an incident or two of some interest, must close this chapter. Everybody
is familiar with the fact that the army is a bad school of morality.
Intemperance, licentiousness, gambling, fighting, stealing, profanity,
and Sabbath-breaking, are the common vices of army life. It was the
constant practice of these vices by those around him which sickened Mr.
Miller of their society. And that he should escape entirely from the
contamination would be too much to expect. However, it is both a matter
of surprise, and highly creditable to him, that his moral integrity and
habits were not affected to a hopeless extent. There were, however, some
redeeming traits to the too generally dark moral picture of army life.
There were a few men in the 30th regiment of infantry who were known as
men of prayer and undoubted piety. And an incident in their history,
which Mr. Miller has often spoken of with great interest, should be
mentioned. One of these praying men, if memory has not failed in the
case, was Sergeant Willey.

“His tent was occasionally used for the purpose of holding a
prayer-meeting. On one of these occasions, when Mr. Miller was ‘the
officer for the day,’ he saw a light in this tent, and, wishing to
know what was going on, as his duty required, he drew near, and heard
the voice of prayer. He said nothing at the time; but, the next day,
on recollecting it, he thought it was a good opportunity to try the
sergeant’s piety, and indulge his own relish for a joke, by calling
Sergeant Willey to account for having his tent occupied by a gambling
party the night before. When the sergeant appeared, Captain Miller
affected great seriousness, and spoke in a tone bordering on severity,
as follows: ‘You know, Sergeant Willey, that it is contrary to the army
regulations to have any gambling in the tents at night. And I was very
sorry to see your tent lit up for that purpose last night. We cannot have
any gambling at such times. You must put a stop to it at once. I hope I
shall not have to speak to you again about it!’

“The poor sergeant stood thunderstruck, for a moment, to hear such an
imputation cast on him and his associates. And then, hardly daring to
look up, he replied, with the most touching simplicity, and in a manner
which showed that he was alike unwilling to suffer the scandal of
entertaining gamblers, or to make a parade of his devotions, ‘We were
not gambling, sir!’ Captain Miller was touched with his appearance. But,
still affecting greater severity than at first, being determined to press
him to a confession, he said to the sergeant, ‘Yes, you were gambling!
And it won’t do! What else could you have your tent lighted up for, all
the evening, if you were not gambling?’

“Sergeant Willey now felt himself under the necessity of being a little
more explicit, and answered, in a manner deeply expressive of his grief
and innocence, ‘We were praying, sir.’ Captain Miller, by this time, was
almost in tears; and indicating, by a motion of his hand, that he was
satisfied, and that the praying sergeant might withdraw, he continued
alone for some time, sensibly affected by the courage manifested by these
Christians in that ungodly camp, by the becoming deportment of their
representative under such a serious scandal, and by the doubtful course
he had taken in reference to them.”

“One fact must be mentioned, which will speak more than volumes in behalf
of his commanding integrity, as it shows the place he occupied in the
respect and confidence of the soldiers. After the war, two members of his
company, who lived as neighbors in the extreme northern part of Vermont,
had some business difficulties, which grew to be so serious that they
could hardly live together as neighbors on speaking terms, to say the
least. This was a great affliction to themselves, as brother soldiers,
to their families, and to the whole neighborhood. These men had often
thought of their former captain, though they were much older than he was,
and wished the difficulties could be submitted to his examination and
decision. But it was a long way to his residence, and the time and cost
of the journey seemed too much to admit of such an arrangement. However,
the matter became a source of so much trouble that the proposition was
made by one, and gladly accepted by the other, to visit Captain Miller;
to submit the case to him, by telling each his own story, and to abide
by his decision. The long journey was performed by these old soldiers
separately, as duelists go to the place of single combat. They arrived
at Captain Miller’s nearly at the same time. Arrangements were made for
a hearing. Each told his story. The decision was made known, after all
the facts of the case had been duly considered. It was received in good
faith by the parties. They took each other cordially by the hand, spent a
little time with their captain, and returned to their homes in company,
as friends and brothers.

“Paradoxical as it may appear, some of the most distinguished and
honorable soldiers have been the most successful bloodless peace-makers,
while, on the other hand, some of the most contemptible cowards, with
peaceable pretensions always on their lips, have distinguished themselves
by very little besides their successful contrivances to keep all engaged
in war with whom they have had to do. Without claiming any special
distinction for Mr. Miller on the score of what are styled brilliant
achievements in the field of danger, the character of a great lover of
peace belonged to him as a distinguishing personal trait. He delighted in
peace, naturally; it is not known that he ever intentionally provoked a
quarrel; and a considerable number of cases could be cited, in which he
has been called to perform the office of a peace-maker, and in the duties
of which he has been remarkably successful. But enough. More must be left
unwritten than it would be practicable or necessary to write.

“The watchful Providence which guarded him in the hour of deadly peril;
the longsuffering which spared him while neglecting the talents bestowed,
or misusing them in rebellion against the Giver; and that wisdom and
grace which overruled all the dangers experienced, and the derelictions
practiced, as in many other persons of distinguished usefulness, demand
our hearty adoration. The close of Mr. Miller’s military life was to be
the commencement of a new era in his history. The circumstances which
preceded that change, the means and instrumentalities employed in its
accomplishment, and the practical results which immediately followed in
the circle of his acquaintance, must be left to another chapter.”

The following, relative to Mr. Miller’s connection with the army, we take
from his “Apology and Defense,” published in 1845:—

“In 1813, I received a captain’s commission in the U. S. service, and
continued in the army until peace was declared. While there, many
occurrences served to weaken my confidence in the correctness of
deistical principles. I was led frequently to compare this country to
that of the children of Israel, before whom God drove out the inhabitants
of their land. It seemed to me that the Supreme Being must have watched
over the interests of this country in an especial manner, and delivered
us from the hands of our enemies.

“I was particularly impressed with this view when I was in the battle
of Plattsburg, when with 1,500 regulars, and about 4,000 volunteers, we
defeated the British, who were 15,000 strong; we being also successful
at the same time in an engagement with the British fleet on the lake. At
the commencement of the battle, we looked upon our own defeat as almost
certain, and yet we were victorious. So surprising a result against such
odds did seem to me like the work of a mightier power than man.”




CHAPTER II.

    REMOVAL TO LOW HAMPTON—HIS CONVERSION—STUDY OF THE BIBLE—RULES
    OF INTERPRETATION, ETC.


“On the retirement of Mr. Miller from the army, he removed his family
from Poultney, Vt., to Low Hampton, N. Y., to begin there the occupation
of farming. His father had died there, in the year 1812, leaving the
homestead encumbered with a mortgage. That was cancelled by Mr. Miller,
who permitted his mother to live there with his brother Solomon, while
he purchased for himself another farm, in the neighborhood, about half a
mile to the west. This lay mostly above the general level of the valley
of the Poultney river, and comprised about two hundred acres of land,
with a surface somewhat uneven, and with soil similar to that usually
found in sections geologically marked by black slate and limestone. Two
miles to the east was the village of Fairhaven, Vt., near the Poultney
river; and eight miles to the west, on the southern extremity of Lake
Champlain, at the foot of bold, precipitous hills, was the village of
Whitehall, N. Y.

“On this spot, in 1815, Mr. Miller erected a convenient farm-house,
similar to those built throughout the interior of New England at that
epoch. It was of wood, two stories high, with an ell projecting in the
rear. The front and ends were painted white, with green blinds, and the
back side was red. It fronts to the north. A small yard, inclosed by
a picket fence, and ornamented by lilacs, raspberry and rose-bushes,
separates it from the public road leading to Fairhaven, which is one of
the interesting objects in the foreground of the extended view to the
east, as seen from the window of the ‘east room,’ so full of tender and
holy recollections to all visitors.

“To the west of the house, a few rods distant, is a beautiful grove,
where, in later times, he often prayed and wept. This spot was selected
by the political party to which Mr. Miller belonged, for the place of
a public celebration of the national independence, on its anniversary,
July 4, 1816. Mr. Miller was selected as the marshal of the day; but, not
fancying a party celebration, he used his influence so that all persons,
irrespective of party, were invited to partake of its festivities. In
those days of party excitement this was considered a wonderful stretch of
charity.

“Mr. Miller’s grandfather Phelps was in the practice of preaching at the
house of Mr. M.’s father, when he made his occasional visits. There was
no church at the time in that section of the town. Through his labors Mr.
Miller’s mother was converted; and a little church was there organized,
as a branch of the Baptist church in Orwell, Vt.

“In 1812, Elisha Miller, an uncle of the subject of this memoir, was
settled over the church in Low Hampton, and a small meeting-house was
afterward erected. On Mr. Miller’s removal to Low Hampton, he became
a constant attendant, except in the absence of the preacher, at that
place of worship, and contributed liberally to its support. His relation
to the pastor, and the proximity of his house, caused it to become the
head-quarters of the denomination on extra as well as on ordinary
occasions. There the preachers from a distance found food and shelter;
and, though fond of bantering them on their faith, and making their
opinions a subject of mirth with his infidel friends, they always found a
home beneath his roof.

“In the absence of the pastor, public worship was conducted by the
deacons, who, as a substitute for the sermon, read a printed discourse,
usually from ‘Proud-foot’s Practical Sermons.’ Mr. Miller’s mother
noticed that, on such occasions, he was not in his seat, and she
remonstrated with him. He excused his absence on the ground that he was
not edified by the manner in which the deacons read; and intimated that
if _he_ could do the reading, he should always be present. This being
suggested to those grave officials, they were pleased with the idea; and,
after that, they selected the sermon as before, but Mr. Miller did the
reading, although still entertaining deistical sentiments.

“The time had now come when God, by his providence and grace, was about
to interpose to enlist the patriotic soldier in another kind of warfare;
when, to his mind, so fond of those departments of truth which appealed
only to reason and sense, was to be opened a more inspiring field;
when the persevering and delighted student of history was to see and
appreciate the connection between the most stirring scenes and mightiest
revolutions in this world’s affairs and God’s great plan of redemption,
to which all the events of time are made subordinate.

“Detecting himself in an irreverent use of the name of God, as before
related, he was convicted of its sinfulness, and retired to his
beautiful grove, and there, in meditation on the works of nature and
Providence, he endeavored to penetrate the mystery of the connection
between the present and a future state of existence.

“As a farmer, he had had more leisure for reading; and he was at an
age when the future of man’s existence _will_ demand a portion of his
thoughts. He found that his former views gave him no assurance of
happiness beyond the present life. Beyond the grave, all was dark and
gloomy. To use his own words: “Annihilation was a cold and chilling
thought, and accountability was sure destruction to all. The heavens
were as brass over my head, and the earth as iron under my feet.
_Eternity!—what was it? And death—why was it?_ The more I reasoned, the
further I was from demonstration. The more I thought, the more scattered
were my conclusions. I tried to stop thinking, but my thoughts would not
be controlled. I was truly wretched, but did not understand _the cause_.
I murmured and complained, but knew not of whom. I knew that there was
a wrong, but knew not how or where to find the right. I mourned, but
without hope.” He continued in this state of mind for some months,
feeling that eternal consequences _might_ hang on the nature and object
of his belief.

“The anniversary of the battle of Plattsburg—September 11—was celebrated
in all that region, for some years, with much enthusiasm. In 1816,
arrangements had been made for its observance, by a ball, at Fairhaven.
The stirring scenes of the late campaign being thus recalled, Captain
Miller entered into the preparations for the expected festivities with
all the ardor of the soldier. In the midst of these, it was announced
that Dr. B. would preach on the evening previous to the ball. In the
general gathering to that meeting, Captain Miller and his help attended,
more from curiosity than from other actuating cause.

“They left Captain Miller’s house in high glee. The discourse was from
Zech. 2:4: ‘Run! speak to this young man!’ It was a word in season. On
their return, Mrs. M., who had remained at home, observed a wonderful
change in their deportment. Their glee was gone, and all were deeply
thoughtful, and not disposed to converse in reply to her questions
respecting the meeting, the ball, &c. They were entirely incapacitated
for any part in the festive arrangements. Other managers of the ball were
equally unfitted for it; and the result was that it was indefinitely
postponed. The seriousness extended from family to family, and in the
several neighborhoods in that vicinity meetings for prayer and praise
took the place of mirth and the dance.

“On the Lord’s day following, it devolved on Captain Miller, as usual in
the minister’s absence, to read a discourse of the deacons’ selection.
They had chosen one on the Importance of Parental Duties. Soon after
commencing, he was overpowered by the inward struggle of emotion, with
which the entire congregation deeply sympathized, and took his seat. His
deistical principles seemed an almost insurmountable difficulty with him.
Soon after, ‘suddenly,’ he says, ‘the character of a Saviour was vividly
impressed upon my mind. It seemed that there might be a Being so good and
compassionate as to himself atone for our transgressions, and thereby
save us from suffering the penalty of sin. I immediately felt how lovely
such a Being must be; and imagined that I could cast myself into the
arms of, and trust in the mercy of, such an One. But the question arose,
How can it be proved that such a Being does exist? Aside from the Bible,
I found that I could get no evidence of the existence of such a Saviour,
or even of a future state. I felt that to believe in such a Saviour
without evidence would be visionary in the extreme.

“‘I saw that the Bible did bring to view just such a Saviour as I needed;
and I was perplexed to find how an uninspired book should develop
principles so perfectly adapted to the wants of a fallen world. I was
constrained to admit that the Scriptures must be a revelation from God.
They became my delight; and in Jesus I found a friend. The Saviour became
to me the chiefest among ten thousand; and the Scriptures, which before
were dark and contradictory, now became the lamp to my feet and light to
my path. My mind became settled and satisfied. I found the Lord God to be
a Rock in the midst of the ocean of life. The Bible now became my chief
study, and I can truly say, I searched it with great delight. I found
the half was never told me. I wondered why I had not seen its beauty and
glory before, and marveled that I could have ever rejected it. I found
everything revealed that my heart could desire, and a remedy for every
disease of the soul. I lost all taste for other reading, and applied my
heart to get wisdom from God.’

“Mr. Miller immediately erected the family altar; publicly professed his
faith in that religion which had been food for his mirth, by connecting
himself with the little church that he had despised; opened his house for
meetings of prayer; and become an ornament and pillar in the church,
and an aid to both pastor and people. The die was cast, and he had taken
his stand for life as a soldier of the cross, as all who knew him felt
assured; and henceforth the badge of discipleship, in the church or
world, in his family or closet, indicated whose he was and whom he served.

“His pious relations had witnessed with pain his former irreligious
opinions; how great were their rejoicings now! The church, favored with
his liberality, and edified by his reading, but pained by his attacks on
their faith, could now rejoice with the rejoicing. His infidel friends
regarded his departure from them as the loss of a standard-bearer. And
the new convert felt that henceforth, wherever he was, he must deport
himself as a Christian, and perform his whole duty. His subsequent
history must show how well this was done.

“To the church, his devotion of himself to his Master’s service was as
welcome as his labors were efficient. The opposite party, especially
the more gifted of them, regarded him as a powerful, and, therefore, a
desirable, antagonist. He knew the strength of both parties. That of the
former he had often tested, when, in his attacks, though they might have
been silenced, he had felt that he had a bad cause; and the weakness of
the latter had been forcibly impressed on him in his fruitless efforts to
assure himself that they were right. He knew all their weak points, and
where their weapons could be turned against them. They were not disposed
to yield the ground without a struggle, and began their attack on him by
using the weapons and assailing the points which characterized his own
former attacks on Christianity; and to this fact, under God, is probably
owing his subsequent worldwide notoriety.

“He had taunted his friends with entertaining ‘a blind faith’ in the
Bible, containing, as it did, many things which they confessed their
inability to explain. He had enjoyed putting perplexing questions to
clergymen and others—triumphing in their unsatisfactory replies. These
questions had not been forgotten; and his Christian friends, also, turned
his former taunts upon himself.

“Soon after his renunciation of deism, in conversing with a friend
respecting the hope of a glorious eternity through the merits and
intercessions of Christ, he was asked how he knew there was such a
Saviour. He replied, ‘It is revealed in the Bible.’ ‘How do you know
the Bible is true?’ was the response, with a reiteration of his former
arguments on the contradictions and mysticisms in which he had claimed it
was shrouded.

“Mr. Miller felt such taunts in their full force. He was at first
perplexed; but, on reflection, he considered that if the Bible is a
revelation of God, it must be consistent with itself; all its parts must
harmonize, must have been given for man’s instruction, and, consequently,
must be adapted to his understanding. He, therefore, said, ‘Give me
time, and I will harmonize all these apparent contradictions to my own
satisfaction, or I will be a deist still.’

“He then devoted himself to the prayerful reading of the word. He
laid aside all commentaries, and used the marginal references and his
concordance as his only helps. He saw that he must distinguish between
the Bible and all the peculiar and partisan interpretations of it. The
Bible was older than them all, must be above them all; and he placed it
there. He saw that it must correct all interpretations; and in correcting
them, its own pure light would shine without the mists which traditionary
belief had involved it in. He resolved to lay aside all preconceived
opinions, and to receive, with child-like simplicity, the natural and
obvious meaning of Scripture.

“He pursued the study of the Bible with the most intense interest—whole
nights, as well as days, being devoted to that object. At times,
delighted with truth which shone forth from the sacred volume, making
clear to his understanding the great plan of God for the redemption of
fallen man; and at times puzzled and almost distracted by seemingly
inexplicable or contradictory passages, he persevered, until the
application of his great principle of interpretation was triumphant. He
became puzzled only to be delighted, and delighted only to persevere the
more in penetrating its beauties and mysteries. His manner of studying
the Bible is thus described by himself:—

    “‘I determined to lay aside all my prepossessions, to
    thoroughly compare scripture with scripture, and to pursue its
    study in a regular and methodical manner. I commenced with
    Genesis, and read verse by verse, proceeding no faster than the
    meaning of the several passages should be so unfolded as to
    leave me free from embarrassment respecting any mysticisms or
    contradictions. Whenever I found anything obscure, my practice
    was to compare it with all collateral passages; and, by the
    help of Cruden, I examined all the texts of Scripture in which
    were found any of the prominent words contained in any obscure
    portion. Then, by letting every word have its proper bearing on
    the subject of the text, if my view of it harmonized with every
    collateral passage in the Bible, it ceased to be a difficulty.

    “‘In this way I pursued the study of the Bible, in my first
    perusal of it, for about two years, and was fully satisfied
    that it is its own interpreter. I found that, by a comparison
    of Scripture with history, all the prophecies, as far as they
    had been fulfilled, had been fulfilled literally; that all the
    various figures, metaphors, parables, similitudes, &c., of the
    Bible, were either explained in their immediate connection, or
    the terms in which they were expressed were defined in other
    portions of the word; and, when thus explained, are to be
    literally understood in accordance with such explanation. I was
    thus satisfied that the Bible is a system of revealed truths,
    so clearly and simply given that the ‘wayfaring man, though a
    fool, need not err therein.’

“In thus continuing the study, he adopted the following

    “RULES OF INTERPRETATION.

    “1. Every word must have its proper bearing on the subject
    presented in the Bible. _Proof_, Matt. 5:18.

    “2. All Scripture is necessary, and may be understood by a
    diligent application and study. _Proof_, 2 Tim. 3:15-17.

    “3. Nothing revealed in Scripture can or will be hid from those
    who ask in faith, not wavering. _Proof_, Deut. 29:29; Matt.
    10:26, 27; 1 Cor. 2:10; Phil. 3:15; Isa. 45:11; Matt. 21:22;
    John 14:13, 14; 15:7; James 1:5, 6; 1 John 5:13-15.

    “4. To understand doctrine, bring all the Scriptures together
    on the subject you wish to know; then let every word have its
    proper influence; and, if you can form your theory without a
    contradiction, you cannot be in error. _Proof_, Isa. 28:7-29;
    35:8; Prov. 19:27; Luke 24:27, 44, 45; Rom. 16:26; James 5:19;
    2 Pet. 1:19, 20.

    “5. Scripture must be its own expositor, since it is a rule
    of itself. If I depend on a teacher to expound to me, and
    he should guess at its meaning, or desire to have it so on
    account of his sectarian creed, or to be thought wise, then his
    guessing, desire, creed, or wisdom, is my rule, and not the
    Bible. _Proof_, Ps. 19:7-11; 119:97-105; Matt. 23:8-10; 1 Cor.
    2:12-16; Eze. 34:18, 19; Luke 11:52; Matt. 2:7, 8.

    “6. God has revealed things to come, by visions, in figures
    and parables; and in this way the same things are oftentimes
    revealed again and again, by different visions, or in different
    figures and parables. If you wish to understand them, you must
    combine them all in one. _Proof_, Ps. 89:19; Hos. 12:10; Hab.
    2:2; Acts 2:17; 1 Cor. 10:6; Heb. 9:9, 24; Ps. 78:2; Matt.
    13:13, 34; Gen. 41:1-32; Dan. 2d, 7th & 8th; Acts 10:9-16.

    “7. Visions are always mentioned as such. 2 Cor. 12:1.

    “8. Figures always have a figurative meaning, and are used much
    in prophecy to represent future things, times and events—such
    as mountains, meaning governments; Dan. 2:35, 44; beasts,
    meaning kingdoms; Dan. 7:8, 17; waters, meaning people; Rev.
    17:1, 15; day, meaning year, &c. Eze. 4:6.

    “9. Parables are used as comparisons to illustrate subjects,
    and must be explained in the same way as figures, by the
    subject and Bible. Mark 4:13.

    “10. Figures sometimes have two or more different
    significations, as day is used in a figurative sense to
    represent three different periods of time, namely, first,
    indefinite; Eccl. 7:14; second, definite, a day for a year;
    Eze. 4:6; and third, a day for a thousand years. 2 Pet. 3:8.
    The right construction will harmonize with the Bible, and make
    good sense; other constructions will not.

    “11. If a word makes good sense as it stands, and does no
    violence to the simple laws of nature, it is to be understood
    literally; if not, figuratively. Rev. 12:1, 2; 17:3-7.

    “12. To learn the meaning of a figure, trace the word through
    your Bible, and when you find it explained, substitute the
    explanation for the word used; and, if it make good sense, you
    need not look further; if not, look again.

    “13. To know whether we have the true historical event for
    the fulfillment of a prophecy: If you find every word of the
    prophecy (after the figures are understood) is literally
    fulfilled, then you may know that your history is the true
    event; but if one word lacks a fulfillment, then you must look
    for another event, or wait its future development; for God
    takes care that history and prophecy shall agree, so that the
    true believing children of God may never be ashamed. Ps. 22:5;
    Isa. 45:17-19; 1 Pet. 2:6; Rev. 17:17; Acts 3:18.

    “14. The most important rule of all is, that you must have
    _faith_. It must be a faith that requires a sacrifice, and, if
    tried, would give up the dearest object on earth, the world and
    all its desires—character, living, occupation, friends, home,
    comforts and worldly honors. If any of these should hinder our
    believing any part of God’s word, it would show our faith to be
    vain. Nor can we ever believe so long as one of these motives
    lies lurking in our hearts. We must believe that God will never
    forfeit his word; and we can have confidence that He who takes
    notice of the sparrow’s fall, and numbers the hairs of our
    head, will guard the translation of his own word, and throw a
    barrier around it, and prevent those who sincerely trust in
    God, and put implicit confidence in his word, from erring far
    from the truth.

    “‘While thus studying the Scriptures,’—continuing the words
    of his own narrative,—‘I became satisfied, if the prophecies
    which have been fulfilled in the past are any criterion by
    which to judge of the manner of the fulfillment of those which
    are future, that the popular views of the spiritual reign of
    Christ—a temporal millennium before the end of the world, and
    the Jews’ return—are not sustained by the word of God; for I
    found that all the Scriptures on which those favorite theories
    are based are as clearly expressed as are those that were
    _literally_ fulfilled at the first advent, or at any other
    period in the past.

    “‘I found it plainly taught in the Scriptures that Jesus
    Christ will again descend to this earth, coming in the clouds
    of heaven, in all the glory of his Father:[2] that, at his
    coming, the kingdom and dominion under the whole heaven will
    be given unto Him and the saints of the Most High, who will
    possess it forever, even forever and ever:[3] that, as the old
    world perished by the deluge, so the earth, that now is, is
    reserved unto fire, to be melted with fervent heat at Christ’s
    coming; after which, according to the promise, it is to become
    the new earth, wherein the righteous will forever dwell:[4]
    that, at his coming, the bodies of all the righteous dead will
    be raised, and all the righteous living be changed from a
    corruptible to an incorruptible, from a mortal to an immortal
    state; that they will be caught up together to meet the Lord
    in the air, and will reign with him forever in the regenerated
    earth.[5]

    “‘The controversy with Zion will then be finished, her children
    be delivered from bondage, and from the power of the tempter,
    and the saints be all presented to God blameless, without spot
    or wrinkle, in love;[6] that the bodies of the wicked will then
    be all destroyed, and their spirits be reserved in prison[7]
    until their resurrection and damnation;[8] and that, when the
    earth is thus regenerated, and the righteous raised, and the
    wicked destroyed, the kingdom of God will have come, when his
    will will be done on earth as it is in Heaven; that the meek
    will inherit it, and the kingdom become the saint’s.[9]

    “‘I found that the only millennium taught in the word of God is
    the thousand years which are to intervene between the first
    resurrection and that of the rest of the dead, as inculcated
    in the twentieth of Revelation; and that it must necessarily
    follow the personal coming of Christ and the regeneration of
    the earth,[10] that, till Christ’s coming, and the end of the
    world, the righteous and wicked are to continue together on
    the earth, and that the horn of the papacy is to war against
    the saints until his appearing and kingdom, when it will be
    destroyed by the brightness of Christ’s coming; so that there
    can be no conversion of the world before the advent;[11] and
    that as the new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness, is
    located by Peter after the conflagration, and is declared by
    him to be the same for which we look, according to the promise
    of Isa. 65:17.

    “‘This is the same that John saw in vision after the passing
    away of the former heavens and earth; it must necessarily
    follow that the various portions of Scripture that refer to
    the millennial state must have their fulfillment after the
    resurrection of all the saints that sleep in Jesus.[12] I also
    found that the promises respecting Israel’s restoration are
    applied by the apostle to all who are Christ’s—the putting on
    of Christ constituting them Abraham’s seed and heirs according
    to the promise.[13].

    “‘I was then satisfied, as I saw conclusive evidence to prove
    the advent personal and pre-millennial, that all the events
    for which the church look to be fulfilled [in the millennium]
    before the advent, must be subsequent to it; and that, unless
    there were other unfulfilled prophecies, the advent of the
    Lord, instead of being looked for only in the distant future,
    might be a continually-expected event. In examining the
    prophecies on that point, I found that only four universal
    monarchies are anywhere predicted, in the Bible, to precede the
    setting up of God’s everlasting kingdom; that three of those
    had passed away—Babylon, Medo-Persia, and Grecia—and that the
    fourth—Rome—had already passed into its last state, the state
    in which it is to be when the stone cut out of the mountain
    without hands shall smite the image on the feet, and break to
    pieces all the kingdoms of this world.

    “‘I was unable to find any prediction of events which presented
    any clear evidence of their fulfillment before the scenes
    that usher in the advent. And finding all the signs of the
    times, and the present condition of the world, to compare
    harmoniously with the prophetic descriptions of the last days,
    I was compelled to believe that this world had about reached
    the limits of the period allotted for its continuance. As I
    regarded the evidence, I could arrive at no other conclusion.

    “‘Another kind of evidence that vitally affected my mind was the
    chronology of the Scriptures. I found, on pursuing the study of
    the Bible, various chronological periods extending, according
    to my understanding of them, to the coming of the Saviour. I
    found that predicted events, which had been fulfilled in the
    past, often occurred within a _given time_. The one hundred
    and twenty years to the flood; Gen. 6:3; the seven days that
    were to precede it, with forty days of predicted rain; Gen.
    7:4; the four hundred years of sojourn of Abraham’s seed; Gen.
    15:13; the three days of the butler’s and baker’s dreams; Gen.
    40:12-20; the seven years of Pharaoh’s; Gen. 41:28-54; the
    forty years in the wilderness; Num. 14:34; the three and a half
    years of famine: 1 Kings 17:1; the sixty-five years to the
    breaking of Ephraim; Isa. 7:8; the seventy years’ captivity;
    Jer. 25:11; Nebuchadnezzar’s seven times; Dan. 4:13-16; and
    the seven weeks, three-score and two weeks, and the one week,
    making seventy weeks, determined upon the Jews; Dan. 9:24-27;
    the events limited by these times were all once only a matter
    of prophecy, and were fulfilled in accordance with the
    predictions.

    “‘When, therefore, I found the 2300 prophetic days, which were
    to mark the length of the vision from the Persian to the end
    of the fourth kingdom, the seven times’ continuance of the
    dispersion of God’s people, and the 1335 prophetic days to
    the standing of Daniel in his lot, all evidently extending
    to the advent,[14] with other prophetical periods, I could
    but regard them as ‘the times before appointed,’ which God
    had revealed ‘unto his servants the prophets.’ As I was fully
    convinced that ‘all Scripture given by inspiration of God is
    profitable,’—that it came not at any time by the will of man,
    but was written as holy men were moved by the Holy Ghost, and
    was written for our learning, that we, through patience and
    comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope,—I could but regard
    the chronological portions of the Bible as being as much a
    portion of the word of God, and as much entitled to our serious
    consideration, as any other portion of the Scriptures.

    “‘I, therefore, felt that, in endeavoring to comprehend what
    God had in his mercy seen fit to reveal to us, I had no right
    to pass over the prophetic periods. I saw that, as the events
    predicted to be fulfilled in prophetic days had been extended
    over about as many literal years; as God, in Num. 14:34, and
    Eze. 4:4-6, had appointed each day for a year; as the seventy
    weeks to the Messiah were fulfilled in 490 years, and the 1260
    prophetic days of the papal supremacy in 1260 years; and as
    these prophetical days extending to the advent were given in
    connection with symbolic prophecy, I could only regard the
    time as symbolical, and as standing each day for a year, in
    accordance with the opinions of all the standard Protestant
    commentators. If, then, we could obtain any clue to the time
    of their commencement, I conceived we should be guided to
    the probable time of their termination, and, as God would
    not bestow upon us a useless revelation, I regarded them as
    conducting us to the time when we might confidently look for
    the coming of the Chiefest of ten thousand, One altogether
    lovely.

    “‘From a further study of the Scriptures, I concluded that
    the seven times of Gentile supremacy must commence when the
    Jews ceased to be an independent nation, at the captivity of
    Manasseh, which the best chronologers assigned to B. C. 677;
    that the 2300 days commenced with the seventy weeks, which the
    best chronologers dated from B. C. 457; and that the 1335 days,
    commencing with the taking away of the daily, and the setting
    up of the abomination that maketh desolate, Dan. 12:11, were
    to be dated from the setting up of the papal supremacy, after
    the taking away of pagan abominations, and which, according
    to the best historians I could consult, should be dated from
    about A. D. 508. Reckoning all these prophetic periods from the
    several dates assigned by the best chronologers for the events
    from which they should evidently be reckoned, they would all
    terminate together, about A. D. 1843.

    “‘I was thus brought, in 1818, at the close of my two years’
    study of the Scriptures, to the solemn conclusion that in about
    twenty-five years from that time all the affairs of our present
    state would be wound up; that all its pride and power, pomp and
    vanity, wickedness and oppression, would come to an end; and
    that, in the place of the kingdoms of this world, the peaceful
    and long-desired kingdom of the Messiah would be established
    under the whole heaven; that, in about twenty-five years, the
    glory of the Lord would be revealed, and all flesh see it
    together—the desert bud and blossom as the rose, the fir-tree
    come up instead of the thorn, and, instead of the briar, the
    myrtle-tree—the curse be removed from off the earth, death be
    destroyed, reward be given to the servants of God, the prophets
    and saints, and them who fear his name, and those be destroyed
    that destroy the earth.

    “‘I need not speak of the joy that filled my heart in view of
    the delightful prospect, nor of the ardent longings of my soul
    for a participation in the joys of the redeemed. The Bible was
    now to me a new book. It was indeed a feast of reason; all that
    was dark, mystical or obscure, to me, in its teachings, had
    been dissipated from my mind before the clear light that now
    dawned from its sacred pages; and oh, how bright and glorious
    the truth appeared!

    “‘All the contradictions and inconsistencies I had before found
    in the word were gone; and, although there were many portions
    of which I was not satisfied I had a full understanding, yet
    so much light had emanated from it to the illumination of my
    before darkened mind, that I felt a delight in studying the
    Scriptures which I had not before supposed could be derived
    from its teachings. I commenced their study with no expectation
    of finding the time of the Saviour’s coming, and I could at
    first hardly believe the result to which I had arrived; but
    the evidence struck me with such force that I could not resist
    my convictions. I became nearly settled in my conclusions, and
    began to wait, and watch, and pray for my Saviour’s coming.

“The above are the conclusions to which he arrived on the general
subject of prophecy; but his views on other scriptural topics may not
be uninteresting in this connection. His general theological opinions
may be inferred from his connecting himself with a Calvinistic Baptist
church, as the one most congenial to his faith. But he has left, among
his papers, an unfinished compendium of his belief, which bears date, and
is appended to the annexed certificate, as follows:—

                                       “‘LOW HAMPTON, SEPT. 5, 1822.

    “‘I hereby acknowledge that I have long believed it my duty
    ... to leave, for the inspection of my brethren, friends and
    children, a brief statement of my faith (and which ought to be
    my practice); and I pray God to forgive me where I go astray.
    I made it a subject of prayer and meditation, and, therefore,
    leave the following as my faith,—reserving the privilege of
    correction.

                                             “‘(Signed,) WM. MILLER.

    “‘ARTICLE ONE.

    “‘I believe the Bible is given by God to man, as a rule for our
    practice, and a guide to our faith—that it is a revelation of
    God to man.

    “‘ARTICLE TWO.

    “‘I believe in one living and true God, and that there are
    three persons in the Godhead—as there is in man, the body,
    soul, and spirit. And if any one will tell me how these exist,
    I will tell him how the three persons of the Triune God are
    connected.

    “‘ARTICLE THREE.

    “‘I believe that God, by his Son, created man in the image of
    the Triune God, with a body, soul, and spirit; and that he
    was created a moral agent, capable of living, of obeying, or
    transgressing the laws of his Maker.

    “‘ARTICLE FOUR.

    “‘I believe that man, being tempted by the enemy of all
    good, did transgress, and became polluted; from which act,
    sin entered into the world, and all mankind became naturally
    sinners, thrust out from the presence of God, and exposed to
    his just wrath forever.

    “‘ARTICLE FIVE.

    “‘I believe that God, knowing from eternity the use that
    man would make of his [free] agency, did, in his council of
    eternity, ordain that his Son should die; and that through his
    death salvation should be given to fallen man, through such
    means as God should appoint.

    “‘ARTICLE SIX.

    “‘I believe that, through the agency of the Holy Spirit,
    sinners are made the recipients of mercy, in conformity to the
    divine plan, founded on the wisdom and knowledge of God; the
    fruits of which are manifested in the recipient by works of
    repentance and faith; and without which no man, coming to years
    of discretion, and able to choose between good and evil, can
    have an interest in the blood and righteousness of Christ.

    “‘ARTICLE SEVEN.

    “‘I believe that Jesus Christ is an offering of God to sinners
    for their redemption from sin, and that those who believe in
    his name may take him by faith, go to God, and find mercy; and
    that such will in nowise be rejected.

    “‘ARTICLE EIGHT.

    “‘I believe that Jesus Christ was the sacrifice for sin which
    justice demanded; and that all those who confess their sins on
    the head of this victim may expect forgiveness of sin through
    the blood of the atonement, which is in Jesus Christ, the great
    High Priest in the holy of holies.

    “‘ARTICLE NINE.

    “‘I believe the atonement to be made by the intercession of
    Jesus Christ, and the sprinkling of his blood in the holy of
    holies, and upon the mercy-seat and people; by which means
    the offended is reconciled to the offender, the offender is
    brought into subjection to the will of God; and the effect is,
    forgiveness of sin, union to the divine person, and to the
    household of faith.

    “‘ARTICLE TEN.

    “‘I believe all those for whom Christ intercedes, who are
    united to God by a living faith, and have received the
    forgiveness of sin through the sprinkling of the blood of
    Christ, can never perish; but are kept by the mighty power of
    God through faith unto salvation.

    “‘ARTICLE ELEVEN.

    “‘I believe that all the promises of God are and will be
    accomplished in Christ Jesus; and that none of the human family
    are or can be entitled to the promises of grace, but those
    who are born of the Spirit in Christ Jesus, any more than the
    antediluvians could have been saved from the deluge without
    entering the ark.

    “‘ARTICLE TWELVE.

    “‘I believe that Christ will eventually take away the sin of
    the world, and cleanse the earth from all pollution, so that
    this earth will become the abode of the saints forever, by
    means which he has appointed; all believers being regenerated,
    sanctified, justified, and glorified.

    “‘ARTICLE THIRTEEN.

    “‘I believe that all final impenitents will be destroyed from
    the earth, and sent away into a place prepared for the devil
    and his angels.

    “‘ARTICLE FOURTEEN.

    “‘I believe Jesus Christ will come again in his glory and
    person to our earth, where he will accomplish his divine
    purposes in the saving of his people, destroying the wicked
    from the earth, and taking away the sin of the world.

    “‘ARTICLE FIFTEEN.

    “‘I believe that the second coming of Jesus Christ is near,
    even at the door, even within twenty-one years,—on or before
    1843.

    “‘ARTICLE SIXTEEN.

    “‘I believe that before Christ comes in his glory, all
    sectarian principles will be shaken, and the votaries of the
    several sects scattered to the four winds; and that none will
    be able to stand but those who are built on the word of God.

    “‘ARTICLE SEVENTEEN.

    “‘I believe in the resurrection, both of the just and of the
    unjust—the just, or believers, at Christ’s second coming, and
    the unjust one thousand years afterwards—when the judgment
    of each will take place in their order, at their several
    resurrections; when the just will receive everlasting life, and
    the unjust eternal condemnation.

    “‘ARTICLE EIGHTEEN.

    “‘I believe in the doctrine of election, founded on the will,
    purpose, and fore-knowledge of God; and that all the elect will
    be saved in the kingdom of God, through the sanctification of
    the Spirit and the belief of the truth.

    “‘ARTICLE NINETEEN.

    “‘I believe in the ordinance of baptism by immersion, as a
    representation of Christ’s burial and resurrection—also of our
    death to sin and life to holiness.

    “‘ARTICLE TWENTY.

    “‘I believe in the ordinance of the Lord’s supper, to be’⸺

“The last article was left thus incomplete, and the series of articles
was not extended, as it was evidently designed to have been, so as
to give an expression of his faith on subjects not included in the
foregoing. It is not known that his views, as above expressed, ever
underwent any change—excepting as his belief in the date of the second
advent was afterwards shown, by the passing of time, to be incorrect.”




CHAPTER III.

    INTERVAL BETWEEN HIS CONVERSION AND HIS PUBLIC
    LABORS—CORRESPONDENCE—DIALOGUE WITH A PHYSICIAN.


All truly great and good men who have been the honored instruments in the
hands of God of accomplishing good, and of leading his people in the way
of truth, have had wrought in them a deep experience in the things of the
Spirit of God. This being the case with William Miller, we are happy to
give in this chapter some of the important facts in his experience. His
biographer says:—

“From the time that Mr. Miller became established in his religious faith,
till he commenced his public labors—a period of twelve or fourteen
years—there were few prominent incidents in his life to distinguish him
from other men. He was a good citizen, a kind neighbor, an affectionate
husband and parent, and a devoted Christian; good to the poor, and
benevolent, as objects of charity were presented; in the Sunday-school,
was teacher and superintendent; in the church he performed important
service as a reader and exhorter, and, in the support of religious
worship, no other member, perhaps, did as much as he.

“He was very exemplary in his life and conversation, endeavored at all
times to perform the duties, whether public or private, which devolved
on him, and whatever he did was done cheerfully, as for the glory of
God. His leisure hours were devoted to reading and meditation; he
kept himself well informed respecting the current events of the time;
occasionally communicated his thoughts through the press, and often, for
his own private amusement, or for the entertainment of friends, indulged
in various poetical effusions, which, for unstudied productions, are
possessed of some merit; but his principal enjoyment was derived from the
study of the Bible. His state of mind at this time can be better given in
his own language.

    “‘With the solemn conviction,’ writes Mr. Miller, ‘that such
    momentous events were predicted in the Scriptures, to be
    fulfilled in so short a space of time, the question came home
    to me with mighty power regarding my duty to the world, in
    view of the evidence that had affected my own mind. If the
    end was so near, it was important that the world should know
    it. I supposed that it would call forth the opposition of the
    ungodly; but it never came into my mind that any Christian
    would oppose it. I supposed that all such would be so rejoiced,
    in view of the glorious prospect, that it would only be
    necessary to present it, for them to receive it. My great fear
    was that in their joy at the hope of a glorious inheritance
    so soon to be revealed, they would receive the doctrine
    without sufficiently examining the Scriptures in demonstration
    of its truth. I therefore feared to present it, lest, by
    some possibility, I should be in error, and be the means of
    misleading any.

    “‘Various difficulties and objections would arise in my mind
    from time to time; certain texts would occur to me which seemed
    to weigh against my conclusions; and I would not present a view
    to others, while any difficulty appeared to militate against
    it. I therefore continued the study of the Bible, to see if I
    could sustain any of these objections. My object was not merely
    to remove them, but I wished to see if they were valid.

    “‘Sometimes, when at work, a text would arise like this:
    “Of that day and hour knoweth no man,” &c.; and how, then,
    could the Bible reveal the time of the advent? I would then
    immediately examine the context in which it was found, and I
    saw at once that, in the same connection, we are informed how
    we may know when it is nigh, even at the doors; consequently,
    that text could not teach that we could know nothing of the
    time of that event. Other texts, which are advanced in support
    of the doctrine of a temporal millennium, would arise; but on
    examining their context, I invariably found that they were
    applicable only to the eternal state, or were so illustrative
    of the spread of the gospel here as to be entirely irrelevant
    to the position they were adduced to support.

    “‘Thus all those passages that speak of the will of God being
    done on earth as in Heaven, of the earth being full of the
    knowledge of the glory of God, &c., could not be applicable to
    a time when the man of sin was prevailing against the saints,
    or when the righteous and wicked were dwelling together, which
    is to be the case until the end of the world. Those who speak
    of the gospel being preached in all the world, teach that, as
    soon as it should be thus preached, the end was to come; so
    that it could not be delayed a thousand years from that time,
    nor long enough for the world’s conversion after the preaching
    of the gospel as a witness.

    “‘The question of the resurrection and judgment was, for a
    time, an obstacle in the way. Being instructed that all the
    dead would be raised at the same time, I supposed it must
    be so taught in the Bible; but I soon saw it was one of the
    traditions of the elders.

    “‘So, also, with the return of the Jews. That question I saw
    could only be sustained by denying the positive declarations
    of the New Testament, which assert: “There is no difference
    between the Jew and the Greek;” that the promise that he
    shall be the heir of the world was not to Abraham and his
    seed through the law, but through the righteousness of faith;
    that “there is neither Jew nor Greek, bond nor free, male nor
    female;” but that “if ye are Christ’s then are ye Abraham’s
    seed, and heirs according to the promise.” I was, therefore,
    obliged to discard an objection which asserts there is a
    difference between the Jew and Greek; that the children of the
    flesh _are_ accounted for the seed, &c.

    “‘In this way I was occupied for five years—from 1818 to
    1823—in weighing the various objections which were being
    presented to my mind. During that time, more objections arose
    in my mind than have been advanced by my opponents since;
    and I know of no objection that has been since advanced which
    did not then occur to me. But, however strong they at first
    appeared, after examining them in the light of the divine
    word, I could only compare them to straws, laid down singly as
    obstacles on a well-beaten road; the car of truth rolled over
    them, unimpeded in its progress.

    “‘I was then fully settled in the conclusions which seven
    years previously had begun to bear with such impressive force
    upon my mind; and the duty of presenting the evidence of the
    nearness of the advent to others—which I had managed to evade
    while I could find the shadow of an objection remaining against
    its truth—again came home to me with great force. I had,
    previously, only thrown out occasional hints of my views. I
    then began to speak more clearly my opinions to my neighbors,
    to ministers, and others. To my astonishment, I found very few
    who listened with any interest. Occasionally, one would see the
    force of the evidence; but the great majority passed it by as
    an idle tale. I was, therefore, disappointed in finding any who
    would declare this doctrine, as I felt it should be, for the
    comfort of saints, and as a warning to sinners.’

“His correspondence during this period shows ardent longings for the
salvation of his relatives and friends. In a letter to a sister, dated
June 25, 1825, after writing on various subjects of family interest, he
says:—

    “‘DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER:—All the news that we had to tell
    having been told above, I will now add a few lines; and oh! may
    they be directed by Infinite Wisdom? What are your prospects
    for eternity? Is there a land of eternal rest, beyond the
    confines of this world, in prospect? Do you believe that the
    blood of the everlasting covenant can and will cleanse you
    from all sin? Are you satisfied with your present evidence of
    an interest in that blood? That we shall die, is certain; and
    due preparation for a better world is wisdom; and we ought as
    rational beings to make ourselves familiar with the road and
    acquainted with the inhabitants of said country. O my soul! go
    thou to the mansions of the dead, and learn there the end of
    all living.

    “‘That we ought to be cleansed from all sin, in order to be
    happy, is certain; for sin constitutes all misery; and a person
    living in the enjoyment (falsely so called) of sin cannot enter
    into rest. How necessary, then, is the work of regeneration
    and sanctification! And may we obtain that evidence which
    will enable us, with Thomas, to say, “My Lord and my God!”
    Redemption is the work of God. How proper, then, that Jesus
    should be called the Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel!
    Redemption is from sin. How improper, then, that we should live
    any longer therein! We ought as much to strive to attain to
    perfection as if it was attainable here below.

        “Lord, I believe thy heavenly word;
          Fain would I have my soul renewed.
        I mourn for sin, and trust the Lord
          To have it pardoned and subdued.

        “My King, my Saviour, and my God,
          Let grace my sinful soul renew;
        Wash my offenses with thy blood,
          And make my heart sincere and true.

        “Oh! may thy grace its power display!
          Let guilt and death no longer reign;
        Save me in thine appointed way,
          Nor let my humble faith be vain.

        “Ye favored lands, who have his word,
          Ye saints, who feel its saving power,
        Unite your tongues to praise the Lord,
          And his distinguished grace adore.”

    “‘P. S. June 30.—I have this day been to Whitehall, to see the
    celebrated Marquis de Lafayette, that made such a conspicuous
    figure, half a century ago, in our Revolution. He is a
    pleasant-looking old man, a friend to freemen, a terror to
    tyrants, and one that has spent his treasures, his blood, and
    the best part of his life, in the cause of freedom and the
    rights of man. He has suffered much; yet he retains a good
    constitution. He goes a little lame, occasioned by wounds
    he received in the Revolution. He deserves the thanks of
    Americans, and he has received a general burst of gratitude
    from Maine to the Mississippi. He has visited every State in
    the Union and almost every important town. I had the pleasure
    of dining with him; and after dinner he took a passage for New
    York.

                             “‘Yours, &c.,

                                                        WM. MILLER.’

“That Mr. M. was one of the men prominent in his section of the country,
is shown by his mingling with them, as above, on the various public
occasions.

“He derived such pleasure from the study of the Bible that it was almost
his constant companion; and a portion of each day was devoted to its
private perusal. He loved to meditate on its teachings and to talk about
its promises.

“In the winter of 1828, the church in Low Hampton, of which Mr. Miller
was a member, was refreshed by an outpouring of the Holy Spirit. In a
letter, dated March 12, written to Elder Hendryx, to whom reference has
before been made, Mr. Miller says: ‘One young man came to my house last
night after nine o’clock, to request prayers. He said he had been eight
years under conviction, and appeared to be almost in despair. I thought I
could say to him, as did John the Baptist to his disciples: “Behold the
Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of the world!” Twelve or fourteen
requested prayers last Sunday evening. It is really the work of the
Lord. I never lived in a reformation so general, so solemn, and with so
little noise. Surely, we have reason to rejoice and be glad. The Lord has
remembered the low state of his people, and hath come down to deliver.
Two of my children, William and Bellona, as I have a good degree of hope,
are subjects of grace. Pray for us.’

“In the same letter he makes mention of trials, as well as blessings.
He says: ‘On Saturday, the first day of March, our meeting-house was
consumed by fire. We should have almost despaired of ever building again,
had not the Lord visited us by his grace, and likewise opened the hearts
of our Christian friends from abroad. $400 have been subscribed from the
adjoining towns. There is now some prospect that we shall build. You know
we are weak in numbers. We are really so in resources. I must bend my
whole force to gain the above-mentioned object.’

“Mr. Miller succeeded in the accomplishment of his wishes, according to
his ability and known liberality.

“He continued to make the Bible his daily study, and became more and
more convinced that he had a personal duty to perform respecting what
he conceived the Bible to teach of the nearness of the advent. These
impressions he thus describes:—

    “‘When I was about my business, it was continually ringing
    in my ears, Go and tell the world of their danger. This text
    was constantly occurring to me: “When I say unto the wicked,
    O wicked man, thou shalt surely die; if thou dost not speak
    to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die
    in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thy hand.
    Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn
    from it; if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in
    his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.” Eze. 33:8,
    9. I felt that, if the wicked could be effectually warned,
    multitudes of them would repent; and that, if they were not
    warned, their blood might be required at my hand.

    “‘I did all I could to avoid the conviction that anything was
    required of me; and I thought that by freely speaking of it to
    all, I should perform my duty, and that God would raise up the
    necessary instrumentality for the accomplishment of the work.
    I prayed that some minister might see the truth, and devote
    himself to its promulgation; but still it was impressed upon
    me, Go and tell it to the world; their blood will I require at
    thy hand. The more I presented it in conversation, the more
    dissatisfied I felt with myself for withholding it from the
    public. I tried to excuse myself to the Lord for not going
    out and proclaiming it to the world. I told the Lord that I
    was not used to public speaking; that I had not the necessary
    qualifications to gain the attention of an audience; that I
    was very diffident, and feared to go before the world; that
    they would “not believe me nor hearken to my voice;” that I
    was “slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.” But I could get no
    relief.’

“In this way he struggled on for nine years longer, pursuing the study
of the Bible, doing all he could to present the nearness of Christ’s
coming to those whom circumstances threw in his way; but resisting his
impressions of duty to go out as a public teacher. He was then fifty
years old, and it seemed impossible for him to surmount the obstacles
which lay in his path, to successfully present it in a public manner.

“His freedom to converse on the subject, and the ability with which he
was able to defend his own views, and oppose those differing from him,
had given him no little celebrity in his denomination in all that region;
and some were rather shy in approaching him. Elder T. Hendryx, a Baptist
clergyman, now in the State of Pennsylvania, who has kindly furnished the
biographer with many original letters from Mr. Miller, thus speaks of his
first acquaintance with him:—

    “‘My first acquaintance with Bro. Miller was in the summer
    of 1831. I had been requested to visit the Baptist church
    in Hampton, and concluded to go. When about to start, I was
    informed by a brother in the church of which I was a member, in
    Salem, N. Y., that there was a brother in the Hampton church,
    possessing considerable influence, who had many curious notions
    on doctrinal points, and on the prophecies—particularly on
    the latter; and also (to use the brother’s language) that he
    was “hard on ministers who differed with him.” Having recently
    commenced preaching, without much confidence in my own ability,
    and not having made any engagement to the church, I at first
    almost concluded not to go. On further reflection, I decided to
    go, and put my trust in Him who had said, “Lo, I am with you
    alway.” On my way I endeavored, by prayer and meditation, to
    divest myself of all prejudice against his peculiar notions,
    whatever they might be (for as yet I was ignorant of them), and
    at the same time to fortify myself against being led into error
    by him.

    “‘I arrived at Bro. Miller’s on the 6th of July, 1831. You may
    well suppose that my situation was not very enviable. I moved
    tremblingly and with the utmost caution. In spite of me, I
    could not act like myself; and it was not till I had been there
    nearly a week, and preached several discourses, that I could
    feel at home, or enjoy my wonted freedom in preaching the word.
    Several other ministering brethren visited at Bro. M.’s during
    my stay there, and I found that I was not altogether alone
    in those feelings. But how perfectly groundless those fears!
    Instead of pouncing upon my errors like the tiger, no brother
    ever dealt with me more tenderly, or exhibited a better spirit
    in presenting his views.

    “‘After being with Bro. M. some time, he asked me my views on
    the millennium. Having thrown off all reserve, I readily gave
    them. I had embraced the old view—the world’s conversion a
    thousand years before the advent; and answered him accordingly.
    His reply was: “Well, Bro. H., prove it! You know I want the
    Bible for all that I receive.” “Well,” said I; and, taking my
    Bible, I turned to the 20th of Revelation, and was about to
    read, when I thought I would examine it again, and with very
    close attention. I was in a deep study. Bro. M. was waiting,
    and watching me closely. He began to smile. “Why don’t you
    read, Bro. H.?” said he. I was astonished; for I could not make
    it out. At last I said: “I go home next Monday. I will draw
    the passages off, and hand them to you when I return.” I took
    some four days for it, and gave him a long list of passages.
    He read them, and said: “Bro. H., what has become of your old
    theory? This is mine.” “Well,” said I, “it is mine, too.” In my
    examination, _my_ theory had been overturned, and I came out
    where I now stand.

    “‘One thing I observed in Bro. M.’s character; If he ever dealt
    harshly with a brother for holding an error, it was because he
    saw, or thought he saw, a spirit of self-importance in him.’

“The labors of Elder Hendryx were attended with a blessing, as appears
from a letter of Mr. Miller’s to him, dated August 9, 1831. In it he
says:—

    “‘The Lord is pouring out his Spirit among us, but not in
    so powerful a manner as I could wish. Baptism has been
    administered every Sabbath but one since you were here. Two or
    three have obtained hope every week.’

“As Mr. Miller’s opinions respecting the nearness and nature of the
millennium became known, they naturally elicited a good deal of comment
among his friends and neighbors, and also among those at a distance.
Some of their remarks, not the most complimentary to his sanity, would
occasionally be repeated to him.

“Having heard that a physician in his neighborhood had said ‘Esquire
Miller,’ as he was familiarly called, ‘was a fine man and a good
neighbor, but was a monomaniac on the subject of the advent,’ Mr. M. was
humorously inclined to let him prescribe for his case.

“One of his children being sick one day, he sent for the doctor, who,
after prescribing for the child, noticed that Mr. Miller was very mute in
one corner, and asked what ailed him.

“‘Well, I hardly know, doctor. I want you to see what does, and prescribe
for me.’

“The doctor felt of his pulse, &c., and could not decide respecting his
malady; and inquired what he supposed was his complaint.

“‘Well,’ said Mr. Miller, ‘I don’t know but I am a monomaniac; and I want
you to examine me, and see if I am; and if so, cure me. Can you tell when
a man is a monomaniac?’

“The doctor blushed, and said he thought he could.

“Mr. Miller wished to know how.

“‘Why,’ said the doctor, ‘a monomaniac is rational on all subjects but
one; and when you touch that particular subject, he will become raving.’

“‘Well,’ said Mr. Miller, ‘I insist upon it that you see whether I am in
reality a monomaniac; and if I am, you shall prescribe for and cure me.
You shall, therefore, sit down with me two hours, while I present the
subject of the advent to you, and, if I am a monomaniac, by that time you
will discover it.’

“The doctor was somewhat disconcerted; but Mr. Miller insisted, and told
him, as it was to present the state of his mind, he might charge for his
time as in regular practice.

“The doctor finally consented; and, at Mr. Miller’s request, opened the
Bible and read from the 8th of Daniel. As he read along, Mr. Miller
inquired what the ram denoted, with the other symbols presented. The
doctor had read Newton, and applied them to Persia, Greece, and Rome, as
Mr. Miller did.

“Mr. Miller then inquired how long the vision of those empires was to be.

“‘2300 days.’

“‘What!’ said Mr. Miller, ‘could those great empires cover only 2300
literal days?’

“‘Why,’ said the doctor, ‘those days are years, according to all
commentators; and those kingdoms are to continue 2300 years.’

“Mr. M. then asked him to turn to the 2d of Daniel, and to the 7th; all
of which he explained the same as Mr. Miller. He was then asked if he
knew when the 2300 days would end. He did not know, as he could not tell
when they commenced.

“Mr. Miller told him to read the 9th of Daniel. He read down till he came
to the 21st verse, when Daniel saw ‘the man Gabriel,’ whom he had ‘seen
in the vision.’

“‘In what vision?’ Mr. Miller inquired.

“‘Why,’ said the doctor, ‘in the vision of the 8th of Daniel.’

“‘Wherefore, understand the matter and consider the vision.’ He had now
come, then, to make him understand that vision, had he?”

“‘Yes,’ said the doctor.

“‘Well, seventy weeks are determined; what are these seventy weeks a part
of?’

“‘Of the 2300 days.’

“‘Then do they begin with the 2300 days?’

“‘Yes,’ said the doctor.

“‘When did they end?’

“‘In A. D. 33.’

“‘Then how far would the 2300 extend after 33?”

“The doctor subtracted 490 from 2300, and replied, 1810. ‘Why,’ said he,
‘that is past.’

“‘But,’ said Mr. Miller, ‘there were 1810 from 33; in what year would
that come?’

“The doctor saw at once that the 33 should be added, and set down 33 and
1810, and, adding them, replied, 1843.

“At this unexpected result the doctor settled back in his chair and
colored; but immediately took his hat and left the house in a rage.

“The next day he again called on Mr. Miller, and looked as though he had
been in the greatest mental agony.

“‘Why, Mr. Miller,’ said he, ‘I am going to hell. I have not slept a wink
since I was here yesterday. I have looked at the question in every light,
and the vision must terminate about A. D. 1843; and I am unprepared, and
must go to hell.’

“Mr. Miller calmed him, and pointed him to the ark of safety; and in
about a week, calling each day on Mr. M., he found peace to his soul,
and went on his way rejoicing, as _great a monomaniac_ as Mr. Miller. He
afterward acknowledged that, till he made the figures 1843, he had no
idea of the result to which he was coming.




CHAPTER IV.

    COMMENCEMENT OF PUBLIC LABORS—PUBLISHES HIS VIEWS IN
    PAMPHLET—INTERVIEW ON THE HUDSON RIVER BOAT—HIS REGARD FOR THE
    BIBLE—CORRESPONDENCE—BECOMES A LICENSED PREACHER—LETTER ON
    UNIVERSALISM—RECORD OF HIS LABORS.


“The public labors of Mr. Miller, according to the best evidence to be
obtained, date from the autumn of 1831. He had continued to be much
distressed respecting his duty to ‘go and tell it to the world,’ which
was constantly impressed on his mind. One Saturday, after breakfast, he
sat down at his desk to examine some point, and, as he arose to go out to
work, it came home to him with more force than ever, ‘Go and tell it to
the world.’ He thus writes:—

    “‘The impression was so sudden, and came with such force, that
    I settled down into my chair, saying, I can’t go, Lord. Why
    not? seemed to be the response; and then all my excuses came
    up—my want of ability, &c.; but my distress became so great, I
    entered into a solemn covenant with God, that if he would open
    the way, I would go and perform my duty to the world. What do
    you mean by opening the way? seemed to come to me. Why, said I,
    if I should have an invitation to speak publicly in any place I
    will go and tell them what I find in the Bible about the Lord’s
    coming. Instantly, all my burden was gone, and I rejoiced that
    I should not probably be thus called upon; for I had never had
    such an invitation. My trials were not known, and I had but
    little expectation of being invited to any field of labor.

    “‘In about half an hour from this time, before I had left the
    room, a son of Mr. Guilford, of Dresden, about sixteen miles
    from my residence, came in, and said that his father had sent
    for me, and wished me to go home with him. Supposing that he
    wished to see me on some business, I asked him what he wanted.
    He replied that there was to be no preaching in their church
    the next day, and his father wished to have me come and talk
    to the people on the subject of the Lord’s coming. I was
    immediately angry with myself for having made the covenant I
    had; I rebelled at once against the Lord, and determined not to
    go. I left the boy, without giving him any answer, and retired
    in great distress to a grove near by. There I struggled with
    the Lord about an hour, endeavoring to release myself from
    the covenant I had made with him; but I could get no relief.
    It was impressed upon my conscience, Will you make a covenant
    with God, and break it so soon? and the exceeding sinfulness of
    thus doing overwhelmed me. I finally submitted, and promised
    the Lord that, if he would sustain me, I would go, trusting
    in him to give me grace and ability to perform all he should
    require of me. I returned to the house, and found the boy still
    waiting. He remained till after dinner, and I returned with him
    to Dresden.

    “‘The next day, which, as nearly as I can remember, was about
    the first Sabbath in August, 1831, I delivered my first public
    lecture on the second advent. The house was well filled with
    an attentive audience. As soon as I commenced speaking,
    all my diffidence and embarrassment were gone, and I felt
    impressed only with the greatness of the subject, which, by
    the providence of God, I was enabled to present. At the close
    of the services on the Sabbath, I was requested to remain and
    lecture during the week, with which request I complied. They
    flocked in from the neighboring towns; a revival commenced, and
    it was said that in thirteen families all but two persons were
    hopefully converted.

    “‘On the Monday following, I returned home, and found a letter
    from Eld. Fuller, of Poultney, Vt., requesting me to go and
    lecture there on the same subject. They had not heard of my
    going to Dresden. I went to Poultney, and lectured there with
    similar effect.

    “‘From thence I went by invitation to Pawlet, and other towns
    in that vicinity. The churches of Congregationalists, Baptists,
    and Methodists, were thrown open. In almost every place I
    visited, my labors resulted in the reclaiming of backsliders,
    and the conversion of sinners. I was usually invited to fields
    of labor by the ministers of the several congregations whom
    I visited, who gave me their countenance; and I have never
    labored in any place to which I was not previously invited. The
    most pressing invitations from the ministry and the leading
    members of the churches poured in continually from that time,
    during the whole period of my public labors, and with more than
    one-half of which I was unable to comply. Churches were thrown
    open everywhere, and I lectured, to crowded houses, through the
    western part of Vermont, the northern part of New York, and in
    Canada East; and powerful reformations were the result of my
    labor.’

“Soon after he began to lecture on the subject, Mr. Miller began to
be importuned to write out and publish his view. In a letter to Elder
Hendryx, dated January 25, 1832, he says:—

    “‘I have written a few numbers on the coming of Christ and the
    final destruction of the beast, when his body shall be given to
    the burning flame. They may appear in the Vermont _Telegraph_;
    if not, in pamphlet form. They are written in letters to Elder
    Smith of, Poultney, and he has liberty to publish.’

“On the same occasion, he adds: ‘I am more and more astonished at the
harmony and strength of the word of God; and the more I read, the more I
see of the folly of the infidel in rejecting this word.’

“The articles referred to were sent as anonymous to the editor of the
_Telegraph_, who declined their publication unless informed of the name
of the writer. This being communicated to him, they appeared, in a series
of sixteen articles, over the initials of W. M. The first article was
published in the paper of May 15, 1832, and they caused much conversation
and discussion.

“Soon after this, he addressed another letter to Elder Hendryx, which
is so quaintly written, contains so much of general interest, and is so
illustrative of his habits of thought and modes of expression, that it is
here given:—

                                          “‘HAMPTON, MARCH 26, 1832.

    “‘DEAR BRO. HENDRYX:—I received your favor of the 19th inst.
    day before yesterday, and should have begun to answer it then,
    but, on coming home, I found Bro. D. at my house, a licentiate
    from Hamilton, who came on purpose to learn these strange
    notions of “crazy Miller,” or at least to save Bro. Miller,
    if possible, from going down to the grave with such an error.
    He was a stranger to me; but, after he introduced himself, we
    went to work, night and day, and he has just left me,—Monday,
    3 o’clock P. M. He has got his load, and, as he says, he never
    was so loaded before.

    “‘You may say this is boasting. No, no, Bro. Hendryx, you
    know better. I only made him read the Bible, and I held the
    concordance. No praise to me; give God the glory. At any rate,
    he will find it hard to resist the truth. He wants me to let
    him come and board with me, two or three months, to study the
    Bible. He is a young man, of brilliant talents; he preached two
    sermons here yesterday, and they were very well done. I have
    somebody to labor with almost daily. I have been into Poultney,
    and some other places, to lecture on the coming of Christ;
    and, in every instance, I have had large assemblies. There is
    increasing anxiety on the subject in this quarter; but they
    will see greater signs of these times soon, so that Christians
    will believe in his coming and kingdom. The harvest is about
    closing up, and the wrath of God is about to be poured upon our
    world. Pestilence, sword, and famine, will succeed each other
    in swift succession, and the kingdoms of this world will soon
    be destroyed by the “stone cut out of the mountain without
    hands.” Yes, brother, it will soon be over when sinners can be
    converted. I would, therefore, advise you to lead your hearers
    by slow and sure steps to Jesus Christ.

    “‘I say _slow_, because I expect all are not strong enough
    to run yet; and _sure_, because the Bible is a sure word;
    and where your hearers are not well indoctrinated, you must
    preach _Bible_; you must prove all things by _Bible_; you must
    talk _Bible_; you must exhort _Bible_; you must pray _Bible_;
    and love _Bible_; and do all in your power to make others
    love _Bible_, too. One great means to do good is to make your
    parishioners sensible that you are in earnest, and fully and
    solemnly believe what you preach. If you wish your people to
    feel, feel yourself. If you wish them to believe as you do,
    show them, by your constant assiduity in teaching, that you
    sincerely wish it. You can do more good by the fireside, and in
    your conference circles, than in the pulpit. Pulpit preaching
    is, and has long been, considered as no more than a trade.
    “Why, he is hired to preach!—he must, of course, tell a good
    story,” &c., &c. And the very reason why there is more good
    done in conference meetings and protracted meetings is simply
    this: The god of this world is shut out. They will say, He
    expects nothing for this; surely our salvation is his anxious
    desire. Reflections of this sort make strong impressions of
    conviction on the mind. If this man of God will make so much
    sacrifice, surely I ought to think, at least, how much my
    brother has my benefit in view in his preaching....

    “‘_May 20, 1832._ It is now almost two months since I began
    this letter, and I ought to make some apology for my long
    neglect. But I hate apologies; for we never tell the whole
    truth. You have, undoubtedly, seen, or will see, two numbers
    in the _Telegraph_ before you receive this letter. A number
    more will soon follow. I expect it will start some queries, if
    nothing more. There is much opposition expressed by some who
    ought to have taught the same things. But people will think
    and reflect; and truth will in the end prevail. Do come, on the
    13th and 14th of June, to our Association. I expect Bro. Sawyer
    will be ordained then. _Do come._ I have much to say to you;
    but I cannot write as I wish....

    “‘I have just come from a prayer-meeting this morning, at our
    school-house, at sunrise. We are praying for the second coming
    of our dear Redeemer, when the “sanctuary will be cleansed.”
    Pray with us, my brother. I am more and more satisfied that the
    end of the world is at hand. The evidence flows in from every
    quarter. “The earth is reeling to and fro, like a drunkard.”
    One short year ago, and Zion was rejoicing with her multiplied
    converts; now she is down “by the cold streams of Babylon.” One
    year since, and we were enjoying a plentiful harvest; now we
    are sleeping in the cold, and the staff of life is neglected.
    Is the harvest over and past? If so, soon, very soon, God will
    arise in his anger, and the vine of the earth will be reaped.
    See, see!—the angel with his sharp sickle is about to take the
    field! See yonder trembling victim fall before his pestilential
    breath! High and low, rich and poor, trembling and falling
    before the appalling grave, the dreadful cholera.

    “‘Hark!—hear those dreadful bellowings of the angry nations! It
    is the presage of horrid and terrific war. Look!—look again!
    See crowns, and kings, and kingdoms tumbling to the dust! See
    lords and nobles, captains and mighty men, all arming for the
    bloody, demon fight! See the carnivorous fowls fly screaming
    through the air! See—see these signs! Behold, the heavens grow
    black with clouds; the sun has veiled himself; the moon, pale
    and forsaken, hangs in middle air; the hail descends; the seven
    thunders utter loud their voices; the lightnings send their
    vivid gleams of sulphurous flame abroad; and the great city
    of the nations falls to rise no more forever and forever! At
    this dread moment, look! look!—O, look and see! What means
    that ray of light? The clouds have burst asunder; the heavens
    appear; the great white throne is in sight! Amazement fills
    the universe with awe! He comes!—he comes! Behold, the Saviour
    comes! Lift up your heads, ye saints,—he comes!—he comes!—he
    comes!

                                                      “‘WM. MILLER.’

“A letter written about the same time with the above, to a sister of Mr.
Miller’s whose husband was a Universalist, is particularly severe on
those sentiments. Beginning with subjects of mere family interest, he
proceeds to those of a religious; and, in speaking of the nearness of the
advent, he says:—

    “‘I now tell you that I am more and more convinced of its
    truth. I have lectured on it, in a number of places this
    winter, and many people believe that the calculation is right.
    Some are afraid of it, and others will not believe; but among
    them all it makes a great deal of talk. Some say Esq. Miller
    is crazy; others, that he is a fool—and neither of them are
    wide from the truth. But Bro. J. and sister A. will say, “We
    wish Bro. William would let that subject alone. We do not want
    to hear so much about Christ’s second coming, the end of the
    world, the judgment-day, and the destruction of the wicked. He
    knows no more about it than the man in the moon.” So say I. But
    the Bible tells us; and that will never fail. You will see,
    within a few weeks, some numbers in the _Vermont Telegraph_,
    signed W. M. Read, and then judge. If it is not printed in the
    paper, I will send it to you in pamphlet form. I think it will
    be printed, at any rate.

    “‘I want to know if J⸺ is a Universalist yet; and, if so,
    whether he can tell me who are the partakers of the second
    death, and what the second death is? You will find the
    description of them in Rev. 20th chapter, and 21:8. Be sure you
    are not deceived, Bro. J.; for the time is shortly coming that
    will try every man’s work, whether it be good or evil; and if
    you love the Lord Jesus, show your love by believing his word,
    and being reconciled to his word and will. How little love to
    Christ do we show when we are unreconciled to his justice,
    his word, or the righteous judgment of God on the finally
    impenitent! Yes, brother; it is not contrary to the carnal
    mind of man to be happy, _if_ we can be happy in our own way.
    Neither should we be very angry with God, if he made all others
    so, if we thought that was the _only_ hope for us. But if the
    Universalists could contrive any plan that would be plausible,
    to save themselves and condemn the Calvinists, or those who
    preach endless misery, their actions show that they would do
    it quickly; or why do they rail at those who preach as Christ
    did? “Except a man is born again he cannot see the kingdom of
    God.” “And these shall go away into everlasting punishment.”
    Why do they oppose those meetings where souls are brought to
    cry out, as in the days of the apostles, “Men and brethren,
    what shall we do to be saved?” Did you ever hear such a cry in
    a Universalist meeting—where brethren and sisters were all
    together in prayer, with one accord praying and agonizing for
    the souls of their brethren according to the flesh? No!

    “‘Do you think they are fools, brother William? You know they
    do not believe in damnation. They preach _all men_ will be
    saved.’ ‘Ah, ha! What fools the apostles were! If they had
    preached thus they would have saved many a bitter cry; and
    Father Paul might have saved himself many a bitter groan in
    endeavoring to save his kinsmen according to the flesh, and not
    have wished himself accursed from Christ for their sakes. I
    really wish—if it is true that all men will be saved—that Paul
    had known it before he made that expression, that he might save
    “_some_,” when he might have said that he had the promise of
    God that “_all_” would be saved. Paul must have been as crazy
    as Bro. William. Oh, how many long arguments it would have
    saved, how many twistings of texts, and windings and turnings,
    if Paul, Peter, John, Matthew, Mark, Luke, Jude, and even
    Christ, had not said anything about two classes of mankind in a
    future state, and nothing about punishment being everlasting!
    But the Universalist is wiser than all these, now-a-days; for
    they do not preach so now, do they J⸺?

                                                         WM. MILLER.

    “‘_March 27, 1832._’

“During the summer of 1832, Mr. Miller appears to have been much engaged
in attending protracted meetings, which were at that time very common
in many parts of the country. Under date of ‘Hampton, Oct. 1, 1832,’ he
wrote to Elder Hendryx:—

    “‘... When your letter arrived, I was attending a protracted
    meeting in Westport; and the next day after I got home I went
    to Poultney to attend one there. I went to Keesville to attend
    one as soon as we left Poultney, and only arrived home last
    Saturday.... I have spent a great share of my time in attending
    protracted meetings this summer and fall.’

“In the same letter he thus exhibits his fondness for the Bible, and
points out the great doctrines which he believed it inculcated:—

    “‘I want to see you more than ever, and when we have less
    company. The light is continually breaking in; and I am
    more and more confirmed in those things of which I told
    you, namely, redemption by grace; the efficacy of Christ’s
    blood; justification by his righteousness imputed to us;
    sanctification through the operation of the divine Spirit;
    and the glorification by our gathering together unto him at
    his appearing. I also believe those things to be founded
    upon election, particular, personal, and certain; governed
    by the mind, will, and plan of God, which was, is, and will
    be eternal; and which is revealed to us so far as to give us
    confidence, hope, and full assurance that nothing in the divine
    plan, either of the means or end, can or will fail of their
    accomplishment.’

“The church in Low Hampton being destitute of a pastor, in a letter to
the same, dated Nov. 17, 1832, Mr. Miller describes the kind of minister
they wished for:—

    “‘We do not want one who thinks much of his own gifts, and is
    lifted up with pride; neither do we want a novice—I mean, a
    fool; one who knows nothing about the gospel of Christ. We want
    one who will stir up our minds, will visit, is good to learn,
    apt to teach, modest, unassuming, pious, devotional, and
    faithful to his calling. If his natural talents are brilliant,
    with those qualifications, they would not hurt him. If they
    are only moderate, they may do well enough for us. Some of
    our people want “a quick gab.” But I should prefer a quick
    understanding.... I set out for Salem to-morrow morning.’

“In a letter to the same, dated Hampton, Feb. 8, 1833, he writes: ‘The
Lord is scattering the seed. I can now reckon eight ministers who preach
this doctrine, more or less, besides yourself. I know of more than one
hundred private brethren who say that they have adopted my views. Be that
as it may, “truth is mighty and will prevail.” If I should get my views
printed, how many can you dispose of, in pamphlet form?... Our people are
about giving me a license to lecture. I hardly know what to do. I am too
old, too wicked, and too proud. I want your advice. Be plain, and tell me
the whole truth.’

“Shortly after, he published his views, in a pamphlet of sixty-four
pages, entitled: ‘Evidences from Scripture and History of the Second
Coming of Christ, about the year 1843; and of his Personal Reign of One
Thousand Years. By William Miller. “Prove all things; hold fast that
which is good.” 1 Thess. 5:21. Brandon, Vermont, _Telegraph_ Office,
1833.’

“Soon after the publication of this pamphlet, he had occasion to visit
the city of New York. As he was passing down the Hudson, in a steamboat,
a company of men standing near him were conversing respecting the
wonderful improvements of the day. One of them remarked that it was
impossible for things to progress for thirty years to come in the same
ratio as they had done; ‘for,’ said he, ‘man will attain to something
more than human.’ Mr. Miller replied to him that it reminded him of Dan.
12:4, ‘Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.’
A pause ensuing, Mr. M. continued, and observed that the improvements
of the present day were just what we should expect at this time in the
fulfillment of Daniel’s prophecy. He then commenced with the 11th chapter
of Daniel, and, comparing the prophecy with the history, showed its
fulfillment, all listening with close attention.

“He then remarked, that he had not intended trespassing so long on their
patience, and, leaving them, walked to the other end of the boat. The
entire company followed, and wished to hear more on the subject. He then
took up the 2d, 7th, 8th, and 9th, chapters of Daniel. His hearers wished
to know if he had ever written on the subject. He told them that he had
published the above pamphlet, and distributed among them what copies he
had with him.

“This was one of his first audiences, and some gentlemen of high
standing listened to his remarks. He scattered the most of his pamphlets
gratuitously, sending them as a response to letters of inquiry respecting
his views, and to places which he could not visit. Under date of April
10, 1833, in writing to Elder Hendryx, and speaking of the evil of
resorting to excommunication from the church for slight causes, in view
of a particular case, he says:—

    “‘Is the remedy better than the disease? Should we cut off
    a man’s leg because he has a thorn in his toe? I think not.
    Should we set a wheat field on fire and burn the whole crop,
    because of a few tares in the field? No; let both grow until
    the harvest. Oh, how much injury is done in church discipline!
    The hypocrite uses it as a tool to make others think that he
    is very pious. The envious use it as a weapon to bring down
    those they imagine are getting above them. The bigot uses it to
    bring others to his faith; and the sectarian, to bring others
    to his creed, &c. But, my dear brother, how many difficulties
    do you think we have in our churches where the spirit of
    Christ is manifested through the whole trial, or where it
    began with “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they
    do”? Therefore, I can frankly and honestly say that the remedy
    which has been applied to cure this moral disease is worse, a
    thousand times worse, than the original cause.’

    “In the same letter, he says: ‘We have no preacher, as yet,
    except the old man [Mr. M.] with his concordance. Last Sunday
    I tried to hold forth the truth from Isa. 65:25; the Sabbath
    before, from the same chapter, verses 17-19. I wish I had the
    tongue of an Apollos, and the mental power of a Paul; what a
    field might I not explore; and what powerful arguments might be
    brought to prove the authenticity of the Scriptures! But I want
    one thing more than either—the Spirit of Christ and of God; for
    he is able to take worms and thresh mountains. O my brother,
    let us pray for each other, especially on the Sabbath, each
    that the Lord would bestow this gift of the Holy Spirit upon
    the other. Peradventure the Lord will answer.’

    “In the same letter he thus expresses his regard for the word
    of God: ‘O may the Bible be to us a rock, a pillar, a compass,
    a chart, a statute, a directory, a polar star, a traveler’s
    guide, a pilgrim’s companion, a shield of faith, a ground
    of hope, a history, a chronology, an armory, a store-house,
    a mirror, a toilet, a closet, a prayer-book, an epistle, a
    love letter, a friend, a foe, a revenue, a treasury, a bank,
    a fountain, a cistern, a garden, a lodge, a field, a haven,
    a sun, a moon, a star, a door, a window, a light, a lamp, a
    luminary, a morning, a noon, an evening, an hour-glass, a
    daysman, a servant.

    “‘It is meat, food, drink, raiment, shelter, warmth, heat,
    a feast, fruit, apples, pictures, wine, milk, honey, bread,
    butter, oil, refreshment, rest, strength, stability, wisdom,
    life, eyes, ears, hands, feet, breath; it is a help to
    hearing, seeing, feeling, tasting, smelling, understanding,
    forgiving, loving, hoping, enjoying, adoring, and saving; it
    teaches salvation, justification, sanctification, redemption,
    and glorification; it declares condemnation, destruction and
    desolation; it tells us what we were, are, and shall be; begins
    with the beginning, carries us through the intermediate, and
    ends only with the end; it is past, present, and to come; it
    discovers the first great cause, the cause of all effects,
    and the effects of all causes; it speaks of life, death, and
    judgment, body, soul, and spirit, Heaven, earth, and hell; it
    makes use of all nature as figures, to sum up the value of the
    gospel; and declares itself to be the Word of God. And your
    friend and brother believes it.

                                                  “‘WILLIAM MILLER.

    “‘_Hampton, April 10, 1833._’

“In the autumn of this year, Mr. Miller received a license to preach,
from the church of which he was a member, as follows:—

    “‘Let brotherly love continue: the Baptist church of Christ, in
    Hampton and Whitehall, do certify that Bro. William Miller is
    a member in regular standing in this church. Bro. Miller has
    been improving his gifts with us in expounding the words of
    divine truth in public, for some time past, to the approbation
    and edification of the church. We are satisfied that Bro.
    Miller has a gift to improve in public, and are willing he
    should improve the same wherever his lot may be cast among the
    Zion of God, that the name of the Lord may be glorified, and
    his followers edified. Done in church meeting, Saturday, Sept.
    14, 1833. By order of the church.

                                         “‘(Signed) BYRON S. HARLOW,
                                         “‘_Clerk, pro tem._’

“In a letter to his sister, before referred to, written two days
subsequent to the date of the above, and dated, ‘Low Hampton, Sept. 16,
1833,’ he speaks of the above license, and of his labors, as follows:—

    “‘I have just returned from Dresden, where I have been to spend
    a Sabbath, and to preach to them the word of life. My texts,
    yesterday, were Hosea 13:1; Isa. 61:7; and Ps. 102:16.... I
    do feel anxious to come and see you; and, if the Lord will,
    and your people should not object, to try to speak to them
    of the things of the kingdom. My brethren have given me a
    license—unworthy and old, and disobedient as I am. Oh, to grace
    how great a debtor!’

“He then proceeds with matters of mere family interests, and closes with
the following exhortation to his brother-in-law, respecting the doctrine
of Universalism:—

    “‘Just as sure as the word of God is _true_, depend upon it,
    universal salvation is _not_ true. Was this what David saw when
    he saw the end of the wicked? Enter into the sanctuary of your
    own conscience, my brother, and you will find, “NO,” responded
    with appalling force. Enter into the sanctuary of God’s word,
    and, in every page, you will have to meet this little word,
    “NO,” or declarations as plain. “Strive to enter in at the
    strait gate; for _many_ shall seek to enter in, and shall _not_
    be able.”

    “‘Look at Dan. 12:9, 10; here we have the _end_ described.
    What does conscience say? Be careful, my brother; remember
    that eternal consequences hang on your decision; and what is
    the answer? “Many [not all] shall be purified, and made white,
    and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly; and _none_ of the
    wicked shall understand.” See Mal. 4:1-3. Where are the wicked,
    the proud, and all that do wickedly? Do they enjoy the healing
    beams of the Sun of Righteousness? No. Again, in Matt. 13:49,
    50. Are the wicked permitted to dwell with the just? Is Heaven
    and happiness their abode? Enter into the sanctuary, and what
    do you hear? No! _No!_

    “‘Again, in Matt. 25:12, 30, and 46. Do the foolish virgins
    enter in to the marriage supper? or are they ever married to
    the Lamb? _No!_ Is the unprofitable servant “in light and
    glory”? No! _No!_ And are the goats enjoying the same communion
    with the sheep? or are they going “into life eternal”? No!
    _No!_ NO! Read, again, Rom. 1:18, to the fifth verse of the
    second chapter. Would it be unjust for God to condemn the
    characters there described? Your judgment tells you, _No!_ Your
    conscience responds the same answer, _No!_ Your tongue must
    _one day_ answer, NO! For every tongue must and will confess
    to the glory of God. O my brother, enter into the sanctuary
    and knock while the door may be opened; seek while you may
    find; look while you may live; and you will most assuredly
    learn “_their end_.” All the plausible reasoning of all the
    Universalists under the whole canopy of heaven cannot save _one
    soul_. “Except a man is born of the Spirit he cannot enter the
    kingdom of God.”’

“During the fall of 1833, and the ensuing winter, Mr. Miller seems to
have been constantly occupied in lecturing in Dresden and other towns
in New York and Vermont. The very modest estimate which he had of his
own abilities and qualifications as a preacher, is apparent in all his
correspondence, where any reference is made to his public labors. In
writing to Eld. Hendryx, under date of Low Hampton, Feb. 25, 1834, he
says:—

    “‘You have undoubtedly heard that I have been trying to
    _preach_ (as some call it) about in this vicinity. I have
    been laboring, it is true, in my weak manner, in Dresden, two
    or three months; and the Lord has seen fit to bless us with
    a little reformation. I have likewise preached in Putnam,
    Wrentham, Poultney, and in this place. You laugh, Bro. Hendryx,
    to think old Bro. Miller is preaching! But laugh on; you are
    not the only one that laughs; and it is all right—I deserve it.
    If I could preach the truth, it is all I could ask.’

“Being now recognized as a regularly licensed preacher his brother
Hendryx naturally addressed him as the ‘Rev. William Miller.’ To a letter
thus directed, Mr. Miller, under date of ‘Hampton, March 22, 1834,’ thus
replied:—

    “‘DEAR BRO. HENDRYX:—I wish you would look into your Bible and
    see if you can find the word Rev. applied to a sinful mortal
    like myself; and govern yourself accordingly.... Let us be
    determined to live and die on the Bible. God is about to rise
    and punish the inhabitants of the world. The proud, the high,
    the lofty, must be brought low; and the humble, the meek, and
    the contrite, will be exalted. Then, what care I for what the
    world calls great or honorable? Give me Jesus, and a knowledge
    of his word, faith in his name, hope in his grace, interest in
    his love, and let me be clothed in his righteousness, and the
    world may enjoy all the high-sounding titles, the riches it can
    boast, the vanities it is heir to, and all the pleasures of
    sin; and they will be no more than a drop in the ocean.

    “‘Yes, let me have Jesus Christ, and then vanish all earthly
    toys. What glory has God revealed in the face of Jesus Christ!
    In him all power centers. In him all power dwells. He is the
    evidence of all truth, the fountain of all mercy, the giver of
    all grace, the object of all adoration, and the source of all
    light; and I hope to enjoy him to all eternity. What! such a
    sinful wretch as I enjoy Christ? How can this be? Yes, yes;
    through the electing love of God, the sprinkling of the blood
    of the covenant, and the work of regeneration, such a sinner
    as I may be cleansed from sin, purified, and made white, and
    glorified in the New Jerusalem, together with him, and with all
    who love our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and who love his
    appearing.

    “‘Bro. H., shall you and I appear together in that general
    assembly and church of the first-born? If God will, I hope we
    shall there meet, to part no more. How can I realize the glory
    that will there be manifested? And how could I bear the thought
    to be banished from the face of Jesus, and from the glory of
    his power? Forbid it, O my Redeemer! Forbid! and let grace
    reign through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ
    our Lord.’

“The same devotional feelings are manifest in all his epistles, and also
evince that he experienced nearness of access to God, and great religious
enjoyment.

“Mr. Miller kept no journal, nor any record of the places he visited,
till October, 1834. Beginning at a place called ‘The Forks,’ supposed to
be ‘Moore’s Forks’ in Clinton County, N. Y., the names of places where,
the dates when, and the texts from which, he preached, are given in two
small memorandum-books as follows:—

    “PLACE.               TIME.       TEXT.             TEXT.
    Forks, N. Y.,        Oct. 1.   Luke 15:18.       Rev. 8:13.
    Keesville, N. Y.,     ”   5.   Rev. 1:20.        Job 23:24.
    Beekmantown,          ”   6.   Dan. 8:13, 14.     ”  10:14.
    Plattsburgh,          ”   8.   Dan. 8:13, 14.    Rev. 20:6.
    Keesville,            ”  11.   1 Cor. 3:11.
        ”                 ”  12.   Rom. 8:6, 7.     Luke 15:18.
    Westport,             ”  14.   Dan. 8:13, 14.     ”  10:14.
        ”                 ”  15.   Rev. 20:6.

“After visiting the above places, he returned home to Low Hampton, and
soon after wrote to Eld. Hendryx, as follows:—

                                     “‘NORTH HAMPTON, OCT. 23, 1834.

    “‘MY DEAR BROTHER HENDRYX:—Your favor of Sept. 17 came to hand
    while I was absent on a tour into Clinton County, of about
    six weeks. I gave thirty-six lectures on the second coming of
    Christ, was at two covenant meetings, attended two protracted
    meetings in said time, saw a number of new-born babes in
    Christ; and now, being at home, I shall write to Bro. H. and
    rest myself a little.

    “‘I am every day more convinced that the whole word of God
    is given for our instruction, reproof, and correction; and
    that the prophecies contain the strongest evidences of the
    divinity and truth of the Bible; and present to saint and
    sinner the strongest motives for a holy life, and repentance
    and faith toward God, that can be produced. When John preached
    repentance, he prophesied that the kingdom of Heaven was at
    hand, as a principal motive. The apostles prophesied that God
    had appointed a day, in which he would judge the world in
    righteousness, by that man, Jesus Christ; and your unworthy
    brother in Christ proclaims that the day is at hand, when “he
    that is filthy will be filthy still, and he that is holy will
    be holy still;” and that Christ is now standing at the door and
    knocking for the last time. And, my dear brother, I can truly
    say that “the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.”
    And yet how many professed ministers of Christ, at the present
    day, treat that part of the word with total neglect, and even
    laugh and jeer at those who would warn the people of their
    approaching danger. But God has supported me beyond my most
    sanguine expectation. And although they say much before they
    hear, yet when they do hear they seem confounded.

    “‘The evidence is so clear, the testimony is so strong, that we
    live on the eve of the present dispensation, toward the dawn
    of the _glorious day_, that I wonder why ministers and people
    do not wake up and trim their lamps. Yes, my brother, almost
    two years since you heard the news, “_Behold, the bridegroom
    cometh!_”—and yet you cry, A little more sleep, a little more
    slumber. Blame not your people if they go to sleep under your
    preaching. You have done the same. Bear with me, my brother. In
    every letter you have written me, you have promised to study
    this all-important subject, and in every letter you confess
    your negligence. The day draws near. More than one-sixth of
    the time is gone since my brother Hendryx promised, and yet
    asleep! O God, forgive him! Are you waiting for all the world
    to wake up before you dare get up? Where has your courage fled?
    Awake! awake! O sluggard! Defend your own castle, or take sides
    with the word of God; _destroy_ or _build_. You must not, you
    cannot, you shall not be neutral. Awake! awake! Tell Deacon
    Smith to help wake you. Tell him, for me, to shake you, and not
    give out shaking, until Bro. H. will put on the whole armor of
    light.

    “‘In every church where I have lectured on this important
    subject, many, very many, seem to awake, rub open their eyes,
    and then fall back to sleep again. But the enemy is waking up.
    In one town (North Beekmantown) I received a letter, the day
    after my first lecture, from some bullies and blackguards, that
    if I did not clear out of the State, they would put me where
    the dogs could never find me. The letter was signed by ten of
    them. I stayed, and, blessed be God! he poured out his Spirit,
    and began a work which gainsayers could not resist.

    “‘Some ministers try to persuade their people not to hear me;
    but the people will go, and every additional lecture will bring
    an additional multitude, until their meeting-houses cannot
    hold them. Depend upon it, my brother, God is in this thing;
    and he will be glorified; and blessed be his holy name! Do pray
    for me, my brother, that I may have grace equal to my need, and
    that I may always see my need, feel my weakness, and be kept
    humble, and that I may always declare the truth. _Do pray!_

    “‘I think, if the Lord will, I shall be in your section of
    country next spring or summer. Do give me a list of some
    brethren between here and your place, if you can.

                      “‘I remain yours in Christ,

                                                  “‘WILLIAM MILLER.’

“Two days subsequent to the date of the above, Mr. M. was again in the
field; and, according to his memorandum-book, gave lectures as follows:
Oct. 25 and 26, at Paulet, Vt.; Nov. 6, 8, and 9, at Orwell, Vt.; 10 and
12, Cornwall, Vt.; and Nov. 16, in Hampton, N. Y. His success in the
above places is indicated in the following extract from a letter which he
wrote Elder Hendryx from Low Hampton, on the 28th of Nov., 1834:—

    “‘I have had good success since I wrote you before. The Lord
    has been with me. I have been into a number of towns in
    Vermont. Some old, hardened rebels have been brought to plead
    for mercy, even before my course of lectures was finished.
    Blessed be the holy name of God! He has given me more than
    I should have dared to ask. How good, my brother, it is to
    preach, having God for paymaster! He pays down. He pays in
    souls. He paid the Shepherd thus, and he was satisfied; will he
    not pay his servants too? Yes, yes. Bless his name, O my soul,
    for all his benefits!

    “‘I find that studious Christians are the best hearers: and the
    reason is obvious. The more we know of mankind, the less room
    there is for bigotry, superstition, and prejudice. Those are
    evils always attending ignorance.’




CHAPTER V.

    NEW DOORS OPEN—HIS LABORS COUNTENANCED BY MINISTERS OF HIS
    DENOMINATION—HIS FIRST DONATION OF TWO HALF-DOLLARS—DEATH
    OF HIS MOTHER—INCIDENT AT SHAFTSBURY—RESULTS OF HIS
    LABORS—TESTIMONY OF A CONVERT FROM INFIDELITY—LETTER OF REV. C.
    FITCH—URGENT APPEALS TO VISIT VARIOUS TOWNS, ETC.


“After the commencement of the new year (1835) Mr. Miller lectured,
during the first week of January, in Addison, Vt., and the second, in
Cornwall, Vt. He then returned home, where he remained till the 12th of
February, writing on the 11th to Elder Hendryx as follows:—

    “‘The Lord opens doors faster than I can fill them. To-morrow
    I have an appointment in Whiting, which will occupy a week.
    The next week I shall be in Shoreham; the last week in this
    month, at Bridgeport; the first week in March, in Middletown;
    the second, in Hoosac. I have calls from Schroon, Ticonderoga,
    Moriah, Essex, Chazy, Champaign, Plattsburgh, Peru, Mooretown,
    Canton, Pottsdam, Hopkinton, Stockholm, Parishville, and other
    places too numerous to mention. The Lord has blessed me thus
    far; in almost every place where I have lectured, the Spirit
    has given fruit. Where I went forth expecting trials and
    persecution, I have found God a present help. Pray for me,
    that my faith fail not, and that I may ever feel my weakness,
    and that my dependence may be on Israel’s God. Pray that I may
    do my duty in the fear of God, and in the love of the truth;
    and then, whatever may become of me, God will be glorified and
    souls saved.’

“After filling the two former of those appointments, he returned home
till the 8th of March, when he lectured in Bridgeport, Vt., three days,
and gave six lectures. He lectured in Granville on the following Sabbath,
March 15, and again returned home.

“It seems to have been his intention, when he left home on the 7th of
March, to return to Whiting, he having received an invitation to that
effect. A powerful work of grace had followed his lectures there, and
several infidels had acknowledged the authenticity of the Scriptures
as demonstrated by the fulfillment of prophecy, and were under deep
conviction, and wished to see him. Whether he went there or not, does not
appear. But, on the 21st of March, he writes, ‘I have been very sick with
a cold, for a day or two past, and I am only able to sit up for a short
time.’

“On the 19th of April, he again visited Granville, where he also lectured
on the 20th and 21st. On the 26th, he lectured at Middletown, N. Y. On
the 28th, he again wrote from Low Hampton:—

    “‘I have been laid up with a severe cold, and have been only
    to two or three places since I wrote last (March 21). But I
    have now recovered my health again, so that I have been the
    last two weeks at Granville and Middletown. Next Sunday (May
    3), I am to be at Fort Ann village, N. Y., if the Lord will;
    and when I shall get through lecturing in this region, I cannot
    tell. Doors open faster than I can fill them. I have calls from
    Wells, Bishop’s Corner, and Tinouth.’

“These lectures and sermons of Mr. Miller met the approval of a large
number of the ministers of his denomination, with whose approbation, from
this time, he went forth, as a public laborer, indorsed and sanctioned by
the following certificate:—

                                                    “MARCH 19, 1835.

    “This may certify, to whom it may concern, that we, whose names
    are hereunto affixed—being ministers in the denomination of
    regular Baptists—are personally acquainted with Bro. William
    Miller, the bearer of this certificate; that he is a member,
    and a licentiate in good regular standing, in the particular
    Baptist church, in Hampton, N. Y.; that we have heard his
    lectures on the subject of the _Second Coming and Reign of
    our Lord Jesus Christ_; and that we believe his views on that
    particular subject, as well as others pertaining to the gospel,
    are worthy to be known and read of all men. As such an one,
    we commend him to God, and the affectionate acceptance of our
    brethren in the precious Saviour.

                                    J. SAWYER, JR., _South Reading_.
                                    E. HALPING, _Hampton_.
                                    AMOS STEARNS, _Fort Ann_.
                                    EMERSON ANDREWS, _Lansingburg_.

“After visiting Fort Ann, N. Y., on the 3d of May, he lectured in
Whitehall, N. Y., on the 10th and 17th of the same month; in West Haven,
on the 7th of June, and in Middlebury, Vt., on the 14th. From that place
he went into the province of Lower Canada, and lectured, on the 21st and
23d, at Bolton; the 25th, at Hutting; the 28th, 29th, and July 1, at
Derby; July 2, at Georgeville; the 5th and 6th, at Bolton, again; the
7th, at Outlet; and the 8th and 9th, at Stanstead Plain. On the 12th,
he lectured at Derby, Vt.; the 13th, at Troy, Vt.; the 14th, at Lowell,
Vt.; the 15th, at Eden, Vt.; the 16th, at Cambridge, Vt.; the 17th, at
Jericho, Vt.; and the 19th, at Orwell, Vt.

“During this tour, while in Canada, a woman placed two half-dollars in
his hand, which was all the assistance he received previous to 1836. His
expenses for travel, &c., were paid from his own funds.

“On his way home from Canada, he was much depressed in his spirits. To
use his own words, he was overwhelmed with a dark cloud, for which he
could not account. He felt impelled to hasten home, with a presentiment
that there was trouble there. Leaving Jericho, Vt., instead of filling
several appointments, he took the nearest route, and hastened home with
all speed. Calling at Orwell, by the urgent request of his Uncle Phelps,
he stopped to speak to the church on the Sabbath, leaving immediately
after service for home, where he arrived late at night. His family were
astonished to see him return so soon, and he was delighted to find them
all well.

“At an early hour on Monday he went to visit his mother, to take to her a
present from her daughter in Canada. His mother lived about half a mile
from Mr. Miller’s, with her son, Solomon. He found her in the enjoyment
of good health, and he spent the day with her, returning home unusually
interested with his visit. His mother did not receive his views, but
always told him to preach the whole truth, as he believed it, and do his
duty. Soon after Mr. Miller had left his mother, she was seized with the
palsy. Mr. M. was sent for. She was unable to converse any; but, by the
pressure of the hand, signified that she knew him, and before the close
of the week, expired. Had not Mr. Miller been impressed with a sense
of ‘trouble at home,’ he would have taken a more circuitous route, and
filled several appointments, according to previous arrangements. By thus
changing his original purpose, he enjoyed the opportunity of a day’s
conversation with his mother, which he would otherwise have been deprived
of. He often recurred to this as a signal instance of God’s favor.

“On the 2d of August, he lectured at South Bay, N. Y.; on the 9th, at
Dresden, N. Y., and, on the 23d, at South Bay, again. On the 28th, he
again writes from Low Hampton, to Eld. Hendryx, as follows:—

    “‘I am yet engaged in warning the inhabitants to be prepared
    for the great day of God Almighty, and am endeavoring to prove
    by the Scriptures that it is near, even at the doors.... I
    always present this as an inducement for men to repent. I call
    on them in the name of my dear Master to turn, repent, believe,
    and obey him. I beseech them, for the value of their souls,
    to believe in Christ. I implore them to lay up treasures in
    Heaven. I importune them, again and again, to read, reflect,
    examine, and see if the word of God is not true. I show them
    its complete fulfillment thus far, and then I pray God to
    direct the arrow to the heart. I ask God, through Jesus
    Christ, to nerve the arm that pulls the bow, and to sharpen the
    arrow that twangs from it. I then put all my confidence in God
    and in his promise, “Lo, I am with you even to the end of the
    world.” ...

    “‘I have this moment received a letter from Bro. Wescott [the
    Baptist clergyman], to be in Stillwater next Sabbath [August
    30]; and I shall be under the necessity of leaving in a few
    minutes. I shall be absent until about the 1st of October.

    “‘My good old mother Miller is dead. She died about four weeks
    since. The rest of us are all in good health.

                        “‘Yours in gospel bonds,

                                                      “‘WM. MILLER.’

“He visited Stillwater, N. Y., according to invitation, and continued
there one week, lecturing each day. On the 13th, he was at Bristol. On
the 1st of November, he visited Middletown, N. Y., and gave a course of
eight lectures. He then lectured again, five days, at Bristol, commencing
on the 15th of November; and, beginning on the 29th, he labored five days
longer at Middletown—usually giving two lectures each day. On the 6th of
December, he was at Whitehall, N. Y.; on the 20th, at Poultney, Vt.; and
on the 27th, at Westhaven. This terminated his labors for the year 1835.

“On the 3d of January, 1836, he lectured at a Brother Aborn’s; on the
24th, at Dresden, N. Y.; on the 7th of February, at Fort Ann village, N.
Y.; on the 13th of March, at Orwell, Vt.; and on the 15th, at Shoreham,
Vt. His public lectures during these winter months were interrupted
by the preparation of his course of sixteen lectures for the press,
which were published in Troy, N. Y., in the spring of this year, by
Eld. Wescott. All the copies of that edition supplied to Mr. Miller, he
purchased at the regular prices.

“On the 24th of April, he again visited Stillwater, N. Y.; and, on the
15th of May, New Haven, Vt. On the 16th he commenced a course of lectures
at Weybridge, Vt., which closed on the 20th. On the day following, he
began his labors at Monkton, N. Y., which continued eight days.

“On the 19th of June, he visited Lansingburg, N. Y., and continued till
the 26th. To pay his stage-fare, he received, on this occasion, four
dollars, which, with the two half-dollars received in Canada, was all
the remuneration he had thus far received for his expenses. Subsequent
to that time, as he says in his ‘Apology and Defense,’ he never received
enough to meet his expenses of travel to the places where he was invited;
so that his public labors were never of any pecuniary advantage to him,
as has been currently reported and believed; but, on the contrary, they
were a heavy tax on his property, which gradually decreased during that
period of his life.

“On the 21st of July, he writes, from Low Hampton, to Eld. Hendryx: ‘I
have been confined at home, for three weeks past, by a bilious complaint.
I was taken unwell while lecturing at Lansingburg, N. Y.; but I finished
my course of lectures, and returned home, and have not been well since.
My lectures were well received in that place, and excited attention. The
house was filled to overflowing for eight days in succession. I feel that
God was there, and believe that in his glorified kingdom I shall see
the fruits.... Infidels, deists, Universalists, and sectarians, were
all chained to their seats, in perfect silence, for hours—yes, days—to
hear the old stammering man talk about the second coming of Christ, and
show the manner, object, time, and signs, of his coming. O my brother!
it makes me feel like a worm—a poor, feeble creature; for it is God
only who could produce such an effect on such audiences. Yet it gives
me confidence; for I solemnly believe it is truth; and God will support
his word, and will be present where it is preached, however feeble the
instrument; for “Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the
world.” Therefore, if I were preaching before all the kings of the earth,
why should I fear? for the King of kings is with me. If all the lords
were there, yet he is Lord of lords, and of the great men of the earth.’

“Mr. Miller again lectured in Dresden, N. Y., on the 7th of August; in
Orwell, Vt., on the 11th of September; and in Keesville, N. Y., on the
18th. He then gave courses of lectures, beginning at Lawrence, N. Y.,
on the 22d; Stockholm, on the 29th; Parishville, on the 7th of October;
Massena, N. Y., on the 14th. He gave ten lectures at Fort Covington, N.
Y., beginning on the 20th, and was at Chataugay, N. Y., on the 27th.
This terminated his labors for the year 1836. In allusion to these last
visits, he wrote on the 23d of December:—

    “‘I have not visited a place where the Lord has not given me
    one or two souls for my hire. I have spent eight weeks in St.
    Lawrence County, and delivered eighty-two lectures this fall.
    Next week I am going to Shaftsbury and vicinity.’

“He visited Shaftsbury, Vt., the 23d of January, 1837, and gave his
full course of sixteen lectures. At the close of one lecture, a Baptist
clergyman arose, and stated that he had come there for the purpose of
exposing the folly of Mr. M., but had to confess that he was confounded,
convicted, and converted. He acknowledged that he had applied various
unhandsome appellations to Mr. Miller, calling him ‘the end of the world
man,’ ‘the old visionary,’ ‘dreamer,’ ‘fanatic,’ and for which he felt
covered with shame and confusion. That confession, evidently so honest,
was like a thunderbolt on the audience.

“Very few particulars of interest have been gathered respecting his
labors during the year 1837. According to his memorandum-book, he
lectured in Wells, Vt., on the 3d of February; in Shrewsbury, Vt., on
the 3d of March; in Andover, Vt., from the 5th to the 12th of March; in
Weston, Vt., four days, beginning with the 13th; in Mt. Holly, Vt., on
the 17th; in Orwell, Vt., on the 23d of April and 7th of May; in Danby,
Vt., the 14th of May; in Poultney, Vt., eight days, beginning with the
21st of May; in Orwell, again, on the 4th of June; in North Springfield,
Vt., from the 11th to the 17th; in Ludlow, Vt., from the 19th to the
21st; in Mt. Holly, Vt., from the 25th of June to the 2d of July;[15]
in Orwell, Vt., on the 9th of July; at Fairhaven, Vt., from the 11th to
the 20th; in Whiting, Vt., on the 23d; in Fairhaven, Vt., on the 13th of
Aug.; in Moriah, Vt., from the 14th to the 22d of October; in Ludlow,
Vt., from the 29th to the 6th of November, and at Stillwater, N. Y., on
the 31st of December.

“With the 1st of January, 1838, he commenced a second course of lectures
at Lansingburg, N. Y., in compliance with the urgent request of the
Baptist church in that place, and of E. B. Crandall, their pastor.
The lectures continued nine days, and were listened to by crowded and
attentive audiences. The result also was most heart-cheering. Infidelity
had several strongholds in that neighborhood, and many of that class
attended his lectures, and were greatly affected by them. In a letter
dated on the 25th of that month, two weeks after the close of the
lectures, a gentleman of that place writes to Mr. Miller:—

    “‘I have never witnessed so powerful an effect in any place as
    in this, on all who heard. I am of the opinion that not less
    than one hundred persons, who held infidel sentiments, are
    brought to believe the Bible. Infidelity is dumb in this place,
    as if frightened, and converts are many.’

“The following testimony of one who was converted from infidelity during
these lectures, is copied from the _Boston Investigator_ (an infidel
paper) of January, 1845:—

    “‘MR. EDITOR:—I was a warm supporter of the views of Abner
    Kneeland, attended his lectures and _protracted dances_,
    disbelieved in divine revelation and a future existence, and
    fully accorded with Mr. Kneeland’s views of religion. Having
    read every work of note that I could obtain, and having heard
    many lectures opposed to God and the Bible, I considered
    myself prepared to overthrow the Christian faith, and feared
    no argument that could be brought from the Bible. With these
    feelings, I attended a full course of Mr. Miller’s lectures. He
    gave his rules of interpretation, and pledged himself to prove
    his position. I approved of his rules—to which I refer you—and
    the result was, he established the fact that the Bible is what
    it purports to be—the word of God—to my mind, beyond a doubt;
    and I have taken it as the man of my counsel.

    “‘I notice your doubts of the truth of the statement in
    relation to hundreds of infidels being converted under the
    preaching of Mr. Miller. This may possibly be owing to your
    never having given Mr. Miller a candid and thorough hearing.
    He is a man mighty in the Scriptures, and has done terrible
    execution in the ranks of the “King’s enemies,” with the sword
    of the Spirit, which is the word of God.

    “‘I am personally acquainted with nearly one hundred, who held
    to similar views with Abner Kneeland, who were converted under
    the preaching of Mr. Miller; and we did not yield the point
    without a struggle, nor without due consideration. Each and
    every prop and refuge of infidelity and unbelief were taken
    away from us, and our sandy foundation was swept by the truth
    of the Almighty as chaff is driven by the wind. Yet we parted
    with them much as a man parts with a _diseased tooth_. We tried
    to cure and keep it there, and when made to know that the
    _root_ and foundation was rotten, it was painful to part with;
    but we rejoiced and felt better after the separation; for there
    is balm in Gilead—there is a Physician there.

                                “‘_Lansingburg, N. Y., Jan., 1845._’

“On the 14th of January, Mr. Miller lectured at Westhaven, N. Y., and two
weeks from that day, at Low Hampton, N. Y. On the 4th of February, he
commenced a course of lectures at Panton, Vt., which he continued eight
days. He then returned to West Haven, N. Y., and lectured seven days,
beginning February 18.

“On returning to Low Hampton, he found the following letter from Rev.
Charles Fitch, pastor at the Marlboro’ Chapel, Boston. It was the
beginning of an acquaintance between those dear brethren in Christ, and
as such, will be read with interest by all:—

                                            “‘BOSTON, MARCH 5, 1838.

    “‘MY DEAR BROTHER:—I am a stranger to you, but I trust that,
    through the free sovereign grace of God, I am not altogether a
    stranger to Jesus Christ, whom you serve. I am the pastor of
    an orthodox Congregational church in this city. A few weeks
    since, your Lectures on the Second Coming of Christ were put
    into my hands. I sat down to read the work, knowing nothing
    of the views which it contained. I have _studied_ it with
    an overwhelming interest, such as I never felt in any other
    book except the Bible. I have compared it with Scripture and
    history, and I find nothing on which to rest a single doubt
    respecting the correctness of your views. Though a miserable,
    guilty sinner, I trust that, through the Lord’s abounding
    grace, I shall be among those that love his appearing. I
    preached to my people two discourses yesterday on the coming
    of our Lord, and I believe a deep and permanent interest will
    be awakened thereby in God’s testimonies. My object in writing
    you, my dear sir, is twofold.

    “‘1st. Will you have the kindness to inform me, by letter,
    in what history you find the fact stated that the last of the
    ten kings was baptized A. D. 508, and also that the decree of
    Justinian, giving the Bishop of Rome power to suppress the
    reading of the Scriptures, was issued in 538? All the other
    data which you have given, I have found correct, and I know of
    no reason to doubt your correctness in these. But, as I have
    not yet been able to find a statement of those facts, you will
    do me a great favor by just informing me where I may find them;
    and I shall then feel prepared to defend the truth, and to
    point others to the right source of information.

    “‘There is a meeting of our Ministerial Association to-morrow,
    and, as I am appointed to read an essay, I design to bring up
    this whole subject for discussion, and trust that I may thereby
    do something to spread the truth.

    “‘2d. My second object in writing was to ask if you would put
    me in the way to obtain a dozen copies of your lectures. I know
    of none to be obtained here. I know of several individuals
    who are very desirous to obtain the work, and if you can tell
    me of any place where it can be obtained in this city, or in
    New York, you will greatly oblige me. If you can give me any
    information of importance on the subject, not contained in your
    book, I should greatly rejoice, because, as I stand a watchman
    on the walls, I wish to “_give the trumpet a certain sound_,”
    and to make that sound as full, and explicit, and convincing,
    as possible.

                 “‘Yours in the faith of Jesus Christ,

                                                   “‘CHARLES FITCH.’

“On the 12th of March, Mr. M. commenced a course of lectures, and
continued eight days, at Benson, Vt. Previous to this, he had received
urgent requests from the Rev. Mr. Hill, of the First Church in Troy, N.
Y., and Rev. Mr. Parke, of the church in West Troy, uniting with their
respective churches, for a course of lectures in each place; and they
were expected, in West Troy, to have been commenced previous to those in
Benson, Vt. Their disappointment, and the great anxiety of ministers and
people, at that period, to secure his services, may be judged of by the
following letter from the pastor of the church in that place:—

                                        “‘WEST TROY, MARCH 12, 1838.

    “‘WILLIAM S. MILLER, ESQ.:[16] Dear Sir, I received a line
    from you, dated March 1, and was glad to hear that Father
    Miller had concluded to visit West Troy on Saturday last. With
    much anxiety, all looked forward to that day, expecting the
    privilege of hearing something upon the subject of Christ’s
    Second Coming. But alas! we are _disappointed_. Dear Sir, I
    write these few lines, letting you know something of the state
    of feeling in this place upon the subject of Mr. Miller’s
    lectures. In the street, in the house, in short, wherever
    (almost) you meet an individual, the first thing is, Has Mr.
    Miller come yet? When is Mr. Miller going to be here? What
    is the reason he does not come? &c. If the old gentleman can
    possibly come down to West Troy, I wish him to come as soon as
    possible. I hope he will not delay. I think we have a little
    claim upon him, if our wishes may be brought into account.
    Dear Sir, upon the reception of this, please write me the
    reason of the _disappointment_; also, when he will come, if at
    all, that I may give an answer to them that ask.

                           “‘Yours in haste,

                                               “‘FREDERIC S. PARKE.’

“At the same date, Mr. Miller’s son received a letter from Troy, N. Y.,
stating that ‘Rev. Mr. Hill is at present very anxious, and most of his
church, for your father to come to East Troy first, and he has undertaken
a negotiation with Eld. Parke, for your father to visit them half of the
time.’

“In compliance with these urgent requests, he commenced a course of
lectures at West Troy, N. Y., on the 8th of March, and continued till the
15th, when he began in East Troy, where he continued till the 25th. These
were attended with happy results. In the March of the next year, the Rev.
Mr. Parke wrote Mr. Miller as follows:—

    “‘It is my privilege to say that God in mercy is doing a great
    work in West Troy. Old and young and middle-aged are alike made
    the happy recipients of grace. The Dutch Reformed church are
    enjoying an interesting state of things. The Methodists are
    full of the Spirit, and the Baptists are pressing on in the
    good cause. Praise the Lord! A number date their awakening to
    your lectures on the Second Coming of Christ.... You have great
    reason to rejoice that God is pleased to make you the honored
    instrument of awakening poor sinners.’

“Previous to these lectures, he had received the following urgent request
from Rev. Emerson Andrews, of the Baptist church in Rome, N. Y.:—

                                      “‘ROME, N. Y., MARCH 20, 1838.

    “‘DEAR BROTHER MILLER:— ... We have heard something of you
    and yours, and want to see you in person, and hear your whole
    course of lectures. I feel as if the time had arrived for you
    to preach the gospel at Rome also. There is more attention to
    religion now than formerly, and some anxiety. The desire to
    hear from you is very great. We want you to come immediately,
    the first Sunday, if possible. Don’t, I beg of you, make _any
    delay, or excuse_, but come right off.... I want you to be here
    before the time if possible.’

“Engagements at Troy made it necessary to defer compliance with the above
till they were attended to. After a few days’ rest, he visited Rome,
N. Y., began his lectures there on the 6th of May, and continued till
the 16th. In the absence of any journal, or of any reference to these
lectures in any of the letters preserved by him, their results cannot be
here recorded.

“In June following, he again visited his friends in Canada East, and
lectured at Outlet on the 10th and 11th, and Bolton from the 12th to the
14th, returning home before the end of the month. After this, he gave
courses of lectures, commencing on the 26th of August, at Braintree, Vt.;
on the 16th of September, at White Creek, Vt.; on the 3d of October,
at Pittsfield, Vt.; on the 7th, at Randolph, Vt.; on the 16th, at
Brookfield, Vt.

“This last course was given at the urgent request of Rev. Jehiel Claflin
and the Baptist church in that place. As early as the 26th of June, Mr.
C. wrote him: ‘There are a great many people in this and the adjoining
towns, who are very anxious to hear you lecture on the subject of the
millennium.’ And, on the 16th of July, he wrote: ‘I received your favor
of the 30th ult., and read the same with much delight, to find that you
could gratify the wish of so many friends in this, and adjacent towns.
I read your letter in meeting, yesterday, to my congregation; and, some
being present from abroad, I consulted them according to your request,
and found an increasing anxiety in their minds that you should come and
lecture in this vicinity, or near by.’

“On the 7th of November, he commenced a course of lectures at Montpelier,
Vt., which he continued there and in the neighborhood till the 23d. On
the 17th, he writes from that place to his son:—

    “‘There is a great excitement on the subject in this place.
    Last night, we had a solemn and interesting meeting. There was
    a great breaking down, and much weeping. Some souls have been
    born again. I can hardly get away from this people. They want
    me to stay another week; but I shall go to the next village
    on Monday. Mr. Kellogg, the Congregational minister here, is
    a good man, and his church are living Christians. Montpelier
    is quite a considerable village, and contains some very
    intelligent people, who appear to listen with much interest.
    This afternoon, I meet the citizens, and am to give them an
    opportunity to ask questions and state objections.... May God
    help me to give his truth! I know my own weakness, and I know
    that I have neither power of body nor mind to do what the Lord
    is doing by me. It is the Lord’s doings and marvelous in our
    eyes. The world do not know how weak I am. They think much more
    of the old man than _I_ think of him.’

“A gentleman in this place, on the 20th of February following, wrote to
Mr. M. as follows: ‘I am happy to inform you that your labors with us
have been blessed, and twenty have united with our church (the Baptist)
since you left Montpelier, and twenty or thirty more will soon join, all
of whom date their awakening at the time you lectured here. Bro. Kellogg
(the Congregationalist minister) is strong in the faith, and his views
are with Bro. Miller on the second coming of Christ.’

“On the 24th of November, he commenced a series of lectures in Jericho,
Vt., which continued till the 2d of December. On the 28th of this month,
he went to Stockbridge, Vt., and on the 30th, to Rochester, where he
continued till the 6th of January, 1839.

“On the 7th of January, 1839, he wrote to his son from Bethel, Vt., that
he had lectured in those places to large audiences, and was on his way to
Woodstock. He arrived at that place on the 7th, and commenced a second
course of lectures, which continued to the 14th. From that date to the
20th, he lectured at Pomfret, Vt.; from the 21st to the 27th, at Bethel,
Vt.; and from the 28th to the 31st, at Gaysville, Vt.; from which place
he returned home. On the 28th, he wrote from Gaysville to his son:—

    “‘There has been a reformation in every place that I have
    lectured in since I left home, and the work is progressing
    in every place rapidly. The meeting-houses are crowded to
    overflowing. Much excitement prevails among the people. Many
    say they believe; some scoff; others are sober and thinking.
    Give my love to all—mother and the children.

                          I remain yours, etc.

                                                      “‘WM. MILLER.’

“On the 10th of March, he commenced in Essex, Vt., and lectured till the
17th. From the 18th to the 25th, he was at Williston, Vt.; and on the
26th, he commenced another course of lectures at Waterbury, Vt., which
closed on the 1st of April. Having projected a tour into Massachusetts
about this time, he was obliged to disappoint a large number who had
solicited visits from him. As evidence of the great desire to hear him,
he then had on file urgent requests from Frederick Daley, ‘Preacher
in charge,’ Northfield, Vt.,—with fifteen signatures from Strafford,
Vt.,—expressing ‘a great anxiety on the part of the public to hear a
course of lectures;’ from Joseph Chase, Middlesex, announcing that the
meeting-house had been opened for him without a dissenting vote, and
urging him to come by all means; Wm. D. Leavett, Grantham, N. H.; urging
his presence there, ‘at an early day as possible;’ Z. Delano, Hartford,
Vt., wishing him to come as early ‘as practicable;’ Jonathan Woods,
Dover, Vt., ‘many people being desirous to hear;’ Hiram Freeman, pastor
of the Congregationalist church in Middlesex, Vt., stating that ‘the
church would gladly see him, and were generally anxious for him to come,’
etc., etc.; none of which appear to have been complied with.




CHAPTER VI.

    VISITS MASSACHUSETTS—INVITATION TO LOWELL—EXTRACT FROM THE
    LYNN RECORD—IS INVITED TO BOSTON—CONVERSATION WITH ELDER
    HIMES—PUBLICATION OF HIS LECTURES BY MR. MUSSEY—LABORS IN
    PORTSMOUTH—INTERVIEW WITH ELDER ROBINSON, ETC.


“In compliance with an invitation from Mr. Seth Mann, of Randolph, Mass.,
dated January 15, 1839, informing him that ‘I, myself, and many of our
Baptist and Pedo-Baptist friends here, wish you to come and preach to
us,’ Mr. Miller visited Massachusetts, and arrived for the first time in
Boston on the evening of April 18. The next day he wrote as follows:—

                         “‘Boston, April 19, 10 o’clock A. M., 1839.

    “‘DEAR SON:—I am now in this place, hearty and well. Start at
    half-past twelve for Randolph, where I expect to be next week.
    Roads were very bad. Snow-storm night before last in Keene, N.
    H.; pleasant yesterday and to-day. I have been running about
    this morning; visited India wharf, the new Market, Faneuil
    Hall, etc., etc. Busy time in Boston. I have no news as yet.
    Will write as often as you will wish to hear. I stopped at the
    Pemberton House, No. 9 Howard street.

                              Yours, etc.

                                                        WM. MILLER.’

“He reached Randolph, and commenced his first course of lectures in
Massachusetts on the 21st of April of that year. He closed his lectures
there on the 28th; commenced in Stoughton, Mass., on the 29th, and
continued to the 6th of May; lectured at Braintree, Mass., on the 7th and
8th, and from the 9th to the 13th in East Randolph, Mass. His lectures
in these places were attended by powerful revivals. On the 27th of May
Mr. Mann wrote him from Randolph, saying:—

    “‘The Lord, we trust, is doing a gracious work in this place.
    There have been twelve or fourteen already converted, and at
    the close of the last meeting about twenty arose for prayers.
    Our last conference meeting was so crowded that we had to
    adjourn to the meeting-house.... There appears to be a great
    solemnity on the minds of nearly all in Mr. M’Leish’s society.
    A powerful work is going on in East Randolph.’

“In July following, Rev. Charles Peabody transmitted to Mr. M. the
unanimous vote of the church for him to repeat his lectures in Randolph;
but he does not appear to have done so.

“Previous to Mr. Miller’s visit to Massachusetts, Elder T. Cole, of
Lowell, had heard of the results attending his labors in Vermont, and
had written for him to visit that city. The dress of Mr. Miller was
very plain and ordinary, much more befitting his profession of a farmer
than of a preacher. Elder Cole, from the reports of his great success,
expected him to appear like some distinguished doctor of divinity. When
Mr. M. came to Randolph, Elder C. obtained a promise of his services in
Lowell, to commence on the 14th of May, and was requested to meet him
at the cars. He had heard that Mr. Miller wore a camlet cloak and white
hat, but expected to see a fashionably-dressed gentleman. On the arrival
of the cars, he went to the depot to meet him. He watched closely the
appearance of all the passengers as they left the cars, but saw no one
who corresponded with his expectations of Mr. M. Soon he saw an old man,
shaking with the palsy, with a white hat and camlet cloak, alight from
the cars. Fearing that this one might prove to be the man, and, if so,
regretting that he had invited him to lecture in _his_ church, he stepped
up to him, and whispered in his ear:—

“‘Is your name Miller?’

“Mr. M. nodded assent.

“‘Well,’ said he, ‘follow me.’

“He led the way, walking on ahead, and Mr. M. keeping as near as he
could, till he reached his house. He was much chagrined that he had
written for a man of Mr. M.’s appearance, who, he concluded, could know
nothing respecting the Bible, but would confine his discourse to visions
and fancies of his own.

“After tea, he told Mr. M. he supposed it was about time to attend
church; and again led the way, Mr. Miller bringing up the rear. He showed
Mr. M. into the desk, but took a seat himself among the congregation.
Mr. M. read a hymn; after it was sung, he prayed, and read another hymn,
which was also sung. He felt unpleasant at being left in the pulpit
alone, but took for his text: ‘Looking for that blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ.’ This
he sustained and illustrated by apposite quotations of Scripture, proving
a second personal and glorious appearing of Christ. Elder C. listened
for about fifteen minutes, when, seeing that he presented nothing but
the word of God, and that he opened the Scriptures in a manner that did
honor to the occasion, like a workman who needeth not to be ashamed, he
walked up into the pulpit, and took his seat. Mr. M. lectured there from
the 14th to the 22d of May, and again from the 29th to the 4th of June.
A glorious revival followed, and elder C. embraced his views in full,
continuing for six years a devoted advocate of them. On the 25th of July,
elder C. wrote Mr. M. that, since the lectures, he ‘had baptized about
forty, sixty in all having joined the church; and there are yet some who
are seeking the Lord.’ Mr. Miller says of his visit:—

    “‘At Lowell I also became acquainted with my Bro. J. Litch, who
    had previously embraced my views, and who has since so aided
    their extension by his faithful lectures and writings, and
    energetic and consistent course.’

“From the 24th to the 28th of May, Mr. M. lectured in Groton, Mass., and
from the 3d to the 9th of June, in Lynn, Mass. In connection with his
visit to this place, he made the following entry in his memorandum-book:
‘Thus ends my tour into Massachusetts, making eight hundred lectures from
October 1, 1834, to June 9, 1839—four years, six months, nine days.’ The
editor of the _Lynn Record_ gave the following notice of Mr. Miller, and
his visit to that place:—

    “‘MILLER AND THE PROPHECIES.

    “‘We took a prejudice against this good man when he first
    came among us, on account of what we supposed a glaring error
    in interpreting the Scripture prophecies so that the world
    would come to an end in 1843. We are still inclined to believe
    this an error or miscalculation. At the same time we have
    overcome our prejudice against him by attending his lectures,
    and learning more of the excellent character of the man, and
    of the great good he has done and is doing. Mr. Miller is a
    plain farmer, and pretends to nothing except that he has made
    the Scripture prophecies an intense study for many years,
    understands some of them differently from most other people,
    and wishes, for the good of others, to spread his views before
    the public. No one can hear him five minutes without being
    convinced of his sincerity, and instructed by his reasoning and
    information. All acknowledge his lectures to be replete with
    useful and interesting matter. His knowledge of Scripture is
    very extensive and minute; that of the prophecies, especially,
    surprisingly familiar. His application of the prophecies to the
    great events which have taken place in the natural and moral
    world is such, generally, as to produce conviction of their
    truth, and gain the ready assent of his hearers. We have reason
    to believe that the preaching or lecturing of Mr. Miller,
    has been productive of great and extensive good. Revivals
    have followed in his train. He has been heard with attention,
    wherever he has been....

    “‘There is nothing very peculiar in the manner or appearance of
    Mr. Miller. Both are at least equal to the style and appearance
    of ministers in general. His gestures are easy and expressive,
    and his personal appearance every way decorous. His Scripture
    explanations and illustrations are strikingly simple, natural,
    and forcible; and the great eagerness of the people to hear him
    has been manifested wherever he has preached.’

“On his way home he lectured at the following places:—Commencing on
the 16th of June at Westford, Vt.; the 23d, at Cambridge, Vt., and on
the 30th at Colchester, Vt. As a result of his labors in Colchester,
twenty-three were added to the Baptist church between that time and the
2d of December following.

“The letters addressed to him and his son at this period show that a
report was in circulation that he was dead; and, that as soon as that was
successfully contradicted, another was current that, on re-examining his
calculations, he had discovered a mistake of one hundred years. Both of
these rumors were several times subsequently revived, and had to be as
often contradicted.

“On the 15th of September, in compliance with ‘the wish of many in
Rutland, Vt.,’ who were ‘very anxious to hear’ his ‘course of lectures,’
he visited that place, and lectured each day, to the 22d, when he
returned to his family, and made arrangements for a second visit to
Massachusetts.

“He commenced his labors at Groton, Mass., on the 13th of October,
and lectured ten days. In reference to these lectures and others in
neighboring towns, Rev. Silas Hawley, Congregational minister, wrote from
Groton, on the 10th of April, 1840, as follows:—

    “‘Mr. Miller has lectured in this and adjoining towns with
    marked success. His lectures have been succeeded by precious
    revivals of religion in all those places. A class of minds
    are reached by him not within the influence of other men.
    His lectures are well adapted, so far as I have learned, for
    shaking the supremacy of the various forms of error that are
    rife in the community.’

“Closing his lectures in Groton, Mr. M. gave a third course of lectures
in Lowell, continuing from the 23d of October to the 1st of November.
These, like the previous lectures in that place, were attended with
precious fruits.

“From the 2d to the 10th of November, he lectured in Haverhill, Mass.,
where he made the acquaintance of Elder Henry Plummer, pastor of the
Christian church, who embraced his views, and was a steadfast friend till
Mr. Miller’s decease.

“On the 11th of November, Mr. M. commenced a course of lectures in
Exeter, N. H., which continued till the 19th. On the 12th, a conference
of the Christian Connection was in session there, and they called on Mr.
Miller in a body. He was a stranger to nearly all of them; and few of
them regarded his views with anything more than mere curiosity. Several
of them questioned him respecting his faith; but they were speedily
silenced by the quotation of appropriate texts of Scripture.

“It was on this occasion that he became acquainted with Elder Joshua V.
Himes, then pastor of the Chardon-street church, Boston. Elder H. had
written to Mr. M., on the 19th of October, inviting him to give a course
of lectures in his chapel. He now renewed his invitation, and got the
promise of a course of lectures in December. Before commencing there, Mr.
Miller gave a second course of lectures in Stoughton, Mass., from the
24th to the 29th of November, and one in Canton, Mass., from the 1st to
the 6th of December. In this last place, he writes to his son, that he
‘lectured three times on the last day, to a house jammed full.’ Pressing
invitations for further labors in the surrounding region had to be
disregarded, in order to fulfill his engagement in the metropolis of New
England.

“He arrived in Boston on the 7th of December, and from the 8th to the
16th lectured in the Chardon-street chapel,—his first course of lectures
in that city.

“On the 12th of December, Mr. Miller writes from Boston to his son:—‘I am
now in this place lecturing, twice a day, to large audiences. Many, very
many, go away unable to gain admittance. Many, I am informed, are under
serious convictions. I hope God will work in this city.’

“At this time he stopped at the house of Elder Himes, who had much
conversation with him respecting his views, his plans for the future,
and his responsibilities. Elder H. became impressed with the correctness
of Mr. M.’s views respecting the nearness and nature of Christ’s coming;
but was not fully satisfied respecting the time. He was, however,
sufficiently convinced that Mr. Miller was communicating important
truths, to feel a great interest in their promulgation.

“‘When Mr. Miller had closed his lectures,’ says Elder H., ‘I found
myself in a new position. I could not believe or preach as I had done.
Light on this subject was blazing on my conscience day and night. A
long conversation with Mr. Miller then took place, on our duties and
responsibilities. I said to Bro. Miller, “Do you really believe this
doctrine?”

“‘He replied, “Certainly, I do, or I would not preach it.”

“‘What are you doing to spread or diffuse it through the world?’

“‘I have done, and am still doing, all I can.’

“‘Well, the whole thing is kept in a corner yet. There is but little
knowledge on the subject, after all you have done. If Christ is to come
in a few years, as you believe, no time should be lost in giving the
church and world warning, in thunder-tones, to arouse them to prepare.’

“‘I know it, I know it, Bro. Himes,’ said he; ‘but what can an old farmer
do? I was never used to public speaking; I stand quite alone; and, though
I have labored much, and seen many converted to God and the truth, yet
_no one_, as yet, seems to enter into the _object_ and _spirit of my
mission_, so as to render me much aid. They like to have me preach, and
build up their churches; and there it ends with most of the ministers, as
yet. I have been looking for help—I want help.’

“‘It was at this time that I laid myself, family, society, reputation,
all, upon the altar of God, to help him, to the extent of my power, to
the end. I then inquired of him what parts of the country he had visited,
and whether he had visited any of our principal cities.

“‘He informed me of his labors,’ as given in the foregoing pages.

“‘But why,’ I said, ‘have you not been into the large cities?’

“‘He replied that his rule was to visit those places where invited, and
that he had not been invited into any of the large cities.

“‘Well,’ said I, ‘will you go with me where doors are opened?’

“‘Yes, I am ready to go anywhere, and labor to the extent of my ability
to the end.’

“‘I then told him he might prepare for the campaign; for doors should be
opened in every city in the Union, and the warning should go to the ends
of the earth! Here I began to “help” Father Miller.’

“With this epoch commenced an entire new era in the spread of the
doctrine of the advent. B. B. Mussey, Esq., a distinguished Boston
publisher, undertook the publication of a revised edition, of five
thousand copies, of Mr. Miller’s Lectures, on condition that Mr. Miller
would secure the copyright. Mr. M. did so, which subjected himself to
some blame, where the reason for the act was not known. Mr. M. gave to
Mr. Mussey the entire profits of the edition for two hundred copies of
the work, which Mr. Mussey gave him.

“On the 17th of December, Mr. M. lectured in Westford, where he was
refused the use of the Congregational church—the first place of worship
that was ever closed against him. From the 19th to the 26th of December,
he lectured in Littleton, Mass. The result of these lectures is indicated
by a letter of Rev. Oliver Ayer (Baptist), who writes, in January:—‘I
baptized twelve at our last communion. I shall, probably, baptize from
fifteen to twenty next time. There have been from thirty-five to forty
hopeful conversions. There is also quite a work in Westford, ten or
twelve conversions, and twenty or thirty inquirers. The work is still
going on.’

“On the 28th he returned to Boston, and repeated his course of lectures
in Mr. Himes’ chapel, closing on the 5th of January, 1840. The day
following, by request of the Baptist church under the care of the Rev.
Mr. Parker, he visited Cambridgeport, and lectured there each day till
the 13th of January. From the 14th to the 20th, he gave a second course
of lectures to Elder Plummer’s society, in Haverhill, Mass.

“On the 21st of January, 1840, he visited Portsmouth, N. H., and
commenced his first course of lectures in that city. The following
article, in reference to them, from the pen of Elder David Millard,
pastor of the Christian Society there, appeared in the columns of the
_Christian Herald_ a few weeks subsequently:—

    “‘On the 21st of January, Bro. William Miller came into town,
    and commenced, in our chapel, his course of lectures on the
    Second Coming of Christ. During the nine days that he remained,
    crowds flocked to hear him. Before he concluded his lectures,
    a large number of anxious souls came forward for prayers. Our
    meetings continued every day and evening for a length of time
    after he left. Such an intense state of feeling as now pervaded
    our congregation we never witnessed before in any place. Not
    unfrequently from sixty to eighty would come forward for
    prayers on an evening. Such an awful spirit of solemnity seemed
    to settle down on the place that hard must be that sinner’s
    heart that could withstand it. Yet, during the whole, not an
    appearance of confusion occurred; all was order and solemnity.
    Generally, as soon as souls found deliverance, they were ready
    to proclaim it, and exhort their friends, in the most moving
    language, to come to the fountain of life. Our meetings thus
    continued, on evenings, for six weeks; indeed, they have thus
    continued, with very little intermission, up to the present.

    “‘Probably about one hundred and fifty souls have been
    converted in our meetings; but a part of these were from
    other congregations, and have returned to their former
    meetings. Among the converts are a considerable number from
    the Universalist congregation; these still remain with us.
    From our meetings this blessed work soon spread into every
    congregation in town favorable to revivals. In several of them
    it is at present spreading with power. For weeks together, the
    ringing of bells for daily meetings rendered our town like a
    continual Sabbath. Indeed, such a season of revival was never
    witnessed before in Portsmouth by the oldest inhabitant.
    It would be difficult, at present, to ascertain the exact
    number of conversions in town; it is variously estimated at
    from five hundred to seven hundred. We have received into
    fellowship eighty-one; nine of these were received on previous
    profession. We have baptized sixty-seven, and the others
    stand as candidates for baptism. Never, while we linger on
    the shores of mortality, do we expect to enjoy more of Heaven
    than we have in some of our late meetings, and on baptizing
    occasions. At the waterside, thousands would gather to witness
    this solemn institution in Zion, and many would return from the
    place weeping. Our brethren at the old chapel have had some
    additions, we believe some over twenty.’

“The Rev. Mr. Peabody, of Portsmouth, in a sermon published soon after,
spoke of the revival which commenced there in connection with Mr.
Miller’s labors, as follows:—

    “‘If I am rightly informed, the present season of religious
    excitement has been, to a great degree, free from what, I
    confess, has always made me dread such times, I mean those
    excesses and extravagances which wound religion in the house
    of its friends, and cause its enemies to blaspheme. I most
    cheerfully express my opinion that there will be, in the fruits
    of the present excitement, far less to regret, and much more
    for the friends of God to rejoice in—much more to be recorded
    in the book of eternal life—than in any similar series of
    religious exercises which I have ever had the opportunity of
    watching.’

“At the time of these lectures, Eld. D. I. Robinson was stationed in
Portsmouth, as the pastor of the Methodist church, and attended a part of
the course. He writes:—

    “‘I heard him all I could the first week, and thought I could
    stop his wheels and confound him; but, as the revival had
    commenced in the vast congregation assembled to hear, I would
    not do it publicly, lest evil should follow. I therefore
    visited him at his room, with a formidable list of objections.
    To my surprise, scarcely any of them were new to him, and he
    could answer them as fast as I could present them. And then he
    presented objections and questions which confounded _me_ and
    the commentaries on which I had relied. I went home used up,
    convicted, humbled, and resolved to examine the question.’

“The result was, that Eld. R. became fully convinced of the nearness of
the advent, and has since been a faithful preacher of the kingdom at
hand. Eld. Thomas F. Barry, also, at this time embraced Mr. Miller’s
views, and continued an able and consistent advocate of the same till his
death, at Oswego, N. Y., July 17, 1846.

“On the 30th and 31st of January, Mr. M. again lectured in Exeter, N. H.,
and from the 2d to the 6th of February in Deerfield, N. H., after which
he returned to Boston.




CHAPTER VII.

    PUBLICATION OF THE “SIGNS OF THE TIMES”—VISIT TO WATERTOWN,
    PORTLAND, NEW YORK CITY, AND OTHER PLACES—LETTERS OF ELDERS
    MEDBURY, FLEMING, AND GREEN—HIS SICKNESS, RESIGNATION, ETC.


“From the 8th to the 29th of February, Mr. M. gave his third course of
lectures in Boston, in the Marlboro’ Chapel and other places, as the
doors opened. It was during this series of meetings that the publication
of a journal, devoted to the doctrine of the advent, was effected. Mr.
Miller (in 1845) thus narrates its origin:—

“For a long time previous to this, the papers had been filled with
abusive stories respecting my labors, and they had refused to publish
anything from me in reply. I had greatly felt the need of some medium of
communication to the public. Efforts had been frequently made to commence
the publication of a paper which should be devoted to the advocacy of
the doctrine, and the communication of information on the fulfillment of
prophecy. We had, however, never been able to find a man who was willing
to run the risk of his reputation and the pecuniary expense in such a
publication.

“On my visit to Boston in the winter of 1840, I mentioned to Bro. Himes
my wishes respecting a paper, and the difficulties I had experienced in
the establishment of one. He promptly offered to commence a paper which
should be devoted to this question, if I thought the cause of truth would
be thereby advanced. The next week, without a subscriber or any promise
of assistance, he issued the first number of the _Signs of the Times_,
on the 28th of February, 1840—a publication [now, 1875, _Messiah’s
Herald_,] which has been continued to the present time.

“With this commenced an entire new era in the spread of information
on the peculiar points of my belief. Mr. Mussey gave up to him the
publication of my lectures, and he published them in connection with
other works on the prophecies, which, aided by devoted friends, he
scattered broadcast everywhere to the extent of his means. I cannot here
withhold my testimony to the efficiency and integrity of my Bro. Himes.
He has stood by me at all times, periled his reputation, and, by the
position in which he has been placed, has been more instrumental in the
spread of these views than any other ten men who have embarked in the
cause. His course, both in laboring as a lecturer and in the manner that
he has managed his publications, meets my full approval.—_Apology and
Defense_, p. 21.

“After the issue of the first number, its printers, Messrs. Dow &
Jackson, proposed to Elder Himes to issue the paper semi-monthly for one
year, he to furnish the editorial matter gratuitously, and they to have
all the proceeds of it. These terms being accepted, they re-issued the
first number on the 20th of March, and continued it, as per agreement,
for one year, when it reverted to Eld. Himes, its projector, by whom it
has been continued to the present time [1853].

“On the 1st of March, 1840, Mr. M. visited Watertown, Mass., and
commenced his first course of lectures in that place. These continued
nine days, and were attended by a crowded audience. Mr. M. was much
pleased with his reception there, and, after leaving, wrote to his son:—

    “‘I have never seen so great an effect in any one place as
    there. I preached last from Gen. 19:17. There were from a
    thousand to fifteen hundred present, and more than one hundred
    under conviction. One-half the congregation wept like children
    when I parted from them. Mr. Medbury, the Baptist minister, a
    good man, wept as though his heart would break, when he took me
    by the hand, and, for himself and people, bade me farewell. He
    and many others fell upon my neck, and wept and kissed me, and
    sorrowed most of all that they should see my face no more. We
    could not get away for more than an hour, and finally we had to
    break away. About twenty were converted while I was there.’

“Rev. R. B. Medbury afterward gave the following account of the result of
Mr. Miller’s lectures there, through the _Signs of the Times_:—

    “‘For several months past we have enjoyed, and are still
    enjoying, a pleasing work of grace among us. This revival, as
    stated in the account published in the _Christian Watchman_
    of the 8th instant, was in progress when Mr. Miller commenced
    lecturing here. In speaking of the results of his labors,
    however, it is but just to say that his influence here preceded
    him. It will be recollected that, some time in January, he
    lectured at Cambridgeport, about four miles from us. Many, both
    of our church and congregation, attended one or more of those
    lectures. The first two subjects of the present work among
    us, as well as some others, who have since been hopefully
    converted, regarded those lectures as instrumental of fastening
    permanent conviction upon their mind. Several Christians, too,
    were awakened to a new sense of their duty.

    “‘There had, however, been rather more feeling than usual
    in several of our meetings previous to that time. And
    in the interval which elapsed between this time and the
    commencement of Mr. Miller’s lectures here, the blessing of
    God had accompanied the means of grace at home to the hopeful
    conversion of about twenty. The work evidently received a new
    impulse while Mr. Miller was here. His lectures were attended
    by crowds, who listened with profound attention, and, we have
    reason to believe, in not a few cases with profit. Many persons
    from neighboring villages shared the benefit of his labors in
    common with us, and, in several cases, returned to their homes
    rejoicing. Other means of grace were, however, mingled with
    his labors, which were, no doubt, in a great degree owned and
    blessed of God.

    “‘Among those who have since united with our church, many have
    mentioned Mr. Miller’s lectures as the means, under God, of
    bringing them to repentance. They have generally stated that,
    for months or years, they had thought more or less on the
    subject; but that on hearing him they felt it was time to take
    a stand. The things of eternity assumed to them an unwonted
    reality. Heaven was brought near, and they felt themselves
    guilty before God. It was not so much the belief that Christ
    might come in 1843 as it was the _certainty_ of that event,
    with the conviction that they were not prepared to hail his
    coming with joy. Many, however, who listened to his whole
    course of lectures with a heart unmoved, have since been melted
    into contrition, and become the hopeful subjects of renewing
    grace.

    “‘Many Christians who attended Mr. Miller’s lectures here have
    regarded them as the means of quickening them to new spiritual
    life. I know not that any one has embraced all his peculiar
    views; but many have been made to feel that time is short,
    that the coming of Christ is at hand, and that what they do
    for their fellow-men must be done quickly. They have felt that
    hitherto the doctrine of the second coming of Christ has had
    little or no practical effect upon them, and that, while they
    could suppose at least one thousand years between that event
    and the present time, its influence must be less than if it
    were a matter of constant expectation. They think that the
    contemplation of this subject has awakened feelings which the
    anticipation of death never kindled in their breasts. Earth has
    receded, and their attachment to all sublunary objects has been
    loosened. Eternity has seemed to open near before them, and its
    scenes have become more distinct objects of vision; while the
    soul, with all that pertains to its immortal weal or woe, has
    been felt to eclipse every other object of earth. In a word,
    they profess to have consecrated themselves unto the service of
    God, and to labor to be found watching whenever the Master of
    the house shall come, “whether at even, or at midnight, or at
    the cock-crowing, or in the morning, lest, coming suddenly, he
    should find them sleeping.”

    “‘_Watertown, May 21, 1840._’

“In compliance with the wishes of Elder L. D. Fleming, pastor of the
Christian church in Portland, Me., Mr. Miller visited and gave his first
course of lectures in that city, from the 11th to the 23d of March. The
result of these was thus stated by Elder Fleming, in April following:—

    “‘There has probably never been so much religious interest
    among the inhabitants of this place, generally, as at present;
    and Mr. Miller must be regarded, directly or indirectly, as
    the instrument, although many, no doubt, will deny it, as some
    are very unwilling to admit that a good work of God can follow
    his labors; and yet we have the most indubitable evidence that
    this is the work of the Lord. It is worthy of note that in
    the present interest there has been, comparatively, nothing
    like mechanical effort. There has been nothing like passionate
    excitement. If there has been excitement, it has been out of
    doors, among such as did not attend Bro. Miller’s lectures.

    “‘At some of our meetings, since Bro. M. left, as many as
    two hundred and fifty, it has been estimated, have expressed
    a desire for religion, by coming forward for prayers; and
    probably between _one_ and _two hundred_ have professed
    conversion at our meetings; and now the fire is being kindled
    through this whole city and all the adjacent country. A number
    of rumsellers have turned their shops into meeting-rooms, and
    those places that were once devoted to intemperance and revelry
    are now devoted to prayer and praise. Others have abandoned
    the traffic entirely, and are become converted to God. One
    or two gambling establishments, I am informed, are entirely
    broken up. Infidels, deists, Universalists, and the most
    abandoned profligates, have been converted—some who had not
    been to the house of worship for years. Prayer-meetings have
    been established in every part of the city, by the different
    denominations, or by individuals, and at almost every hour.
    Being down in the business part of our city, on the 4th inst.,
    I was conducted into a room over one of the banks, where I
    found about thirty or forty men, of different denominations,
    engaged, with one accord, in prayer, at about eleven o’clock in
    the day-time! In short, it would be almost impossible to give
    an adequate idea of the interest now felt in the city. There is
    nothing like extravagant excitement, but an almost universal
    solemnity on the minds of all the people. One of the principal
    book-sellers informed me that he had sold more Bibles in _one
    month_, since Mr. Miller came here, than he had in any four
    months previous.’

“An article in the Maine _Wesleyan Journal_ gave the following account of
his person and style of preaching:—

    “‘Mr. Miller has been in Portland, lecturing to crowded
    congregations in Casco-street Church, on his favorite theme,
    the end of the world, or literal reign of Christ for one
    thousand years. As faithful chroniclers of passing events, it
    will be expected of us that we should say something of the man
    and his peculiar views. Mr. Miller is about sixty years of
    age, a plain farmer, from Hampton, in the State of New York.
    He is a member of the Baptist church in that place, from which
    he brings satisfactory testimonials of good standing, and a
    license to improve publicly. He has, we understand, numerous
    testimonials, also, from clergymen of different denominations,
    favorable to his general character. We should think him a man
    but of common-school education; evidently possessing strong
    powers of mind, which, for about fourteen years, have been
    almost exclusively bent to the investigation of Scripture
    prophecies. The last eight years of his life have been devoted
    to lecturing on this favorite subject.

    “‘In his public discourse, he is self-possessed and ready;
    distinct in his utterance, and frequently quaint in his
    expressions. He succeeds in chaining the attention of his
    auditory from an hour and a half to two hours; and in the
    management of his subject discovers much tact, holding frequent
    colloquies with the objector and inquirer, supplying the
    questions and answers himself in a very natural manner, and,
    although grave himself, sometimes producing a smile from a
    portion of his auditors.

    “‘Mr. Miller is a great stickler for literal interpretations;
    never admitting the figurative, unless absolutely required to
    make correct sense, or meet the event which is intended to be
    pointed out. He doubtless believes, most unwaveringly, all he
    teaches to others. His lectures are interspersed with powerful
    admonitions to the wicked, and he handles Universalism with
    gloves of steel.’

“In connection with the foregoing was appended a statement of Mr. M’s
opinions, which elicited from him the following comment:—

    “‘In all the cities which I have visited, the editors of
    religious newspapers have almost invariably misstated and
    ridiculed my views, doctrines, and motives; but in Portland
    I found, as I honestly believe, an honest editor. He gave a
    candid, honest, and impartial account.’

“Mr. Miller was strongly urged by ‘the wardens of the First Baptist
Society, worshiping in Pleasant street,’ where he lectured a portion of
the time, to give them ‘another course of lectures,’ but he was obliged
to decline the invitation; and, on the last Tuesday in March, left
Portland, and by stage and railroad reached his home in Low Hampton on
Friday night following, ‘being absent from home nearly six months, and
having delivered three hundred and twenty-seven lectures.’

“On his way home, a young man, dressed in black, who, Mr. M. afterward
learned, was a clergyman in a neighboring town, became his companion
for a short distance in the stage. The young man was very talkative
respecting the ministers of his acquaintance,—remarking what a smooth
preacher A was, how learned B was, and how popular C was, &c. When the
stage stopped for the passengers to dine, the young man proved to be an
acquaintance of the landlord, and they commenced conversation respecting
‘the prophet Miller.’ The landlord inquired of the gentleman in black
if he had read Mr. Miller’s lectures, which the former had loaned him a
few days previous. ‘No,’ the clergyman said; he read the introduction,
and found that Mr. M. was not a _learned_ man, and therefore he had no
confidence in the work. This reply struck Mr. M. with much force, as
evidence of the manner in which many let those reputed to be learned do
their thinking for them.

“From the 5th to the 29th of April, he lectured in Hampton, N. Y., to
full houses, and a good work followed. On the 2d of May he commenced a
course of lectures in the Baptist church in Benson, Vt., and lectured
there and in the church of the Rev. Mr. Francis (orthodox) nine days. On
leaving this place, Mr. Miller wrote to his son: ‘The several clergymen
in the town met with us. The Lord came down in his power and by his
Spirit; a gracious influence was felt, and many a stout heart yielded to
the gospel of Christ. About thirty had obtained a hope, and about one
hundred more were anxious, when I left.’

“Mr. Miller next visited New York city, and commenced his first course
of lectures there, from the 16th to the 29th of May, at the corner of
Norfolk and Broome streets, to good assemblies. On the 19th, he wrote:
‘Last night we had a solemn time. An anxious and deep attention was
given by the whole congregation.’ Considerable interest was excited by
this course, and the ground was prepared for subsequent labors. At the
close of these lectures, Mr. Miller returned home, where he remained a
few days, and then made another visit to Canada East. He lectured at
Hatly on the 21st of June, and at Bolton on the 24th. On the 28th he
commenced a course of lectures in Georgeville, which closed on the 5th of
July. Writing from this place, on the 29th of June, he speaks of ‘large
congregations,’ ‘serious attention,’ and of the prospect ‘that much good
would be done there.’ He then returned to Low Hampton, where he lectured
on the 12th of July.

“He remained at home about four weeks, when he visited Dresden, N. Y.,
and lectured from the 9th to the 12th of August. Of that place he writes,
under date of August 13: ‘We had a good time; the Lord was there.’ He
then adds: ‘I do not know what to say about coming to Massachusetts
again. Day after to-morrow I begin a course of lectures at Fort Ann. The
next week I go north, where I have three places, which will take three
weeks at least. I have more business on hand than any two men like me
should perform. I must lecture twice every day. I must converse with
many—answer a host of questions—write answers to letters from all parts
of the compass, from Canada to Florida, from Maine to Missouri. I must
read all the candid arguments (which I confess are not many) which are
urged against me. I must read all the slang of the drunken and sober....
The polar star must be kept in view; the chart consulted, the compass
watched; the reckoning kept; the sails set; the rudder managed; the ship
cleared; the sailors fed; the voyage prosecuted; the port of rest, to
which we are destined, understood; and to the watchman call, “Watchman,
what of the night?”

“On the 15th of August, 1840, he commenced his anticipated lectures at
South Bay, in the town of Fort Ann, N. Y., and continued to the 20th.

“On the 2d, in compliance with a previous invitation, he commenced a
second course of lectures in Colchester, Vt., which terminated on the
29th. Of these meetings Elder Columbus Green thus writes:—

    “‘The audiences were very large, notwithstanding it was a time
    of great excitement, and our place of worship was as still
    as death. His lectures were delivered in the most kind and
    affectionate manner, convincing every mind that he believed the
    sentiments he uttered. He made the most powerful exhortations
    that I ever heard fall from the lips of any one. A deep
    solemnity pervaded the minds of the community. Young men and
    maidens, amid the pleasures of early years; men in the meridian
    of life, hurrying on with locomotive speed in pursuit of the
    treasures of earth; gray-haired sires, and matrons whose hoary
    locks gave evidence that many winters had passed over them, all
    paused and pondered on the things they heard, inquiring, “Am I
    ready?” Many came to the conclusion that they were unprepared
    to meet their Saviour, repented of their sins, and, through
    the merits of Jesus, obtained pardon full and free. For two
    years after this, there was a constant state of revival in that
    place; and many were the souls that dated their convictions of
    sin at that time, when the faithful old man warned them of the
    world’s approaching doom. No man was more highly esteemed than
    he was; and it was not uncommon for impenitent men to vindicate
    his character when his motives were impeached.

    “‘Many there regarded him as “a chosen vessel of the Lord,” who
    had been instrumental in building them up “in the most holy
    faith;” who had taken them, as it were, to Pisgah’s top, and
    shown them the promised land, that better country for which
    patriarchs and prophets sighed. Among the public servants
    of the Most High, to them most dear, our departed brother
    held a conspicuous place. Years have passed since I enjoyed
    those happy seasons with them, and swift-rolling rivers and
    snow-capped hill-tops now lie between us. But, in whatever
    light they may now regard the efforts of him who sleeps in
    death, they then appreciated them. For one, I have never since
    seen the time when I was not thankful to God that I was counted
    worthy to see the light, and rejoice in it. And my prayer is
    that the torch of truth may illume our path through time,
    and that we may at last have an abundant entrance into the
    everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.

    “‘_Montgomery, Vt., March 14, 1850._’

“Mr. Miller next lectured in Burlington, Vt., from the 30th of August to
the 5th of September; in Salisbury, Vt., from the 12th to the 20th of
September; and from the 26th of the same month to the 1st of October, in
Sudbury, Vt., after which he returned to Low Hampton.

“In anticipation of attending the first General Conference of believers
in the second coming of Christ, which was to assemble on the 14th of
October, 1840, in Boston, Mr. Miller left home on the 8th, and proceeded
as far as Fairhaven, Vt., about two miles from home, where he was taken
with a severe attack of typhoid fever. In the afternoon of the same
day he was carried back to Low Hampton. He was thus deprived of the
long-desired privilege of meeting fellow-laborers in the work in which he
was engaged. On the 15th of October he was able to dictate a few lines to
those assembled in conference, as follows:—

    ... “‘Why was I deprived of meeting those congenial minds in
    this good, this glorious, cause of light and truth? Why am I
    to bear this last affliction, and not enjoy this one pleasure
    of meeting fellow-laborers in a cause so big with prospects,
    so glorious in its results, so honoring to God, and so safe to
    man? Why are the providences of God so mysterious? I have often
    inquired. Am I never to have _my will_? No, never, until my
    will shall harmonize with thine, O Father! Yes, God is right;
    his providence is right; his ways are just and true; and I am
    foolish to murmur or complain.

    ... “‘Oh, I had vainly hoped to see you all, to breathe and
    feel that sacred flame of love, of heavenly fire; to hear and
    speak of that dear, blessed Saviour’s near approach!... But
    here I am, a weak, feeble, toil-worn old man, upon a bed of
    sickness, with feeble nerves, and, worse than all, a heart, I
    fear, in part unreconciled to God. But bless the Lord, O my
    soul! I have great blessings yet, more than I can number. I was
    not taken sick far from home. I am in the bosom of my family.
    I have my reason; I can think, believe, and love. I have the
    Bible—O blessed book! If I cannot read, I have a daughter who
    loves that book, and she can read for me. How pleasant it is
    to hear those infant voices read that holy book! How soft the
    couch of sickness may be made by dutiful children and the book
    of God! I have a hope,—yes, yes, “a blessed hope,”—founded on
    that Word that never fails. My hope is in Him who soon will
    come, and will not tarry. I love the thought; it makes my bed
    in sickness; I hope it will in death. I wait for him. My soul,
    wait thou on God. I have the Spirit; O blessed Holy Spirit!
    He whispers in my heart, “Fear not, I am with thee; be not
    dismayed, I will sustain thee.” I have a promise from the great
    I AM: “Though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my
    flesh shall I see God.” I have many friends, and I am persuaded
    they will last forever. I am confident that I have daily
    prayers from many hearts.’...

“When sufficiently restored, he returned to Fort Ann, and lectured from
the 26th to the 30th of December, 1840, in compliance with the ‘unanimous
invitation’ of the Baptist church there, Rev. J. O. Mason, pastor, who
had dispatched a messenger for him. From the 2d to the 8th of January,
1841, he lectured at Ballston Spa, N. Y.; and again, from the 9th to the
12th, at Fort Ann.




CHAPTER VIII.

    LECTURES IN BOSTON (4TH, 5TH, AND 6TH COURSES), IN ANDOVER,
    PROVIDENCE, GALWAY, N. Y., CLAREMONT, N. H., BENSON,
    VT.,—HIS ILLNESS—INCIDENT AT SANDY HILL, AT WORCESTER—THE
    PHRENOLOGIST—MEETINGS AT HARTFORD.


“On the 31st of January, 1841, Mr. Miller again visited Boston, and
commenced his fourth course of lectures in that city. He continued there
till the 19th of February. The first eighteen lectures were given in the
Chardon-street Chapel, ‘which was crowded almost to suffocation, and
thousands were obliged to retire for want of room.’ Beginning on the 9th,
a second course of eighteen lectures was delivered, by invitation of the
Baptist church in South Boston, Thomas Driver, pastor.

“In compliance with an invitation from Rev. N. Hervey, pastor of the
Baptist church in Andover, Mass., Mr. M. commenced a course of lectures
in their house on Sunday, February 21, 1841. The students of the orthodox
institution there requested him to lecture only evenings, that they
might attend his full course; but he could not consistently comply with
their wishes. His labors continued there till March 2, and were attended
by a very large and attentive audience. Mr. Hervey, in whose church they
were delivered, has given the following sketch of them:—

    “‘His exposition of the prophecies, together with his earnest
    and impressive appeals to Christians and sinners to prepare for
    the coming of the Lord, was the means of arousing Christians
    to action, and of the conversion of a number of persons who
    before were without hope and without God in the world. In
    the course of the lectures, an incident occurred which shows
    his familiar acquaintance with the Scriptures and promptness
    to meet objectors to his views. About the fourth day of his
    labors he received a letter, signed “Anonymous,” containing a
    long list of passages from the Old and New Testaments, which
    were evidently quoted by “Anonymous” from _memory_, without
    naming their chapter and verse. These passages were thought
    by the author of the letter to be directly opposed to Mr.
    Miller’s view of the near approach and personal reign of Christ
    on earth. To these texts was affixed a single question. The
    letter, on being taken from the office, was presented to Mr.
    Miller, who read it through, and immediately said: “Anonymous”
    has not quoted a single text right. In the evening, previous
    to his lecture, he took the letter from his pocket, and
    inquired if there was a person in the audience by the name of
    _Anonymous_. If so, he would like to have him stand up. The
    house was filled on that evening by a large congregation. Mr.
    Miller waited some time for the appearance of “Anonymous;”
    the congregation remained in breathless silence to see the
    stranger. But no one answered to the call. Mr. Miller then
    read the letter, and, as he read each passage, also read the
    same from the Bible. The audience were satisfied that not one
    text was correctly quoted. Mr. Miller again repeated the call
    for “Anonymous” to stand up, if he was present. No one arose.
    Mr. Miller then read the question which closed the letter,
    namely—“Mr. Miller, how dare you assert your theory with so
    much confidence without a knowledge of the Hebrew and Greek
    languages?” To this Mr. Miller promptly replied, “If I am not
    acquainted _with the HEBREW and GREEK_, I know enough to quote
    the _English_ texts of the Scriptures rightly.” “Anonymous”
    never made himself known, and it was the impression of many of
    the audience that the author of the letter, if he _was_ skilled
    in the Hebrew and Greek, was _exceedingly deficient_ in his
    knowledge of the _English_ Scriptures.

    “‘During Mr. Miller’s stay in Andover several persons called
    to converse with him on the topics of his lectures, and
    he was very ready to devote his time to conversation with
    persons desirous of receiving information. He entered into the
    conversation with all his heart, and hundreds will remember
    with delight and devout gratitude to God the interviews they
    have enjoyed with him, and the instructions they have received
    from his lips. He was ever ready to answer all reasonable
    questions, and could generally distinguish between the caviler
    and the sincere inquirer after truth. Two young men, who were
    in the course of study at the Theological Seminary at Andover,
    called to see Mr. Miller while at the house of the writer,
    and spent some time in conversation with him upon the advent
    of Christ. After the conversation, as they were about leaving,
    one of the young men asked Mr. Miller the following question:
    “Well, if the Lord is coming so soon, Mr. Miller, what shall
    _we do_ who are _studying_ for the ministry? We have some time
    yet to prepare for the pastoral office.”

    “‘To this the good man promptly replied: “Young men, if God has
    called you to study, keep on in your course, and I will aid you
    all in my power; but if he has called you to preach, study your
    Bibles, and commence preaching immediately.”

    “‘The young men bade their adviser good day.

                                                            “‘N. H.’

“From the 3d to the 13th of March, he lectured to crowded audiences at
the Marlboro’ Chapel, his fifth course of lectures in Boston. From the
13th to the 19th of the same month, he lectured in Fairhaven, Mass.;
from the 20th to the 26th, in New Bedford, Mass.; and from the 27th of
March to the 5th of April, to large audiences in Providence, R. I. The
Town Hall, a commodious building, was granted by the City Council for
that purpose. On Sunday, the 4th, by the invitation of Rev. Mr. Jameson,
of the 3d Baptist Church, he lectured there all day to full and solemn
congregations. His keeping no journal, makes it impossible to give the
particular results of these lectures; but in each of the last three
places a large number of intelligent members, in the several churches,
embraced his views.

“From the 8th to the 15th of April, 1841, he labored in Lowell, Mass.,
when, after an absence of three months, he returned home to enjoy a
season of rest. At this time he estimated that, since the 1st of October,
1839, he had ‘traveled four thousand five hundred and sixty miles, and
preached six hundred and twenty-seven lectures, averaging one and a half
hours each, resulting in about five thousand hopeful conversions.’

“On the 23d of May, in compliance with a very urgent request from
Addison, Vt., he commenced a course of lectures there, which continued
till the 30th, when he was taken sick with a painful inflammation in
his left limb. He immediately returned home, when the other limb was
similarly affected. This terminated in painful swellings and copious
discharges, which began to heal about the 10th of June, but confined him
to his room till the last of August; so that he rested from labor during
the summer.

“From the 12th to the 20th of September, he lectured in Hartford, N. Y.,
to crowded houses. On the 26th of September, and onward to October 6, he
lectured at Ballston, N. Y.; and on the 10th of October, he commenced a
course of lectures at Galway, N. Y., which closed on the 17th. With these
lectures a revival commenced, which, according to a letter from Rev. Wm.
B. Curtis, pastor of the Baptist church, extended into the neighboring
towns. Under date of March 12, 1842, he wrote to Mr. Miller as follows:—

    “‘The glorious work soon became general and powerful, and we
    continued our meetings (including the week you were with us)
    eight weeks, with only a day or two intermission. I find I have
    over one hundred names of persons who profess to have obtained
    hope in the pardoning mercy of God. Including those converted
    in other meetings originating from this revival, it is probable
    that from one hundred and fifty to two hundred have been
    converted to God in this vicinity since your labors here. In
    justice to yourself and the truth, I must say that the extent
    and power of this glorious revival was greatly promoted by
    your lectures. Many converts date their first impressions from
    hearing you. The work has prevailed principally in the Baptist,
    Methodist, and Christian societies, while there have been but
    few conversions among the Presbyterians, who stood aloof from
    you when here.’

“On the 18th of October he returned to Low Hampton, and presided at a
Conference of Second Advent believers, which assembled in the Baptist
church there, from the 2d to the 5th of November, 1841.

“On the 10th of November, in compliance with an invitation numerously
signed, he commenced a course of lectures in the town-house at Claremont,
N. H., and continued to the 18th. A letter signed ‘J. Andrews,’ written
soon after, states: ‘Now all the town is aroused to the subject of
religion. The Baptist, Methodist, and Congregational societies are all
united in this work. Some are converted, and from sixty to seventy-five
are anxiously seeking the Lord.’

“On the 14th of November, the First Baptist Church, Mr. Parker, pastor,
in Cambridgeport, Mass., voted unanimously to renew an invitation, which
they had some time before extended to Mr. Miller, and with which he had
been unable to comply, to give a course of lectures there. In compliance
with that request, he made arrangements to commence there on Sunday, the
21st of November; but, in consequence of the breaking down of the stage
on Saturday, he was detained in Nashua over the Sabbath, and gave three
lectures to the citizens of that place. He reached Cambridgeport on the
23d, and continued till the 28th. On the day following, he commenced his
sixth course of lectures in Boston, at Boylston Hall, where he addressed
large audiences each day and evening till the 9th of December.

“These repeated series of discourses in Boston had a powerful effect
on the community. As usual, large numbers went away, unable to gain
admittance, and many were hopefully converted from sin to holiness. This
last was a common feature in all his labors, and was one great reason
why calls from those who did not entertain his views were so frequent
and urgent. This reason is given in an invitation extended to him by the
Baptist church in New Ipswich, N. H., November 29, 1841. Their pastor, J.
M. Willmarth, thus writes: ‘The majority desire you to come, principally
because they have understood that your addresses to sinners are plain
and pungent, and frequently attended with the divine blessing in the
conversion of souls.’

“A course of lectures in Dover, N. H., continuing from the 11th to the
19th of December, terminated his labors for the year 1841.

“From the 8th to the 16th of January, 1842, he lectured at Fonday’s
Bush, N. Y.; from the 17th to the 26th of January, in Jamesville, N. Y.;
and from the 27th of January to the 3d of February, in the Presbyterian
church at Sandy Hill, N. Y. A conference of Advent believers was held
in this church, commencing on the 1st of February and closing on the
4th. The services were held the last evening at the court-house. On
that occasion about one hundred persons arose for prayer, and a revival
commenced which continued for weeks. On this evening an incident occurred
which did much to deepen the impressions made by the lecture. H. B.
Northop, Esq., a prominent lawyer of that county, arose, at the close
of the meeting, and remarked that he had stood at that bar many times
and addressed a jury of twelve sensible men, presenting evidence and
arguments which he knew were weak and fallacious, and he knew others
might have seen it; but he had sat down with the confident expectation
that those twelve men would give him their verdict. He had attended
these lectures, and had done it with a mind strongly predisposed to
reject the doctrine, and exceedingly skeptical. He had attended with a
determination, if possible to overthrow the theory, and to exult with
a feeling of triumph if he succeeded. He had watched every word and
sentence, and made an effort at every point where he thought there was a
possibility of making a breach; but had been unable to do it. And now,
after making himself acquainted with history, sacred and profane, with
prophecies and prophetic periods, so far as his circumstances would
permit him to do, he would frankly confess that he had never found any
theory that would compare with this for strength of evidence. He would
not say he believed the event would come in 1843, or within ten years
of that; but he could see no reason why it would _not_ take place then!
At any rate, he was satisfied, if there was any truth in the Bible, the
event was near; and this is the nearest calculation we can possibly come
to respecting the time.

“The effect of such a declaration, from such a source, can be better
imagined than described.

“Rev. Seth Ewer, in a letter of the 2d of March following, wrote:—

    “‘For about four weeks we continued meetings, day and
    evening.... We find new cases of conviction daily, and frequent
    hopeful conversions. Our house of worship is thronged every
    evening. Last Sabbath evening the question was put, whether
    they wished to continue the services; and hundreds arose in
    the affirmative.... Between fifty and sixty profess to have
    obtained a hope.’

“From the 12th of February, 1842, to the 17th, he lectured in Benson,
Vt. At the close of this meeting he took a violent cold, which prevented
him from speaking for a few days. He commenced a course of lectures at
Nashua, N. H., on the 24th of February; but, after speaking a few times
to crowded houses, the state of his lungs and the want of a suitable
place to speak in compelled him to relinquish his labors there on the
third day.

“From the 6th to the 9th of March, Mr. Miller lectured in Medford, Mass.
While here a friend took him to a phrenologist in Boston, with whom he
was himself acquainted, but who had no suspicion whose head he was about
to examine. The phrenologist commenced by saying that the person under
examination had a large, well-developed, and well-balanced head. While
examining the moral and intellectual organs, he said to Mr. Miller’s
friend:—

“‘I tell you what it is, Mr. Miller could not easily make a convert of
_this man_ to his hair-brained theory. He has too much good sense.’

“Thus he proceeded, making comparisons between the head he was examining
and the head of Mr. Miller, as he fancied it would be.

“‘Oh, how I should like to examine Mr. Miller’s head!’ said he; ‘I would
give it one squeezing.’

“The phrenologist, knowing that the gentleman was a particular friend of
Mr. Miller, spared no pains in going out of the way to make remarks upon
him. Putting his hand on the organ of marvelousness, he said: ‘There!
I’ll bet you anything that old Miller has got a bump on his head there as
big as my fist;’ at the same time doubling up his fist as an illustration.

“The others present laughed at the perfection of the joke, and he
heartily joined them, supposing they were laughing at his witticisms on
Mr. Miller.

    “‘He laughed; ’twas well. The tale applied
    Soon made him laugh on t’ other side.’

“He pronounced the head of the gentleman under examination, the reverse,
in every particular, of what he declared Mr. Miller’s must be. When
through, he made out his chart, and politely asked Mr. Miller his name.

“Mr. Miller said it was of no consequence about putting his name upon the
chart; but the phrenologist insisted.

“‘Very well,’ said Mr. M.; ‘you may call it Miller, if you choose.’

“‘_Miller_, _Miller_,’ said he; ‘what is your first name?’

“‘They call me William Miller.’

“‘What! the gentleman who is lecturing on the prophecies?’

“‘Yes, sir, the same.’

“At this the phrenologist settled back in his chair, the personation of
astonishment and dismay, and spoke not a word while the company remained.
His feelings may be more easily imagined than described.

“The following description of Mr. Miller’s phrenological developments
were furnished by a phrenological friend in 1842, and may be of some
interest to those acquainted with that science:—

“ORGANS VERY LARGE.—Amativeness, Adhesiveness, Combativeness, Firmness,
Conscientiousness, Benevolence, Constructiveness, Ideality, Calculation,
Comparison.

“LARGE.—Philoprogenitiveness, Alimentiveness, Acquisitiveness,
Self-Esteem, Imitation, Mirthfulness, Form, Size, Order, Locality,
Eventuality, Time, Language, Causality.

“FULL.—Inhabitiveness, Concentrativeness, Caution, Approbation, Wonder,
Veneration, Weight, Color, Tune.

“MODERATE.—Marvelousness, Secretiveness, Hope, Individuality.

“From the 12th to the 20th of March, he lectured in the Town Hall
in Worcester, Mass. The meetings were well attended, the hall being
crowded during most of the time; two thousand people were judged to have
been present. While explaining the 7th chapter of Daniel, Mr. M. very
significantly inquired how there could be a millennium, according to the
common understanding of it, while the little horn warred with the saints,
which he was to do till the coming of the Ancient of Days? A Baptist
clergyman arose, and offered to answer that question the following
morning. The next morning he came in and requested additional time, and
his answer was postponed another day. When that time arrived he came in
and presented the common view respecting the millennium, and inquired
if there was no way to harmonize that text with it. Mr. M. said, that
was what they were waiting for him to do! But he left it there. This
caused Mr. M. to be listened to with more than usual interest. A revival
attended his labors, and considerable effect was produced on the public
mind.

“From the 22d to the 28th, he lectured in the City Hall in Hartford, Ct.
From two hundred to three hundred persons in that city became favorable
to his views as the result of those lectures. Mr. M. was prevented from
giving his whole course of lectures, on this occasion, by a severe attack
of catarrh and influenza, which made him unable to proceed. The Hartford
_Christian Secretary_, a Baptist periodical, said of these meetings:—

    “‘One fact connected with this conference struck us somewhat
    forcibly; and that was, the immense crowd which attended
    the whole course of lectures. We are unable to speak of the
    attendance during the day, but in the evening the large hall
    was filled to overflowing with attentive listeners. Probably
    not less than from fifteen hundred to two thousand persons were
    in attendance every evening. This large mass of hearers was
    made up from nearly or quite every congregation in the city.
    How many of them have become converts to this new doctrine we
    have no means of judging, but presume the number is not very
    small. Of one thing we are satisfied, and that is this: unless
    the clergy, generally, present a better theory than the one
    offered by Mr. Miller, the doctrine will prevail to a very
    general extent.’

“It was on this occasion that the writer of this became convinced that
the second advent is to be pre-millennial; and the first resurrection, a
‘resurrection out from among the dead.’ At the close of these labors, Mr.
M. returned to Low Hampton, for that rest which his overtasked frame now
greatly needed.




CHAPTER IX.

    LECTURES IN NEW YORK—NEWARK—SARATOGA—NEWBURYPORT—PALMER—THE
    EAST KINGSTON CAMP-MEETING—BRANDON—BENSON—CHICOPEE—NEW HAVEN,
    ETC.


“On the 24th of April he commenced a course of lectures in the large hall
of the Apollo, 410 Broadway, in the city of New York, as usual to large
audiences, closing on the 10th of May.

“On the 7th of May, he visited Newark, N. J., and gave two discourses
in the Universalist chapel in that city. In compliance with three very
urgent requests from Rev. Joshua Fletcher, pastor, and the unanimous vote
of the Baptist church, in Saratoga, N. Y., Mr. M. again visited that
place, and lectured from the 14th to the 22d of May. From the 24th to
the 28th of May, he gave his seventh course of lectures in Boston; and
from the 29th of May to the 3d of June, 1842, he lectured in Newburyport,
Mass. At the commencement of his lecture, in the evening of the first
day, an egg was thrown into the hall, at him, but fell upon the side of
the desk. At the close, stones were thrown through the windows, by a mob
outside, who indulged in some characteristic hootings and kindred noises.
The congregation dispersed without damage, save the glass of lamps and
windows. Under those circumstances, the town authorities closed the hall,
and the lectures were adjourned to the chapel in Hale’s Court. They
continued till Friday, June 3, a goodly number having received Christ to
the joy of their souls.

“From the 4th to the 12th of June, he gave a second course of lectures in
the Casco-street church, Portland, Me. They were attended by crowds of
anxious hearers, and many Christians were refreshed, while some sinners
were converted to God. From the 16th to the 26th of June, he lectured
at Three Rivers (in Palmer, Mass.) A member of the Baptist church there
afterward wrote, through the _Christian Reflector_, the organ of that
denomination, as follows:—

    “‘DEAR BROTHER GRAVES:—It is with gratitude to God that I
    am able to turn aside from the joyful scenes around me to
    inform the friends in Zion what God hath wrought for us. Rev.
    William Miller, on the 16th of June last, commenced a course
    of lectures on the second advent of Christ to this world in
    1843. The lectures were delivered in our meeting-house, which,
    however, would hold but a small part of the audience, it being
    estimated at five thousand; and notwithstanding prepossessions,
    prejudices, and the slanderous reports circulated about this
    man of God, the people gave heed to the word spoken, and
    seemed determined to examine the Scriptures, to see if these
    things were so; and deep solemnity pervaded the vast assembly.
    The children of God were soon aroused to a sense of their
    duty; sinners were seen weeping, and heard to say, “Pray for
    me!” The number increased, until one hundred in an evening
    prayer-meeting were seen to arise to be remembered in the
    prayers of the saints. Soon converts began to tell us what
    the Lord had done for them. Some deists, some Universalists,
    and many of the thoughtless, of both the middle-aged and the
    youthful part of the community, have been brought to submit
    their hearts to God, and are now waiting for and hasting to
    the coming of the day of God. As to the character of the work,
    let me say, I have never seen a more thorough conviction of
    the total depravity of the heart, and the utter helplessness
    of the sinner, and that, if saved, it must be by the sovereign
    grace of God, than has been manifest in all that have given a
    relation of their experience.’

“On the 29th of June, 1842, Mr. M. commenced a course of lectures on
the camp-ground at East Kingston, N. H. This was the first camp-meeting
held by believers in the advent near, and was noticed by a writer in the
_Boston Post_ as follows:—

    “‘The Second Advent camp-meeting, which commenced at East
    Kingston, N. H., on Tuesday, June 29, and continued from day
    to day until Tuesday noon, July 5, was attended by an immense
    concourse of people, variously estimated at from seven to ten
    thousand....

    “‘The meeting was conducted with great regularity and good
    order from beginning to end. The ladies were seated on one
    side, and the gentlemen on the other, of the speaker; meals
    were served uniformly and punctually at the times appointed,
    and the same punctuality was observed as to the hours appointed
    for the services.

    “‘The preachers were twelve or fifteen. Mr. Miller gave
    the only regular course of lectures—the others speaking
    occasionally. Many of the people, without doubt, assembled
    from motives of curiosity merely; but the great body of them,
    from their solemn looks and close attention to the subject,
    were evidently actuated by higher and more important motives.
    Each tent was under the supervision of a tent-master, who was
    responsible for the good order within the same, where religious
    exercises were kept up at the intermissions between the public
    exercises and meals, and where lights were kept burning through
    the night....

    “‘Some fault was found, or dissatisfaction felt, with that
    part of the regulations which precluded all controversy, _i.
    e._, which prevented people of opposite theological sentiments
    from occupying the time or distracting the attention of the
    audience, which would otherwise have introduced confusion and
    defeated the object of the meeting. Nothing could be more
    reasonable than this regulation, and no peace-loving person
    would make any objection.... The meeting broke up with harmony
    and good feeling.’

“A few years later, a distinguished American writer and poet, J. G.
Whittier, who was present at this meeting, made the following reference
to it:—

    “‘Three or four years ago, on my way eastward, I spent an
    hour or two at a camp-ground of the Second Advent in East
    Kingston. The spot was well chosen. A tall growth of pine and
    hemlock threw its melancholy shadow over the multitude, who
    were arranged upon rough seats of boards and logs. Several
    hundred—perhaps a thousand—people were present, and more were
    rapidly coming. Drawn about in a circle, forming a background
    of snowy whiteness to the dark masses of men and foliage, were
    the white tents, and back of them the provision stalls and cook
    shops. When I reached the ground, a hymn, the words of which I
    could not distinguish, was pealing through the dim aisles of
    the forest. I know nothing of music, having neither ear nor
    taste for it; but I could readily see that it had its effect
    upon the multitude before me, kindling to higher intensity
    their already excited enthusiasm. The preachers were placed in
    a rude pulpit of rough boards, carpeted only by the dead forest
    leaves and flowers, and tasselled, not with silk and velvet,
    but with the green boughs of the somber hemlocks around it.
    One of them followed the music in an earnest exhortation on
    the duty of preparing for the great event. Occasionally he was
    really eloquent, and his description of the last day had all
    the terrible distinctness of Anelli’s painting of the “End of
    the World.”

    “‘Suspended from the front of the rude pulpit were two broad
    sheets of canvas, upon one of which was the figure of a
    man—the head of gold, the breast and arms of silver, the
    belly of brass, the legs of iron, and feet of clay—the dream
    of Nebuchadnezzar! On the other were depicted the wonders
    of the Apocalyptic vision—the beasts—the dragon—the scarlet
    woman seen by the seer of Patmos—oriental types and figures
    and mystic symbols translated into staring Yankee realities,
    and exhibited like the beasts of a traveling menagerie. One
    horrible image, with its hideous heads and scaly caudal
    extremity, reminded me of the tremendous line of Milton, who,
    in speaking of the same evil dragon, describes him as

        “‘Swinging the scaly horrors of his folded tail.’

    “‘To an imaginative mind the scene was full of novel interest.
    The white circle of tents—the dim wood arches—the upturned,
    earnest faces—the loud voices of the speakers, burdened with
    the awful symbolic language of the Bible—the smoke from the
    fires rising like incense from forest altars—carrying one back
    to the days of primitive worship, when

        “‘The groves were God’s first temples, ere men learned
        To hew the shaft, and lay the architrave,
        And stretch the roof above it.’

“There were near thirty tents on the ground, and the interest of the
meeting continued to the last. Mr. Miller left the ground on the 4th of
July, for Northampton, Mass., where he lectured from the 5th to the 7th,
and then proceeded to Low Hampton.

“He remained at home till past the middle of August. On the 20th of that
month he commenced a course of lectures at Brandon, Vt., which continued
till the 28th. On the 25th, a large tent had been pitched at Chicopee,
Mass., where Mr. Miller was anxiously expected; but he did not arrive so
as to commence his lectures till the 1st of September. He then lectured
each day till the 4th, when the meeting closed. That was a very large
gathering, and, as was estimated, some four hundred or more found peace
in believing.

“From the 7th to the 11th of September, he lectured at Castine, Maine. On
returning to Boston, on the 12th, at the request of the passengers, he
gave a lecture on the boat. He went to Albany on the 13th, lectured there
in the evening, and on the next day took the canal-boat, on which he also
lectured, on his way to Granville, N. Y., where he lectured from the 18th
to the 23d of September. From the 8th to the 16th of October, he lectured
in Whitehall, N. Y., and from the 20th to the 30th, at Benson, Vt., where
Mr. Himes held a tent-meeting in connection with his lectures.

“On the 3d of November, Mr. Himes erected the big tent in Newark, N. J.
Mr. Miller was not able to be present till the 7th, from which time to
the 14th he gave fifteen discourses. Five days before the close of that
meeting the weather became so inclement that the meetings could not be
continued in the tent, and they were adjourned to the Presbyterian church
in Clinton street, which was kindly opened during the week. On Sunday,
the 13th, the meeting was held in the morning in Mechanic’s Hall, which
was crowded to suffocation, and found to be altogether too strait for
them. At 2 P. M., Mr. Miller spoke from the steps of the court house
to nearly five thousand people. Notwithstanding the inclemency of the
weather, and their being thus driven from pillar to post, the meetings
were very interesting, and were productive of much good.

“At the close of the meeting in Newark, he commenced a course of lectures
in New York city, which continued till the 18th of November. On the
19th of November, he commenced a course of lectures in New Haven, Ct.,
in the M. E. church, Rev. Mr. Law, pastor. On Sunday, the 20th, although
the house was large, it was crowded; and in the evening many were unable
to gain admittance. He continued there till the 26th, the interest
continuing during the entire course. _The Fountain_, a temperance paper
published in that city, gave the following account of the meeting:—

    “‘Mr. William Miller, the celebrated writer and lecturer on the
    second advent of our Saviour, and the speedy destruction of the
    world, has recently visited our city, and delivered a course
    of lectures to an immense concourse of eager listeners in the
    First Methodist church. It is estimated that not less than
    three thousand persons were in attendance at the church, on
    each evening, for a week; and if the almost breathless silence
    which reigned throughout the immense throng for two or three
    hours at a time is any evidence of interest in the subject of
    the lectures, it cannot be said that our community are devoid
    of feeling on this momentous question.

    “‘Mr. Miller was accompanied and assisted by Rev. J. V. Himes,
    who is by no means an inefficient coadjutor in this great and
    important work. We did not attend the whole course, the last
    three lectures being all we had an opportunity of hearing. We
    were utterly disappointed. So many extravagant things had been
    said of the “fanatics” in the public prints, and such distorted
    statements published in reference to their articles of faith,
    that we were prepared to witness disgusting, and perhaps
    blasphemous, exhibitions of “Millerism,” as the doctrine of the
    second advent is called.

    “‘In justice to Mr. Miller we are constrained to say that he is
    one of the most interesting lecturers we have any recollection
    of ever having heard. We have not the least doubt that he is
    fully convinced of the truth of the doctrine he labors so
    diligently to inculcate, and he certainly evinces great candor
    and fairness in his manner of proving his points. And he proves
    them, too, to the satisfaction of every hearer; that is,
    allowing his premises to be correct, there is no getting away
    from his conclusions.

    “‘There was quite a number of believers in attendance from
    other places, and a happier company we have never seen. We
    have no means of ascertaining the precise effect of these
    meetings on this community, but we know that many minds have
    been induced to contemplate the Scripture prophecies in a new
    light, and not a few are studying the Bible with unwonted
    interest. For our own part, this new view of the world’s
    destiny is so completely at variance with previous habits of
    thought and anticipation that we are not prepared to give it
    entire credence, though we should not dare hazard an attempt to
    disprove it.

    “‘The best part of the story is, that a powerful revival has
    followed the labors of Messrs. Miller and company. We learn
    that over fifty persons presented themselves for prayers at
    the altar of the Methodist church on Sunday evening. On Monday
    evening the number was about eighty.’

“In the month of May following, Rev. A. A. Stevens (Orthodox Cong.), then
a member of Yale College, in a letter to the _Midnight Cry_, stated that
‘the powerful and glorious revival which then commenced, continued for
some two months, with almost unabated interest.’

“At the close of these lectures, Mr. M. returned to New York city, where
he gave six discourses, from the 27th to the 29th of November, and then
returned to Low Hampton. Arriving home, he wrote as follows:—

                                        “‘LOW HAMPTON, DEC. 7, 1842.

    “‘DEAR BROTHER HIMES: ... I did not get home till 10 o’clock on
    Saturday night. On Wednesday, at 6 o’clock, P. M., same day we
    left New York, we were brought up all standing in a snow-bank,
    which we kept bunting, with two or three locomotives, until
    the next evening at 7 o’clock. On Thursday, by the mighty
    power of three locomotives, we gained twelve miles from Great
    Barrington, where we were brought up the night before, to the
    state line, where they left us and we waited for the Boston
    cars, which had been due thirty hours. That night we slept in
    the cars, as the night before, and Friday we got as far as
    Lansingburg. Saturday I came home, cold and weary, worn out
    and exhausted. On my arrival, I found a messenger after me and
    my wife, to visit her mother, who was supposed to be dying.
    My wife went, and soon returned with the news of her death.
    After attending the funeral, we came home on Monday night, and
    yesterday I got some rest. This morning I feel some refreshed.
    But the fatigue of body and mind has almost unnerved this old
    frame, and unfitted me to endure the burdens which Providence
    calls upon me to bear. I find that, as I grow old, I grow more
    peevish, and cannot bear so much contradiction. Therefore I
    am called uncharitable and severe. No matter; this frail
    life will soon be over. My Master will soon call me home, and
    soon the scoffer and I shall be in another world, to render
    our account before a righteous tribunal. I will therefore
    appeal to the Supreme Court of the Universe for the redress of
    grievances, and the rendering of judgment in my favor, by a
    revocation of the judgment in the court below. The World and
    Clergy vs. Miller.

    “‘I remain, looking for the blessed hope,

                                                  “‘WILLIAM MILLER.’




CHAPTER X.

    SYNOPSIS OF HIS VIEWS—ADDRESS TO BELIEVERS IN THE NEAR
    ADVENT—INTERVIEW AT WATERFORD—UTICA—DISTURBANCE AT
    PHILADELPHIA—THE THIRD OF APRIL—STATEMENT OF HIS AFFAIRS, ETC.


“Mr. Miller had not been sufficiently definite respecting the time of the
advent, in the estimation of some who embraced his views. The expression
‘about the year 1843’ they regarded as too general. As he was about to
enter on the long-looked-for year, he prepared and published the following

    SYNOPSIS OF HIS VIEWS.

    “1. I believe Jesus Christ will come again to this earth.
    Proof. John 14:3; Acts 1:11; 1 Thess. 4:16; Rev. 1:7.

    “2. I believe he will come in all the glory of his Father.
    Matt. 16:27; Mark 8:38.

    “3. I believe he will come in the clouds of heaven. Matt.
    24:30; Mark 13:26; Dan. 7:13.

    “4. I believe he will then receive his kingdom, which will be
    eternal. Dan. 7:14; Luke 19:12, 15; 2 Tim. 4:1.

    “5. I believe the saints will then possess the kingdom forever.
    Dan. 7:18, 22, 27; Matt. 24:34; Luke 12:22, 29; 1 Cor. 9:25; 2
    Tim. 4:8; Jas. 1:12; 1 Pet. 5:4.

    “6. I believe at Christ’s second coming the body of every
    departed saint will be raised, like Christ’s glorious body. 1
    Cor. 15:20-29; 1 John 3:2.

    “7. I believe that the righteous who are living on the earth
    when he comes will be changed from mortal to immortal bodies,
    and, with them who are raised from the dead, will be caught up
    to meet the Lord in the air, and so be forever with the Lord. 1
    Cor. 15:51-53; Phil. 3:20, 21; 1 Thess. 4:14-17.

    “8. I believe the saints will then be presented to God
    blameless, without spot or wrinkle, in love. 1 Cor. 4:14; Eph.
    5:27; Col. 1:22; Jude 24; 1 Thess. 3:13; 1 Cor. 1:7, 8.

    “9. I believe, when Christ comes the second time, he will come
    to finish the controversy of Zion, to deliver his children from
    all bondage, to conquer their last enemy, and to deliver them
    from the power of the tempter, which is the devil. Deut. 24:1;
    Isa. 34:8; 40:2, 5; 41:10-12; Rom. 8:21-23; Heb. 2:13-15; 1
    Cor. 15:54, 56; Rev. 20:1-6.

    “10. I believe that when Christ comes he will destroy the
    bodies of the living wicked by fire, as those of the old world
    were destroyed by water, and shut up their souls in the pit of
    woe, until their resurrection unto damnation. Ps. 50:3; 97:3;
    Isa. 66:15, 16; Dan. 7:10; Mal. 4:1; Matt. 3:12; 1 Cor. 3:13; 1
    Thess. 5:2, 3; 2 Thess. 1:7-9; 1 Pet. 1:7; 2 Pet. 3:7, 10; Isa.
    24:21, 22; Jude 6-15; Rev. 20:3-15; John 5:29; Acts 24:15.

    “11. I believe, when the earth is cleansed by fire, that Christ
    and his saints will then take possession of the earth, and
    dwell therein forever. Then the kingdom will be given to the
    saints. Ps. 37:9-11, 22-34; Prov. 2:21, 22; 10:30; Isa. 60:21;
    Matt. 5:5; Rev. 5:10.

    “12. I believe the time is appointed of God when these things
    shall be accomplished. Acts 17:31; Job 7:1; 14:14; Ps. 81:3;
    Isa. 40:2; Dan. 8:19; 10:1; 11:35; Hab. 2:3; Acts 17:26.

    “13. I believe God has revealed the time. Isa. 44:7, 8; 45:20,
    21; Dan. 12:10; Amos 3:7; 1 Thess. 5:4.

    “14. I believe many who are professors and preachers will never
    believe or know the time until it comes upon them. Jer. 8:7;
    Matt. 24:50; Jer. 25:34-37.

    “15. I believe the wise, they who are to shine as the
    brightness of the firmament, Dan. 12:3, will understand the
    time. Eccl. 8:5; Dan. 12:10; Matt. 24:43-45; 25:6-10; 1 Thess.
    5:4; 1 Pet. 1:9-13.

    “16. I believe the time can be known by all who desire to
    understand and to be ready for his coming. And I am fully
    convinced that some time between March 21, 1843, and March 21,
    1844, according to the Jewish mode of computation of time,
    Christ will come, and bring all his saints with him; and that
    then he will reward every man as his works shall be. Matt.
    16:27; Rev. 22:12.

“With the commencement of the new year, he issued the following

    ADDRESS TO BELIEVERS IN THE NEAR ADVENT.

    “‘DEAR BRETHREN:—This year, according to our faith, is the last
    year that Satan will reign in our earth. Jesus Christ will
    come, and bruise his head. The kingdoms of the earth will be
    dashed to pieces, which is the same thing. And he, whose right
    it is to reign, will take the kingdom, and possess it forever
    and ever. And the God of peace shall tread Satan under your
    feet shortly. Therefore, we have but a little time more to do
    as our good brother, Paul, was commanded, Acts 26:18, to open
    their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from
    the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness
    of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by
    faith that is in me.

    “‘Let us then put forth our best energies in this cause; let
    every one of us try, by persuasion, by the help and grace of
    God, to get one, at least, of our friends to come to Christ, in
    this last year of redemption; and, if we succeed, what an army
    of regenerated souls may we not hail in the new heavens and new
    earth! I pray God, my brethren, that nothing may deter you from
    this work. Let scoffers scoff, and liars tell lies; we must not
    suffer ourselves to be drawn from our work. Yes, the glorious
    work of salvation, within a few short months, will be finished
    forever. Then I need not exhort you more on this point; you
    yourselves know the value of this great salvation.

    “‘And another thing it is well for us to remember. The world
    will watch for our halting. They cannot think we believe what
    we speak, for they count our faith a strange faith; and now
    beware, and not give them any vantage-ground over us. They
    will, perhaps, look for the halting and falling away of many.
    But I hope none who are looking for the glorious appearing
    will let their faith waver. Keep cool; let patience have its
    perfect work; that, after ye have done the will of God, ye may
    receive the promise. This year will try our faith; we must be
    tried, purified and made white; and if there should be any
    among us who do not in heart believe, they will go out from
    us; but I am persuaded that there cannot be many such; for it
    is a doctrine so repugnant to the carnal heart, so opposite
    to the worldly-minded, so far from the cold professor, the
    bigot and hypocrite, that none of them will, or can, believe
    in a doctrine so searching as the immediate appearing of Jesus
    Christ to judge the world. I am, therefore, persuaded better
    things of you, brethren, although I thus speak. I beseech
    you, my dear brethren, be careful that Satan get no advantage
    over you by scattering coals of wild-fire among you; for if
    he cannot drive you into unbelief and doubt, he will try his
    wild-fire of fanaticism and speculation to get us from the word
    of God. Be watchful and sober, and hope to the end for the
    grace that shall be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus
    Christ.

    “‘Think not, my brethren, that I stand in doubt of your
    perseverance. I know your faith, your love, and hope, to be
    rooted and grounded on the word of the Almighty. You are not
    dependent on the wisdom or commandments of men. Many, if not
    all of you, have examined for yourselves. You have studied,
    and found true, what at first was only reported unto you. You
    have found the Bible much more precious than you had before
    conceived; its doctrines to be congenial with the holy and just
    character of God; its precepts to be wise, benevolent and kind;
    and its prophecies to be clear and lucid, carrying conviction
    of the truth and inspiration of the Scriptures, by a harmony of
    manner and matter from Genesis to Revelation. In one word, you
    have found a new Bible, and I hope and believe you have read
    it with new delight. I fear not that you can ever be satisfied
    with the views of our opponents; their manner of explaining
    Scripture is too carnal to satisfy the devoted child of God.

    “‘Then let me advise to a continual searching for truth, both
    for faith and practice; and wherever we have wandered from the
    word of God, let us come back to the primitive simplicity of
    the gospel once delivered to the saints. Thus we shall be found
    ready at his coming to give an account of our stewardship, and
    hear our blessed Master say, “Well done, thou good and faithful
    servant; enter thou in to the joy of thy Lord.” Every truth we
    get from the blessed book prepares us better for his coming
    and kingdom. Every error prevents us, in part, from being
    ready. Let us, then, stand strong in the faith, with our loins
    girt about with truth, and our lamps trimmed and burning, and
    waiting for our Lord, ready to enter the promised land, the
    true inheritance of the saints. This year the fullness of time
    will come, the shout of victory will be heard in Heaven, the
    triumphant return of our great Captain may be expected, the
    new song will commence before the throne, eternity begin its
    revolution, and time shall be no more.

    “‘This year—O blessed year—the captive will be released, the
    prison doors will be opened, death will have no more dominion
    over us, and life, eternal life, be our everlasting reward.
    This year—O glorious year!—the trump of jubilee will be blown,
    the exiled children will return, the pilgrims reach their
    home, from earth and Heaven the scattered remnant come and
    meet in the middle air,—the fathers before the flood, Noah and
    his sons, Abraham and his, the Jew and Gentile, all who have
    died in faith, of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people,
    will meet to part no more. This year! the long-looked-for year
    of years! the best! it is come! I shall hope to meet you all
    through faith in God and the blood of the Lamb. Until then
    farewell. May God bless you, and sustain you in the faith.

    “‘May you be patient in all tribulation, and endure unto the
    end. May you this year be crowned with immortality and glory.
    And finally, my brethren, pray God, your whole body, soul, and
    spirit, be preserved blameless unto the coming of the Lord
    Jesus Christ.’

                                                   “‘WILLIAM MILLER.

    “‘_Low Hampton, Jan. 1, 1843._’

“In compliance with the wishes of Elder Marvin Eastwood and his
congregation, in Waterford, N. Y., Mr. Miller lectured there from the
last day of December, 1842, to the 8th of January, 1843.

“On the morning of the third day, the Congregational minister called on
him, with a deacon of his church, and wished to ask him a few questions.
Five other gentlemen soon came in, and took seats in the room. Mr. Miller
told the clergyman that he might ask any question he pleased, and he
would answer the best he could. The minister accordingly asked him some
twenty questions, each one of which Mr. M. answered by quoting a text of
Scripture. He then thanked Mr. M. for his politeness, and acknowledged
that he had answered him fairly. ‘But,’ said he, ‘I do not believe your
doctrine.’

“‘What doctrine?’ said Mr. M.

“‘I don’t believe God has revealed the time.’”

“Mr. M. asked him if he would answer three questions.[17]

“The minister replied that he did not come there to _answer_ questions.
One of the gentlemen present then inquired of the minister why he
would not answer. He said he did not come for the purpose of answering
questions, and did not choose to. The gentleman then said to him: ‘I have
disbelieved the Bible, but have been one of your principal supporters
many years; and, when Mr. Miller has answered so many of your questions,
if you will not let him ask you three, I can pay you no more of my
money.’ He added, ‘I have seen more evidence in proof of the truth of
the Bible in the few lectures I have heard from Mr. M. than in all the
sermons you have ever preached.’

“‘Why,’ said the minister, ‘how does Mr. Miller prove the truth of the
Bible?’

“‘By the fulfillment of prophecy.’

“‘And do not I prove it in the same way? Do not I show how all the
prophecies in reference to Christ were fulfilled in him?’

“‘Why, yes, you do that; but you have never shown that those prophecies
were written before Christ; and it is very easy to write a history. But
Mr. M. has shown us how the prophecies are being fulfilled in our own
day; he has shown us how the history of Napoleon is a perfect fulfillment
of prophecy; and I _know_ that that prophecy was written before the time
of Napoleon.’

“The minister and deacon retired. The gentleman then turned to Mr.
Miller, and said that he and his four companions were infidels; that they
had attended his lectures; had become quite interested; but had very
curious feelings, and wished to know what ailed them.

“Mr. M. inquired whether they would attend any more of his lectures.

“They replied that they should lose none of them.

“‘Well,’ said Mr. M., ‘I think I will not tell you what ails you; but, if
you will give close attention during the week, I think you will find out.’

“They attended his lectures, and, before the end of the week, with a
number of others who had been infidels, were rejoicing in the goodness
and forgiveness of God. At the close of his last lecture, one hundred and
twenty persons voluntarily arose for prayers; a goodly number were soon
rejoicing in the Saviour, and a glorious result followed.

“On the 10th of January, 1843, Mr. M. began a course of lectures in the
Presbyterian church in Utica, N. Y., where an interest was elicited
which extended to surrounding places. Invitations were received from
many of the neighboring towns, which could not be complied with. The
meetings closed on the 17th, when forty or fifty were inquiring what they
should do to be saved. A good work had been commenced, which continued
for several weeks. The _Methodist Reformer_, published in that city,
announced that ‘many thoughtless sinners and cold professors were stirred
up to duty by them;’ and the _Baptist Register_ said, ‘Mr. Miller’s
appeals were often very pungent, and made a very deep impression on the
audience, and many came forward for prayer.’

“From the 21st to the 29th of January, 1843, Mr. Miller lectured in
Bennington, Vt. He then went to Philadelphia, Pa., and lectured in the
large hall of the Chinese Museum, which was crowded to excess, from the
3d to the 10th of February. On the evening of the 7th, a gentleman arose
and confessed that he had been an infidel, but could now praise God for
what he had done for his soul. Many others followed, bearing testimony to
God’s pardoning mercy.

“The interest attending the lectures continued to increase from the first
till the evening before their close. On that evening the house was filled
to overflowing at an early hour. When the lecture commenced, the crowd
and confusion were so great as to render it almost impossible to hear
the speaker; and it was thought best, after notifying the people what
was to be done, and giving an opportunity for all who wished so to do to
go out, to close the doors, and thus secure silence. This was done, and
the speaker proceeded to his subject. For about half an hour there was
profound silence, and deep interest was evinced by the immense audience,
with the exception of a few unruly boys. This would have undoubtedly
continued had it not been for the circumstance of a lady’s fainting, and
it becoming necessary to open the doors for her to go out. When the door
was opened, there was a rush of persons who stood outside for admittance.
As soon as this was done, and a few had come into the room, an unruly boy
raised the cry of ‘fire,’ which threw the whole assembly into confusion,
some crying one thing, and some another. There did not appear to be any
disposition on the part of the multitude to disturb the meeting; but all
came from the rush and cry. The disorder arose more from the excited
fears of the people than from any other cause. Order was again restored,
and the speaker proceeded for a few moments, when another rush was made,
and the excitement became so great within as to render it expedient to
dismiss the meeting.

“The police of the city were willing to do what they could, but there was
nothing for them to do; for they could not govern the excited nerves of
the audience.

“On Friday morning the multitude were again assembled at an early hour
for service, and Mr. Miller proceeded to answer numerous questions which
had been proposed. A most profound attention was manifested until the
meeting was about half through, when a man arose and wished to propose
some questions, which interrupted the order of the meeting.

“The owners became alarmed for the safety of the hall, and ordered the
meetings to be closed after the afternoon service. Although this fact
was unknown except by a few persons, yet the room was literally packed
with a mass of living beings, who listened with breathless silence to Mr.
Miller’s last lecture.

“There had been no intimation given throughout of what had transpired
to close the meetings, until he came to bid them farewell. There were
then bitter tears and strong sighs. The announcement of the fact came
unexpectedly. The appeal was melting beyond expression. Probably more
than a thousand persons arose to testify their faith in the truth of
the advent near, and three or four hundred of the unconverted arose to
request an interest in his prayers. Mr. Miller closed the services by
a most feeling and appropriate prayer and benediction. No blame was
attached to the owners of the Museum for their course.

“About this time it was announced, by a correspondent of Bennett’s _N.
Y. Herald_, that Mr. Miller had fixed on the 3d of April for the advent.
This being industriously circulated, led Prof. Moses Stuart to say of
‘the men of April 3, 1843,’ “I would respectfully suggest, that in some
way or other they have, in all probability, made a _small mistake_ as
to the _exact day_ of the month when the grand catastrophe takes place,
the _1st of April_ being evidently much more appropriate to their
arrangements than any other day in the year.”—_Hints_, 2d ed., p. 173.
The _New York Observer_, of February 11, 1843, in commenting on this
suggestion of Prof. Stuart, thought it sufficient ‘to quiet every feeling
of _alarm_!’ As remarks like these, and other equally foolish stories
which are referred to in the following letter, met the eye of Mr. Miller,
he thus denies them through the columns of the _Signs of the Times_:—

    “‘DEAR BROTHER HIMES:—At the request of numerous friends, I
    herein transmit to them, through you, a brief statement of
    facts, relative to the many stories with which the public
    are humbugged, concerning the principles I advocate, and the
    management of my worldly concerns.

    “My principles, in brief, are, that Jesus Christ will come
    again to this earth, cleanse, purify, and take possession
    of the same, with all his saints, some time between March
    21, 1843, and March 21, 1844. I have never, for the space of
    more than twenty-three years, had _any other time preached
    or published by me_; I have never fixed on any month, day,
    or hour, during that period; I have never found any mistake
    in reckoning, summing up or miscalculation; I have made no
    provision for any other time; I am perfectly satisfied that
    the _Bible_ is _true_, and is the _word_ of _God_, and I am
    confident that I rely wholly on the blessed book for my faith
    in this matter. I am not a prophet. I am not sent to prophesy,
    but to read, believe, and publish what God has inspired the
    ancient prophets to administer to us, in the prophecies of
    the Old and New Testaments. These have been, and now are, my
    principles, and I hope I shall never be ashamed of them.

    “‘As to worldly cares, I have had but very few for twelve
    years past. I have a wife and eight children; I have great
    reason to believe they all are the children of God, and
    believers in the same doctrine with myself. I own a small
    farm in Low Hampton, N. Y.; my family support themselves upon
    it, and I believe they are esteemed frugal, temperate, and
    industrious. They use hospitality without grudging, and never
    turn a pilgrim from the house, nor the needy from the door. I
    bless God that my family are benevolent and kind to all men who
    need their sympathy or aid; I have no cares to manage, except
    my own individual wants; I have no funds or debts due me of any
    amount; “I owe no man anything;” and I have expended more than
    two thousand dollars of my property in twelve years, besides
    what God has given me through the dear friends, in this cause.

                         “‘Yours respectfully,

                                                     WILLIAM MILLER.

    “‘_Philadelphia, Feb. 4, 1844._’

“The almost unparalleled abuse to which Mr. Miller was subject, through
most of the secular and some of the religious papers, during this period,
called forth the following manly rebuke from the _Sandy Hill Herald_, a
paper published in Mr. Miller’s own county:—

    “‘FATHER MILLER.

    “‘While we are not prepared to subscribe to the doctrine
    promulgated by this gentleman, we have been surprised at the
    means made use of by its opponents to put it down. Certainly
    all who have ever heard him lecture, or have read his works,
    must acknowledge that he is a sound reasoner, and, as such, is
    entitled to fair arguments from those who differ with him. Yet
    his opponents do not see fit to exert their reasoning powers,
    but content themselves by denouncing the old gentlemen as a
    “fanatic,” a “liar,” “deluded old fool,” “speculator,” &c., &c.
    Mr. Miller is now, and has been for many years, a resident of
    this county, and as a citizen, a man, and a Christian, stands
    high in the estimation of all who know him; and we have been
    pained to hear the gray-headed, trembling old man denounced as
    a “speculating knave.”

    “‘Speculating, forsooth! Why need he speculate? He has enough
    of the good things of this world to last him through the few
    days which at longest may be his on earth, without traveling
    from city to city, from town to village, laboring night and
    day like a galley-slave, to add to a store which is already
    abundant. Who that has witnessed his earnestness in the pulpit,
    and listened to the uncultivated eloquence of nature, which
    falls in such rich profusion from his lips, dare say that he is
    an impostor? We answer, without fear of contradiction from any
    candid mind, None! We are not prepared to say how far the old
    man may be from correct, but one thing, _we doubt not that he
    is sincere_; and we do hope that some one of his many opponents
    will take the pains to investigate the subject, and, if it be
    in their power, drive the old man from his position. It is
    certainly a subject worthy of investigation, and one fraught
    with momentous consequences; and no matter who the individual
    is that promulgates the doctrine, if he offers good reasons and
    sound arguments, drawn from the word of God and from history,
    we say he is entitled to his position until, by the same
    means, he is driven from it. Mr. Miller certainly goes to the
    fountain of knowledge, revelation, and history, for proof,
    and should not be answered with low, vulgar, and blasphemous
    witticisms.’

“We like the following remarks, copied from an exchange, in relation to
this subject:—

    “‘MILLERISM.—This is the term by which the opinions of those
    who oppose the idea of a millennium, and maintain that the end
    of the world will take place in 1843, are distinguished; and
    they are thus denominated because Mr. Miller first propagated
    it.

    “‘We certainly are not a convert to the theory; but we feel
    bound in duty to lift our voice in reproof of, and enter our
    protest against, the _infidel scurrility and blasphemous
    witticisms_ with which some of our exchanges abound, and from
    which religious periodicals are not wholly exempt.

    “‘If Mr. Miller is in error, it is possible to prove him so,
    but not by vulgar and blasphemous witticisms and ribaldry;
    these are not arguments. And to treat a subject of such
    overwhelming majesty, and fearful consequences—a subject which
    has been made the theme of prophecy in both Testaments; the
    truth of which, occur when it will, God has sealed by his own
    unequivocal averments—we repeat it, to make puns and display
    vulgar wit upon this subject, is not merely to sport with the
    feelings of its propagators and advocates, but is to make a
    jest of the day of Judgment, to scoff at the Deity himself, and
    contemn the terrors of his judgment bar.’

“The _Pittsburg_ (Pa.) _Gazette_, also said:—

    “‘We do not concur with Mr. Miller in his interpretations of
    the prophecies; but we can see neither reason nor Christianity
    in the unmerited reproach which is heaped upon him for
    propagating an honest opinion. And that he is honest we have
    no doubt. True, we think him in error, but believe he is
    honestly so. And suppose he does err in his views of prophecy,
    does that make him either a knave or a fool? Have not some
    of the greatest or best men who have lived since the days of
    the apostles erred in the same way? And who will say that all
    these, including Whitby, Bishop Newton, and others of equal
    celebrity, were monomaniacs, and driven by a pitiable or
    culpable frenzy to the adoption of their opinions? The truth
    is, as we apprehend, that many of those who are so indecorous
    and vituperative in their denunciations of Miller, are in
    fearful trepidation, lest the day being so near at hand, should
    overtake them unawares, and hence, like cowardly boys in the
    dark, they make a great noise by way of keeping up their
    courage, and to frighten away the bugbears.’

“The editor of the _Countryman_, in giving the synopsis of Mr. Miller’s
views, added:—

    “‘The abstract of Miller’s views, which we give on our fourth
    page, so far as we give it in this paper, is and has been,
    according to what we have been able to ascertain, the professed
    belief of orthodox Christians, from the day of Christ’s
    ascension into Heaven until the present hour. Therefore they
    are not merely Mr. Miller’s views, but the acknowledged views
    of the Christian church, the received Bible doctrine; and if
    Bible doctrine, then are they the truth.

    “‘One of the apostles, who shared as largely in the confidence
    and personal instruction of his Master as any, concludes a
    reference to this subject in these words: “Wherefore, beloved,
    seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent, that ye may
    be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless.” 2 Pet.
    3:14. If the things here referred to have not taken place—and
    who will say they have?—they, of course, are yet to transpire.
    If so, is not the caution of the apostle as important in this
    our day as it was when he uttered it? And if it was an event
    to be looked for and hoped for _then_, should it be an object
    of less solicitude _now_? Every intelligent, free moral agent
    upon earth, whether aware of it or not, has an interest in
    this issue. He may absorb his mind in other matters, he may
    drown reflection in the whirl of business or pleasure, he may
    wrap his soul in projects of wealth or ambition, and fill his
    aspiring eye with the anticipated glories of some dazzling
    hight, but his interest still cleaves to the immortality of his
    nature, and, sooner or later, he must discover that it is the
    most important interest ever presented to his consideration, or
    that is attached to his being or his destiny. Is it not, then,
    the hight of wisdom to give heed to these things, and examine
    them with all that diligence and dispassionate attention their
    importance merits?’




CHAPTER XI.

    MR. MILLER AND HIS REVIEWERS—DOCTORS DOWLING, CHASE,
    JARVIS, ETC.—THE FOURTH KINGDOM—THE LITTLE HORN—PROPHETIC
    NUMBERS—SEVENTY WEEKS—COMING OF CHRIST, ETC.


“As it will be proper to take some notice of the controversy between Mr.
Miller and those who entered the lists against him, it may as well be
referred to in this connection. As his views gained adherents, various
publications of sermons, reviews, &c., were issued from the press—the
design of which was to counteract his expositions of prophecy. Some of
these were direct attacks on him, and others only indirect, by opposing
the long-established principles of Protestant interpretation. The
controversy had respect principally to the following points:—

“1. The Fourth Kingdom of Daniel, 7th chapter.

“2. The Little Horn of the same.

“3. The Little Horn of the 8th.

“4. The Length of the Prophetic Periods.

“5. The Commencement of the Seventy Weeks of Dan. 9.

“6. Their Connection with the 2300 days of Dan. 8.

“7. The Rise of the Little Horn of the 7th.

“8. The Nature of Christ’s Second Advent.

“9. The Return of the Jews.

“10. The Epoch of the Resurrection.

“Mr. Miller laid no claim to _originality_ in his position respecting any
of the above points; but maintained that they were established opinions
of the church, and, being so, that his conclusions from such premises
were well sustained by human as well as by divine teachings. While his
opponents attacked the view he took of these points, no one of them
assailed the whole; but each admitted his correctness on some of the
points; and, among them, the whole were admitted.

“1. _The Fourth Kingdom of Daniel._ This he claimed to be the _Roman_.
In this, he had the support of the ablest and most judicious expositors
of every age. William Cunninghame, Esq., of England, an eminent
expositor, in speaking of the four parts of the great image of the dream
of Nebuchadnezzar, says that they are ‘respectively applied by Daniel
himself to _four kingdoms, which have, by the unanimous voice of the
Jewish and Christian churches, for more than eighteen centuries, been
identified with_ the empires of Babylon, Persia, Greece, and Rome.’
Should this be questioned, the witnesses are abundant. In the Jewish
church, we have the Targum of Jonathan Ben Uzziel, Josephus, and the
whole modern synagogue, including the names of Abarbanal, Kimchi, David,
Levi, and others. In the Christian church, such as Barnabas, Irenæus,
Chrysostom, Cyril of Jerusalem in his catechism, Jerome, and according
to him, all ecclesiastical writers, Hyppolitus and Lactantius in the
early ages; since the Reformation, Luther, Calvin, Mede, T. H. Horne,[18]
Sir Isaac Newton, Bishop Newton, Dr. Hales, Scott, Clarke, Brown,[19]
Watson,[20] Bishop Lloyd, Daubuz, Brightman, Faber, Noel, Dr. Hopkins,
and almost every biblical expositor of any note in the Protestant church.
Those who make this application of the four parts of the image have no
difficulty in making a like application of the four beasts of Daniel
seventh. The remarkable similarity of the two visions requires this.

“This long-established opinion was controverted by Prof. Stuart of
Andover, in his ‘Hints,’ before referred to. He said: ‘The fourth beast
in Dan. 7:6, &c., is, beyond all reasonable doubt, the divided Grecian
dominion, which succeeded the reign of Alexander the Great.’—_Hints_, p.
86.

“Prof. Irah Chase, D. D., said: ‘The fourth empire was that of the
successors of Alexander, among whom Seleucus was pre-eminent.’—_Remarks
on the Book of Daniel_, p. 20.

“Others, of lesser note, copied from these, and took a similar position
respecting the fourth kingdom.

“Of those who opposed Mr. Miller on other points, John Dowling, D.D., of
New York city, in his ‘Exposition of the Prophecies,’ did not assail this.

“Rev. W. T. Hamilton, D. D., of Mobile, Ala., in his ‘Lecture on
Millerism,’ said: ‘I freely admit, that in his general outline of
interpretation (excluding his dates), following, as he does, much
abler men who have gone before him, Mr. Miller is correct. The several
dynasties prefigured in the great metallic image of Nebuchadnezzar—in
the vision of the four beasts, and of the ram and he-goat—Daniel himself
points out. Mistake there is not easy.”—p. 18.

“Dr. Jarvis, D. D., LL. D., of Middletown, Ct., in his ‘Two Discourses on
Prophecy,’ also applies the fourth beast in the same manner.—p. 42.

“J. T. Hinton, A. M., of St. Louis (‘Prophecies Illustrated’), said:
‘The dream of the image, the vision of the four beasts, that of the
ram and he-goat, and the “Scriptures of truth,” give us four detailed
descriptions of the history of the world, from the time of Daniel to the
“time of the end;” and the Apocalyptic visions refer to the same period
as the latter portion of the prophecies of Daniel.’—p. 25. ‘The dream
of the image is of the greatest importance; it leaves _without excuse_
those who would reduce the remaining prophecies of Daniel to the narrow
compass of the little acts of the reign of Antiochus Epiphanes. Nothing
can be clearer than that the gold, the silver, the brass, the iron, and
the clay, are designed to cover the history of the world in all its
successive ages.”—p. 27.

“Again he says: ‘We think our readers will concur with us, and with the
great mass of writers on prophecy, that the “ten horns” or Daniel’s
“fourth beast,” and “the beast rising out of the sea, having seven
heads,” of the Apocalyptic visions, refer to the ten kingdoms into which
the Roman Empire was divided. Of the identity of the ten-horned beasts of
Daniel and John there can be no reasonable doubt.”—p. 232.

“2. _The Little Horn of the seventh chapter of Daniel._ This he held
to be the papacy. This was no novel view of that symbol, being, as it
was, the view of the whole Protestant world. See Dr. Clarke’s Notes on
2 Thess. 2; Croly on the Apoc., pp. 113-117, Horne’s Int., vol. 4, p.
191, Watson’s Theol. Dic., p. 62, G. T. Noel, Prospects of the Church of
Christ, p. 100, William Cunninghame, Esq., Political Dest. of the Earth,
p. 28, Mede, Newton, Scott, Daubuz, Hurd, Jurieu, Vitringa, Fleming,
Lowman, and numerous others of the best standard expositors.

“Prof. Stuart, Prof. Chase, and others who applied the ‘fourth beast’ to
the four divisions of Alexander’s successors, applied the little horn of
the same chapter to Antiochus Epiphanes.

“Mr. Hinton took the same view that Mr. Miller did of this symbol.
He said: ‘If any other events of history can be set forth and made
to fill out _all the particulars_ mentioned by Daniel and John, we
should be happy to see them stated; till then, we shall believe the
little horn rising up amidst the ten horns, and having three of them
plucked up before it, to refer to the rise of the papacy in the midst
of the kingdoms into which the Roman Empire was divided in the sixth
century.”—p. 237.

“Dr. Dowling, Dr. Hamilton, and others, who admitted that the fourth
beast symbolized the Roman Empire, also applied its little horn to the
papacy.

“3. _The Little Horn of the eighth chapter of Daniel, that became
exceeding great._ This Mr. Miller believed to be a symbol of Rome. In
this view he was sustained by Sir Isaac Newton, Bishop Newton, Dr. Hales,
Martin Luther, Dr. Prideaux, Dr. Clarke, Dr. Hopkins, Wm. Cunninghame,
and others.

“Dr. Horne said of the first three above named: ‘Sir Isaac Newton, Bishop
Newton, and Dr. Hales, have clearly shown that the Roman power, and no
other, is intended; for, although some of the particulars may agree very
well with that king (Antiochus), yet others can by no means be reconciled
to him; _while all of them agree and correspond exactly with the Romans,
and with no other power_.”—_Intro._, vol. 4, p. 191.

“In addition to these, almost all the old writers who applied it to
Antiochus Epiphanes did so only as the type of Rome, where they looked
for the Antichrist. St. Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, in the fourth
century, said: ‘This, the predicted Antichrist, will come when the times
of the (pagan) Roman Empire shall be fulfilled, and the consummation
of the world approach. Ten kings of the Romans shall rise together, in
different places indeed, but they shall reign at the same time. Among
these, the eleventh is Antichrist, who, by magical and wicked artifices,
shall seize the Roman power.’

“Prof. Stuart, Prof. Chase, and even Dr. Dowling, with others, applied
this symbol to Antiochus Epiphanes.

“Rev. R. C. Shimeal, of New York (“Prophecy in Course of Fulfillment”),
dissented from Mr. Miller, and also from the foregoing, and understood
this horn to symbolize the Mahommedan power. Mr. Hinton took the same
view.

“Mr. Miller was sustained in his application of this point by Dr.
Hamilton and Dr. Jarvis. The latter said: ‘Sir Isaac Newton, with that
sagacity which was peculiar to him, was the first, I believe, who showed
clearly that this little horn was the Roman power.’—p. 43.

“4. _The Length of the Prophetic Numbers._ In explaining these, Mr.
Miller adopted the Protestant view, that they represent years. There is
probably no point respecting which Protestant commentators have been
more agreed than this. Faber, Prideaux, Mede, Clarke, Scott, the two
Newtons, Wesley, and almost every expositor of note, have considered this
a _settled question_. Indeed, so universal has been this interpretation
of these periods that Professor Stuart says: ‘IT IS A SINGULAR FACT THAT
THE GREAT MASS OF INTERPRETERS in the English and American world have,
for many years, been wont to understand the _days_ designated in Daniel
and the Apocalypse as the _representatives or symbols of years_. I found
it difficult to trace the origin of this _GENERAL, I might say ALMOST
UNIVERSAL, CUSTOM_.’—_Hints_, p. 77.

“He also says: ‘For a long time these principles have been so current
among the expositors of the English and American world, that scarcely
a serious attempt to vindicate them has of late been made. They have
been regarded as _so plain_ and so well _fortified_ against _all
objections_, that _most expositors_ have deemed it quite useless even to
attempt to defend them. One might, indeed, almost compare the ready and
unwavering assumption of these propositions, to the assumption of the
first self-evident axioms in the science of geometry, which not only may
dispense with any process of ratiocination in their defense, but which do
not even admit of any.’—_Hints_, p. 8.

“Prof. Stuart, however, dissented from this ‘almost universal custom,’
and claimed that the prophetic days—the 1260, 1290, 1335, and
2300—indicated only days. Of the 1260 he said: ‘The very manner of the
expression indicates, of course, that it was not the design of the
speaker or writer to be _exact_ to a day or an hour. A little more or
a little less than three and a half years would, as every reasonable
interpreter must acknowledge, accord perfectly well with the general
designation here, where plainly the aim is not statistical exactness, but
a mere generalizing of the period in question.’—_Hints_, p. 73.

“Again he says: ‘A statistical exactness cannot be aimed at in cases of
this nature. Any near approximation to the measure of time in question
would, of course, be regarded as a sufficient reason for setting it down
under the general rubric.’

“‘By the 1260 days,’ he said, ‘no more than three and a half years
literally can possibly be meant’ (p. 75); and of the 2300: ‘We must
consider these 2300 evening-mornings as an expression of simple time, _i.
e._, of so many days, reckoned in the Hebrew manner.’—p. 100.

“Prof. C. E. Stowe, D. D., of Andover Mass., in his ‘Millennial
Arithmetic,’ claimed that ‘_day_ does not mean _year_ in the prophecies
any more than elsewhere and that ‘a definite designation of time was not
here intended, but only a general expression.’—p. 13.

“Prof. Chase agreed with Prof. Stuart respecting the 1260 days; but
said of the 2300: ‘The period predicted is _not_ two thousand and three
hundred _days_ but only _half_ that number—1150.’—_Remarks_, p. 60.

“Dr Dowling agreed with Prof. Chase that the 2300 were half days; but
differed both from him and Prof. Stuart respecting the 1260, of which
he says: ‘I believe, as Mr. Miller does, and indeed most Protestant
commentators, that the 1260 years denote the duration of the dominion
of the papal Antichrist. After comparing these passages, and the entire
prophecies to which they belong, with the history and character of
papacy, I cannot doubt that this is the mystical Babylon, whose name is
written in Rev. 17:5; and that, when the 1260 years are accomplished,
then shall that great city, Babylon, be thrown down, and shall be found
no more at all.’—_Reply to Miller_, p. 27.

“Prof. Pond, D. D. (of Bangor, Me.), in his ‘Review of Second Advent
Publications,’ was in doubt whether the periods of Daniel could be proved
to be years; but was willing to cut the matter short by conceding the
point that it may be so.—p. 22.

“Dr. Jarvis, Mr. Hinton, Mr. Shimeal, and Prof. Bush, sustained Mr.
Miller respecting the significance of the prophetic days.

“In speaking of the application of the 2300 days to the time of the
persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes, Dr. Jarvis says: ‘This interpretation
would, of course, be fatal to all Mr. Miller’s calculations. It is not
_surprising_, therefore, that it should be eagerly embraced by many of
his opponents. But, with all due deference, I think there are insuperable
difficulties in the way of this scheme, which makes Antiochus Epiphanes
the little horn.’ ‘I make no difficulty, therefore, in admitting the
evening-morning to mean a prophetic day.’—_Sermons_, p. 46. He further
says that Daniel was told to shut up the vision, ‘because the fulfillment
of it should be so far distant; a strong collateral argument, as I
understand it, for the interpretation of 2300 prophetic days.’—_Ib._, p.
47. And ‘The vision is the whole vision of the ram and he-goat.’—p. 45.

“Prof. Bush, in writing to Mr. Miller, said: ‘I do not conceive your
errors on the subject of chronology to be at all of a serious nature,
or in fact to be _very wide of the truth_. In taking a _day_ as the
prophetical time for a _year_, I believe you are _sustained_ by the
_soundest exegesis_, as well as _fortified_ by the high names of Mede,
Sir Isaac Newton, Bishop Newton, Faber, Scott, Keith, and a host of
others, who have long since come to _substantially your conclusions_ on
this head. They _all agree_ that the leading periods mentioned by Daniel
and John _do actually expire about this age of the world_; and it would
be strange logic that would convict you of heresy for holding in effect
the same views which stand forth so prominently in the notices of these
eminent divines.’ ‘Your results in this field of inquiry do not strike
me as so _far out of the way_ as to affect any of the great interests of
truth or duty.’—_Ad. Her._, vol. 7, p. 38.

“Writing to Prof. Stuart, Prof. Bush said: ‘I am not inclined
precipitately to discard an opinion _long prevalent in the church_, which
has commended itself to those whose judgments are entitled to profound
respect. That such is the case in regard to the _year-day_ calculations
of prophecy I am _abundantly satisfied_; and I confess, too, at once to
the pleasure that it affords me to find that that which is sustained by
_age_ is also sustained by _argument_.’ Again he says: ‘Mede is very
far from being the first who adopted this solution of the symbolic term
day. It is the solution naturally arising from the construction put,
in _all_ ages, upon the oracle of Daniel respecting the SEVENTY WEEKS,
which, by Jews and Christians, have been interpreted weeks of years, on
the principle of a day standing for a year. This fact is obvious from
the Rabbinical writers _en masse_, where they touch upon the subject;
and Eusebius tells us (_Dem. Evangl._ 8, p. 258—Ed. Steph.), that this
interpretation in his day was _generally_ if not _universally admitted_.’

“I have, in my own collection, writers on the prophecies, previous to
the time of Mede, who interpret the 1260 days as so many years, and
who are so far from broaching this as a _new_ interpretation that they
do not even pause to give the grounds of it, but proceed onward, as if
no risk were run in taking for granted the soundness of the principle
which _came down to them accredited by the IMMEMORIAL usage of their
predecessors_.’—_Hierophant_, vol. 1, p. 245.

“If the old, established principle of the year-day theory is wrong, then,
said Prof. Bush, ‘not only has the whole Christian world been led astray
for ages by a mere _ignis fatuus_ of false hermeneutics, but the church
is at once cut loose from every chronological mooring, and set adrift in
the open sea, without the vestige of a beacon, light-house, or star, by
which to determine her bearings or distances from the desired millennial
haven to which she had hoped she was tending.’

“5. _The Commencement of the Seventy Weeks._—These were believed by
Mr. Miller to be the weeks of years—four hundred and ninety years—and
commenced with the decree of Artaxerxes Longimanus to restore and build
Jerusalem, according to Ezra seventh, B. C. 457. This has also long been
considered by commentators to be a settled point; and it probably would
not have been disputed were it not for a desire to avoid the conclusion
to which Mr. Miller came, on the supposition that it was the beginning
of the 2300 days. On so settled a point as this it is only necessary to
mention such names as Horne (see Int., vol. 1, p. 336, vol. 4, p. 191),
Prideaux (see Connection, pp. 227-256), Clarke (see Notes on 9th of
Daniel), Watson (Theol. Dic., p. 96), William Howel, LL. D. (Int. of Gen.
His., vol. 1, p. 209), Scott, and Cunninghame.

“This point was not much questioned by any. A Mr. Kindrick, in a ‘New
Exposition of the Prophecies of Daniel,’ said: ‘They are seventy
years only, and commenced with the birth of Christ and ended with the
destruction of the Jewish nation.’—p. 4. Rev. Calvin Newton affirmed, in
the _Christian Watchman_, that they were fulfilled in seventy literal
weeks. And Prof. Stuart said: ‘It would require a volume of considerable
magnitude even to give a history of the ever-varying and contradictory
opinions of critics respecting this _locus vexatissimus_; and perhaps a
still larger, to establish an exegesis which would stand. I am fully of
opinion that no interpretation as yet published will stand the test of
thorough grammatico-historical criticism.’—_Hints_, p. 104.

“Mr. Shimeal, while he admitted that they are weeks of years, commenced
them four years later than Mr. M.

“Dr. Hamilton sustained Mr. Miller on this point. He said: ‘The
interpretation which Mr. Miller gives of Daniel’s seventy weeks,
commencing with the decree of Artaxerxes Longimanus, in the seventh
year of his reign (B. C. 457), for the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and
terminating with the death of Christ, A. D. 33, is, in the main, correct,
because here Mr. M. but gives a tolerably faithful report of the result
of the labors of the learned Prideaux and others in this field of
research.’—p. 18. This interpretation was not denied by Dr. Jarvis, Mr.
Hinton, and Mr. Morris. And Dr. Dowling said: ‘Mr. Miller says the four
hundred and ninety years begin B. C. 457, which is correct. He says they
end A. D. 33, which is also correct.’—p. 49.

“6. _The connection between the 70 weeks and 2300 Days._—This was a
_vital_ point in the chronology of Mr. M. to bring the end in 1843. The
Rev. William Hales, D. D., the most learned modern chronologer, says:
‘This simple and ingenious adjustment of the chronology of the seventy
weeks, considered as forming a branch of the 2300 days, was originally
due to the sagacity of Hans Wood, Esq., of Rossmead, in the county of
Westmeath, Ireland, and published by him in an anonymous commentary on
the Revelation of St. John, Lon., 1787.’—_New Anal. Chro._, vol. 2, p.
564. He elsewhere calls it ‘the most ingenious of its class.’

“The argument which Mr. Miller used in support of this point was based
upon the literal meaning of the Hebrew word, which, in our version of
Daniel 9:24, is rendered ‘determined’—_cut off_, or _cut out_,—and the
circumstances in which Gabriel appeared to Daniel, as stated in the ninth
chapter, with the instruction given.

“In the 8th chapter of Daniel is recorded a vision which was to extend
to the cleansing of the sanctuary, and to continue 2300 days. Daniel had
‘sought for the meaning’ of that vision, and a voice said: “Gabriel,
make this man to understand the vision.” Gabriel said to Daniel: ‘I will
make thee know what shall be in the last end of the indignation; for,
at the time appointed, the end shall be;’ and then proceeded to explain
the symbols, but said nothing of their duration. At the close of the
explanation Daniel fainted, and was sick certain days; and he says he
‘was astonished at the vision, but none understood it.’

“Three years subsequent to that vision, Daniel—understanding ‘by books
the number of years whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the
prophet, that he would accomplish seventy years in the desolations
of Jerusalem,’—set his face unto the Lord to seek by prayer and
supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes. He proceeded
to confess his own sins and the sins of his people, and to supplicate
the Lord’s favor on the sanctuary that was desolate. While he was thus
speaking, Daniel says:—‘Gabriel, whom I had seen in _the vision_ at the
beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the
evening oblation; and he informed me, and talked with me, and said: ‘O
Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee skill and understanding. At the
beginning of thy supplications the commandment came forth, and I am come
to show thee; for thou art greatly beloved; therefore understand the
matter and consider _the vision_. Seventy weeks are _determined_’ &c.
‘From the going forth of the decree to restore and to build Jerusalem
unto Messiah the Prince:’—after which Jerusalem was to be made desolate
‘until the consummation.’—Dan. 9:20-27.

“Dr. Gill, a distinguished divine and scholar, rendered the word
‘determined,’ _cut off_, and is sustained by good scholars.

“Hengstenberg, who enters into a critical examination of the original
text, says: ‘But the very use of the word, which does not elsewhere
occur, while others, much more frequently used, were at hand, if Daniel
had wished to express the idea of determination, and of which he has
elsewhere, and even in this portion, availed himself, seems to argue
that the word stands from regard to its original meaning, and represents
the seventy weeks, in contrast with a determination of time (_en
platei_), _as a period cut off from subsequent duration, and accurately
limited_.’—_Christology of the Old Test._, vol. 2, p. 301. Washington,
1839.

“Gesenius, in his Hebrew Lexicon, gives _cut off_ as the definition
of the word, and many others of the first standing as to learning and
research, and several versions have thus rendered the word.[21]

“Such being the meaning of the word, and such the circumstances under
which the prophecy of the seventy weeks was given, Mr. Miller claimed
that _the vision_ which Daniel was called on to consider, and respecting
which Gabriel was to give him skill and understanding, was _the vision_
of the 8th chapter; of which Daniel sought the meaning, which Gabriel was
commanded to make him understand, but which, after Gabriel’s explanation,
none understood; and that the seventy weeks of years—_i. e._, four
hundred and ninety that were _cut off_—were cut off from the 2300 days of
that vision; and, consequently, that those two periods must be dated from
the same epoch, and the longer extend 1810 years after the termination of
the shorter.

“The same view was advocated by several English divines. Rev. M.
Habershon says: ‘In this conclusion I am happy in agreeing with Mr.
Cunninghame, who says, “I am not aware of any more probable era which
can be selected for the commencement of the 2300 years than that which
has been chosen by some recent writers, who supposed this period to
have begun at the same time with the seventy weeks of Daniel, or in the
year B. C. 457, and consequently that it will terminate in the year
1843.”’—_Hist. Dis._, p. 307.

“The celebrated Joseph Wolf, though dating the seventy weeks and 2300
days from B. C. 453, commenced them at the same epoch.—_Missionary
Labors_, p. 259. And Dr. Wilson, of Cincinnati, who is high authority in
the Presbyterian church, in a discourse on ‘Cleansing the Sanctuary,’
says: I undertake to show that Daniel’s ‘seventy weeks’ is the beginning
or first part of the ‘two thousand three hundred days’ allotted for the
cleansing of the sanctuary; that Daniel’s ‘time, times, and a half’ is
the last or concluding part of the 2300 days.’

“Prof. Stuart, Dr. Dowling, Prof. Chase, and others, who denied the
year-day calculation when applied to the 2300 days, of course dissented
from Mr. Miller on this point. Dr. Dowling went so far as to _deny_(!)
that the Hebrew article _hai_ (THE) is in the phrase ‘the vision.’ in the
original of Dan. 9:23.

“Of those who admitted the year-day theory, Dr. Hamilton, Dr. Jarvis, Mr.
Hinton, and Dr. Pond, denied any connection between the two periods. Dr.
Hamilton commenced the 2300 days B. C. 784, and ended them with the era
of the Reformation, A. D. 1516. The others did not hazard any opinion
respecting the time of their commencement.

“Mr. Miller was supposed to be sustained on this point by Prof. Bush,
who did not consider him in any serious error respecting the time. And
Mr. Shimeal said, ‘I trust it will not be deemed a violation of that
modesty which becomes me, if, for the reasons here given, I withhold my
assent from the conclusion of the Rev. Dr. Jarvis on this subject; which
is that the seventy weeks form no part of the two thousand three hundred
days.’—p. 34.

“7. _The rise of the Papacy—the Little Horn of Dan. 7._—Mr. Miller
claimed that the one thousand two hundred and sixty years of the papacy
were to be reckoned from A. D. 538, by virtue of the decree of Justinian.
This decree, though issued A. D. 533, did not go into full effect
until 538, when the enemies of the Catholics in Rome were subjugated
by Belisarius, a general of Justinian. In this view, as to the rise of
papacy, he was sustained by Croly (see his work on Apoc., pp. 113-117);
G. T. Noel (see Prospects of Ch., p. 100); Wm. Cunninghame, Esq. (Pol.
Destiny of the earth, p. 28); Keith, vol. 1, p. 93; Encyclopedia of Rel.
Knowl., art. Antichrist; Edward King, Esq., and others.

“Prof. Stuart and Prof. Chase, in applying this little horn to Antiochus,
and the beast of the Apocalypse to Nero, explained these numbers in days,
satisfactorily to themselves.

“Dr. Jarvis, who admitted that they symbolize years, denied Mr. Miller’s
commencement, without assigning any other. He said: ‘I would rather
imitate the caution of the learned Mr. Mede, with regard to the time of
the great apostasy, “and curiously inquire not, but leave it unto him who
is the Lord of times and seasons.”’

“And of the 1260, 1290, and 1335 days, Mr. Dowling said, ‘If I am asked
the question, As you reject the interpretation Mr. Miller gives of these
prophetic times, can you furnish a better? I reply, _I do not feel myself
bound to furnish any_’!—_Reply to M._, p. 25.

“Dr. Hamilton rather agreed with Faber and Scott, in dating from the
decree of Phocus, A. D. 606.

“Mr. Shimeal sustained Mr. Miller in dating from the decree of Justinian,
but reckoned from the _date_ of its _issue_, instead of from its going
into effect.—p. 45.

“8. _The Coming of Christ._—Mr. Miller contended that this was to be
literal and personal. This was the view which had been entertained by the
church in all ages, and is recognized in the formulas of faith adopted
by all evangelical churches. Whether his coming is to be pre or post
millennial, is another question; but that Christians, in all ages, have
believed that Christ will come again in person to judge the world, will
not be questioned.

“That Christ will ever thus return was denied by Prof. Stuart and Prof.
Bush. The former said that he had ‘a deeper conviction than ever of the
difficulties which attend the supposition of a _personal_, _actual_,
and _visible_ descent of Christ and the glorified saints to the
earth.’—_Hints_, 2d ed., p. 153. Again: ‘All the prophecies respecting
the Messiah are invested with the costume of figurative language.’—_Ib._,
p. 183. And again: ‘Christ himself assumed a visible appearance,’ at his
first advent, ‘only that he might take on him our nature and die for sin.
When he appears a second time, there is no necessity for assuming such a
nature.’—_Ib._, p. 185.

“Prof. Bush gave as his opinion, that ‘the second advent of the Saviour
is not affirmed to be _personal_, but _spiritual_ and _providential_;
and that the event so denominated is to be considered as having entered
upon its incipient fulfillment at a very early period of the Christian
dispensation.’—_Anastasis_, p. 9.

“Mr. Dowling and others, who admitted the personal coming of Christ at
the _close_ of the millennium, claimed that the predicted reign of Christ
on earth during that period is to be _spiritual_.

“But Mr. Shimeal sustained Mr. Miller in his belief that the advent
will be personal and pre-millennial. And Bishop Hopkins, of Vermont
(Two Discourses on the Advent), while he claimed that the time was not
revealed, said, nevertheless, ‘we would admonish you, with still greater
earnestness, to keep your souls in constant readiness for your Lord’s
advent, and in a state of sacred desire to behold him in his glory.’—p.
29.

“9. _The Return of the Jews._—Mr. Miller looked for no return of the
Jews previous to the resurrection of the just; and the righteous of that
nation, who have died in the faith of Abraham, with all Gentile believers
of like precious faith, he regarded as the subjects of all unfulfilled
promises to Israel—the fulfillment of which will be in the new earth, and
in the resurrection out from among the dead.

“That the promise to Abraham has reference to the resurrection state, is
no novel or unscriptural view.

“Rabbi Eliezer the Great, supposed to have lived just after the second
temple was built, applied Hosea 14:8 to the pious Jews, who seemed likely
to die without seeing the glory of Israel, saying: ‘As I live, saith
Jehovah, I will raise you up in the resurrection of the dead; and I will
gather you with all Israel.’

“The Sadducees are reported to have asked Rabbi Gamaliel, the preceptor
of Paul, whence he would prove that God would raise the dead; who quoted
Deut. 9:21: ‘Which land the Lord sware that he would give to your
_fathers_.’ He argued, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had it not, and as
God cannot lie, that they must be raised from the dead to inherit it.

“Rabbi Simai, though of later date, argues the same from Ex. 6:4,
insisting that the law asserts in this place the resurrection from the
dead, when it said, ‘And also I have established my covenant with them,
to give them the Canaan;’ for, he adds, ‘It is not said to _you_, but to
them.’

“Mennasseh Ben Israel says: ‘It is plain that Abraham and the rest of the
patriarchs did not possess that land: it follows, therefore, that they
must be raised in order to enjoy the promised good, as, otherwise, the
promises of God would be vain and false.”—_De Resurrect. Mort._, L, i.,
c. 1, sec. 4.

“Rabbi Saahias Gaion, commenting on Dan. 12:2, says: ‘This is the
resuscitation of the dead Israel, whose lot is eternal life, and those
who shall not awake are the forsakers of Jehovah.’

“‘In the world to come,’ says the Sahar, fol. 81, ‘the blessed God will
vivify the dead and raise them from their dust, so that they shall be no
more an earthly structure.’

“Luther, Calvin, and many other divines of the era of the Reformation,
apply the promises to Abraham in a like manner; as do many divines of the
present time.

“Of those who entered the list against Mr. Miller, Dr. Dowling, Mr.
Shimeal, and Dr. Hamilton, strenuously contended for the return of the
Jews in the flesh to Palestine.

“Prof. Stuart sustained Mr. Miller so far as the question has respect to
the true Israel, applying the promises to all who are of the faith of
Abraham.

“10. _The Epoch of the Resurrection._—Mr. Miller held that the
resurrection of the just will be pre-millennial, and that that of the
wicked will be at the close of the millennium. This hinges on the
interpretation given to Rev. 20:4-6. It is worthy of note that, during
the first two centuries, there was not an individual who believed in any
resurrection of the dead, whose name or memory has come down to us, who
denied that a literal resurrection is there taught.

“Eusebius admits that Papias was a disciple of John the Evangelist, and
that he taught that, ‘after the resurrection of the dead, the kingdom of
Christ shall be established corporeally on this earth.’—[Hist. Lib. 3,
Sec. 39.] And Jerome quotes Papias [De Script. Eccles.] as saying, that
‘he had the apostles for his authors, and that he considered what Andrew,
what Peter said, what Philip, what Thomas said, and other disciples of
the Lord.’ Irenæus taught that at the resurrection of the just the meek
should inherit the earth; and that then would be fulfilled the promise
which God made to Abraham.

“Justyn Martyr, who was born A. D. 89, seven years before the Revelations
were written, says that he and many others are of this mind, ‘that Christ
shall reign personally on the earth,’ and that ‘all who were accounted
orthodox so believed.’ He also says, ‘A certain man _among us_, whose
name is John, being one of the twelve apostles of Christ, in that
Revelation which was shown to him, prophesied that those who believe in
our Christ shall fulfill a thousand years at Jerusalem.’

“Tertullian, who wrote about A. D. 180, says it was a custom of his
times for Christians to pray that they might have part in the first
resurrection; and Cyprian, who lived about A. D. 220, says that
Christians ‘had a thirst for _martyrdom_, that they might obtain a better
resurrection,’—the martyrs being raised at the commencement of the
thousand years.

“The first of whom we have any account that opposed this doctrine was
Origen, in the middle of the third century, who styled those who adhered
to it ‘the simpler sort of Christians.’ Mosheim assures us that the
opinion ‘that Christ was to come and reign a thousand years among men’
had, before the time of Origen, ‘met with _no opposition_.’—_Ch. Hist._,
vol. 1, p. 284.

“At the era of the Reformation this doctrine was revived, and taught by
Luther and Melancthon; it is in the confession of Augsburg (A. D. 1530);
was the belief of Latimer, Cranmer, and Ridley; is in the Articles of the
Church (Ed. vi., A. D. 1552); is not denied in the more prominent creeds
and confessions of faith of the churches, and was believed by Mede, Sir
Isaac Newton, Bishop Newton, Milton, Knox, Bunyan, Gill, Cowper, Heber,
Pollok, Greswell, and many other distinguished names of modern times.

“This point was vital to Mr. Miller’s theory, for, however correct
he might be in his _time_, without this _event_ he must fail in his
application of prophecy.

“Prof. Bush, while he admitted that all ‘the leading periods
mentioned by Daniel and John do actually expire _about_ this age of
the world’ (_Letter to Mr. M._, p. 6), claimed that ‘the great event
before the world is not its _physical conflagration_, but its _moral
regeneration_.’—p. 11.

“Mr. Hinton said: ‘It is possible we may have reached the goal of the
world’s moral destiny. It is, indeed, our deliberate opinion that we are
in the general period of termination of the 23d century alluded to by the
prophet ... and that the events alluded to in the phrase “then shall the
sanctuary be cleansed” are now actually passing before us.’—p. 121. But
he considered the _event_ ‘a resurrection from death in trespasses and
sins.’—p. 336.

“Dr. Dowling, Dr. Hamilton, and others, while they did not admit, with
Prof. Bush, that the present age ‘is just opening upon the crowning
consummation of all prophetic declarations,’ contended that the
millennium ‘is to be ushered in, not by a literal resurrection of the
bodies of the saints, but by the figurative resurrection of the holy men
of all past ages, in the numerous instances of eminent piety that shall
appear in every nation under heaven.’—_Dr. H._, p. 30.

“Prof. Stuart, while he admitted that the resurrection here brought
to view was a resurrection of the body, limited it to the martyrs,
and denied that there is to be a descent of Christ to the earth, or a
_visible_ reign of the martyrs with him.

“Dr. Jarvis did not deny the event for which Mr. Miller looked; and
Mr. Shimeal taught, with Mr. Miller, the resurrection of the glorified
saints, and their visible reign with Christ on the earth; but he held
that they would reign over the converted nations, and denied the
conflagration previous to the end of the thousand years.

“And Bishop Hopkins gave as his opinion that the consummation ‘is drawing
nigh; how nigh none can tell.’

“There were various other issues between Mr. Miller and his reviewers;
but they were more collateral than vital to the question at issue, and
are not, therefore, particularly noticed in this connection.

“It is seen, from the foregoing, that Mr. Miller’s points, taken
separately, were not new or original with him; and that the peculiarity
of his theory consisted in putting them _together_; and that, while
none of his opposers condemned the whole, and each point separately was
admitted by some of them, there was no more unanimity between them than
between him and them. They had not only to battle with Mr. Miller’s
theory, but each had to disprove those of the others.

“It was, therefore, not surprising that the reviewers of Mr. Miller made
no impression on those who held his opinions. It was seen that to oppose
him they were ready to abandon old established principles of Protestant
interpretation. Even the _Boston Recorder_ (Orthodox Cong.) said: ‘_It
must needs be ACKNOWLEDGED THAT OUR FAITH IS GREATLY SHAKEN IN THE
INTERPRETATIONS ON WHICH, IN COMMON WITH MOST OF OUR OWN BRETHREN, WE
HAVE HERETOFORE RELIED, and which forms the FOUNDATION of the baseless
theories of Miller_!’ And the _Christian Advocate and Journal_ (Meth.
Epis.) said: ‘If his (Prof. Chase’s) views in regard to the prophecies
of Daniel be correct, the _long-established opinion_ that the Roman
Empire is the fourth kingdom of the prophet, _must give way_ to the more
successful researches of Dr. Chase. Some other opinions, _which have been
thought to be settled beyond a doubt_, ARE TERRIBLY SHAKEN.’

“Those who adhered to the established principles of interpretation did
not fail to perceive that Prof. Stuart, Dr. Dowling, Prof. Chase, &c.,
had not fairly met Mr. Miller, and that their expositions would not stand
the test of sound criticism.

“Of Professors Stuart and Bush the New York Evangelist said: ‘The
tendency of these views is to destroy the Scripture evidence of the
doctrine of any real end of the world, any day of final judgment, or
general resurrection of the body. The style of interpretation, we assert,
tends fearfully to _Universalism_. This tendency we are prepared to
prove.’

“The Hartford _Universalist_ said of Professor Stuart: ‘He puts an
uncompromising veto upon the popular interpretations of Daniel and
Revelation, and _unites with Universalists_ in contending that most
of their contents had special reference to, and their fulfillment in,
scenes and events which transpired but a few years after those books were
written.’—_Oct. 15, 1842._

“Mr. Hinton said of the same: ‘We regret that, in the midst of the
great moral conflict with Antichrist, which is now carrying on, those
into whose hands the saints were so long given should find so able
a coadjutor. We have, however, no fears that Christians of sound
common sense, and capable of independent thought, will, after a candid
consideration of the scheme which excludes papacy from the page of
prophecy, and that which traces in the prophetic symbols a faithful
portraiture of its abominations, make a wrong decision. Since we have
read the work of the learned Stuart, we have rejoiced the more that
our humble abilities have been directed to the defense of the old
paths.’—_Proph. Illus._, p. 231.

“Of Mr. Dowling, Dr. Breckenbridge said: ‘As for this disquisition of
Mr. Dowling, we may confidently say that it is hardly to be conceived
that anything could be printed by Mr. Miller, or Mr. Any-body-else,
more shallow, absurd and worthless. There is hardly a point he touches
on which he has not managed to adopt the very _idlest conjectures_ of
past writers on the prophecies; and this so entirely without regard to
any coherent system, that the only clear conviction a man of sense or
reflection could draw from his pamphlet, if such a man could be supposed
capable of believing it, would be that _the prophecies themselves are a
jumble of nonsense_. Such answers as his can have no effect, we would
suppose, except to bring the whole subject into ridicule, or to _promote
the cause he attacks_.’—_Spirit of the 19th Century, March No., 1843._

“Again he says, in speaking of ‘the general ignorance which prevails on
this subject,’ that of it ‘no greater evidence need be produced than the
fact that this pamphlet of Mr. Dowling has been extensively relied on,
yea, _preached_, as a sufficient answer’ to Mr. Miller.

“On surveying the whole field of controversy, Professor Bush, while he
claimed that the spiritualists were nearer the truth, said of them: ‘They
have not answered the arguments of their opponents, nor can they do it
on the ground which they themselves professedly occupy in respect to a
millennium. Assuming that that period is yet future, and its commencement
of no distant date, the Literalists, or Adventists, bear down with
overwhelming weight of argument upon them, maintaining that the second
coming precedes and ushers in that sublime era. The spiritualists say,
Nay, but refuse to commit themselves to a defined position. All that they
know is, that there is to be a millennium of some kind, occurring at some
time, introduced in some way, and brought to an end from some cause; and
that immediately thereupon the Lord is to descend from heaven, burn up
the earth, raise the dead, and administer the judgment; but as to the
what, the when, the how, the why—on these points they rest content in
_knowing nothing_, because of the impression taken up that _nothing is to
be known_.”—_N. C. Repos._, 1849, p. 248.

“Dr. Jarvis, in his sermons, was particularly severe on Mr. Miller, but
afterwards did him ample justice, as in the following. He said: ‘Mr.
Miller, in his eagerness to make out his scheme, absolutely falsities
the language of the Bible. He makes Jehoram to have reigned five years,
where the Scripture positively says he reigned eight; and between Amaziah
and Azariah, or Uzziah, he introduces an interregnum of eleven years,
for which he has not even the shadow of an authority in the Bible. He
quotes, indeed, chapters 14 and 15 of the 2d book of Kings; and this
may be sufficient for those who are ready to take his opinions upon
trust. But, if you examine the chapters to which he refers, you will be
astonished to find that there is not in either of them one word upon the
subject.’—_Sermons_, p. 55.

“In his preface to his sermons Dr. Jarvis makes the following correction
of the above. He says:—

    “‘It will be seen that in speaking of the curtailment of the
    reign of Jehoram, the son of Jehoshaphat, from eight to five
    years, and the introduction of eleven years of interregnum
    between the reigns of Amaziah and Uzziah, he has censured Mr.
    Miller in too unmeasured terms. These particulars he is bound
    to explain.

    “‘It would have been easier, and perhaps more advantageous to
    the author, to have made the alterations silently, and omitted
    the censure. But would it have been equally honest?

    “‘In preparing the introductory volume of his “Ecclesiastical
    History,” he had carefully avoided reading modern writers on
    chronology, for fear of being biased by their systems. For this
    reason he had never read the learned work of Dr. Hales; and
    though familiar with Petavius, Usher, and Marsham, a good while
    had elapsed since he had consulted them on the parts of history
    connected with the prophecies. But these great writers being
    entirely silent as to any interregnum in the kingdom of Judah,
    the existence of such an interregnum was entirely a new idea
    to him. Mr. Miller quoted 2 Kings, 14, 15, without mentioning
    the verses from which he drew the inference; and it was not
    till the author had read Dr. Hales’ “Analysis” that he saw the
    correctness of that inference. If this admission gives Mr.
    Miller an advantage, he is fairly entitled to it. We cannot,
    for one moment, suppose that he knew anything about Dr. Hales
    or his work. As a plain, unlettered man, his perspicuity in
    reading his Bible, and _his Bible only_, is much to his credit;
    and we ought to consider it as giving additional force to the
    reasons assigned by Dr. Hales, that an ignorant man, as Mr.
    Miller confessedly is, should, from the mere examination of
    the Bible, have arrived at the same conclusion. The censure,
    however, in the sermon, holds good with regard to the reign of
    Jehoram, the son of Jehoshaphat (2 Kings, 8:17; 2 Chron. 21:5);
    but, being equally applicable to Archbishop Usher, should not
    have been laid particularly at Mr. Miller’s door.’




CHAPTER XII.

    HIS TREATMENT OF OPPONENTS—SPECIMENS OF HIS
    PREACHING—COLLOQUIAL, EXPOSTULATORY, EXPOSITORY, ETC.


“Mr. Miller did not consider that his reviewers always treated him and
his arguments with the utmost fairness; and, in speaking of them, he
sometimes retorted in terms of great severity. Considering his treatment,
by the religious and secular press, and the contumely which was
incessantly heaped on him, that he should, at times, manifest a degree of
impatience, was more an occasion of regret than of surprise. Few men have
been called to endure so great an amount of reproach as fell to his lot;
and few could have endured it as he did. He was human, and shared in all
the weaknesses common to humanity; but, whenever he failed to endure the
smart of undeserved wounds with all the sweetness of gospel charity, no
one more sincerely regretted it than he did; and his liability to err in
this respect was with him a subject of many prayers and tears.

“His severity, however, was often richly merited; and he knew how to
be severe, without being uncourteous. Those who used their learning
to fritter away the plain meaning of Scripture, and to make it teach
something which the common reader would never have perceived in it,
merely for the purpose of opposing his conclusions—he had little
inclination to spare.

“In speaking of the 8th chapter of Daniel, and the question, ‘How long
shall be the vision?’ he says, ‘The answer is, “Unto 2300 days.”

“‘But,’ says the critic, it is ‘evenings-mornings.’

“‘No matter: all men seem to understand it _days_; for it is so
translated in every language with which we are acquainted at the present
day. Therefore, this can never be made plainer, if this compound Hebrew
word should be criticised upon until the judgment shall set. I am sick
of this continual harping upon words. Our learned critics are worse on
the waters of truth than a school of sharks on the fishing-banks of the
north, and they have made more infidels in our world than all the heathen
mythology in existence. What word in revelation has not been turned,
twisted, racked, wrested, distorted, demolished, and annihilated by
these voracious harpies in human shape, until the public have become so
bewildered they know not what to believe? “They have fouled the waters
with their feet.” I have always noticed where they tread the religious
spirit is at a low ebb. It becomes cold, formal, and doubtful, at least.
It is the mind of the Spirit we want, and God’s word then becomes spirit
and life unto us.

“‘The words “_evenings-mornings_” convey to our mind the idea of days;
thus this vision is 2300 days long,’ says the reader.

“‘Yes. But how can all this be?” says the inquiring mind. ‘Can three
kingdoms rise up and become great; from a small people become a strong
nation; conquer all the nations of the earth, and then in its turn,
be subdued and conquered by a kingdom still more fortunate; and so on
through three successive kingdoms, and do this in little over six years?
Impossible.’

“‘But God has said it, and I must believe. Now the only difficulty is in
time.’

“‘How can this be?’

“‘Very well,’ says the dear child of God; ‘I remember me: God says I must
“dig for the truth as for hid treasure.” I will go to work, and, while I
am digging, I will live by begging. Father in Heaven, I believe it is thy
word; but I do not understand it; show me thy truth.’

“I had rather have one humble prayer of this kind, with an English Bible
in my hand, than all the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Bro. S. ever knew.

“The child then takes the word _day_, and compares spiritual things with
spiritual, to find what his Heavenly Father means by days in a figurative
sense. The first text he lights upon is in Num. 14:34, ‘_each day for a
year_.’

“‘May this not be it?’ says the child.

“He takes hold of it by faith, carries it home, lays it up in his cell of
sweets, richer than a lord, and again goes forth in search of more. He
now lights upon Eze. 4:6: ‘_I have appointed thee each day for a year._’
He is now rich in very deed—two jewels in one cell. He does not stop to
criticize, like a Stuart, and query, and reason himself out of common
sense and reason too; but, Abraham-like, he believes, and lays up his
treasure at home.

“‘I see,’ says the child, ‘this use of days was so ordained by my Father
in two cases; and two witnesses are enough. But I am not certain that I
have a right to use these jewels in this place. I will go and beg, and
dig again.’

“In this excursion he lights on Daniel 9:23-27: ‘Seventy weeks are
determined upon thy people.’

“‘Seventy weeks of what?’ says the critic.

“‘I do not care a fig.’ says the believing child, ‘whether you call it
_days_ or _years_: I know how long it was in fulfilling.’

“‘How long?’

“‘Exactly four hundred and ninety years: from the decree given in the
seventh year of Artaxerxes, four hundred and fifty-seven years before
Christ, unto his death, thirty-three years after the birth of Christ,
making exactly four hundred and ninety years, or seventy sevens of years
of the vision.’

“Prof. Stuart having applied the days in Daniel 12 to the times of
Antiochus, when the context shows that the resurrection will follow their
termination, Mr. Miller said: ‘Suppose Prof. Stuart had been a believing
Jew, and lived in the time of Antiochus, and had been of the same mind
he is now, or says he is, and one of his brother Jews had come along and
prophesied or preached that the Jews were to be a scattered and a peeled
people, _dashed_ and scattered among all nations, more than two thousand
years, then to come; and suppose the professor had been then an expounder
of the law and the prophets, and was called upon to explain this text as
being then fulfilled, what would he say to his brother Jew, the prophet?
He would say, as any man must say by him:—

“‘Sir, you are a false prophet; for God has told us plainly, in this
very text, that, when this three and a half years are fulfilled under
which we are now groaning, then our scattering or dashing will be
accomplished—yes, and finished, too. So says the word. Therefore do you
keep away from my flock of Pharisees, for I do not want my people excited
by your false, alarming doctrine. Do you not see that, at the end of
1335 days, Daniel will stand in his lot? And do you not see, sir, that
his standing in his lot means the resurrection? Read the first three
verses of this chapter.’

“‘Ah,’ says the prophet, ‘that does not mean the resurrection, but⸺’

“‘But what?’ says the professor.

“‘Oh! I do not know—difficult to understand,’ says the prophet.

“‘I see,’ says the professor, ‘you are a Sadducee. You do not understand
either the Hebrew or the Chaldaic, or the exegesis of the Scriptures. How
dare you prophesy evil of this nation, when God hath spoken peace after
these days? I say you are a Sadducee. I will have no fellowship with you.
You must not come into my synagogue.’

“Would not this be the natural result of such a case? I leave it for the
reader to judge.

“Or, suppose that the professor was now in controversy with a Jew,—a
Sadducee,—and was under the necessity of proving the doctrine of the
resurrection by the Old Testament, would he not put into requisition this
very text, and prove by the same a resurrection unto eternal life? And,
if he did not believe such plain and positive proofs as these texts would
be, would he not consider him a poor, blinded Sadducee? Let us be careful
that our own mouths do not condemn us.

“If, then, these days can only end with the resurrection, it is
impossible that these Scriptures can apply to Antiochus. And, as the
rules which he has given us in his Hints are the same, in substance,
which I was forced to adopt more than twenty years ago, I cannot believe
that Antiochus Epiphanes is even hinted at from Daniel 11:14 to the end
of the 12th chapter. And, if the prophecy does not belong to Antiochus,
then he must acknowledge that the little horn can apply only to the papal
power; and must agree with nearly all Protestant writers that ‘time,
times, and a half,’ are, together with the other numbers in this chapter,
to be understood in a symbolical sense.

“In writing, he sometimes indulged in a colloquial style. In the
following he hints at an objection often urged against him, that he,
being a farmer, should not presume to teach. He says:—

“_As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the Son
of man._ They were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage,
until Noah entered into the ark. Methinks I can almost see the scenes
of that day. See you not that elegant building yonder, near that ark
of gopher-wood? That building was reared at a great expense, by the
host, for the purpose of entertaining strangers who might come to visit
that ark, and to ridicule and laugh at that old, white-headed man you
see yonder pitching the ark. The host, you see, has become rich by the
great gain he has made, from the furnishing of the workmen, citizens
and strangers, with food and drink of the most costly kind. Look into
the dining hall of that establishment. See the table loaded with all
the delicate viands of the season. See those bottles filled with the
sparkling juice of the grape. See the host at his door, beckoning to each
passer-by to enter and regale himself. Hear the conversation between the
host and the stranger guest who has just entered his mansion.

“_Guest._ What great building is that in yonder field, on that eminence?

“_Host._ That is called Noah’s ark.

“_Guest._ But what use is he going to put it to? It seems to be built for
sailing. Surely the old man does not expect to sail on dry land.

“_Host._ Yes; you are right. The old man says the world is coming to an
end (Gen. 6:13), and he has prepared an ark to save himself and family;
for all flesh will be destroyed by water, as he says.

“_Guest._ But how does he know this?

“_Host._ He says God told him.

“_Guest._ What kind of a man is he? He must be a great fanatic, I am
thinking.

“_Host._ Why, yes; we think he is crazy a little; but you cannot discover
it in anything else but his building that great ark, and neglecting his
farm and other worldly matters. But what he has lost I have gained.

“_Guest._ A farmer, say you?—a farmer! Why did not God tell some of our
‘mighty men, which are men of renown’? (Gen. 6:4.) A farmer, too! There
is no truth in it. But do any believe him?

“_Host._ Believe him! No. We have other things to attend to, and cannot
spend time to hear the old farmer. But we were all very much startled, no
longer ago than yesterday; for the old man has been telling some that he
had prepared rooms for the beasts of the field, and for the fowls of the
air, and every creeping thing; and yesterday they came, two and two of
every sort, and entered the ark, apparently of their own accord. (Gen.
7:8, 9.) This, you may be sure, startled us some; but the banquets and
feasts of last night have dissipated the fears of all, and to-day things
are as they should be.

“_Guest._ It is rather strange; yet it cannot be true. God will not
destroy the world in the midst of this hilarity and glee, and in the
hight of all these improvements at the present day. Much, much of the
earth remains yet to be cultivated and inhabited. Our western wilderness
is yet to be explored and settled. Then the world is yet in its
infancy—not two thousand years old yet; and you know we have a tradition
that the earth is to wax old like a garment. It cannot be true, what the
old man tells you. I will warrant you the earth will stand many thousand
years yet.

“_Host._ Look! look! there goes the old fool and his family now, I dare
say, into the ark. I remember me now, the old man told us, four days ago,
that, in seven days (Gen. 7:4-10), God would cause it to rain sufficient
to destroy every living thing from the face of the earth. I shall have a
chance to laugh at the old man four days hence. I told him to his face
that, after his seven days were ended, he would be ashamed to preach any
more, and we should have some quiet then.

“_Guest._ But do your priests let him preach in their congregations and
societies?

“_Host._ Oh, no! by no means; that is, none that are called respectable,
or of the higher class. Why, sir, they held a meeting last night at my
banqueting house. After the cloth was removed, and while the wine was
circulating freely, old Noah was the subject of the toast. And it would
have done you good to have heard their sharp cuts and squibs; it caused
a roar of laughter among the guests. See, yonder come some of them now.
Let us go in, and enjoy another treat. (_They go in._)

“Ah, said I, were these scenes acted before the flood, and will it be so
in the end of the world? And will the generation of the righteous not
pass off until they behold these things acted over again? So says our
blessed Saviour, _and so I believe_.

“Then shall ‘heaven and earth pass away.’ The righteous will pass off to
meet their Lord, and the wicked be consumed to cleanse the world. Then
will the prophecy in this chapter be fulfilled, and ‘the word of God will
not pass away.’

“Prepare, ye servants of the Most High, to render up your stewardship. Ye
scoffers, take warning; cease your revilings, your newspaper squibs, your
bombast, your revelings, and your banquetings. And you, my dear reader,
prepare! prepare! for lo!—

    ‘He comes, he comes, the Judge severe;
    The seventh trumpet speaks him near.’

“The foregoing will also serve as a specimen of his mode, at times, of
addressing an audience. At other times he was very earnest and solemn.
In arguing that we must be beyond the end of the 1260 days of Daniel and
John, from the fact that the church is not now in the wilderness, he
said:—

    “‘Can we be mistaken in the fulfillment of this prophecy?
    Is the church now in the wilderness? And if you should
    respond, She is, I ask you, When, then, was she out? Not in
    the apostolic age; for she was not more free then than now.
    And then, let me inquire, where are your twelve hundred and
    sixty years? They can have no meaning. O Christian! I beg of
    you, believe in the word of God; do not, I pray you, discard
    time, any more than manner. Is it not selfishness in us to
    discard the set times which God has fixed, and not man? Where
    is our faith? Why are we so slow of heart to believe? Three
    times we have witnessed,—yes, in the lifetime of some of
    us,—the fulfillment of the “time, times, and a half,” in the
    accomplishment of the “forty-two months,” in the completion of
    the “twelve-hundred and three-score days,” and yet, O God, we
    refuse to believe! Shame on that professor who will not open
    his eyes!

    “‘They tell us we cannot understand prophecy until it is
    fulfilled.

    “‘But here it is three times fulfilled in this day in which
    we live. What excuse have you now, O ye heralds of the cross?
    Ah! say you, that is _your_ construction; we are not bound to
    follow your explanations. No, no! But for ages you and your
    fathers have been telling us that these prophecies were true;
    and you have told us that when they come to pass we should
    know what they meant; and, although ages on ages have rolled
    their rapid course, yet nothing has transpired, as you will
    own; and we, if we should search, and find, as we believe, the
    prophecies fulfilling, and tell our reasons, you then can taunt
    us with a skeptic argument,—“this is _your_ construction,”
    and then not dare to tell us what it means! Awake, awake, ye
    shepherds of the flock! Come, tell us why these things are not
    fulfilled. Deceive us not. You stand upon the walls, both
    night and day; then tell us what it means. We have a right
    to ask, “Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the
    night?” An answer we must have; or you must leave your towers.
    It will not do to answer us, “I am under no obligation to tell
    you.”[22] Has Zion no better watchmen on her walls than this?
    Alas! alas! then we may sleep, and sleep, until the trumpet’s
    dreadful blast shall shake our dusty beds, and the last angel
    raise his hand and swear “that time shall be no longer.” Why
    are you thus negligent and remiss in duty? If I am not right
    in my construction of God’s holy word, pray tell us what is
    truth, and make it look more plain,—and will we not believe?
    Thus you will cleanse your garments from our blood, and we must
    bear the shame. What time of night? Come, tell us plainly.
    There are portentous clouds hanging over our heads; we hear the
    murmurs of the fitful winds; we see sad omens of a dreadful
    storm; and where is our watchman’s voice? Your silence gives
    us fears that we are betrayed. Awake! awake! Ye watchmen, to
    your post! It is no false alarm. There are judgments, heavy
    judgments, at the door. “Our God shall come, and shall not
    keep silence; a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be
    very tempestuous round about him. He shall call to the heavens
    from above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people.”
    How shall the fearful stand in that great day, when heaven and
    earth shall hear his mighty voice, and they that hear must come
    to judgment? Where will the unbelieving scoffer then appear?
    When God makes inquisition for the blood of souls, and when
    the under-shepherds stand, with their flocks, around the “great
    white throne,” to have each motive, thought, word, act, and
    deed, brought out to light, before a gazing world, and tried
    by that unerring rule, “the word.” I ask you, scorner, jester,
    scoffer, how will you appear? Stop, stop, and think, before you
    take a fatal leap, and jest away your soul!’

“In closing a discourse on the text, ‘We shall reign on the earth,’ he
thus proceeds:—

    “‘We shall reign on the earth, says our text. Not under its
    present dispensation, but after it is cleansed by fire; after
    the wicked are destroyed by fire, as the antediluvians were by
    water; after the resurrection of the saints, and when Christ’s
    prayer, taught to his disciples, shall be answered, “_Thy will
    be done on earth, even as in Heaven._” When the bride has made
    herself ready, and is married to the Bridegroom, he will then
    move her into the New Jerusalem state, prepared as a bride
    adorned for her husband, where we shall reign with him forever
    and ever, on the new earth and in the new heavens. “And God
    shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be
    no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there
    be any more pain; for the former things are passed away.” Then
    the whole earth “shall be full of his glory;” and then, as says
    the prophet, Isaiah 54:5, “For thy Maker is thine husband; the
    Lord of Hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of
    Israel; the God of the whole earth shall he be called.”

    “‘And then, my dear hearer, if you have had your heart broken
    off from sin; if you have by faith been united in spirit to
    the Lamb of God; if you have patiently endured tribulation and
    persecution for his name,—then you will live and reign with
    him on the earth, and this earth will be regenerated by fire
    and the power of God; the curse destroyed; sin, pain, crying,
    sorrow, and death, banished from the world, and mortality
    clothed upon by immortality, death swallowed up in victory.
    You will rise up in that general assembly, and, clapping
    your hands with joy, cry, “Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God
    Almighty, which was, and is, and is _now come_.” Then you will
    be in a situation to join the grand chorus, and sing the new
    song, saying, “Thou art worthy, for thou wast slain, and hast
    redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and
    tongue, and people, and nation, and hast made us unto our God
    kings and priests, and we shall reign on the earth.... Saying,
    with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive
    power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
    glory, and blessing.” And all who meet in that grand assembly
    will be then heard to shout, “Blessing, and honor, and glory,
    and power, be unto Him that sitteth upon the throne, and
    unto the Lamb forever and ever.” And methinks I can now see
    every one who loves our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ in this
    assembly rising upon their feet, and in one united prayer of
    faith, crying, “Come, Lord Jesus, O come quickly!”

    “‘But you, O impenitent man or woman! where will you be then?
    When heaven shall resound with the mighty song, and distant
    realms shall echo back the sound, where, tell me, where will
    you be then? _In hell!_ O think! _In hell!_—a dreadful word!
    Once more think! _In hell!_ lifting up your eyes, being
    in torment. Stop, sinner; think! _In hell!_ where shall be
    weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth. Stop, sinner, stop;
    consider on your latter end. _In hell!_ “where the beast
    and false prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night
    forever and ever.” I entreat of you to think—_in hell_! I
    know you hate to hear the word. It sounds too harsh. There is
    no music in it. You say it grates upon the ear. But think,
    when it grates upon the soul, the conscience, and the ear,
    and not by sound only, but a dread reality, when there can be
    no respite, no cessation,[23] no deliverance, no hope! You
    will then think,—yes, of this warning, of a thousand others,
    perhaps of this hour, with many more that are lost,—yes, worse
    than lost,—that have been squandered in earthly, vain, and
    transitory mirth, have been abused; for there have been many
    hours the Spirit strove with you, and you prayed to be excused.
    There was an hour when conscience spake; but you stopped your
    ears and would not hear. There was a time when judgment and
    reason whispered; but you soon drowned their cry by calling in
    some aid against your own soul. To judgment and reason you have
    opposed _will_ and _wit_, and said “_in hell_” was only _in the
    grave_. In this vain citadel, in this frail house of sand, you
    will build until the last seal is broken, the last trump will
    sound, the last woe be pronounced, and the last vial be poured
    upon the earth. Then, impenitent man or woman, you will awake
    in everlasting woe!

    “‘Be warned; repent; fly, fly for succor to the ark of God,
    to Jesus Christ, the Lamb that once was slain, that you might
    live; for he is worthy to receive all honor, power, and glory.
    Believe, and you shall live. Obey his word, his Spirit, his
    calls, his invitations; there is no time for delay; put it not
    off, I beg of you,—no, not for a moment. Do you want to join
    that heavenly choir, and sing the _new song_? Then come in
    God’s appointed way; repent. Do you want a house not made with
    hands, eternal in the heavens? Then join in heart and soul this
    happy people, whose God is the Lord. Do you want an interest
    in the New Jerusalem, the beloved city? Then set your face as
    a flint Zionward; become a pilgrim in the good old way. “Seek
    first the kingdom of Heaven,” says Christ, “and then all these
    things shall be added unto you.”’

“At other times his discourse was of the most mild and gentle kind. Thus,
in speaking of the church of Christ under various circumstances, he says:—

    “‘In tracing her history from the patriarch Abraham to the
    present day, we find her variable as the wind, and changeable
    as the weather.

    “‘To-day, she is coming up out of the wilderness leaning on the
    arm of her Beloved; to-morrow, “like a young roe leaping upon
    the mountains, and skipping upon the hills.”

    “‘Now she is seen among the trees of the woods; next in a
    palace of silver inclosed in boards of cedar.

    “‘There we saw her in the clefts of the rock; here we behold
    her in the broad way, in the streets of the great city.

    “‘Again we find her among the foxes of the desert; and anon we
    perceive her seeking Him whom her soul loveth.

    “‘She is asleep on her bed by night; and the same night the
    watch finds her in the city.

    “‘Behold her Lord knocking at the door for admittance, while
    she is too indolent to arise and let him in. The next moment
    she is opening to her Beloved, but he has withdrawn himself. At
    one time the voice of her Beloved, sounding over the hills and
    echoing among the mountains like the roar of distant thunder,
    has no impression; next, the soft whisper of love gains all her
    attention.

    “‘Here blows the rough north wind and strong south wind upon
    her spices, yet they put forth no fragrance. And there the
    lightest breeze makes her roses blossom, and all the air is
    perfume.

    “‘See her countenance to-day black as the tents of Kedar; and
    to-morrow comely as the daughters of Jerusalem, and fair as the
    purple curtains of Solomon. To-day she is “a garden barred, a
    spring shut up, a fountain sealed;” to-morrow, “a garden open,
    a well of living waters, and streams from Lebanon.” Now she
    is weak as a babe; a single watchman can “smite, wound, and
    take away her veil;” and then she is courageous and valiant,
    “terrible as an army with banners.” To-day she is made to keep
    another’s vineyard; to-morrow she is realizing a thousand
    pieces of silver from her own. She is truly a changeable being,
    carried about by the slightest circumstances.”’

“The following extract from a discourse, is another specimen of this mode
of address:—

    “‘Come, and let us return unto the Lord; for he hath torn, and
    he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up. After
    two days will he revive us; in the third day he will raise us
    up, and we shall live in his sight. Then shall we know, if we
    follow on to know the Lord; his going forth is prepared as the
    morning; and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter
    and former rain unto the earth.’ Hosea 6:1-3.

    “‘The text to which I have directed your attention, in the
    above paragraph, is one of the richest and most interesting
    prophecies that was ever delivered to mortals by any prophet
    since the world began. Every word speaks, and is full of
    meaning; every sentence is a volume of instruction. No wisdom
    of man could communicate as much in as few words. It is a pearl
    of great price, lying deep in the waters of prophecy; it is a
    diamond, which will cut the film that covers the visual organ
    of the readers of God’s word; it is a gem in the mountain
    of God’s house, shining in the darkness, and the darkness
    comprehendeth it not. It puzzled the Pharisee, confounded the
    scribe, and perplexed the Sadducee. It has, and will continue
    to have, the same influence on similar characters until the
    end of time. The great men of the earth will not stoop to its
    light, because it lies too low. The small men of the earth
    will not pick it up, for fear of ridicule from those above
    them. And now, dear reader, I am afraid you will go and do
    likewise,—either treat it with contempt or ridicule. But you
    will find, if you will examine, that in it is contained,—

    “‘1. OUR DUTY TO GOD.

    “‘_Come, let us return unto the Lord_;’ and, ‘_If we follow on
    to know the Lord_.’ Here is the whole duty of man, as clearly
    described as any crystal could make it. Repent, believe, and
    obey, are clearly inculcated. What better words could an
    orator make use of, to excite the minds of men to noble deeds
    of daring than are here used by the prophet? ‘_Come_’—he
    invites—‘_let us_’—he will go with them—‘_return_.’ Ah! what a
    word—_return_! Traveler, have you ever wandered far from home,
    in a cold, unfeeling world, among strangers, among robbers,
    enemies, thieves, and hard-hearted worldlings? Have you been
    sick and weak, wounded and torn, spoiled and robbed, smitten
    and cheated, hated and reviled, and this, too, for days,
    months, or years? Have you at last ‘_returned_’ to your family,
    your friends, your native land? Do you remember those familiar
    objects, as you returned—the way, the mountain, the hill, the
    valley, and the plain; the grove, the turn, the house, and the
    brook? Do you remember the tree, the rock, the barberry-bush,
    the gate and the post, the door-way and latch? “Oh, yes,” say
    you; “I remember, too, my beating and palpitating heart, and
    the falling tear which I stopped to wipe away from my blanched
    cheek, while my hand was on the latch. I remember how I
    listened to hear the loved ones breathe, although it was then
    in the dark watches of the night.”

    “Thus tells the wanderer the tale of his ‘_return_;’ and in
    like manner could all the wandering sons of Zion speak of their
    ‘_return_.’ You, then, who have experienced these things, can
    realize the value of the word ‘_return_.’ And from my soul I
    pity the wanderer that never has returned ‘_unto the Lord_;’ to
    Him that loved us, to Him who died for us; more, vastly more,
    than mortal friends could ever do—he died. And so, say you, can
    fathers die for children, and mothers for their sons; children
    can give their lives, though rare the gift, to save the life
    of parents; husbands, and wives, and friends have fallen, to
    save each other from death. All this is true. But here is love
    greater than these; ‘for while we were enemies Christ died for
    us.’ Yea, more: he left his Father’s presence, his glory, and
    that Heaven where angels dwell; where he, the brightest star in
    all the upper world, stood highest; where seraphim and cherubim
    in glory cast down their crowns, and worshiped at his feet. ‘He
    became poor, that we through his poverty might be made rich.’
    Again: he bore our shame, and by his stripes we are healed.
    He was buffeted for our offenses, and despised by mortals,
    for whom he suffered in the flesh. He rose from death for our
    justification, and ascended on high, to intercede for sinners,
    and has sent down his Spirit to bring us wanderers home.

    “‘_For he hath torn._’ True, he suffers our sins to tear us,
    and those earthly powers, in whom we trust, to break our proud
    hearts, and, therefore, tears away our vain supports. He tears
    our affections from earthly things, that he may place them on
    a more enduring substance. He tears our hearts from idol gods,
    that he may place them on God supreme. He tears our soul from
    the body, that we may no longer live in the flesh to sin, but
    depart in the spirit, and be with Christ.

    “‘_And he will heal us._’ Yes, he will heal us from all our
    backslidings, and love us freely for his own name’s sake. He
    will heal us from sin, by showing us its deadly nature. He will
    heal us from worldly affections, by placing our affections in
    Heaven. He will heal our hearts of idolatry, by the taking
    possession of them himself. He will heal us from death, by the
    resurrection from the grave.

    “‘_He hath smitten._’ God has so ordered, in his providence,
    that his children cannot have intercourse and association with
    men of the world, and with the kingdoms of this earth, but
    that persecution, or loss of Christian character, is sure to
    follow. The prophet is showing the present state of the church,
    while the tares and wheat are growing together. The children
    of God shall be smitten—meaning they shall be chastised,
    persecuted, ruled over. See the Roman power, from the days of
    their connection with the Jews until the present time, ruling
    over, persecuting, and trampling under foot the church of God.
    Our text is not only showing us our duty to God, but it teaches
    us the sufferings of the church, the dealings of God with her,
    and her final redemption; the first and second coming of her
    Lord; her final deliverance from death and all enemies, and her
    glorified reign.

    “‘_And he will bind us up_:’ which is a promise of God, that,
    although the church should be torn and smitten, yet he would
    heal them, and bind them up. In due time he would gather them
    into one fold; he would bind up all their wounds, and heal them
    of all their maladies. He would visit their transgressions
    with a rod, and their iniquities with stripes; but his loving
    kindness he would not take from them.

“An extract from his lecture on the parable of the ‘ten virgins,’ will
close these specimens. He thus gives his understanding of what is denoted
by their ‘trimming’ their lamps:—

    “‘The world, for a number of years, have been trimming
    their lamps, and the wise and foolish have been engaged in
    translating the word of God into almost every language known
    to us upon the earth. Mr. Judson tells us that it has been
    translated into one hundred and fifty languages within thirty
    years; that is three times the number of all the translations
    known to us before. Then fourfold light has been shed among the
    nations, within the short period of the time above specified;
    and we are informed that a part, if not all, of the word of
    God is now given to all nations in their own language. This,
    surely, is setting the word of life in a conspicuous situation,
    that it may give light to all in the world. This has not been
    done by the exertions of Christians or professors only, but by
    the aid of all classes and societies of men. Kings have opened
    their coffers and favored those engaged in the work; nobles
    have used their influence, and have cast into the treasury
    of the Lord of their abundance; rich men have bestowed of
    their riches; and, in many cases, the miser has forgotten his
    parsimony, the poor have replenished the funds of the Lord’s
    house, and the widow has cast in her mite. How easy to work the
    work of the Lord when the hearts of men are made willing by his
    power!

    “‘But shall we forget those who have forsaken the land of their
    fathers, the home of their nativity, and have spent lonesome
    years of toil among strangers,—yes, worse than strangers,—among
    heathen idolaters, and the savages of the wilderness, in the
    cold regions of the north, and under the scorching rays of a
    vertical sun, among the suffocating sands of the desert, or in
    the pestilential atmosphere of India; who have risked their
    lives to learn a language, and prepare themselves to trim a
    lamp for those who sit in darkness and the shadow of death? No,
    we will not forget them; the prayers of thousands have ascended
    before the golden altar, morning and evening, on their behalf,
    and Israel’s God has been their protector. Surely we may hope
    that these have oil in their lamps, who have sacrificed so much
    to bestow a lamp upon others. But remember, my brethren, the
    Lord he is God, and let him have all the glory. This is the
    time, and the same time that Gabriel informed Daniel, ‘Many
    should run to and fro, and knowledge should increase.’ This,
    too, is the same time when the angel flying through the midst
    of heaven had the everlasting gospel to preach to them who
    dwelt upon the earth. Here are Christ’s words fulfilled where
    he says, “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in
    all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall
    the end come.”

    “‘2d. It is plain, to any diligent observer of the signs of the
    times, that all the societies for moral reform in our world at
    the present day are parts of the fulfillment of the parable,
    giving more light. What of our Bible societies? Are not these
    trimming the lamp for millions of human beings? Thirty years
    past, more than three-fourths of the families in what we call
    Christian lands were without the lamp of life, and now nearly
    all are supplied. Many of those who sat in heathenish darkness
    then are now rejoicing in the light of God’s book. And much of
    this has been performed through the instrumentality of Bible
    societies; and not only through the agency of the church, but
    political men, men of the world, the great men, merchants of
    the earth, and those who trade in ships, all who live under
    the influence of the gospel,—the ‘kingdom of Heaven,’—have
    engaged in the work. Will not the most skeptical acknowledge
    that this society has succeeded beyond the most sanguine
    expectation of its most ardent advocates? And is not this
    strong circumstantial evidence that the Bridegroom is near,
    even at the door?

    “‘3d. The missionary societies, of all sects and denominations,
    which have been established within forty years, have as far
    exceeded all former exertions of this kind as the overflowing
    Nile does the waters of the brook Kidron. See the missionary
    spirit extending from east to west, and from north to south,
    warming the breast of the philanthropist, giving life and vigor
    to the cold-hearted moralist, and animating and enlivening the
    social circle of the pious devotee. Every nation from India to
    Oregon, from Kamtschatka to New Zealand, has been visited by
    these wise servants (as we hope) of the cross, proclaiming the
    acceptable _year_ of the Lord, and the _day_ of vengeance of
    our God, carrying the lamp, the word of God, in their hands,
    and oil, faith in God, in their hearts. All classes of men are
    engaged in this cause, from the gray hairs of old age down to
    the sprightly youth of ten years. Who, then, can doubt but that
    the virgins, in this sense, have and are trimming their lamps,
    and the bride is making herself ready? Go ye out to meet him.

    “‘4th. The Sabbath-schools and Bible-classes are but a part
    of the fulfillment of the parable, yet clearly an evidence
    that the virgins are now trimming their lamps. This system of
    teaching the young and ignorant took its rise between forty and
    fifty years since, at the very time that the Christian world
    were praying, and ardently praying, for the coming of Christ,
    before that part of the Saviour’s prayer was forgotten, “Thy
    kingdom come.” From a little fountain this stream of water has
    become a great river, and encompassed the whole land. Every
    quarter of the globe is drinking at this fountain or stream
    of knowledge, and the youth are taught to trim their lamps.
    And when the Bridegroom shall come, may we not reasonably hope
    that the thousands of the young men and young women, who have
    assisted in giving light to others, may be found having oil
    in their vessels, and their lamps trimmed and burning, and
    they looking and waiting for the coming of their Master, that
    when he comes they may rise to meet him in the air, with ten
    thousand of their pupils, who will sing the new song in the
    New Jerusalem forever and ever? Search diligently, my young
    friends, and see to it that ye believe in this word, which is
    able to make you wise unto salvation.

    “‘5th. Tract societies are of much use, and are an efficient
    means to help to trim the lamps. Like snuffers that take away
    the preventives to the light, so are tracts. They take away
    from the mind the prejudice that thousands have against reading
    the word of God; they remove those rooted and groundless
    opinions, which many have, that they cannot understand the
    Bible; they serve to excite the mind to this kind of reading;
    they enlighten the understanding in some scriptural truths;
    they are pioneers, in many instances, to conversion; they can
    be sent where the word of God cannot at first be received; in
    one word, they are the harbingers of light, the forerunners of
    the Bible. And in this, too, all men in this probationary state
    seem to be more or less engaged, from the king on the throne,
    down to the poor peasant in the cottage, writing, printing,
    folding, transporting, paying, or reading, those silent little
    messengers of the virgins’ lamp. ‘Then all those virgins arose
    and trimmed their lamps.’ Has not God’s hand been seen in all
    this? And glory be to Him who hath disposed the hearts of men
    to work the work that God bids them, and to fulfill the blessed
    word which he hath given them. This institution took its rise
    about the same time with the Bible society.

    “‘6th. Temperance societies. These serve one purpose in
    trimming the lamps and preparing the way for the virgins to
    go out and meet the Bridegroom. Our world, twenty years ago,
    might be called a world of fashionable drunkards; almost all
    men drank of the intoxicating bowl, and thought it no harm. But
    when the lamp began to dart its rays around our tabernacles,
    it was found by woful experience that those who drank of the
    poisonous cup were totally and wholly unprepared to receive
    the warning voice, or to hear the midnight cry, “Behold, the
    Bridegroom cometh!” No, “they that were drunken were drunken
    in the night,” says the apostle. “Therefore let us watch and
    be sober.” And Peter tells us, “But the end of all things
    is at hand; be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer.”
    How foolish would it have been for a drunken man to be set
    on a watch, or a praying man to be found drunk! Therefore,
    in order that men might be in a suitable frame of mind to
    receive instruction at the close of this dispensation, and be
    in a situation to listen to the midnight cry, God ordered the
    virgins, and they arose and trimmed their lamps; and in all
    human probability thousands, who would have met a drunkard’s
    grave if this society had not arose, are now watching, with
    their lamps trimmed and burning, ready to meet the Bridegroom
    at his coming. Perhaps this temperance society is the virgins’
    last resort. The Judge stands at the door; go ye out to meet
    him. This society, like the others before mentioned, is a
    general thing, and all sects, denominations, and classes of
    men, are engaged in it, and it has an important influence upon
    all men who are in this probationary state, and who may be
    termed, as in our text, “virgins.” This society is of later
    origin than the others, and seems to be a rear-guard to wake
    up a few stragglers which the other societies could not reach.
    And now, drunkards, is your time; Wisdom stands at the door
    and knocks; let go the intoxicating bowl; be sober, and hear
    the midnight cry, “Behold, the Bridegroom cometh!” For your
    souls’ sake drink not another draught, lest he come and find
    you drunken, “and that day come upon you unawares and find
    you sleeping.” Oh, be wise, ye intemperate men! for they only
    went into the marriage who were found ready, “and the door was
    shut.” “Then came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord,
    open to us. But he answered and said, Verily, I say unto you,
    I know you not. Watch, therefore, for ye neither know the day
    nor the hour when the Son of man cometh.” “But the wise shall
    understand,” says Daniel, 12:10.

    “‘And now, my Christian friends, let me inquire, Are your lamps
    trimmed and burning? And have you oil in your vessels? And
    are you prepared for the coming Bridegroom? And are you awake
    to this important subject? What say you? If this parable, to
    which I have directed your minds, has reference to the last
    day and the coming of Christ; if the “virgins” have reference
    to all men in the probationary state, and dividing them into
    two classes, wise and foolish; if the “lamp” is the word of
    God, and “oil” means faith in his word, or grace in the heart,
    as some say, then my conclusions are just, and the evidence
    is strong that we live at the end of the gospel kingdom, and
    upon the threshold of the glorified state of the righteous.
    Then examine your Bibles, and if you can more fairly prove any
    other exposition of this parable than I have this, then believe
    yours, and time must settle the issue; but if you can find
    nothing in the Scriptures to controvert plainly my explanation,
    then believe, and prepare to meet the Bridegroom; for, behold,
    he cometh. Awake! ye fathers and mothers in Zion! ye have long
    looked and prayed for this day. Behold the signs! He is near,
    even at the door. And, ye children of God, lift up your heads
    and rejoice, for your redemption draweth nigh. For these things
    have begun to come to pass. And, ye little lambs of the flock,
    remember, Jesus has promised to carry you in his arms, and
    that he will come and take you to himself, that where he is
    there ye may be also. But remember, all of you, the wise had
    oil in their lamps, and they were trimmed and burning. Search
    deep; examine yourselves closely; be not deceived; and may the
    Spirit, which searcheth all things, and knoweth what is in the
    mind of man, assist you.

    “‘But, my impenitent friends, what shall I say to you? Shall
    I say, as the Master in the parable, “Behold, the Bridegroom
    cometh: go ye out to meet him”? Prepare to meet your Judge. Now
    he has given you a time for repentance; you have a probationary
    season, and possibly now the scepter of mercy is held out to
    you. Repent, or it will soon be said to you, as Jeremiah said
    to the virgin, the daughter of Egypt, “In vain shalt thou use
    many medicines; for thou shalt not be cured;” or, as in the
    parable, “I know you not.” Have you no oil in your lamps? Delay
    not a moment; believe the gospel, and you will live; believe
    the word of God; receive the love of the Bridegroom, and make
    no delay; for while they went to buy, the Bridegroom came; and
    they that were ready went in with him to the marriage, and the
    door was shut. Oh, think what must be the exercise of your
    minds when these things shall be real; when you will stand
    without and knock, saying, “Lord, Lord, open to us!” Again I
    ask, Will you repent, believe, and be saved? Are you determined
    to resist the truth until it is too late? Say, sinner, what
    think ye?

    “‘We will risk the consequence. We do not believe in your day
    you tell us of. The world is the same it always was,—no change,
    nor ever will be; but if it should come, it will not this ten
    thousand years,—not in our day, certainly. You do not believe
    yourself. If you did, we should call you a fool.’

    “‘Are these your arguments, sinner?’

    “‘Yes.’

    “‘Well, if I had brought no more, no stronger arguments than
    these, I would not blame you for not believing, for not one of
    yours can you or have you supported with a particle of proof.
    They are mere assertions; your believing or not believing will
    not alter the designs of God. The antediluvians believed not.
    The citizens of the plain laughed at the folly of Lot. And
    where are they now? Suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.’




CHAPTER XIII.

    HIS SICKNESS—VISIT TO MASSACHUSETTS—FANATICISM—MR. MILLER
    REPUDIATES IT.


“At the close of his lectures in Philadelphia, Mr. Miller went to
Trenton, N. J., to spend the Sabbath (February 12, 1843). By invitation
of the mayor of that city, he lectured there three days, and was listened
to by crowded houses.

“From Trenton he returned to New York city, but held no public meeting
there. He improved the opportunity to visit a brother at Williamsburg,
Long Island, where he had an interview with the editor of the _Gazette
and Advertiser_, who thus referred to it:—

    “‘Our curiosity was recently gratified by an introduction to
    this gentleman, who has probably been an object of more abuse,
    ridicule and blackguardism, than any other man now living.
    A large number of the veracious editors of the political
    and religious newspapers have assured us that Mr. Miller
    was totally insane, and sundry preachers had confirmed this
    assurance. We were somewhat surprised to hear him converse on
    religious subjects with a coolness and soundness of judgment
    which made us whisper to ourselves,

        “If this be madness, then there is method in’t.”

    “‘When our interview closed, we were left wondering at the
    cause of that malignant spirit of slander and falsehood with
    which a man has been assailed, who has spent his time and
    substance in a course of unceasing toils to persuade men “to
    flee from the wrath to come.”’

“From New York, Mr. M. went up the Hudson River as far as Lansingburg,
N. Y., where he lectured from the 17th to the 21st of February. The day
following, in compliance with the urgent request of the Baptist church
in Half Moon, N. Y., he visited that place, and commenced a course of
lectures, which continued till the 5th of March.

“At the request of Mr. Davis, pastor of the Presbyterian church in
Ballston Center, Mr. M. next lectured in his house from the 6th to the
11th of March; and, on the 12th, gave two discourses at the Spa. As
usual, a large number were present, and God’s blessing was manifested.

“On the 15th of March, he delivered two discourses at Rock City, in the
town of Milton, N. Y., about six miles from Saratoga Springs. He had
attempted to go as far as Albany, to fulfill an engagement there; but,
after getting within fourteen miles of that city, he was obliged to
return to Rock City, where he was taken sick with his old complaint,
erysipelas, in his right arm. He remained at the house of Dea. Dubois,
where he received the kindest attention, till the 23d of March. On that
day he was removed to the house of Herman Thomas, in the same place.
He was carefully provided for there till the 30th, when he was so far
convalescent as to be removed by his son. By short and easy journeys he
reached his home at Low Hampton on the 31st, as comfortably as could have
been hoped for.

“On the 6th of April he commenced a letter to Mr. Himes, in which he
says: ‘I am now at home; was brought home six days since. I am very weak
in body, but, blessed be God! my mind, faith, and hope, are yet strong
in the Lord,—no wavering in my belief that I shall see Christ this
year,’ &c. This letter not being completed on the 13th of April, his son
forwarded it to Mr. Himes, adding, ‘Father is quite low and feeble, and
we fear he may be no better.’

“His complaint manifested itself in a multiplicity and succession of
carbuncle boils, which were a great drain on his system, and wasted his
strength rapidly. On the 3d of May, when their violence had greatly
abated, he wrote: ‘My health is on the gain, as my folks would say.
I have now _only_ twenty-two boils, from the bigness of a grape to a
walnut, on my shoulder, side, back, and arms. I am truly afflicted, like
Job, and have about as many comforters, only they do not come to see me,
as Job’s did.’ Two weeks later, he was again much more feeble, and his
physicians prohibited visitors from seeing him.

“On the 28th of May, his son wrote: ‘Father’s health is no better, on
the whole. He continues very weak and low, confined to his bed most of
the time.’ In addition to his numerous boils, he had, by a fever, been
brought near to death’s door.

“About the 1st of July he was so far recovered as to be able to walk
about his house, and his health continued to improve, so that, from
the 6th to the 9th of September, he gave a course of lectures in N.
Springfield, Vt. He lectured in Claremont, N. H., on the 11th; in
Springfield, N. H., on the 12th; in Wilmot, N. H., on the 14th; in
Andover, N. H., on the 17th; in Franklin, N. H., on the 18th; in
Guilford, N. H., from the 21st to the 24th; in Gilmanton, N. H., on the
25th; and at Concord, N. H., on the 26th and 27th. On the 2d of October
he gave two addresses at the camp-meeting in Exeter, N. H., and arrived
at Lowell, Mass., on the 3d. He went to Boston on the 6th, gave three
discourses, and then returned home to Low Hampton, where he remained till
the 9th of November.

“During this tour, Mr. Miller was much pained by witnessing a tendency
to fanaticism on the part of some who held to his views. As he had no
sympathy for anything of the kind, and has been unjustly identified with
it in the minds of the public, it becomes necessary to show its origin,
that its responsibility may rest where it rightly belongs.

“The views of Mr. Miller being embraced by persons belonging to various
religious denominations, it was impossible, from the nature of the case,
for those of any particular faith to teach their own private opinions in
connection with the Advent, without exciting the jealousy of those who
held opposite sentiments. To avoid any such clashing of opinions, the
following platform was adopted by the first conference held by believers
in the Advent (October 14, 1840), in their Address unanimously presented
to the public, namely:—[24]

    “‘Our object in assembling at this time, our object in
    addressing you, and our object in other efforts, separate and
    combined, on the subject of the kingdom of Heaven at hand,
    is to revive and restore this ancient faith, to renew the
    ancient landmarks, to “stand in the way, and see, and ask for
    the old paths, where is the good way” in which our fathers
    walked, and the martyrs “found rest to their souls.” We have
    no purpose to distract the churches with any new inventions,
    or to get ourselves a name by starting another sect among the
    followers of the Lamb. We neither condemn nor rudely assail
    others of a faith different from our own, nor dictate in
    matters of conscience for our brethren, nor seek to demolish
    their organizations, nor build new ones of our own; but simply
    to express our convictions, like Christians, with the reasons
    for entertaining them, which have persuaded us to understand
    the word and promises, the prophecies and the gospel of our
    Lord, as the first Christians, the primitive ages of the
    church, and the profoundly learned and intelligent reformers,
    have unanimously done in the faith and hope that the Lord will
    come quickly in his glory, to fulfill all his promises in the
    resurrection of the dead.

    “‘We are agreed and harmonize with the published creed of
    the Episcopal, Dutch Reformed, Presbyterian, and Methodist
    churches, together with the Cambridge Platform of the
    Congregational church, and the Lutheran and the Roman Catholic
    churches, in maintaining that Christ’s second and only coming
    now will be to judge the world at the last day.

    “‘We are not of those who sow discord among brethren, who
    withdraw from the fellowship of the churches, who rail at
    the office of the ministry, and triumph in the exposure of
    the errors of a secular and apostate church, and who count
    themselves holier than others, or wiser than their fellows. The
    gracious Lord has opened to us wondrous things in his word,
    whereof we are glad, and in view of which we rejoice with fear
    and trembling. We reverently bless his name, and we offer
    these things, with the right hand of our Christian fellowship
    and union, to all disciples of our common Lord, of every sect
    and denomination, praying them, by the love of the crucified
    Jesus, to regard the promise of his coming, and to cultivate
    the love of his appearing, and to sanctify themselves in view
    of his approaching with power and great glory; although they
    conscientiously differ from us in minor points of faith, or
    reject some of the peculiarities which exist in individuals of
    this Conference.

    “‘We do not seek to excite the prejudices of our fellow-men,
    or to join with those who mock at sin, or who scoff at the
    word or promise of the great Jehovah, or who lightly esteem
    offices and ordinances of the church, or who empty of their
    power the threatenings of the holy law, or who count the blood
    of the atonement a useless thing, or who refuse to worship and
    honor the Son of God even as they honor the Father; nor do we
    refuse any of these, or others of divers faith, whether Roman
    or Protestant, who receive and heartily embrace the doctrine of
    the Lord’s coming in his kingdom.’

“It was thus unanimously agreed that the sectarian questions which divide
Christians should be avoided in the presentation of the advent doctrine,
and that ‘minor points of faith,’ and the ‘peculiarities’ in the belief
of any, should not be made prominent, to impede their united labors.

“In the autumn of 1842, Mr. Miller’s views were embraced by John
Starkweather, a graduate of the Andover Theological Seminary, and a
minister of good standing in the Orthodox Congregational denomination.
He had been a minister at the Marlboro’ chapel, in Boston, and at other
places, and was regarded as a man of peculiar sanctity. He was at
that time, unemployed by any people, and Elder Himes being obliged to
spend much of his time in preaching in other places than Boston, Mr.
Starkweather was called as an assistant pastor of his church, at the
chapel in Chardon-street.

“Mr. Starkweather commenced his labors there in October, 1842. He was
tall, well formed, and had a voice of great power and not unpleasant
tones. His personal appearance was thus prepossessing, which, with his
reputation for superior sanctity, enabled him easily to secure the
confidence of his hearers, who nightly thronged the chapel.

“His principal theme was the necessity of a preparation for the
Saviour’s coming. At such a time no subject seemingly could be more
appropriate. But Mr. Starkweather had embraced peculiar views respecting
personal sanctification; and, contrary to the understanding which had
been had on the subject of sectarian views, he made his own notions
not only a test of readiness for the Lord’s coming, but of Christian
fellowship,—demanding the largest liberty for himself, and granting none
to others. He taught that conversion, however full and thorough, did not
fit one for God’s favor without a second work; and that this second work
was usually indicated by some bodily sensation.

“During the winter, the losing of strength and other cataleptic and
epileptic phenomena became manifested, and were hailed by him as
evidences of the great power of God in the sanctification of those who
were already devoted Christians. He denominated such ‘the sealing power.’

“Those who were familiar with the history of fanaticism in past ages,
who had read with pain the termination of the career of the eloquent
Edward Irving in England, who knew the devastation caused by fanaticism
in the time of the Reformation, of its effects in the early ages of
Christianity, and of the results produced by it even in many portions of
our own country during the infancy of some of the sects among us, were at
no loss respecting its character.

“It was at first supposed that Mr. Starkweather was an innocent cause of
this, and that he was ignorant of his strong mesmeric powers, by which
he had obtained a sympathetic influence over some of his hearers. He was
reasoned with on the subject, but to no purpose. His mind was bent in
a certain direction, and pursue his course he would. His actual spirit
was not discovered until leading brethren publicly dissented from such
exercises as any necessary part of Christianity. At this the uncaged lion
was aroused, and it became evident what manner of spirit he was of.

“Near the close of April, 1843, it was deemed necessary to take a decided
stand on the subject. A meeting had been appointed for the afternoon, and
Mr. Himes, who had been absent during these occurrences, with judicious
brethren determined to endeavor to stem the current of fanaticism which
had commenced. In a calm and faithful manner, he gave them the history
of various movements which had been destroyed or greatly injured by
fanaticism; and, without intimating that evidences of such then existed,
he exhorted them to learn from past experience, and see to it that they
avoid the rocks on which others had been shipwrecked.

“Mr. Starkweather arose in reply, and was so vehement that Mr. Himes felt
justified in again addressing the audience, exposing the nature of the
exercises that had appeared among them, and their pernicious tendency.

“This so shocked the sensibilities of those who regarded them as the
‘great power of God,’ that they cried out and stopped their ears. Some
jumped upon their feet, and some ran out of the house. ‘You will drive
out the Holy Ghost!’ cried one. ‘You are throwing on cold water!’ said
another.

“‘Throwing on cold water!’ said Mr. Himes; ‘I would throw on the Atlantic
Ocean before I would be identified with such abominations as these, or
suffer them in this place unrebuked.’

“Starkweather immediately announced that ‘the saints’ would thenceforth
meet at another place than the Chardon-street chapel; and, retiring, his
followers withdrew with him.

“From this time he was the leader of a party, held separate meetings,
and, by extending his visits to other places, he gained a number of
adherents. He was not countenanced by the friends of Mr. Miller; but the
public identified him and his movement with Mr. Miller and his.

“This was most unjust to Mr. Miller; but to this day the Romanists
identify, in the same manner the fanaticism consequent on the
Reformation, with Luther and those who repudiated the doings of Munzer,
Storch and others.

“While Starkweather was thus repudiated, he persisted in forcing himself,
wherever he could, upon the public, as a religious teacher and lecturer
on the Advent.

“On the 9th of August, 1843, a camp-meeting commenced at Plainfield, Ct.,
at which Starkweather was, and some manifestations were exhibited which
were entirely new to those present, and for which they could not account.
Another meeting was held at Stepney, near Bridgeport, on the 28th of the
same month, where the developments were more marked. A few young men,
professing to have the gift of discerning spirits, were hurried into
great extravagances. Elder J. Litch published a protest against such
exhibitions, in which he said:—

    “‘A more disgraceful scene, under the garb of piety, I have
    rarely witnessed. For the last ten years I have come in contact
    nearly every year, more or less, with the same spirit, and
    have marked its developments, its beginning, and its result;
    and am now prepared to say that it is evil, and only evil,
    and that continually. I have uniformly opposed it wherever it
    has made its appearance, and as uniformly have been denounced
    as being opposed to the power of God, and as resisting the
    operations of the Spirit. The origin of it, is the idea that
    the individuals thus exercised are entirely under the influence
    of the Spirit of God, are his children, and that he will
    not deceive them and lead them astray; hence every impulse
    which comes upon them is yielded to as coming from God, and,
    following it, there is no length of fanaticism to which they
    will not go.’”—_Midnight Cry_, Sept. 14, 1843.

“During Mr. Miller’s confinement by his sickness, he had not come
in contact with any of these things; but, on his last tour into
Massachusetts, he had seen something of it, and took the earliest
opportunity to do his duty respecting it, by a prompt disclaimer.
Before reaching home, he stopped a day at Castleton, Vt., and wrote the
following letter, which was published in the _Signs of the Times_ of
November 8, 1843:—

    “‘DEAR BROTHER: My heart was deeply pained, during my tour
    east, to see in some few of my former friends a proneness to
    wild and foolish extremes and vain delusions, such as working
    miracles, discerning of spirits, vague and loose views on
    sanctification, &c.

    “‘As it respects the working of miracles, I have no faith in
    those who pretend beforehand that they can work miracles.
    See Rev. 13:13, 14: “And he doeth great wonders, so that he
    maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight
    of men, and deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the
    means of those miracles which he had power to do in the sight
    of the beast.” Whenever God has seen fit to work miracles,
    the instruments have seemingly been unconscious of having the
    power, until the work was done. They have, in no instance that
    I recollect, proclaimed as with a trumpet that they could or
    would work a miracle. Moses and the apostles were more _modest_
    than these modern pretenders to this power. You may depend upon
    it, whosoever claims the power has the spirit of Antichrist.
    Rev. 16:14: “For they are the spirits of devils, working
    miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth, and of
    the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day
    of God Almighty.”

    “‘I know they pretend to prove that men are to have this
    power unto the end of the world, by Mark 16:17. But take the
    whole passage together, and what does it prove? Not that all
    believers can do these miracles, but that these miracles would
    follow those who believe; that is, those who believed in the
    record that God had given would, in the apostolic age, have a
    confirmation of the truth of that word by those miracles, which
    would follow them.[25] The word would be thus confirmed by
    miracles, performed by prophets and apostles, who were inspired
    to write the Old and New Testaments. I see no reason for the
    working of miracles in this age; “for if they believe not Moses
    and the prophets, neither would they believe though one should
    arise from the dead.” Since the apostles’ day, none have worked
    miracles but the anti-Christian beast.

    “‘The discerning of spirits is, I fear, another fanatical
    movement to draw off Adventists from the truth, and to lead
    men to depend on the feeling, exercise, and conceit of their
    own mind, more than on the word of God. It builds up a spirit
    of pride and self-righteousness, and thus loses sight of the
    humbling doctrine, to account others better than ourselves. If
    all Christians were to possess this gift, how should we live
    by faith? Each would stand upon the spiritual gifts of his
    brother, and, if possessed of the true Spirit of God, could
    never err. Surely the devil has great power over the minds of
    some at the present day. And how shall we know what manner of
    spirit they are of? The Bible answers: “By their fruits ye
    shall know them.” Then it is not by the spirit.

    “‘I think those who claim this power will soon manifest, by
    their fruits, that they have another rule than the Bible. I
    have observed that those persons who think that they have
    been baptized by the Holy Ghost, as they term it, become more
    sensitive of themselves, and very jealous for their own glory;
    less patient, and full of the denunciatory spirit against
    others who are not so fortunate as themselves. There are many
    spirits gone out into the world; and we are commanded to try
    the spirits. The spirit that does not cause us to live soberly,
    righteously, and godly, in this present world, is not the
    spirit of Christ. I am more and more convinced that Satan has
    much to do in these wild movements. He has come down, having
    great wrath, knowing he hath but a short time; and he will, if
    possible, deceive the very elect.

    “‘On sanctification I have but little at present to say.
    Sanctification has two prominent meanings in Scripture: setting
    apart for holy purposes; and being cleansed from all sin and
    pollution. Every soul converted to God is sanctified in the
    first sense. He devotes himself to God, to love, serve, and
    obey him forever. Every one who obtains complete redemption,
    body, soul, and spirit, is sanctified in the second sense.
    The first kind is, or ought to be, now enjoyed by every _true
    believer_ in Christ. The other will never be accomplished till
    the resurrection of the just, when these vile bodies shall be
    changed. We are sanctified, in the first sense, through faith
    and a knowledge of the truth; and, in my opinion, are not
    perfect until we are perfect in faith and knowledge of the word
    of God. Yet many among us, who pretend to be wholly sanctified,
    are following the traditions of men, and apparently are as
    ignorant of truth as others who make no such pretensions, and
    are not half so modest. I must confess that they have to me an
    appearance of boasting.

    “‘I would not judge harshly; but I cannot see any reason to
    believe them any more holy than many others who make no such
    claims. I would say nothing to prevent any man or woman from
    living holy. This is what we are all seeking after, and what
    I expect to attain, when Christ shall come and blot out my
    sins, according to his promise. Acts 3:19. I think those with
    whom I have conversed, who pretend to have obtained this
    grace, instead of enjoying more than others, labor, in their
    arguments, to lower down the standard of holiness to their
    present capacity. Instead of looking for a blessed hope at the
    appearing of Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile bodies,
    and raise our capacity to enjoy and adore him forever, in
    an infinitely higher state of perfection, they think they
    are actually enjoying all the promises _now_, and are not in
    need of any further work of grace to give them a right to the
    eternal inheritance of the saints.

    “‘If this be so, and we are truly perfect, sanctified, and
    prepared for our possession in Heaven, then every moment we are
    debarred our right of entering and taking possession of our
    inheritance would be an illegal withholding of us from our just
    rights of participating in the enjoyment of the will of our
    blessed Master. But it is not so. We are minors, and subjects
    of chastisements. Prov. 3:11, 12: “My son, despise not the
    chastening of the Lord, neither be weary of his correction; for
    whom the Lord loveth he correcteth; even as a father the son
    in whom he delighteth.” Heb. 12:5-9: “And ye have forgotten
    the exhortation which speaketh unto you as unto children, My
    son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint
    when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord loveth he
    chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. If ye
    endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what
    son is he whom the father chasteneth not? But if ye be without
    chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards,
    and not sons. Furthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh
    which corrected us, and we gave them reverence; shall we not
    much rather be subject to the Father of spirits, and live?”

    “‘Therefore, let us all be modest, unassuming, and godlike,
    pressing on to the mark. Let us not, therefore, judge one
    another any more. Rom. 14:13: “But judge this rather, that
    no man put a stumbling-block or an occasion to fall in his
    brother’s way.” 1 Cor. 8:9-13: “But take heed lest by any means
    this liberty of yours become a stumbling-block to them that are
    weak. For if any man see thee, which hast knowledge, sit at
    meat in the idol’s temple, shall not the conscience of him that
    is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are offered
    to idols; and through thy knowledge shall the weak brother
    perish, for whom Christ died? But when ye sin so against the
    brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against
    Christ. Wherefore, if meat make my brother to offend, I will
    eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my brother
    to offend. If my brother is truly perfect in every good work,
    he will bear with me and my weakness.” Rom. 15:1: “We, then,
    that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and
    not to please ourselves.” 1 Cor. 9:22: “To the weak became I as
    weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all
    men, that I might by all means save some.”

    “‘I have not written this to condemn my “perfect” brother,
    or to call out a reply. He may call one thing perfect
    sanctification, and I another. If he is “perfect” and strong,
    he can bear my weakness. If he wants contention, it will show
    that he is not perfect, but contentious. I beg of my brother to
    let me follow on to know the Lord; and God forbid that I should
    call him back. I hope he will not boastingly exclude me from
    the path he would tread. May God sanctify and prepare us for
    his own use, and deliver us from the wrath to come.

                     “‘Yours, in the blessed hope,

                                                         WM. MILLER.

    “‘_Castleton, Vt., Oct. 12, 1843._’

“Not only Mr. Miller, but all who were in his confidence, took a decided
position against all fanatical extravagances. They never gave them any
quarter; while those who regarded them with favor soon arrayed themselves
against Mr. Miller and his adherents. Their fanaticism increased; and
though opposed by Mr. Miller and his friends, the religious and secular
press very generally, but unjustly, connected his name with it;—he being
no more responsible for it than Luther and Wesley were for similar
manifestations in their day.




CHAPTER XIV.

    HOME OF MR. MILLER—TOUR INTO WESTERN NEW YORK—HIS PERSONAL
    APPEARANCE—ADDRESS TO ALL DENOMINATIONS—VISIT TO WASHINGTON,
    ETC.


“In the interval between Mr. Miller’s return from Boston to his home at
Low Hampton and the recommencement of his public labors, he was visited
by his dearly beloved friend, the late Elder Nathaniel Southard, who
wrote as follows of

    “‘THE HOME OF WILLIAM MILLER.

    “‘It was Saturday forenoon when we passed over the rough road,
    and stopped at a one-storied house, where a post-office is
    kept. It is the residence of William S., oldest son of Bro.
    Miller, P. M., at the office, which, for distinction, is
    called Low Hampton. He was not at home; but one of his little
    daughters told us the residence of her grandfather was in sight
    on the hill. Without waiting for her to point it out, I easily
    recognized it—from previous description—among the good-looking
    farm-houses in sight. It was not the largest or handsomest. The
    back part of it only, which is painted red, could be seen. It
    is two stories high. The northern front and ends are painted
    white. On the way we passed the small, plain meeting-house of
    the Baptist church to which Bro. M. belongs.

    “‘At the gate of his hospitable mansion we met a young man in a
    wagon, with crutches by his side, whose round, open countenance
    showed him to be a son of William Miller. He gave us a cordial
    invitation to enter. Three visitors were already in the house,
    to whom myself, wife and child, being added, made a number
    which we feared would be burdensome. We soon found ourselves
    perfectly at home, though we had never before seen one of the
    family but its venerable head.

    “‘The next day other visitors arrived, one of whom was a lady
    from Iowa, and three from Vergennes. The day was very stormy.
    We went to the place of worship, and found a congregation
    consisting of fewer persons than we left at the house. The
    preacher, Bro. Increase Jones, gave a plain, practical sermon
    on the text, “The end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore
    sober, and watch unto prayer.” In the afternoon we opened
    the Scriptures, and tried to pursue the apostolic method in
    speaking of Jesus and the resurrection.

    “‘On our way from the meeting, after referring to the number of
    guests, we asked Robbins if they usually had as much company.

    “‘Pretty nigh,’ said he; ‘I wish I had kept count of the
    number of visitors for the last six months.’

    “‘Did they come in such numbers when Bro. Miller was sick?’ we
    inquired.

    “‘It seemed to make but little difference,’ he replied.

    “‘We just then passed by the open carriage gate into the
    spacious inclosure at the west end of the house.

    “‘It seemed to be the hardest task,’ he proceeded, ‘to make
    friends understand that it was not friendly to visit a sick man
    in such numbers. I have had to stand here and keep people out
    of the house, and sometimes there were six asking admission at
    once.’

    “‘As it was, I have no doubt company added weeks to his
    sickness, and dollars to the doctor’s bill. I afterward learned
    that the expenses of his sickness were one hundred dollars.

    “‘Let us try to get a glimpse at his wealth and resources.
    Twelve years ago he was the owner of about two hundred acres
    of land, less than half of which was capable of cultivation,
    yielding a liberal return to hard labor. No one, who knows
    with what energy, diligence, and firmness, Bro. Miller has
    prosecuted the labors he seems to have been raised up to
    perform, will need to be told that he is a man of industrious,
    temperate, frugal habits. Such a man in such a place, with
    a help meet for him, could not be poor and thriftless.
    Twenty-five years ago he built his house. Other buildings were
    erected as they became necessary, but none within the last
    dozen years, except a bee-house, and small, plain shed, or
    boiling-house, where food is prepared for his hogs.

    “‘He showed me his home farm, consisting of ninety-six acres,
    lying wholly on the south side of the road. There is some
    common wall upon it; but the moss-grown, weather-beaten stones
    unanimously contradict the foolish and malicious lies which
    have been told about its recent origin. He also owns a rough
    tract of fifty acres, north of the road, and twenty acres of
    interval a little distance to the east. When he let out his
    farm to his son, he sold him $500 worth of stock, and has since
    sold seventy acres of land to his son-in-law. What he has thus
    realized, and $100 yearly for the use of his farm, have enabled
    him to meet the expenses of traveling, printing, and giving
    away books, company, sickness, &c.

    “‘He has brought up eight children, two others having died in
    early life. His whole family, like Job’s, originally consisted
    of seven sons and three daughters. Four of them are now in the
    house with him, and two sons are at the West. As a specimen of
    the fertility of his farm, he showed us a potato weighing two
    pounds and seven ounces.

    “‘While contemplating this lovely family, and their plain but
    comfortable dwelling-place, equally free from the marks of
    wasteful neglect or extravagant expenditure, I saw, as never I
    saw before, the folly and malignity of those falsehoods which
    have been so industriously told about them. Look at them.

    “‘A diligent student of the Bible tells us he finds prophetic
    periods reaching down to the resurrection and the second coming
    of Christ.

    “‘Nonsense!’ cries one, who must stand at the Judgment seat of
    Christ; ‘Mr. Miller is a man of property, and he holds on to
    it.’

    “‘But won’t you please to look in the Bible, and see the
    evidence that these periods are just running out?’

    “‘Humbug!’ says another, who must give an account for the
    manner in which he treats that message from Heaven; ‘Mr. Miller
    is building a solid brick wall round his farm.’

    “‘But will you not consider and discern the signs of the times,
    which show that the kingdom of Heaven is nigh, even at the
    doors?’

    “‘It is all a money-making scheme,’ says a third, who must soon
    give up his stewardship; ‘Mr. Miller is putting up some large
    buildings in New Haven, and he has a barrel of jewels in his
    house, which have been given him where he has preached.’

    “‘The amazing stupidity of these fictions almost hides from
    view the malice which invented them. But when we look at his
    wife and daughter, to whom a husband and father’s reputation is
    as the apple of the eye, we begin to feel them as a personal
    injury, though they are nothing, in this view, in comparison
    with the public mischief they occasion.

    “‘Bro. Miller’s faith remains unwavering. He said he should be
    happy if he felt as sure of Heaven as he did that he had the
    truth on the prophecies of Daniel.

    “‘His eyesight is improved since his sickness, so that he now
    uses spectacles which he had laid aside as being too young
    several years ago. He reads the small Polyglot Bible with the
    greatest ease. He is a diligent reader of Second Advent papers.
    After he has received one he seldom lays it aside till he
    has become acquainted with all its contents. The rest of his
    reading is nearly confined to the Scriptures. He is able to
    write freely, and it requires no small share of his time to
    attend to the numerous letters he receives.

    “‘He starts early next week (Providence permitting) on his way
    to Rochester, Lockport, and Buffalo, N. Y. It will be necessary
    for one of his sons to accompany him, as he is not strong
    enough to travel alone.

    “‘We were interested in seeing his old family Bible, which cost
    $18.50, and his quarto copy of Cruden’s Concordance, which was
    originally purchased, in 1798, for $8. These two books were
    almost the only ones he looked at while preparing his lectures.
    A clergyman once called at his house in his absence, and, being
    disappointed in not seeing him, wished the privilege of looking
    at his library. His daughter conducted the visitor into the
    north-east room, where he has sat so many hours at his ancient
    desk. Those two books, and no others, lay upon the table.
    “That is his library,” said she. The clergyman was amazed. Her
    remark was strictly true, as far as theological writings were
    concerned. He never had a commentary in his house, and did not
    remember reading any work upon the prophecies, except Newton
    and Faber, about thirty years ago.

    “‘When we spoke to him about the stories in relation to his
    property in New Haven, he pleasantly remarked that those who
    believed them could easily satisfy themselves; for he had sold
    to Bro. McDonald, of Williamsburg, near New York city, all
    his property, real or personal, out of Low Hampton, for five
    dollars, and the purchaser had offered to give half of it to
    any one who would find any.

    “‘Monday afternoon we reluctantly took leave of this peaceful
    spot, which had been our pleasant home for two days, rejoicing
    that calumny could there find no truthful basis on which to
    found its reckless and cruel assertions.

                                                      “‘N. SOUTHARD.

    “‘_Carleton, Vt., October 23, 1843._’

“In company with his wife and son George, Mr. Miller started for
Rochester, N. Y., on the 9th of November. On his passage down the canal
from Whitehall, by request of the passengers on the boat, he spoke to an
attentive audience from Titus 2:13.

“From the 12th to the 19th of November, he gave his first course of
lectures in the city of Rochester, speaking to full houses on the
afternoon and evening of each day. The ground had been previously
prepared for him by a course of lectures in June, delivered by Mr. Himes
and others, in connection with the ‘great tent.’

“Mr. Himes had commenced a paper there called the _Glad Tidings_, and
published thirteen numbers of it, which were extensively circulated; and
the late Elder Thomas F. Barry, a devoted brother, had remained in that
field during the summer. By those instrumentalities quite an interest had
been created, and the labors of Mr. Miller there were abundantly blessed.

“Receiving a pressing invitation from Rev. Elon Galusha, pastor of the
Baptist church, and sixty-eight others, in Lockport, N. Y., to visit that
place, he lectured there from the 21st to 30th of November. The salvation
of some souls and a general expression of interest in the subject of his
discourses, were the result of his labors.

“From the 2d to the 10th of December he lectured in Buffalo, N. Y., in
the theater, to a house full of attentive hearers. Writing from that
place, on the 4th, he says: ‘Yesterday I saw the tears of some in the
congregation, who, I am informed, were old, hardened infidels.’

“In compliance with an invitation from Rev. A. Claghorn, pastor of the
Baptist church, and twenty-three others, he next lectured in Lewiston,
N. Y., from the 11th to the 17th of December. There were many hearers
present from Canada, as well as from the American side of the line, who
gave him a respectful hearing. Writing respecting this place, Mr. M.
says:—

    “‘I was here, as at Rochester and Lockport, challenged to a
    public debate by a Universalist. I will not contend with them.
    It would be an admission that they _might_ be right, which I
    cannot for a moment believe. Michael would not contend with the
    devil. Why? Because he would not admit he could be right. Was
    he afraid of the devil? No. But he said, “The Lord rebuke thee,
    Satan!” And so say I to his ministers.’

“Being invited to visit Penfield, N. Y., by Rev. David Bernard and the
unanimous vote of his church, he lectured in the Baptist meeting-house
there, from the 20th to the 27th of December. Some souls professed
conversion, and the pastor and a number of his people avowed their faith
in the near coming of Christ.

“Mr. Miller returned to Rochester on the 29th of December, continued
there a few days, gave five discourses, and on the 3d of January, 1844,
he left for home by the way of Troy. After reaching Low Hampton, he
wrote:—

    “‘On Saturday, January 6, I arrived home, having been absent
    about eight weeks, and given eighty-five lectures. I have
    seen a number of infidels converted to God; and more than one
    hundred have obtained a hope where I have been.’

“On the 28th of January he again visited Boston, and gave a course of
lectures in the Howard-street Tabernacle. This was his ninth visit to
Boston, and his seventh regular course of lectures there. On no previous
occasion had such crowds been present to hear as were then assembled
in that capacious building. On the Sabbath (January 28), all day and
evening, the seats and aisles were filled with as many as could find a
place to sit or stand. Many of the young with the middle-aged, and even
men with gray hairs, stood and listened to the story of the coming One,
with the evidences of his near approach. Had the Tabernacle been twice
its size, it would hardly have held the multitude who sought admittance.
The interest continued during his entire course of lectures, which closed
on the 4th of February.

“On the 5th of February, in company with Mr. Himes, he left for New York
city; but the weather was inclement, the boat was delayed in the Sound
all the next day by ice, and the passage was uncommonly tedious. Mr.
Fowler, the phrenologist, being one of the passengers, to while away
the time, gave, by request, a lecture on his science. After the lecture
he was blindfolded, and in that state examined quite a number of heads.
At the request of the company, Mr. Miller’s head was examined. All were
eager to hear the opinion of the lecturer. Among other things he said:—

    “‘This man has large benevolence. His object is to do his
    fellow-beings good. He has great firmness—is a modest man,
    open, frank, no hypocrite, good at figures, a man of great
    mental power, might make a noise in the world, has no personal
    enemies; if he has enemies, it is not because they know him,
    but on account of his opinions.’

“At the close of the examination his blindfold was removed, and he was
introduced to Mr. Miller, to the no small amusement of the company.

“They arrived in New York on the evening of the 6th of February, 1844,
and found a conference assembled in Franklin Hall. Mr. Miller gave two
discourses there on the 7th; when, finding the place too small, they
adjourned to the Broadway Tabernacle, where he lectured in the afternoon
and evening of the 8th and 9th of February, to crowded assemblies. It
was estimated that not less than five thousand persons were present. The
audiences were solemn and attentive.

“On the 10th of February they went to Philadelphia, and on the 11th Mr.
M. commenced a course of lectures in the saloon of the Chinese Museum,
closing on the 18th. That immense hall was filled to overflowing.

“While laboring here, a friend gave the following description of Mr.
Miller’s personal appearance:—

    “‘There is a kindness of soul, simplicity, and power,
    peculiarly original, combined in his manner; and he is affable
    and attentive to all, without any affectation of superiority.
    He is of about medium stature, a little corpulent, and,
    in temperament, a mixture of sanguine and nervous. His
    intellectual developments are unusually full, and we see in
    his head great benevolence and firmness, united with a lack of
    self-esteem. He is wanting in marvelousness, and is naturally
    skeptical. His countenance is full and round, while there is a
    peculiar expression in his blue eye, of shrewdness and love.
    Although about sixty-two years of age, his hair is not gray,
    but of a light, glossy auburn; his voice is full and distinct,
    and his pronunciation somewhat northern-antique. In his social
    relations, he is gentle and affectionate, and insures the
    esteem of all with whom he mingles. In giving this charcoal
    sketch to the public, I have merely sought to correct numerous
    misstatements, and gratify the honest desire of many distant
    believers with a faint outline of the character and appearance
    of the man.’

“While drawing crowded houses of intelligent and attentive hearers,
his name was seldom mentioned in the religious press, except by way of
ridicule or denunciation; and many churches, particularly those of his
own denomination, were taking disciplinary steps with those who had
embraced his views. This called forth from him the following

    “‘ADDRESS TO BELIEVERS IN CHRIST OF ALL DENOMINATIONS.

    “‘DEAR BRETHREN: We would ask, in the name of our dear Master,
    Jesus Christ, by all that is holy, by the fellowship of the
    saints, and the love of the truth, why you cast us off as
    if we were heretics? What have we believed, that we have
    not been commanded to believe by the word of God, which you
    yourselves allow is the rule and only rule of our faith and
    practice? What have we done that should call down such virulent
    denunciations against us from pulpit and press, and give you
    just cause to exclude us (Adventists) from your churches and
    fellowship? In the name of all that is dear, all that is holy
    and good, we call upon some of you to come out and tell us
    wherein our great sin lies. Have we denied the faith once
    delivered to the saints? Tell us, we pray you, or, wherein is
    our fault? If there is an honest man among you, of which we
    cannot doubt, we shall expect to see your reasons publicly and
    honestly avowed; and if we are guilty of heresy or crime, let
    the Christian community know it, that we may be shunned by all
    who know and love the truth.

    “‘Is it heterodox to believe that Jesus Christ will come
    again to this earth, to receive his saints to himself, and
    to reward all men as their work shall be? If so, then our
    fathers, and our ministers, our creeds, and our Bibles, have
    taught us heresy; and from our infancy we have misunderstood
    our teachers, and misapplied our Bible. Do tell us what mean a
    class of texts like these? John 14:3: “And if I go and prepare
    a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto myself;
    that where I am there ye may be also.” Acts 1:11: “Which also
    said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven?
    This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall
    so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.” 1
    Pet. 1:7 and 13: “That the trial of our faith, being much more
    precious than of gold that perisheth, though it may be tried
    with fire, might be found unto praise, and honor, and glory,
    at the appearing of Jesus Christ. Wherefore, gird up the loins
    of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end for the grace that
    is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ.”
    Rev. 1:7: “Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall
    see him, and they also which pierced him; and all kindreds of
    the earth shall wail because of him.”

    “‘Does our crime consist in looking for him and loving his
    appearing? This, too, we charge upon our fathers and teachers;
    we have heard, ever since we had consciousness, as our duty
    explained and enforced, to watch and look, to love and be
    prepared for his return, that when he comes we may enter into
    the marriage supper of the Lamb. We also have Christ and the
    apostles for our example in so doing. Witness Matt. 24:44;
    25:13; Mark 13:34-37; Phil. 3:20, 21; 2 Tim. 4:8; Titus 2:13; 2
    Pet. 3:12; Rev. 14:15.

    “‘Or are we to be severed from our brethren because we believe
    the prophecies of the Old and New Testaments to be the true
    prophecies of God; or because that we think we can understand
    them, and see in the history of our world their fulfillment?
    Are we to be cut off from our connection with your churches
    because we believe as your ministers have told us we ought to
    for ages past? Acts 24:14: “But this I confess unto you, that
    after the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of
    my fathers, believing all things which are written in the law
    and in the prophets.” 26:22: “Having therefore obtained help
    of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and
    great, saying none other things than those which the prophets
    and Moses did say should come. King Agrippa, believest thou
    the prophets?” 1 Tim. 4:14: “That thou keep this commandment
    without spot, unrebukable, until the appearance of our Lord
    Jesus Christ.” Rev. 1:4: “Blessed is he that readeth, and they
    that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things
    which are written therein; for the time is at hand.”

    “‘Again, let me inquire: Are we treated as heretics because we
    believe Christ will come this year? Are we not all commanded
    to watch? Mark 13:37: “And what I say unto you, I say unto
    all, Watch.” And I would ask, Is it not our duty to watch this
    year? If so, will you tell us how a man can watch, and not
    expect the object for which he watches? If this is the crime,
    we plead guilty to the charge, and throw ourselves upon the
    word of God, and the example of our fathers, to justify us in
    so doing. Eccl. 8:5, 6: “Whoso keepeth the commandments shall
    feel no evil thing; and a wise man’s heart discerneth both
    time and judgment; because to every purpose there is time and
    judgment.” Dan. 12:6, 7: “And one said to the man clothed in
    linen, which was upon the waters of the river, How long shall
    it be to the end of these wonders? And I heard the man clothed
    in linen which was upon the waters of the river, when he held
    up his right hand and his left hand unto heaven, and sware by
    him that liveth forever, that it shall be for a time, times
    and a half; and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the
    power of the holy people, all these things shall be finished.”
    1 Pet. 1:9, 13: “Receiving the end of your faith, even the
    salvation of your souls. Of which salvation the prophets have
    inquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace
    that should come unto you; searching what, or what manner of
    time, the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when
    it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory
    that should follow. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto
    themselves, but unto us they did minister the things which
    are now reported unto you, with the Holy Ghost sent down from
    Heaven; which things the angels desire to look into. Wherefore,
    gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end
    for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation
    of Jesus Christ.”

    “‘Now, if we are wrong, pray show us wherein consists our
    wrong. Show us from the word of God that we are in error; we
    have had ridicule enough; that can never convince us that we
    are in the wrong; the word of God alone can change our views.
    Our conclusions have been formed deliberately and prayerfully,
    as we have seen the evidence in the Scriptures; and all
    reasoning against our views has only served to confirm us in
    them.

    “‘Or, are you ready to say that our crime consists in examining
    the Bible for ourselves? We have inquired “Watchman, what of
    the night?” We have besought and entreated them to give us
    any signs of the coming morning, and have waited patiently
    for an answer; but have waited in vain; have been turned off
    with some German or French philosophy, or had the book closed
    in our face, and been insulted for our deep anxiety. We have,
    therefore, been obliged to study for ourselves; and if we
    are to be cut off for honestly believing in the exactness of
    prophetic time, then Scott and Wesley, and the Newtons, and
    Mede, Gill, and others, should all be excommunicated for the
    like offense. We, therefore, once more call upon you to show us
    our errors; and until this is done, we must continue to believe
    the Lord will come in this Jewish year.

                                                      “‘WM. MILLER.’

“On the 17th of February, Messrs. Miller, Himes, and Elder Josiah Litch,
left Philadelphia for Washington city, which they reached on the 20th.
On the evening of that day they held their first meeting in the Baptist
house, near the Navy-yard. It became so thronged that, on the 26th, they
removed to the Apollo Hall, near the President’s mansion, where they
continued till the 2d of March.

“During these lectures, on the 28th of February, the ‘Peacemaker,’ on
board of the ‘Princeton,’ exploded, killing Colonel Gardiner and Mr.
Upshur, the United States Secretary of State, and wounding others. That
event added interest and solemnity to the lectures, and caused them to be
more fully attended. There were present at the lectures a goodly number
of persons belonging to both houses of Congress.

“Writing from Washington on the day of that explosion, but before the
occurrence, Mr. Miller said:—

    “‘They throng us constantly for papers, books, and tracts,
    which Bro. Himes is scattering gratuitously by thousands,
    containing information on this subject. They send in from this
    vicinity and from “old Virginia” for papers and lecturers; but
    the one-hundredth part of their requests can never be complied
    with. Never have I been listened to with so deep a feeling, and
    with such intense interest, for hours.’

“Mr. Miller gave nineteen lectures in this place, and Messrs. Himes and
Litch fifteen.

“Calls for them to extend their tour further south came up from
Charleston, S. C., Savannah, Geo., Mobile, Ala., and from many other
of the larger places in the Southern States. Some of these were very
importunate, but previous arrangements prevented a compliance with those
requests.

“They returned north, held meetings in Baltimore from the 3d to the 8th
of March, and, on the 9th, returned to Philadelphia. There Mr. Miller
gave two more discourses on the 10th; on the 11th he lectured in Newark,
N. J., in the Free Presbyterian meeting-house; on the 12th he gave one
discourse in New York; on the 13th he spoke in Brooklyn and Williamsburg,
N. Y., and on the 14th he returned to Low Hampton.

“He seems to have kept no minute of his subsequent labors, but closes his
note-book, at the termination of this tour, with these words: ‘Now I have
given, since 1832, _three thousand two hundred lectures_.’




CHAPTER XV.

    THE PASSING OF THE TIME—HIS POSITION—LINES ON HIS
    DISAPPOINTMENT—CONFESSION—VISIT OF ELD. LITCH—MR. MILLER AND
    THE METHODIST MINISTERS—TOUR TO OHIO—RETURN, ETC.


“The vernal equinox of 1844 was the furthest point of time to which Mr.
Miller’s calculation of the prophetic periods extended. When this time
passed, he wrote to Mr. Himes as follows:—

                                      “‘LOW HAMPTON, MARCH 25, 1844.

    “‘MY DEAR BROTHER HIMES:—I am now seated at my old desk in
    my east room. Having obtained help of God until the present
    time, I am still looking for the dear Saviour, the Son of God
    from Heaven, and for the fulfillment of the promise made to my
    fathers, and confirmed unto us by them that heard him, that he
    would come again and would receive us to himself, or gather in
    one body all the family of the first-born in Heaven and earth,
    even in him. This, Paul has told us, would be in the _fullness
    of times_. Eph. 1:9, 10.

    “‘The time, as I have calculated it, is now filled up; and I
    expect every moment to see the Saviour descend from heaven.
    I have now nothing to look for but this glorious hope. I am
    full in the faith that all prophetic chronology except the
    1000 years in the 20th of Rev. is now about full. Whether God
    designs for me to warn the people of this earth any more, or
    not, I am at a loss to know; yet I mean to be governed, if time
    should continue any longer than I have expected, by the word
    and providence of Him who will never err, and in whom I think I
    have trusted, and been supported during my twelve years arduous
    labors, in trying to awaken the churches of God, and the
    Christian community, and to warn my fellow-men of the necessity
    of an immediate preparation to meet our Judge in the day of his
    appearing.

    “‘I hope I have cleansed my garments from the blood of souls.
    I feel that, as far as it was in my power, I have freed
    myself from all guilt in their condemnation. It is true, but
    not wonderful, when we become acquainted with the state
    and corruption of the present age of the Laodicean church,
    that I have met with great opposition from the pulpit and
    professed religious press; and I have been instrumental,
    through the preaching of the Advent doctrine, of making it
    quite manifest, that not a few of our theological teachers
    are infidels in disguise. I cannot for a moment believe that
    denying the resurrection of the body, or the return of Christ
    to this earth, or of a judgment day yet future, is any the
    less infidelity now than it was in the days of infidel France;
    and yet, who does not know that these things are as common as
    pulpits and presses are? And which of these questions are not
    publicly denied in our pulpits and by the writers and editors
    of the public papers?

    “‘Surely, we have fallen on strange times. I expected of course
    the doctrine of Christ’s speedy coming would be opposed by
    infidels, blasphemers, drunkards, gamblers and the like; but I
    did not expect the ministers of the gospel and professors of
    religion would unite with characters of the above description,
    at stores and public places, in ridiculing the solemn doctrine
    of the Second Advent. Many who were not professors of religion
    have affirmed to me these facts, and say they have seen them,
    and have felt their blood chilled at the sight.

    “‘These are some of the effects which are produced by preaching
    this solemn and soul-stirring doctrine among our Pharisees of
    the present day. Is it possible that such ministers and members
    are obeying God, and watching and praying for his glorious
    appearing, while they join these scoffers in their unholy and
    ungodly remarks? If Christ does come, where must they appear?
    and what a dreadful account they will meet in that tremendous
    hour? But I feel almost confident that my labors are about
    done, and I am, with a deep interest of soul, looking for my
    blessed and glorious Redeemer, who will then be King over all
    the earth, and God with us forevermore.

    “‘This I can truly say is my chief desire. It is my meditation
    all the day long. It is my song in the night, and my faith and
    hope amidst the scenes of this sin-cursed earth. It consoles me
    in sickness, comforts me in tribulation, and gives me patience
    to endure the scoffs and tauntings of an ungodly, selfish,
    and unfeeling world. My faith and confidence in God’s word
    is as strong as ever; although he has not come in the time I
    expected. I still believe the time is not far off, and that
    God will soon, yes, too soon for the proud scoffers, justify
    himself, his word, and the cry of alarm which has been given
    through your indefatigable labors, with others whom God has
    raised up to assist in giving the midnight cry.

    “‘I am highly gratified with your present position; if you had
    gone to criticising words in order to find another time, yet
    future, men would not have thought you honest in your views,
    would have lost all confidence in you, and the good you have
    done would have been neutralized, had you shifted or changed
    your ground.

    “‘You have good, honest and sure ground yet to stand upon;
    for Christ says, “_So likewise ye when ye shall see all these
    things, know that he is near, even at the door._” Now we have
    lived to see all the signs fulfilled, the time accomplished.
    “_Watch therefore: for ye know not what hour your Lord doth
    come._”

    “‘This is the position I have now to take, and what more work I
    have to do, will be done in this manner. I will,

    “‘1. PROVE BY SCRIPTURE AND HISTORY THAT TIME IS FULFILLED.

    “‘2. SHOW THE SIGNS ALL COMPLETED.

    “‘3. THE DUTY OF WATCHING, FOR WE KNOW NOT WHAT HOUR THE LORD
    MAY COME. And if God has anything more for me to do in his
    vineyard, he will give me strength, open the door, and enable
    me to do whatever may be his will, for his glory and the best
    good for man.

    “‘To him I leave the event, for him I watch and pray, saying,
    “COME, LORD JESUS, COME QUICKLY. AMEN. _Even so, come, Lord
    Jesus._”

                                                  “‘WILLIAM MILLER.’

“On the 2d of May he wrote as follows:—

    “‘TO SECOND ADVENT BELIEVERS....

    “‘Were I to live my life over again, with the same evidence
    that I then had, to be honest with God and man I should have to
    do as I have done. Although opposers said it would not come,
    they produced no weighty arguments. It was evidently guess-work
    with them; and I then thought, and do now, that their denial
    was based more on an unwillingness for the Lord to come than on
    any arguments leading to such a conclusion.

    “‘I _confess my error_ and acknowledge _my disappointment_; yet
    I still believe that the day of the Lord is near, even at the
    door; and I exhort you, my brethren, to be watchful, and not
    let that day come upon you unawares. The wicked, the proud, and
    the bigot, will exult over us. I will try to be patient. God
    will deliver the godly out of temptation, and will reserve the
    unjust to be punished at Christ’s appearing.

    “‘I want you, my brethren, not to be drawn away from the truth.
    Do not, I pray you, neglect the Scriptures. They are able to
    make you wise unto eternal life. Let us be careful not to be
    drawn away from the manner and object of Christ’s coming; for
    the next attack of the adversary will be to induce unbelief
    respecting these. The manner of Christ’s coming has been well
    discussed.’

“Shortly after this he wrote the following lines respecting his
disappointment:—

    “‘How tedious and lonesome the hours,
      While Jesus, my Saviour, delays!
    I have sought him in solitude’s bowers,
      And looked for him all the long days.

    “‘Yet he lingers—I pray tell me why
      His chariot no sooner returns?
    To see him in clouds of the sky,
      My soul with intensity burns.

    “‘I long to be with him at home,
      My heart swallowed up in his love,
    On the fields of New Eden to roam,
      And to dwell with my Saviour above.’

“During the last week of May, the Annual Conference of Adventists was
held in the Tabernacle at Boston. Mr. Miller was present, and, at the
close of one of the meetings, in accordance with a previous notice,
arose, and frankly confessed his mistake in the definite time at which
he supposed the prophetic periods would have terminated. The following
notice of this confession, written by a hearer, appeared in the _Boston
Post_ on the 1st of June following:—

    “‘FATHER MILLER’S CONFESSION.—Many people were desirous of
    hearing what was termed Father Miller’s Confession, which,
    according to rumor, was to be delivered at the Tabernacle
    on Tuesday evening last, when and where a large concourse
    assembled, myself among the number, to hear the “conclusion of
    the whole matter;” and I confess I was well paid for my time
    and trouble. I should judge, also, by the appearance of the
    audience, and the remarks I heard from one or two gentlemen
    not of Mr. Miller’s faith, that a general satisfaction was
    felt. I never heard him when he was more eloquent or animated,
    or more happy in communicating his feelings and sentiments to
    others. Want of time and space will not permit me to give even
    a mere sketch of his remarks, which occupied more than an hour.
    He confessed that he had been disappointed, but by no means
    discouraged or shaken in his faith in God’s goodness, or in
    the entire fulfillment of his word, or in the speedy coming of
    our Saviour, and the destruction of the world. Although the
    supposed time had passed, God’s time had not passed. “If the
    vision tarry, wait for it.” He remained firm in the belief
    that the end of all things is at hand, even at the door. He
    spoke with much feeling and effect, and left no doubt of his
    sincerity.

                                                                 D.’

“His disappointment in the passing of the time was great; but it did not
at all impair his confidence in God, or affect his usual cheerfulness of
disposition. Eld. Josiah Litch, who visited him on the 8th of June, at
Low Hampton, thus wrote:—

    “‘I found both himself and family well and in fine spirits.
    Indeed, I have never seen him when he seemed to enjoy himself
    better than at present. If any evidence of his sincerity
    in preaching the advent of Christ in 1843 were wanting, in
    addition to his arduous and unrequited toil of twelve years,
    his present humble submission to his disappointment, and the
    spirit of meekness with which the confession of disappointment
    is made, is sufficient to satisfy the most incredulous that
    nothing but a deep conviction of duty to God and man could
    have moved such a man to such a work. That he is greatly
    disappointed in not seeing the Lord within the expected time,
    must be evident to all who hear him speak; while the tearful
    eye and subdued voice show from whence flow the words he utters.

    “‘Although disappointed as to time, I never saw him more strong
    than now in the general correctness of his expositions of
    Scripture and calculation of prophetic times, and in the faith
    of our Lord’s speedy coming.’

“In company with his son George and Mr. Himes, Mr. Miller left home
on the 21st of July, 1844, for a tour as far west as Cincinnati. They
reached Rochester, N. Y., on the 23d, and on the 24th commenced a series
of meetings in a beautiful grove in Scottsville, near that city. Mr.
Miller was listened to with unusual interest.

“From Rochester they visited Buffalo, N. Y., Toronto, C. W., Lockport, N.
Y., Cleveland, Akron, Cincinnati, and other places in Ohio. At this last
place he lectured, on the evening of August 19, to an audience of about
four thousand persons, and continued there one week.

“They had proposed going further west, but freshets in the rivers in
those parts prevented. They returned from Cincinnati, up the Ohio and
Muskingum rivers, to McConnellsville, which they reached on the 28th of
August, and where Mr. M. delivered five lectures.

“On the 2d of September they left this place by steamboat, down the
Muskingum river to Marietta, from thence to take a boat to Pittsburg, on
their way to Philadelphia. On board the boat for Marietta they found from
thirty to forty Methodist ministers, who were on their way to attend the
Methodist Episcopal Conference in that city.

“Mr. M. noticed some sly glances from one to another, which seemed to
say, ‘We will have some sport with the old gentleman.’ He, however, took
no notice of them, but went to a retired part of the deck, and commenced
reading. Soon a dandy-looking minister walked past him several times, and
finally asked him:—

“‘Is your name Miller?’

“Mr. M. replied in the affirmative, and kept on reading.

“He then asked him if he was the Miller who had prophesied the end of the
world.

“Mr. M. said he did not prophesy, but supposed that he was the one to
whom he referred.

“The minister said that he did not believe we could know when the world
was to end.

“Mr. M., thinking he had a right to his unbelief, made no reply.

“The minister then said he did not believe God had revealed the time.

“Mr. M. replied that he could prove by the Bible that God had revealed
it; and that, if he was an honest man, he would make him acknowledge
it, by asking him a few questions in reference to the Bible, if he would
answer them.

“The man retired, procured his Bible, and returned with about twenty
other ministers, who gathered around him. An elderly one, who looked
like an honest man, took his seat in front, on the capstan. All were
attention. Mr. M. asked the man to read the first three verses of Dan. 12.

“This he did aloud.

“Mr. M. then asked if the _resurrection_ was brought to view in those
verses.

“The man looked at them for a while, and said he did not know that it was.

“Mr. M. asked him if he would tell what they did mean.

“He said he did not choose to do so.

“‘Oh! very well,’ said Mr. M.; ‘we have nothing more to say together; for
I did not agree to convince you, if you would not answer a few questions.’

“The elderly minister then asked him why he would not answer.

“‘Because I do not choose to do so.’

“‘Why,’ said the old gentleman, ‘I should have no objection to answering
that question. It does refer to the resurrection.’

“‘Well, father,’ said Mr. M., ‘I perceive you are an honest man. I will,
if you please, ask _you_ a few questions.’

“The old gentleman said he would answer them if he could.

“Mr. M. asked him to read the 6th verse—‘How long shall it be to the end
of these wonders?’—and say what wonders were referred to.

“The dandy minister then spoke—‘Don’t answer that question; he will make
a _Millerite_ of you.’

“The elderly minister said he was not afraid of the Bible, let it make
what it would of him; and replied, that the ‘wonders’ referred to must
mean the resurrection, &c.

“‘Well,’ said Mr. M., ‘is the reply of the one clothed in linen, who
sware “that it should be for a time, times, and an half,” given in answer
to the question, how long it will be to the resurrection?’

“Here the dandy minister again spoke—‘Don’t answer that question; for, if
you do, he will make a _Millerite_ of you.’

“The other gave him to understand that he was afraid of no result to
which an honest investigation of the Scriptures might lead, and that
he should answer any questions he choose to. The admission of the
dandy minister, that honest answers could not be given to a few simple
questions on a portion of Scripture, without making men ‘Millerites,’
excited the interest of all to the highest point.

“The elderly minister replied that he thought it must be given in answer
to that question.

“On hearing the answer, the dandy minister shrunk back, closed his mouth,
and interfered no more.

“Mr. M. asked who it was that gave this answer.

“The other readily replied that he was undoubtedly the Lord Jesus Christ.

“‘Well, then,’ said Mr. M., ‘if the Lord Jesus Christ, in answer to the
question, How long it should be to the resurrection, has sworn with an
oath that it shall be for a time, times, and an half, is not the time
revealed?’

“‘But,’ said the other, ‘you can’t tell what that time, times, and an
half mean.’

“‘I did not agree,’ said Mr. M., ‘to do that; our _understanding_ of it
is another thing. But has not God there revealed the time, and sworn to
it with an oath?’

“‘Yes,’ said the other, ‘he has.’

“‘Well, then,’ said Mr. M., ‘I have proved all I agreed to.’

“‘Why,’ said the minister, ‘I never saw this in this light before. Can
you tell what is meant by time, times, and an half?’

“_Mr. M._ ‘I will try. Read, if you please, the 6th verse of Rev. 12.’

“_Min._ ‘“And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a place
prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred
and three-score days.”’

“_Mr. M._ ‘Now read the 14th verse.’

“_Min._ ‘“And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that
she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished
for a time, and times, and half a time.”’

“_Mr. M._ ‘Do not those two denote the same period of time?’

“_Min._ ‘Yes.’

“_Mr. M._ ‘Then must not the time given in answer to the question be the
same as the 1260 days?’

“The minister acknowledged it must be so.

“Mr. M. pointed him to the various places where the same period is
presented under different forms,—forty-two months, 1260 days, time,
times, and half a time—and showed him how 30 days to a month, and 12
months to a year, would make 3½ years, equal to 1260 days. He then
asked him if we might not know that God had revealed the time to the
resurrection in days.

“He said, Yes; but asked if we could know how to reckon them.

“Mr. M. pointed him to Dan. 7:25, the time of the continuance of the
saints in the hands of the little horn, a period of the same length, and
asked if that could denote simply 1260 days; ‘for’ said he, ‘you know
that they persecuted the saints more than so many literal days.’

“This he admitted; but asked, if not literal days, what they were.

“Mr. M. showed him that the language was symbolical; that if it had
been given in literal time, it would have had a bad effect on past
generations, as they would have seen that the judgment could not come in
their day, and they might not have lived in continual readiness for it,
as they should do. He then referred to Num. 14: 34, and Eze. 4:6, where
God has appointed a day for a year; showed him how the 70 weeks were
fulfilled in 490 years—as many years as there were days in 70 weeks—and
showed there were just 1260 years from the time the decree of Justinian
went into effect, A. D. 538, to 1798, when the papacy was subverted by
Napoleon.

“The minister acknowledged the pertinency of these references, and
confessed that the time sworn to by Christ must denote 1260 years.

“Mr. M. then showed how the 2300 days and the four great kingdoms, &c.,
bring us down to the end, and how they must terminate about this time;
but confessed that the expected time had gone by. He spoke about an
hour, during which the strictest attention was given by those who stood
around. Many confessed they never thought that ‘Millerism’ was anything
like that.

“On arriving at Marietta, Mr. M. was detained a part of the next day in
the boat, and the inhabitants came down with the request that he would
stop and lecture, offering him the Methodist house. But he was obliged to
hasten on, and could not comply with their invitation.

“They arrived at Harrisburg, Pa., on Sunday, the 8th, and lectured four
days in the old Methodist chapel to good audiences. On the 11th Mr.
Miller wrote to the _Signs of the Times_ as follows:—

                                       “‘HARRISBURG, SEPT. 11, 1844.

    “‘DEAR BRO. BLISS:—We are now in this place laboring to prove
    to the people that the Bible is the revealed will of God, and
    that all may and will be known which concerns us, to make
    us perfect in every good work, by every sincere and candid
    inquirer, in this age of general expectation of some moral
    or physical revolution in the earth. And we believe, and we
    so teach, that the revolution so much expected, and so long
    desired by every child of God, is the coming of King Jesus, the
    marriage of the Lamb, and the completion of all the promises
    given us who believe in God’s word. We are as confident as
    faith in the blessed word can make us, that Christ is now at
    the very door, and soon our wondering eyes will be ravished by
    all the beauty, splendor, pomp and glory of our descending King.

    “‘These thoughts make me happy while I write; but, O God! what
    then will be my feelings, when faith will end in sight, and
    hope in fruition? I know that my mind is too feeble to imagine,
    my faculties too weak to comprehend the emotion of my soul,
    when I shall stand before him; yes, and see him as he is, and
    be like him; yes, more than that, ten times more grand, more
    glorious still than all, shall be forever with him. No more a
    stranger in this giddy world, no more a pilgrim from the dizzy
    maze of life’s ten thousand cares, no more a wanderer from my
    Father’s house, no more to meet the scoffs of friends or foes,
    or meet the upturned lip, or curl of scorn from that black
    coat, and hear the oft-repeated epithet, in accents of deep
    derision, “_There goes old Miller._” My soul rejoices when I
    think a few more days, at most, and all these scenes will be
    forgotten in the eternal sunshine of his glory. Why not begin
    the song of everlasting gratitude to God for this blessed hope.

    “‘I find in every place where Bro. Himes and myself have
    traveled and labored, the same selfish, Pharisaical bigotry
    among the sects, and more especially among the several editors
    of pretended religious newspapers. Many of these misrepresent
    and falsely accuse their brethren of other sects in their
    trade—and they only fatten on the destruction of those who do
    not wear their sectarian badge. This would be a dark picture
    for the Christian religion, were it not for a few exceptions in
    the moral heavens; but there is now and then a brilliant star
    in the galaxy, that shines the brighter in consequence of the
    surrounding darkness; and in every sect we find a few of their
    numbers whose faithful hearts and honest lives denote they have
    not bowed the knee to Baal. Were it not for this, I long ago
    would have yielded up the point, that wicked men and devils,
    and the gates of hell, had in this our day prevailed against
    the church. But thank the Lord, a remnant yet is left; the
    Bible yet is true, and these men are but the tares which soon
    will be gathered and burned. I do believe few men will be left.

    “‘The organ of the “_Church of God_,” so called, in this place,
    has spit his venom out, and I hope his poison will not taint
    his own body; but if it does, and should he reap the fruits, I
    hope he will remember his false assertions only go to show the
    bird was hit, and all his gall falls harmless at the feet of
    those he meant to wound. I will write you again when I get home.

    “‘I remain as ever “looking for the blessed hope,” &c.

                                                  “‘WILLIAM MILLER.’

“They then passed on to Middletown, where they remained two days; to
Sandersville, where Mr. M. gave one lecture; and to Philadelphia, where
they arrived on the 14th of September. On the 16th, Mr. M. commenced his
lectures at the Museum Saloon, in Julian street.

“On the 19th, Mr. M. reached New York city, and the next day gave a
discourse in Franklin Hall. On Sunday, P. M., he preached in the church
in Chrystie street, from these words: ‘But this I confess unto thee, that
after the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers,
believing all things that are written in the law and the prophets; and
have hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that there shall
be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust.’ Acts 24:14,
15. He spoke with great ease and clearness respecting the reasons which
had fixed his mind on 1843. He acknowledged that there had been a
mistake, but expressed his assurance in the near coming of Christ, for
which event he entreated all to be in readiness. In the evening, he spoke
in the same place, to a crowded and attentive audience, upon the seven
last plagues of Rev. 16:15-17, six of which he believed had been poured
out during the last three hundred years.

“His health was at this time suffering considerably from the fatigues
of the western tour; and, feeling it his duty to rest for a season, he
declined the many urgent invitations which were then pressing upon him
for lectures elsewhere, and returned to his family at Low Hampton. From
that place he wrote as follows:—

                                               “‘SEPTEMBER 30, 1844.

    “‘DEAR BROTHER:—I am once more at home, worn down with the
    fatigue of my journey, my strength so exhausted and my bodily
    infirmities so great that I am about concluding I shall never
    be able again to labor in the vineyard as heretofore. I wish
    now to remember with gratitude all those who have assisted me
    in my endeavors to awaken the church and arouse the world to a
    sense of their awful danger.

    “‘I pray God, my brethren and sisters, that you may receive
    a reward in this life of a hundred fold, and, in the world
    to come, eternal life. Many of you have sacrificed much—your
    good names, former associations, flattering prospects in life,
    occupation, and goods; and with me you have received scorn,
    reproach, and scandal from those whom it was our souls’ desire
    to benefit. Yet not one of you _to whom my confidence has ever
    been given_, has, to my knowledge, murmured or complained. You
    have cheerfully endured the cross, despised the shame, and with
    me are looking for and expecting the King in all his glory.
    This is to me a cause of gratitude to God. May he preserve you
    unto the end. There have been _deceivers_ among us, but God has
    preserved me from giving them _my confidence_ to deceive or
    betray....

                                                  “‘WILLIAM MILLER.’




CHAPTER XVI.

    THE SEVENTH MONTH MOVEMENT—DISAPPOINTMENT—THE NOBLEMAN AND HIS
    SERVANTS—NEED OF PATIENCE—CONFERENCE AT LOW HAMPTON—ETC.


“For a few months previous to this time, the attention of some had been
directed to the tenth day of the seventh month of the current Jewish
year, as the probable termination of several prophetic periods. This
was not generally received with favor by those who sympathized with Mr.
Miller, till a few weeks previous to the time designated, which, on that
year, following the reckoning of the Caraite Jews, fell on the 22d day of
October. Mr. Miller had, a year and a half previous, called attention to
the seventh month[26] as an important one in the Jewish dispensation;
but as late as the date of his last letter (September 30, 1844,) he had
discountenanced the positiveness with which some were then regarding it.
On the 6th of October he was first led to favor the expectation which
pointed to that month, and thus wrote: ‘If Christ does not come within
twenty or twenty-five days, I shall feel twice the disappointment I did
in the spring.’

“About the same time, also, the belief in the given day was generally
received. There were exceptions, but it is the duty of the impartial
historian to record the fact that those who had embraced the views of
Mr. Miller did, with great unanimity, heartily and honestly believe that
on a given day they should behold the coming of the King of glory.

“The world cannot understand how that could be; and many who professed
the name of Christ, have spoken contemptuously of such an expectation.
But those who in sincerity love the Saviour, can never feel the least
emotion of contempt for such a hope. The effect on those entertaining
this belief is thus described by Mr. Miller, in a letter dated October
11, 1844:—

    “‘I think I have never seen among our brethren such _faith_
    as is manifested in the seventh month. “He will come,” is the
    common expression. “He will not tarry the second time,” is
    their general reply. There is a forsaking of the world, an
    unconcern for the wants of life, a general searching of heart,
    confession of sin, and a deep feeling in prayer for Christ
    to come. A preparation of heart to meet him seems to be the
    labor of their agonizing spirits. There is something in this
    present waking up different from anything I have ever before
    seen. There is no great expression of joy: that is, as it were,
    suppressed for a future occasion, when all Heaven and earth
    will rejoice together with joy unspeakable and full of glory.
    There is no shouting; that, too, is reserved for the shout
    from Heaven. The singers are silent: they are waiting to join
    the angelic hosts, the choir from Heaven. No arguments are
    used or needed: all seem convinced that they have the truth.
    There is no clashing of sentiments: all are of one heart and
    of one mind. Our meetings are all occupied with prayer, and
    exhortation to love and obedience. The general expression is,
    “Behold, the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him.” Amen.
    Even so come, Lord Jesus.

                                                  “‘WILLIAM MILLER.’

“The natural heart would be unable to realize that any emotion, but that
of fear and dread, could fill the minds of those thus believing. But when
the secrets of the great day shall be made known, it will be seen that
the coming of Christ was ardently desired by them, and that their hearts
were filled with a holy joy, while they were subdued by awe, as standing
in the presence of the Governor of the universe. The state of mind thus
produced was a great moral spectacle, upon which those who participated
in it will ever look back with pleasure, and without regret.

“The time immediately preceding the 22d of October was one of great
calmness of mind and of pleasurable expectation on the part of those
who regarded that point of time with interest. There was a nearness of
approach to God, and a sweetness of communion with him, to which those
who experienced it will ever recur with pleasure. During the last ten
days, secular business was, for the most part, suspended; and those who
looked for the advent gave themselves to the work of preparation for that
event, as they would for death, were they on a bed of sickness expecting
soon to close their eyes on earthly scenes forever.

“There were some cases of extravagance, as there have been in all
great movements; and it would have been strange had there not been.
But the published accounts of these were greatly exaggerated, and
hundreds of reports had no foundation in fact. All reports respecting
the preparation of ascension robes, &c., and which are still by many
believed, were demonstrated over and over again to be false and
scandalous. In the investigation of the truth of such, no labor and
expense was spared; and it became morally certain that _no instance of
the kind anywhere occurred_.

“The most culpable incident, which had any foundation in fact, was in
Philadelphia. In opposition to the earnest expostulations of Mr. Litch
and other judicious persons, a company of about one hundred and fifty,
responding to the pretended vision of one C. R. Georgas, on the 21st
of October went out on the Darby-street road, about four miles from
Market-street bridge, and encamped in a field under two large tents,
provided with all needed comforts. The next morning, their faith in
Georgas’ vision having failed, all but about a dozen returned to the
city. A few days later the others returned. That was an act the report
of which was greatly exaggerated. It met the emphatic disapproval of Mr.
Miller and the Adventists generally, and its folly was promptly confessed
by the majority of those who participated in it.

“The day passed, and the expectation of the advent at that time was
proved to be premature. The friends were at first quite saddened, but
were not disheartened by the passing of the time. This was the _only_
specific _day_ which was regarded by intelligent Adventists with any
positiveness. There were other days named by those whose opinions were
received with no favor; but their unauthorized declarations should not be
imputed to the body.

“The fact that many suspended their business for a few days was censured
by opponents; but it was only acting consistently with their faith,
opponents being judges. Dr. Dowling, a celebrated Baptist clergyman in
New York city, in a review of Mr. Miller, used this strong language:—

    “‘Were this doctrine of Mr. Miller established upon evidence
    satisfactory to my own mind, I would not rest till I had
    published in the streets, and proclaimed in the ears of my
    fellow-townsmen, and especially of my beloved flock, “The day
    of the Lord is at hand! Build no more houses! Plant no more
    fields and gardens! Forsake your shops and farms, and all
    secular pursuits, and give every moment to preparation for this
    great event! for in three short years this earth shall be burnt
    up, and Christ shall come in the clouds, awake the sleeping
    dead, and call the living before his dread tribunal.”’

“In the first communication received from Mr. Miller after this time, he
wrote from Low Hampton, Nov. 10, 1844:—

    “‘DEAR BRO. HIMES:—I have been waiting and looking for the
    blessed hope, and in expectation of realizing the glorious
    things which God has spoken of Zion. Yes, and although I have
    been twice disappointed, I am not yet cast down or discouraged.
    God has been with me in Spirit, and has comforted me. I have
    now much more evidence that I do believe in God’s word; and
    although surrounded with enemies and scoffers, yet my mind
    is perfectly calm, and my hope in the coming of Christ is as
    strong as ever. I have done only what after years of sober
    consideration I felt it to be my solemn duty to do. If I have
    erred, it has been on the side of charity, the love of my
    fellow-man, and my conviction of duty to God. I could not see
    that I should harm my fellow-men, even supposing the event
    should not take place at the time specified, for it is a
    command of our Saviour to look for it, watch, expect it, and
    be ready. Then if I could by any means, in accordance with
    God’s word, persuade men to believe in a crucified, risen,
    and coming Saviour, I felt it would have a bearing on the
    everlasting welfare and happiness of such. I had not a distant
    thought of disturbing our churches, ministers, religious
    editors, or departing from the best biblical commentaries
    or rules which had been recommended for the study of the
    Scriptures. And even to this day, my opposers have not been
    able _to show_ where I have _departed from any rule laid down
    by our old standard writers of the Protestant faith_. I have
    only interpreted Scripture in accordance with their rules, as
    I honestly believed. And not one honest man, who understands
    this question, will deny this assertion of mine. But that, over
    which I could have no control, transpired to produce on the
    public mind an unhappy effect.

    “‘The public excitement commenced some six years ago. Although
    I had been proclaiming the Second Advent for six years before,
    there was not one of our churches that I visited but what
    _acknowledged the happy effects of the doctrine_; and many
    were hopefully converted, who united themselves with the
    several sects as their own judgment dictated. In 1839 and
    1840, the opposition to the doctrine began to rage, united
    with ridicule and misrepresentation. The Universalists
    commenced the contest, and were followed by every sect in
    our country. Then the brethren who loved the appearing of
    our Saviour, found themselves among opposers. And instead of
    meeting sound argument and light among their former brethren,
    they were almost universally met with scoffing, ridicule, and
    misrepresentation. Odious names and cruel epithets were applied
    to us; and in many cases our motives were impugned, and a war
    of extermination was commenced against the Advent faith. Many
    of our brethren caught a measure of this spirit, and began
    to defend themselves in like manner, against the attacks of
    the several sects. The name of “_Babylon_,” and I am sorry
    to say it, was applied to _all_ of our churches without any
    _discrimination_, although in _too many_ instances it was not
    unjustly applied. We were thus placed at the time we expected
    our deliverance; and if Christ had come and found us in this
    condition, who would have been ready, purified, and made white?
    But the time passed, and the Adventists were humbled; and thus
    we see that our God was wise and good, in the tarrying of the
    vision, to humble, purify, and prepare us for an admittance
    into his blessed kingdom.

    “‘I would now beg and pray, my brethren, that we may humble
    ourselves, avoid disputes, and enter into our chambers, and
    hide ourselves for a little while until the danger is over.
    Hold no unnecessary controversy with the despisers of our
    blessed hope, let us separate ourselves from them in very deed.
    We have thus far done all we could—and now is the time of their
    triumph, but it will be short. I am determined by the grace of
    God to follow this rule. God will fight our battles for us, and
    in due time we shall see who is the only Potentate. Now let
    patience have its perfect work. Our duty now is to comfort
    one another with these words, strengthen those that are weak
    among us, comfort the feeble, establish the wavering, raise up
    the bowed down, speak often one to another, and forsake not
    the assembling of ourselves together; let our conversation be
    in Heaven from whence we look for the Saviour, for the time
    has now come for us to live by faith, _a faith_ that is tried
    like gold seven times purified. Let us hold fast our profession
    without wrath or doubting, for he is faithful who has promised,
    and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Let us
    be careful that we become not overcharged with the things of
    this world, and so that day come upon us unawares; but know,
    brethren, that the day will not come upon you as a thief; you
    will see and know the sign of the Son of man.

    “‘I would advise you, Bro. Himes, to continue publishing
    your papers in Boston and New York. We must have a medium of
    communication with one another, so that amid the moral darkness
    which has shrouded the people on the prophecies, we may have
    light in all our dwellings. This cannot be far from the time.
    I feel confident that God will justify his word, and the time
    which we have preached; for we cannot have varied far from the
    truth in our own views of the seven times, the 2300 days, the
    1335 days, the trumpets, &c.

    “‘_Brethren_, hold fast; let no man take your crown. I have
    fixed my mind upon another time, and here I mean to stand until
    God gives me more light—and that is _To-day_, TO-DAY, and
    TO-DAY, until he comes, and I see HIM for whom my soul yearns.
    Permit me to illustrate by parable.

    “‘A certain nobleman about taking a long journey, called
    together his servants, gave instructions to every one
    respecting their work, and commanded them to be faithful in
    their several occupations; and at his return, he would reward
    every one as his work should be. He also informed them how many
    days he should be absent; but the time of night when he should
    return, he did not make known; yet, if they would watch, they
    should know when he was near, even at the door. And he informed
    them how they might know. They would first see the lights of
    his carriage in the distance, and they would hear the rumbling
    of his carriage wheels, and go out to meet him, and open the
    portal gates for him immediately. Whether he should come in
    the first, second, third, or fourth watch, he would not then
    inform them; but commanded them to watch. After he was gone,
    many of the servants began to neglect their master’s business,
    and to form plans for their own amusement. Thus engaged, the
    days appointed for their master’s return were forgotten. The
    giddy whirl of dissipation had filled their mind, and time
    passed rapidly along; and the days were nearly run out when
    some of the servants discovered in the steward’s book the
    number of days recorded when their master should return. This
    was immediately read in the hearing of the servants, and
    created no small excitement among them. Some said the time was
    not revealed, because the master said the watch was not known.
    Others said the master would never return, he would send his
    principal servant, and then they would have a feasting time to
    their own liking.

    “‘Thus they were wrangling and disputing until the days,
    according to the best reckoning they could make, had run
    out, and the night came, in which some of them expected him.
    The porter, and a few others determined to watch, while the
    remainder of the servants were feasting and drinking. The
    porter and his companions kept a good lookout; for, at the
    first watch, they expected their master. They thought they saw
    the light and heard the rumbling of the wheels. They ran among
    the servants, and cried, “Behold, the master cometh.” This
    caused no small stir among them, and many made preparation for
    their master’s return. But it proved to be a false alarm. Then
    those servants ridiculed the porter and his friends for their
    _fears_ as _they_ called it, and returned to their feasting
    again. But the porter and his friends were still vigilant
    until the second watch, when they were again disappointed, and
    the servants were more vexed than ever. They now scoffed, and
    mocked, and then turned some of them out of doors. Again they
    waited for the third watch, and again they were disappointed.
    Now the majority of the servants, being more angry than ever,
    beat and bruised the porter and his friends, and turned them
    all out of the house, locked the doors, and laid themselves
    down to sleep. At the fourth watch the master came, and found
    the porter and a few of his companions watching. The doors were
    barred and the remainder of the servants were asleep.

    “‘Now let me ask, Will the master condemn the porter and his
    friends for making three false alarms? Will he punish them
    for disturbing their carousing brethren? Which of these two
    classes of servants will have shown the most love for their
    master? Let every one answer to himself these questions, and
    decide his own case justly. Our former brethren say they
    _watch_, but do not expect him.

    “‘Bro. Himes, give us the signification of the word WATCH.
    Yours as ever, looking, &c.

                                                      “‘WM. MILLER.’

Again Mr. Miller wrote on the 18th of November from Low Hampton:—

    “‘DEAR BRO. HIMES: Be _patient_, establish your heart, for
    the coming of the Lord draweth nigh. For you have need of
    _patience_, that, after ye have done the will of God, ye
    might receive the promise. For yet a little while and he that
    shall come will come and will not tarry. This is the time
    for _patience_, it is the last trial the dear Second Advent
    brethren are to experience. For this will carry us to the
    coming of the Lord. “Be patient, therefore, brethren, unto
    the coming of the Lord.” James 5:7. This is the way God will
    sanctify his host. Now there will be a great falling away,
    for the want of this grace, _patience_. But all that endure
    this last trial unto the end, the same shall be saved. 2 Pet.
    1:4-11. As our father Abraham did, who hoped against hope, and
    so after he had _patiently_ endured, he obtained the promise.
    It is evident as the sun at noon that we are in this time of
    _patience_. We have done the will of God in this thing. We
    have written the vision and made it plain, we have run all
    our published time out, and the world say that “every vision
    faileth,” and therefore we have now need of _patience_, to wait
    unto the coming of the Holy One. Then let us have _patience_,
    and exercise it; for we can see, this trial will bring _joy_
    and the hope of _glory_. Rom. 5:2-5. “Blessed is the man that
    endureth temptation; for when he is tried, he shall receive the
    crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love
    him.” James 1:12. Hearken, then, my brother, is not the trial
    of our faith more precious than gold? and shall we not stand
    in this last trial of our faith by _patience_? “For whatsoever
    things were written aforetime, were written for our learning,
    that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might
    have hope. Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to
    be like-minded one toward another according to Christ Jesus.”
    Rom. 15:4, 5. Then whatever was written, was for our example
    who live in this our last day; let us then through _patience_
    have hope. “Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
    appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ.” Titus
    2:13.

    “‘We have done our work in warning sinners, and in trying to
    awake a formal church. God, in his providence, has shut the
    door;[27] we can only stir one another up to be _patient_,
    and be diligent to make our calling and election sure. We are
    now living in the time specified by Malachi 3:18; also Daniel
    12:10; Rev. 22:10-12. In this passage we cannot help but see
    that, a little while before Christ should come, there would be
    a separation between the just and unjust, the righteous and
    wicked, between those who love his appearing and those who hate
    it. And never since the days of the apostles has there been
    such a division line drawn as was drawn about the 10th or 23d
    day of the 7th Jewish month. Since that time, they say, “they
    have no confidence in us.”

    “‘We have need of _patience_ after we have done the will of
    God, that we may receive the promise; for he says, “Behold,
    I come _quickly_, to reward every one as his work shall be.”
    You may inquire, how long quickly means. The false-hearted
    professor will tell you it may mean ages upon ages yet to come;
    but the real lover of Christ will _hope_ it is _near_. Christ
    has told us how near. Matt. 24:32, 33. Again, the apostle James
    has told us that we are to have _patience_, for it is nigh.
    He then tells us that the husbandman waiteth for the precious
    fruit of the earth, and hath long _patience_ for it, until
    he receive the early and latter rain. How long then does the
    husbandman wait? The former rains, in Judea, fell after the
    autumnal equinox, at their seed time, to quicken the grain;
    and the latter rains, after the vernal equinox, to insure a
    plentiful crop. [_Carpenter’s Introduction_, p. 334.] “Be ye
    also _patient_; stablish your hearts; for the coming of the
    Lord draweth nigh.” How nigh? It cannot be seen, by the reading
    of the passage, that we are to be in this _patient_ waiting for
    his coming, after we have done the will of God, sown the seed,
    given the midnight cry, longer; and it may be much less than
    the husbandman waited. Therefore let us stablish our hearts, be
    determined to go forward, let us not look back, “Remember Lot’s
    wife.”

    “‘I think the event for which we look cannot be afar off. I
    know of no rule by which we can fix on any day or hour. But
    Christ tells us we may know when it is near even at the door.
    James 5:9, tells us, when this time of _patient waiting_ comes,
    then, “Behold, the Judge standeth before the door.” I feel
    as confident as ever that God will justify us in fixing the
    year. And I believe as firmly that this Jewish year will not
    terminate before this wicked and corrupted earth’s history will
    all be told. The amount of scoffing and mocking at the present
    time is beyond any calculation. We can hardly pass a man,
    professor or non-professor, but what he scoffingly inquires,
    “You have not gone up,” or “God cannot burn the world,” &c.,
    ridiculing the Bible itself, and blaspheming the word and power
    of God. And yet ministers and moral editors wink at it. And
    some of them are performing the same, to the no small joy of
    the most depraved characters in the community.

    “‘If this is not a sign of the last day, we are sure never to
    see fulfilled 2 Pet. 3:3, 4, “Knowing this first, that there
    shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own
    lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for
    since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they
    were from the beginning of the creation;” nor Jude 18, “How
    that they told you there should be mockers in the last time,
    who should walk after their own ungodly lusts.” I pity the
    inhabitants who may live in an age of the world that is worse
    than this. I cannot believe this earth will ever again be so
    cursed. Where are our moral judges and rulers? Has virtue fled
    from the earth? and is there no fear of God in all the land?

    “‘Come, Lord Jesus, oh! come quickly, or we shall be as when
    God overthrew the cities of the plain, like unto Sodom and
    Gomorrah. Where are the watchmen upon the walls of Zion? Can
    the sign of Peter and Jude be fulfilled before their eyes,
    and they not see it? Do they not know that one sign plainly
    fulfilled is proof enough? for God is not man that he should
    lie, nor is like unto the sons of men that he should be
    mistaken. I would beg to know what could be called _scoffing_
    and _mocking_, if the conduct of all classes of men opposing
    the Second Advent doctrine is not. Paul tells us, 1 Thess.
    4:17, “Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up
    together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air;
    and so shall we ever be with the Lord.” And some are tauntingly
    inquiring, “Have you not gone up?” Even little children in the
    streets are shouting continually to passers-by, “Have you a
    ticket to go up?” The public prints, of the most fashionable
    and popular kind, in the great Sodoms of our country, are
    caricaturing in the most shameful manner the “white robes of
    the saints,” Rev. 6:11, the “going up,” and the great day of
    “burning.” Even the pulpits are desecrated by the repetition
    of scandalous and false reports concerning the “ascension
    robes,” and priests are using their powers and pens to fill the
    catalogue of scoffing in the most scandalous periodicals of the
    day. England and France, with their sinks of pollution, London
    and Paris, cannot, will not, and dare not, compete with our
    Boston, New York, or Philadelphia, in scoffing. If these will
    not open the eyes of our good men in these cities, then I shall
    believe there is none there. And at any rate, the world must
    and will be burned up, and few men left. Adieu, my brother, I
    am _patiently waiting_ for my King, &c.

                                                      “‘WM. MILLER.’

On the 29th of November he wrote to Eld. I. E. Jones, which appears in
the _Advent Herald_ for Dec. 25, 1844:—

    “‘DEAR BRO. JONES.—Yours of the 23d inst. was received
    yesterday, and I am now seated to answer it. The disappointment
    which we have experienced, in my opinion, could never have been
    foreseen or avoided, and we have been honest men and believed
    in the truth of the Bible. I have had time a few weeks past
    to review the whole subject, and with all the aid of Stuart,
    Chase, Weeks, Bush, and the whole school of modern writers, I
    cannot see why we are not right. And even by taking the whole
    together, instead of disproving the position we have taken, as
    it respects prophecy, they confirm me in my views. But, say
    you, time has shown we are wrong. I am not so certain of that.
    Suppose Christ should come before this year of Jewish time
    should expire. Then every honest man would say we were right.
    But if the world does stand two, or even three, years more, it
    would not in the least alter the manner of the prophecy, but
    would affect the time. One thing I do know, I have preached
    nothing but what I believed, and God’s hand has been with me,
    his power has been manifested in the work, and much good has
    been effected; for people have read the Bible for themselves,
    and no one can honestly say that they have been deceived by me.
    My advice has always been for every one to study the evidences
    of their faith for themselves.

    “‘Again, I can see no object that Satan could have in
    publishing a doctrine which his own subjects would so generally
    oppose. No one can possibly plead that those who have excited
    the mobs, or the mobs themselves who have committed violence,
    were obeying the example or spirit of Christ. This would be
    blasphemy in the highest sense. Very well; then Satan would be
    opposing Satan, but on the part of the Adventists, Satan would
    be a non-resistant. Can this be true? If it is, then I have no
    rule by which to judge where the Spirit of Christ may be known.
    To tell us that those who have headed the most violent mobs in
    our country were performing the will of God, is an insult to
    common sense. Yet in no case have the nominal churches dealt
    with their brethren for such an offense.

    “‘It cannot be that we are deceived. That Christ will come and
    justify us yet I will not doubt. Our meetings are like yours,
    sweet and heavenly refreshings from the presence and Spirit of
    God, with no wicked to molest us; they have left us entirely.
    For some time in October they crowded our house night and day;
    but now “there is room enough.” The trap is laid for them,
    they appear to know that Christ will never come. They that
    were crying for mercy a few days since, are now scoffing and
    mocking us, and ridiculing each others’ fears. Even some old
    professors are worse than the world. Have not such individuals
    sinned against the Holy Ghost? And when they say, Peace and
    safety, will not sudden destruction overtake them? While the
    wicked were thus expecting him, how could the Scriptures have
    been all fulfilled if he had come? They could not. But now they
    are ready for the snare, and out of their own mouths will God
    judge them; for they well knew they were unprepared, and the
    way they knew, or why were they so anxious for mercy? But when
    the danger was past, all of their preparation was over.

    “‘I feel confident that we shall see very serious times. We
    shall _need_ much _patience_. And this peculiar grace will
    last us through, “_unto the coming of the LORD_.” I am almost
    certain we shall not need _patience_ longer than the farmer
    waits for the precious fruits of the earth, and hath long
    patience for it until he receive the early and latter rain.
    But I will try to be _patient_. James 5:7-11. To whom did the
    apostle address himself in his exhortation? To what age of the
    church? To that age where the coming of the Lord draweth nigh,
    and the Judge standeth at the door. Why did he caution them
    to be patient? Because he supposed they would be impatient
    to have the Lord come. Is there any sign among our nominal
    churches and sects, that they are impatient for Christ to
    come? No, evidently it is the reverse; they desire him not to
    come. Then if the Judge standeth at the door, are they not
    James’ brethren? No. Will you tell me who are James’ brethren
    in this age? They are those who are converted from Judaism and
    scattered. Chap. 1:1-4. They ask wisdom of God, in faith, not
    wavering. Verses 5 and 6. The poor among them are exalted, and
    the rich are made low. Verses 9 and 10. They endure temptation
    without wavering, and after their trial are blessed with a
    crown of life. Verse 12. They are begotten of God with his work
    of truth, and doers as well as hearers of the word. Verses
    18-22. They have forsaken creeds, and look and continue in the
    law of liberty. Verse 25. They visit the afflicted and have no
    fellowship with the world. Verse 27.

    “‘They must not countenance nor support war, for that cometh
    from lust. Chap. 4:1-3. They must not have respect to the rich,
    and despise the poor; for that is judging unrighteously. Chap.
    2:1-10. They must show their faith by their works, and have no
    boasting where their works are not made manifest. Verses 14-26.
    They must not strive to be masters or rulers of their brethren,
    and have but few D. Ds. or A. Ms. among them. James 3:1-12.
    They must have no envying or striving against the truth, and be
    possessed of that wisdom which cometh down from above. Verses
    13-18. They are to humble themselves and speak no evil of the
    brethren. Chap. 4:10-17. They are to cry unto the Lord in their
    afflictions and persecutions and make no resistance. Chap.
    5:4-6. They will stablish their hearts in faith by patience,
    and grieve not the brethren. Verses 7-9. They will take the
    prophets for their example, and remember that the end of Job’s
    trials from the Lord was his patience. Verses 10 and 11. They
    will not swear nor take any oath. Verse 12. If afflicted, they
    will pray; if merry, sing; if they are sick, call for the
    elders to pray, and if they sin, confess their faults; and if
    others sin, restore if possible. Verses 13-20.

    “‘And now, my brother, if you can find such a band, they are
    the apostle’s brethren. Say to such, “Be _patient_ therefore,
    brethren, unto the coming of the Lord, be ye also _patient_;
    stablish your hearts; for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh.”
    Read this to all the _holy brethren_; for it is the best and
    only advice I can give them; and tell them I request their
    prayers, that I may follow the same advice; for their prayers
    are better to me than the world’s love, and much more to be
    desired than a good name from those who hate my King. I ask no
    favors of Cæsar’s household, but that I may enjoy in peace my
    blessed hope. I have never courted the smiles of the proud, nor
    quailed when the world frowned. I shall not now purchase their
    favor; nor shall I go beyond duty to tempt their hate. I shall
    never seek my life at their hands; nor shrink, I hope, from
    losing it, if God in his good providence so orders. I thank
    God for your steadfastness in the truth, and pray him that you
    may endure unto the end. I remain as ever looking for, and
    expecting the King in his glory soon.

                                                        WM. MILLER.’

Again Mr. Miller writes for the _Herald_, Dec. 3, 1844:—

    “‘DEAR BRN. HIMES AND BLISS.—I cannot sit down to write
    without the reflection that this letter may never reach its
    destination. Yet I believe in occupying until Christ shall
    come. Therefore, I still feel it to be my duty to occasionally
    drop you a line, to let you know how my soul prospers, and
    how my faith holds out. As it respects the soul, I have never
    enjoyed more calmness of mind, nor more resignation to the holy
    will of God, and patience of spirit, than I have within a few
    weeks past. My soul, I think, is stayed on God and I enjoy
    peace like a river. For years past I have often had a spirit of
    impatience for Christ to come, and I have felt grieved in soul
    because I found in my heart so much of what I called a spirit
    of fretfulness and a mind full of impatience. But I bless God I
    have had but little of that recently. I have had great reason
    to thank God for his abundant goodness in this respect. My
    _faith_ is stronger than ever; and this is somewhat remarkable,
    when I reflect on the disappointment I have met in my former
    expectations. But here, too, I see the good hand of God in my
    strength of faith.

    “‘I have read with much interest and great satisfaction your
    “Address to the Adventists.” And I am perfectly satisfied it is
    the right ground for you to take. I believe the ground we have
    formerly stood upon, as it regards the chronology of prophecy,
    is the only ground we can take; and if the defect is in human
    chronology, then no human knowledge is sufficient in this age
    to rectify it, with any degree of certainty; and I see no good
    that can be accomplished by taking a stand for any future
    period, with less evidence than we had for 1843-4. For those
    who would not believe, with the evidence we then produced, we
    cannot expect will now believe with much less testimony.

    “‘Again it is to me almost a demonstration that God’s hand is
    seen in this thing. Many thousands, to all human appearance,
    have been made to study the Scriptures by the preaching of the
    time; and by that means, through faith and the sprinkling of
    the blood of Christ, have been reconciled to God. And those of
    us who have been familiar with the fruits and effects of the
    preaching of this doctrine, must acknowledge that he has been
    with us in so doing, and his wisdom has in a great measure
    marked out our path, which he has devised for such good as he
    will accomplish in his own time and manner; as in the case of
    Ninevah by the preaching of Jonah. If this should be the real
    state of the case, and we should go on to set other times in
    the future, we might possibly be found frustrating, or trying
    to, at least, the purposes of God, and receive no blessing. I
    think my brethren will all admit that God has been in the work,
    and he has tried our faith in the best possible manner. The
    vision has been made plain on tables. We have had a tarrying
    time. And now we are having our time of patience unto the
    coming of the Lord. Then I say, Let patience have its perfect
    work. I have great hope, and a good confidence. I think I may
    safely say that the Lord will make his appearance yet before
    this Jewish year shall terminate. And if so, and we should be
    looking for years to come, we should not do well. Therefore,
    the only safe measure for me to pursue, under the best light
    I can now get, is to keep what light I have burning, and look
    and expect him every day until he comes. This is my present
    position, and the greatest danger which those are in who take
    this position, will be the loss of patience and a neglect of
    watching and prayer. To remedy this, I would advise that we
    keep ourselves as much as possible from worldly associations,
    vain and trifling conversation, wrangling or disputing on any
    subject; and when we do hold conversation, let it be with those
    whose conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for the
    Saviour. And when we pray, remember God hears every word, and
    knows every motive which dictates our prayers; and be sure that
    we be honest before God.

    “‘If the experience which we have passed through, from the
    beginning of the present year,—the tarrying time from April
    until October and the sanctifying influence of the seventh
    month, with the humiliation and patience of those who are
    evidently looking for the redemption of the true Israel,—is
    not the beginning and preparation of the final _cleansing of
    the sanctuary_, then I will acknowledge I am deceived. The
    great fault with us who have been expounding the time of the
    fulfillment of prophecy, is, we have crowded all these things
    into a very unwarrantable short space of time, we have given no
    time for preparation, we were too impatient. Therefore, we are
    exhorted to be patient, and James says, “The Judge standeth at
    the door.” I am fully convinced the work has already begun. Let
    us then have patience, brethren, from this time until he comes;
    for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh.

    “‘We have erred in many things, and even the second advent
    brethren were not prepared for the coming of Christ; they had,
    many of them, left the work of the Lord, and had been doing
    their own work. The work of the Lord, which he had commanded us
    to do, was to make the vision plain, to write it on tables, to
    give the alarm, the midnight cry, and wake up the virgins; and
    while these things, and these things only were attended to, our
    work prospered, and God was with us. And now, my dear brethren,
    permit me to be plain: I hope all who are worth saving are
    humble enough to bear my reproof, and I mean to give it with
    the sincerest of motives, and with the kindest affection of my
    heart.

    “‘The causes which required God’s chastising hand upon
    us, were, in my humble opinion, PRIDE, FANATICISM, and
    SECTARIANISM. _Pride_ worked in many ways. We ascribed our
    conquest in argument over our opponents to ourselves. We
    were seeking the honors or applause of men more than of God.
    We were some of us seeking to be leaders, instead of being
    servants—boasting too much of our doings. And _Fanaticism_:
    I know our enemies accused of this before we were guilty;
    but this did not excuse us for running into it. A thousand
    expressions were used, without thought or reflection, and I
    thought sometimes very irreverently, such as, “Bless God,” &c.
    I was afraid it was done in very many cases to the appearance
    of outward piety, rather than as the hidden manna of the
    heart. Sometimes our meetings were distinguished by noise and
    confusion, and, forgive me, brethren, if I express myself too
    strongly, it appeared to me more like Babel than a solemn
    assembly of penitents bowing in humble reverence before a holy
    God. I have often obtained more evidence of inward piety from a
    _kindling eye_, a _wet cheek_, and a _choked utterance_, than
    from all the _noise_ in Christendom. _Sectarianism_: this is
    always produced by some private opinion of man, rather than by
    the plain declaration of God’s word. For years after I began
    to proclaim this blessed truth of Christ at the door, I never,
    if possible to avoid it, even alluded to sectarian principles;
    and the first objection my Baptist brethren brought against me,
    was, I mixed with, and preached unto, all denominations, even
    to Unitarians, &c. But we have recently, my brethren, been
    guilty of raising up a sect of our own; for, the very things
    which our fathers did, when they became sects, we have been
    doing. We have, like them, cried Babylon! Babylon!! Babylon!!!
    against _all but Adventists_. We have proclaimed and discussed,
    “pro et con,” many sectarian dogmas which have nothing to do
    with our message. May God forgive us. And now, brethren, we
    have need of patience, that after we have done the will of God,
    we may receive the promise. Yours as ever,

                                                      “‘WM. MILLER.’

On the 28th and 29th of December, 1844, a Conference was held at Low
Hampton, where the following address, prepared by Bro. Miller at the
request of the brethren, was presented by a committee, and unanimously
adopted by the Conference:—

    “‘ADDRESS TO ADVENT BELIEVERS.

    “_To the dear Second Advent brethren, scattered abroad_:
    despised, but not forsaken; poor, yet making many rich;
    discarded by the proud Pharisees of our day, yet not
    discouraged; cruelly treated for the doctrine you love, and yet
    holding firmly to your hope of salvation at the door.

    “‘We the undersigned, partakers of the same hope, children of
    the same faith, looking for the same deliverance, loving the
    same Lord, feeding on the same word, enjoying the same Spirit,
    suffering the same trials, subjected to like disappointments,
    and having the same care and fellowship for your welfare and
    furtherance in the truth, as ye have one for another and for
    us, address you by this our epistle, in the way of consolation
    and advice; knowing that while we may comfort and console your
    hearts, we are establishing and strengthening our own. For if
    through many disappointments, temptations and trials, you stand
    fast in the faith once delivered to the saints, we rejoice in
    your steadfastness, are comforted together with you, and are
    strengthened even in the inner and the outer man.

    “‘We thank God always on your behalf, when we hear, as we
    already have heard, that your and our late disappointment has
    produced in you, and we hope in us also, a deep humiliation and
    close inspection of our hearts; and although we are humbled,
    and in some measure pained in our hearts to see and hear the
    scoffs and jeers of a wicked and perverse generation, yet we
    are in nowise terrified or cast down by the adversaries of our
    faith. We pray you, then, brethren, to “let patience have its
    perfect work,” knowing “that patience worketh experience, and
    experience hope, and hope maketh not ashamed.” No, we are not
    ashamed, for we all know why we hope. You can and will, all
    of you, from the least of you to the greatest, old or young,
    when inquired of for the reason of your hope, open your Bibles
    and with meekness and fear show the inquirer why you hope in
    the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus
    Christ. You need not in a single instance refer the inquirer to
    your minister to give the reason of your faith and hope.

    “‘We bless God for you, my brethren, that you are all taught
    of the Lord. Your creed is the Scriptures; your spelling-book
    is the Bible; your grammar is the word indited by the Spirit;
    your geography respects the promised inheritance of the holy
    land; your astronomy respects the bright starry crown of
    righteousness; your philosophy is the wisdom which cometh down
    from God; your bond of union is the love and fellowship of the
    saints; your teacher is the Holy Ghost; and your professor, the
    Lord Jesus Christ; your recitation room is your closet; your
    recitations are heard in your prayers, and your songs fill up
    your vacations. We speak not of rewards, diplomas, and degrees,
    for these are reserved in Heaven for us, when these dusty walls
    of this tabernacle shall be dissolved, and we are called home
    into the new heavens and new earth, to a full fruition of that
    hope of which we are not ashamed. Ashamed of this hope? No.
    Ashamed of looking for this hope? No. Ashamed of expecting
    Jesus? Why, what a question!! When we look, do we not expect?
    The ministers of our formal churches, some of them, say “they
    look, but do not expect.” Yet, brethren, we have expected time
    and again and have been disappointed, but are not ashamed.

    “‘We would not yield a hair’s breadth of our expectations for
    all the honors of Cæsar’s household, with all the popular
    applause of a worldly church. We exhort you, then, by all the
    love and fellowship of the saints, to hold fast to this hope.
    It is warranted by every promise of the word of God. It is
    secured to you by the two immutable things, the _council_ and
    _oath_ of God, in which it is impossible for God to lie. It
    is ratified and sealed by the death, blood, resurrection and
    life of Jesus Christ. You have already had a foretaste of the
    bliss of this hope, in the seventh month, when every moment you
    looked for the heavens to open and reveal unto your anxious
    gaze the King of glory. Yes, then your whole soul was ravished
    with a holy joy, when you expected every moment to hear the
    shout of the heavenly host descending from the Father’s glory,
    to welcome you, a weary pilgrim, to your blessed abode of
    eternal rest. In that eventful period where was the world with
    all its vain allurements and empty show? It was gone.

    “‘If our Saviour then had come as we expected, no tears would
    have fallen for a receding world, nor sighs have heaved
    our breasts for a dissolving earth, with all its pomp, its
    pleasures, or its praises. All this was then no more to us
    than is a bubble in Niagara’s cataract. God’s goodness gave us
    then a slight repast, like Elijah’s meat, that lasted forty
    days. And how can you, or we, give up a hope so full of joy,
    of holy love and heavenly anticipation, as is this? The world
    may frown and scoff; the unbelieving church may laugh and
    sneer and try to call us back. They may and will report their
    slanderous tales to complete our trials, vainly supposing they
    can wound our pride, and by this means take away our hope, and
    make us, like themselves, a whited sepulcher. In all our trials
    those who have obtained this blessed hope by the study of the
    Scriptures have remained steadfast and immovable among the
    scoffs and jeers with which we have been assailed.

    “‘This, to us, is a source of great joy; and it shows
    conclusively where our faith is founded and our hope
    predicated. It is upon the sure word of prophecy, and no other
    evidence, that we rely. This is our main support, as even
    our opposers will, and do, admit; or why do they, in their
    attacks upon us, first try to show that prophecy is not to be
    understood, or if it is, that it is couched in such mystical
    and ambiguous language, that the ignorant and unlearned (as
    they are pleased to call us poor Bible students, in their
    mighty elemency) cannot comprehend its true import? Or why do
    they ridicule us as a set of fanatical, unlearned heretics,
    in trying to understand the sure word of prophecy, without
    first coming to our bishops, or themselves, to learn what the
    original text may mean? Why do they use these and similar
    arguments in order to overthrow us if they are not sensible of
    the fact that the prophecies of God’s word are our main pillar?
    Why do they, without any discrimination, try to make our sure
    word of prophecy so dark, mysterious, and incomprehensible, and
    in many instances acknowledge their own ignorance, and then
    call us heretics because we search and believe what to us looks
    clear, consistent, and harmonious with every part of God’s holy
    word? But, say they, “time has proved you in an error; unerring
    time has favored us, and proved what you say we failed to do.”

    “‘True, gentleman, time has failed us in one or two instances,
    yet you cannot show why? And as you do not show any reason for
    the failure, permit us to give ours before we take your ground
    and deny that prophecy can be understood. Every man of common
    intellect and information knows that we are dependent in some
    things on what we call human chronology for the conclusion
    of our premises as it respects _time_. Again, they well know
    that our most learned and studious writers and historians
    disagree in the chronology of the events from which we date,
    some four or five years. It is true that we who have been most
    efficient in presenting this subject before the public, have
    chosen, and we think wisely too, the earliest possible time at
    which these momentous things might be expected to transpire,
    believing that it would be infinitely better for the souls of
    our fellow-beings to come short of the time, rather than to
    pass over. And indeed, we do not see any good reason now why we
    should not have done in this matter as we have; for if we had
    looked only to the very last point of disputed time, and the
    accomplishment had come before that, or even at that time, how
    could there have been a tarrying time as the Bible predicts?

    “‘How could there have been a time for the trial of our faith
    and patience, and the purifying and sanctifying of the whole
    house of the true Israel? If we had not anticipated the time
    a little, with what propriety could the wicked scoffer and
    those who professedly belong to the house of Israel say, “The
    days are prolonged, and every vision faileth”? and what has
    God said we shall answer this rebellious house of Israel with?
    With another specified time? No. How then shall we ever silence
    their caviling and scoffing, if we can fix no future time? We
    answer, That is not our work to do. God has promised to do that
    work. Hark! and hear what the Lord saith. “I will make this
    proverb to cease, and they shall no more use it as a proverb in
    Israel.” God will perform his engagements in his own time and
    manner. We have only to believe and be patient.

    “‘But we are taunted with, “Oh! you have prolonged your
    _vision_ again and again; and you have failed every time; now
    won’t you give it up and come back to us? You are not honest
    if you will not.” When they thus call us dishonest, have we
    nothing we can say? If we altogether hold our peace, they will
    be wise in their own conceits, and go and report that they
    have shut up our mouths so that we could not say a word for
    ourselves; and thus the cause would be injured. But never fear,
    brethren; God has told you what to say; do as he bids you, and
    he will take care of the consequences. God says, “But say unto
    them, The days are at hand, and the effect of every vision.”
    See Eze. 12:21-25. So we see God has been in this thing; he
    well knew into what a straightened place we should be brought;
    he knew what the rebellious house of Israel would say, and he
    has given us the best weapon of defense.

    “‘The word of God has a sufficiency of all armor, that the
    man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good
    work. We therefore hope that none of us will try to change the
    chronology of the visions; for they must all fail in all our
    eyes; and if any vision should be so construed as to fix on
    another definite time in the future, we cannot conceive how the
    Scripture would be fulfilled, that “every vision faileth.” Let
    us then be satisfied in patiently waiting for God’s time. But
    let us be careful that we do not lay off our armor, cease our
    watching, go to sleep at our post, or be caught in a snare,
    when the Son of man shall come. It is better to be ready before
    the time, and wait a while, than not to be ready when the time
    shall come, and be lost. We exhort you then with the Lord’s
    advice, “be like men waiting for their Lord, that when he
    cometh they may open to him immediately.”

    “‘Again, we exhort you, brethren, that every one may edify, and
    be edified, that ye forsake not the assembling of yourselves
    together, as often as your situation and circumstances shall
    permit; that we may comfort and console each other in our
    trials, be established ourselves in the present truth, and our
    minds be stirred up to remember that our Judge is now standing
    at the door. How can we who have taken so great delight in
    the study of the blessed Bible, again return to the beggarly
    elements of vain philosophy and tradition of the fathers? We
    cannot sit under preaching where the Bible is discarded from
    the pulpit, except as a text-book, and the plainest passages
    of Scripture are mysticised and explained away, our hope in
    the resurrection of the body taken from us, and the kingdom of
    Heaven preached as in this state of division, persecution and
    death, and the promise of being caught up in the air, ridiculed
    by the oft-repeated slang of ascension robes. These things we
    cannot fellowship; we will not hear them repeated. We therefore
    advise you, dear brethren, to hold meetings for prayer, reading
    of the Scriptures, exhortation and singing, if you may not be
    able to obtain a lecturer or preacher. And may the Spirit of
    God bless you with his presence, and preserve you blameless
    unto his coming.

    “‘Again we exhort you, brethren, to be faithful in business.
    Let every one labor with his hands, in the several callings in
    which God has placed us, that none of us may be a burden to
    any, and that we may all of us have wherewith to communicate
    and do good, for it is more blessed to give than to receive;
    and that we may none of us give any occasion to our enemies to
    reproach us with being busybodies in other men’s matters, or as
    not providing for our own house. In thus doing we may put to
    silence the reproaches of those who are seeking every occasion
    to destroy the doctrine that we rejoice to believe. We may,
    while we are engaged in our several occupations, be fervent
    in spirit, serving the Lord. If we could not, it would be
    evidence that we were not engaged in a proper calling; or, that
    our hearts were not right with God. Paul, the great apostle
    to the Gentiles, labored with his hands, that he might not be
    chargeable to the saints; and what was duty then, will be duty
    as long as the gospel remains to be preached. And we thank God
    we have never preached any other doctrine, you yourselves being
    our judges.

    “‘We also beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord
    Jesus Christ, that ye be not led about by every spirit; but
    try the spirits. For every spirit is not of God; and it is now
    evident that there are many spirits in the earth,—even the
    three unclean spirits which are working miracles, and deceiving
    not only kings, but the whole earth. It therefore becomes us to
    be very cautious by what spirit we are led. The spirit of error
    will lead us from the truth; and the Spirit of God will lead
    us into truth. But, say you, a man may be in error, and think
    he has the truth. What then? We answer, The spirit and word
    agree. If a man judges himself by the word of God, and finds a
    perfect harmony through the whole word, then we must believe we
    have the truth; but if he finds the spirit by which he is led
    does not harmonize with the whole tenor of God’s law, or book,
    then let us walk carefully, lest we be caught in the snare
    of the devil and fall from our own steadfastness; and so be
    deceived, and lose the crown for which we are running. Let us
    follow the teachings of the apostle Paul in Titus 2:12, “That
    denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
    righteously, and godly, in this present world.” Or, as Peter
    tells us in his second epistle, chap. 3:11, “Seeing then that
    all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
    ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness.” In both
    cases the context teaches us to look for the coming of the day
    of God; or, which is the same thing, “the glorious appearing of
    the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ.”

    “‘There are a few individuals among us who are teaching that
    Christ has come, and that we were not mistaken in the time,
    but only in the manner of his coming. Let us be careful lest
    we cease from our watchfulness and so that day come upon us
    unawares. Remember that the same Jesus will come in like manner
    as they saw him ascend; and every eye shall see him, and we
    shall see him as he is, and be like him, when that day shall
    come for which we look; and then “the heavens being on fire,
    shall be dissolved, and the elements melt with fervent heat.”
    If the one can be spiritualized away, all the rest must of
    course be spiritualized in like manner; and it would make the
    whole description of the Judgment but a jumble of nonsense. We
    hope but few will be carried away by such vain trifling with
    the Bible.

    “‘If God does not mean what he says, to whom shall we go for
    instruction? Who has been his counselor? and who has set in
    the council chamber of the Almighty? Man is but grass, and the
    flower thereof fadeth. He is but of yesterday, and his life but
    a breath. “Cursed is the man who trusteth in man, and maketh
    flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the Lord.” Hold
    on then, brethren, to the sure word of prophecy, for you will
    reap soon the fruits of your faith, if you faint not.’

“January 29, 1845, by the action of an ecclesiastical council, Mr. Miller
and the majority of the church in Low Hampton were virtually separated
from the Baptist denomination. About this time Mr. Miller wrote the
following, which appeared in the _Advent Herald_ for Feb. 12, 1845:—

    “‘DEAR BRO. BLISS: I have received a number of letters
    from almost every part of the country, almost all of them
    propounding the same questions, viz., What I thought of the
    experience we had in what was denominated the seventh month?
    And also, What was my opinion concerning the closing of the
    door of mercy, or probation for sinners? To save a multiplicity
    of letters, I thought best to answer these queries through the
    _Herald_, if you should think proper.

    “‘1. The experience of the seventh month. The sympathetic and
    simultaneous movement on the minds of almost all the Second
    Advent brethren, and on many others preceding the tenth, the
    rapidity with which that sentiment was received, the general
    credence that was given to it, by nearly all of those who
    were looking for immediate redemption, the humbling effect it
    produced on the hearts and conduct of those who believed,—in
    the abandonment of all worldly objects, the sacrifice of
    earthly goods, and in many cases the total dedication of soul
    and body to God,—the deep and anxious feelings of heart which
    many of us felt, all marked its character. Then we expected
    every moment the heavens would open and reveal to us the dear
    Saviour with all his shining hosts, and we should see the
    graves open and the loved forms of our relations rising from
    their dusty beds in immortal bloom and eternal life; and we
    ourselves pass the sudden change from mortality to immortality,
    from time to eternity. Then, as we verily thought, we had bid
    adieu to this world of sin, of misery and woe, and expected
    to be ushered into the new heavens and new earth wherein
    dwelleth righteousness. Oh, blissful day! How solemn, yet
    how interesting. I hope to see another day like this, and
    literally realize what I then expected. It was a day long to be
    remembered, and I cannot account for it on any other principle
    than to suppose God’s benevolent hand and wisdom was in the
    movement....

    “‘But you ask why I do not show whether the probation of
    sinners is ended.[28] I answer, It is a close point, and if
    handled at all, it ought to be done very wisely and with
    a great deal of humility. I would not grieve, if possible
    to avoid it, one of Christ’s little ones. There is much
    sensitiveness on this point among our good brethren, therefore
    I would much rather keep my views in my own breast, if I could,
    and do right, than run the risk of hurting the oil and the
    wine. You will, therefore, permit me to give my views by the
    Scripture; and first, Dan. 12:10, “Many shall be purified,
    and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly;
    and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall
    understand.” It will be readily seen by this text, that before
    the end, the people of God must be “_purified, made white, and
    tried_.” Now if probation goes on until the last moment of
    time, how can those who are regenerated in this last moment
    have their faith and patience tried?

    “‘Again, Rev. 7:13, 14, “And one of the elders answered,
    saying unto me, What are these which are arrayed in white
    robes? and whence came they? And I said unto him, Sir, thou
    knowest. And he said to me, These are they which came out of
    great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them
    white in the blood of the Lamb.” How can it be said, that those
    made _white_ “came out of great tribulation,” if in the next
    moment after they experience the new birth, they are beyond all
    tribulation and trial? Also in the first passage, the wicked
    are to do wickedly; and _none_ of the wicked shall understand.
    Yet if _one_ of these wicked is converted after the time
    specified, then the word _none_ could not be true in fact. This
    must be in time, it cannot mean in eternity.

    “‘Zech. 13:9, “And I will bring the third part through the
    fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try
    them as gold is tried; they shall call on my name, and I will
    hear them; I will say, It is my people; and they shall say,
    The Lord is my God.” Here we learn that they are tried in this
    state, where they will need to pray.

    “‘Mal. 3:18, “Then shall ye return, and discern between the
    righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him
    that serveth him not.” When shall that test be given, which
    shall make us discern between the _righteous_ and the _wicked_?
    The answer is plain, before the day cometh that shall burn as
    an oven. For in that day no doubt could rest on any mind, who
    is who, or what is the character each individual would appear
    in.

    “‘Rev. 22:11, “He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and
    he which is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is
    righteous, let him be righteous still; and he that is holy,
    let him be holy still.” This text is perfectly plain and needs
    no comment. The 12th verse, “And behold, I come quickly; and
    my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work
    shall be,” shows that a little while before Christ comes,
    every character will be determined. “He,” that is, any _one_,
    or every _one_ who is _unjust_ or _filthy_, let him be so
    still; and so on the other hand, he that is righteous or holy,
    let them be so still. “_And behold_,” connects the sentence
    before and what follows after, and is a caution for us to take
    particular notice of the reason why they are in this peculiar
    situation or fixed state, as though the idle servants could
    have no more time to mind their day’s work, which God had given
    them in their day of probation to perform.

    “‘The eleventh hour was passed, and no chance for them to enter
    the master’s vineyard now, in this last hour. While on the
    other hand, the good servant might know that the good master
    was at the door, and he would quickly pay them their wages, and
    relieve them from their toils. See Matt. 20:1-16.

    “‘Then this agrees with St. Paul, Heb. 10:36, 37, “For ye have
    need of patience, that, after ye have done the will of God,
    ye might receive the promise. For yet a little while, and he
    that shall come will come, and will not tarry.” After we have
    done our work, we have need of patience to wait for the Master,
    “for yet a little while, and he that shall come will come,
    and will not tarry.” I did believe, and must honestly confess
    I do now, that I have done my work in warning sinners, and
    that in the seventh month. I know my feelings are no rule for
    others; therefore, let every one who feels he has a duty to do
    for sinners, let him do it. I will have no hard feelings. But
    I must be honest; when I am inquired of, I must state my own
    conviction honestly. I have done it, and given my reasons from
    the word of God. And now let me say, brethren, we will have no
    contention on this point, for we be brethren. Let every man
    be fully persuaded in his own mind, and so let them speak or
    preach, as God and their own consciences may dictate.

    “‘I have a strong expectation that Christ will come before the
    Jewish year will expire; but let us all see to it that we are
    ready every day, so that when he comes we shall not be ashamed
    before him. This letter must suffice for all those friends who
    have requested my views on the subject. My love to all who love
    our Lord Jesus Christ and pray for his kingdom.

                                                      “‘WM. MILLER.’

“The editors of the _Advent Herald_ replied to Mr. Miller’s arguments,
and contended that probation only terminated with the personal coming
of Christ. His letter, as published, gave little satisfaction to either
party. Both claimed him. To determine his actual position, Prof. N. N.
Whiting wrote him, and Mr. Miller replied as follows:—

                                      “‘LOW HAMPTON, MARCH 10, 1845.

    “‘MY DEAR BROTHER:—Your favor of the 5th was gladly received,
    and I take this early opportunity to answer your inquiries as
    far as my memory or knowledge will admit.

    “‘As it respects your first question, whether, in my judgment,
    “the time of probation came to an end on the 22d of October or
    not,” I answer, My mind was not definite on that day. But the
    experience and scenes of that month were astounding to me, and
    my mind was brought to a conclusion that God, by his invisible
    angels, was separating the two classes of men, the chaff from
    the wheat. But to say my judgment was fully convinced that it
    was closed, I must say, No. I know it is true that, in answer
    to a score of letters, making the same inquiries as yourself,
    in my letter, published in the _Herald_, of February 12, I
    gave several texts, which, to me, were evidence that, before
    Christ came, there would be a time when men would seek, knock,
    and cry, and it would not be opened; for, how sinners could or
    would knock in the eternal state, I have no means of knowing.
    The editors of the _Herald_, knowing more about the controversy
    which had begun in the ranks of the Adventists than I did or
    could, in order to prevent the mischief or harm which they
    supposed my letter might do, attached their notes, which gave
    the brethren on the other side of the question more reason to
    suppose I had taken the ground that the door was shut in the
    seventh month....

    “‘With our present light, it would be impossible for any man
    to prove that the door is shut; it can only be a conjecture,
    founded upon circumstances in the case. There are two cases
    which I will mention: one would be the cessation of the
    operation of the Spirit upon the hearts of the truly pious in
    laboring and praying for sinners; and the other must be the
    fearful looking for the fiery indignation, which, I think,
    according to the Scripture, must seize upon the hearts of
    those who have willfully rejected Christ. The hypocrite is
    given over to believe a lie, considering himself safe in his
    profession; and, consequently, the despair of some, and the
    perfect recklessness of others, and the restraint of the Holy
    Spirit being withdrawn from the minds of the impenitent, would
    immediately produce a time of trouble such as Daniel 12:1
    speaks of: “And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great
    Prince which standeth for the children of thy people; and there
    shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was
    a nation even to that same time; and at that time thy people
    shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in
    the book.” These would at least be evidences to my suspicion,
    if not to my full assurance. It was a fact, for a few days
    in the seventh month in the circle of my acquaintance, that
    the reports I heard from every quarter led me to have strong
    suspicion that we had approached the time which I cannot but
    believe we must experience before the end. I think at present
    the evidence is strong against the idea of the door being
    shut; but those brethren who have adopted the suspicion at
    least ought to be treated with a great deal of kindness. I do
    not like much I have seen published and spoken on both sides
    of the question. It is one of that kind of questions which is
    calculated to divide warm friends; for it cannot be settled
    satisfactorily but by time and experience.

    “‘The arguments, in my humble opinion, on both sides, want a
    great quantity of brotherly love to make them digest easily.
    I, then, beg and pray, my brethren, that we may let contention
    alone before it is meddled with.[29] And I now plead with those
    who have supposed the door to be shut to yield the point to our
    brethren of the opposite view; for it is evident at present
    that all the evidence is against its being now shut, if we can
    believe the reports of our brethren from different parts; and
    surely my soul will not permit me to doubt their veracity who
    have been with us as pioneers in the work of calling up the
    world to this important point of our faith, the second advent
    of Jesus. Let us be silent at least for two months, if Christ
    does not come before, and by that time I think we shall obtain
    more light; and if Christ does come, we shall not wish to be
    found contending with brethren of a like precious faith on a
    subject dependent wholly on circumstances in which we may be
    so likely to err. I do hope my advice will be heeded in this
    thing, and that we will be patient, and not grieve each other;
    for the Judge is at the door....

                                                  “‘WILLIAM MILLER.’

Writing on the 7th of April, he referred to these things as follows:—

                                       “‘LOW HAMPTON, APRIL 7, 1845.

    “‘MY DEAR BRO. HIMES: I should utterly despair of the second
    advent cause were it not evident, by its past and present
    history, that God is for us. You know, my dear brother,
    there was a time when you and I, with a few choice brethren,
    stood alone.... We acknowledged our weakness, and claimed no
    superiority over our fellows. We provoked no one to combat, and
    made no attack on the prevailing or popular institutions of the
    day; yet they began to be alarmed. Why? Because, as the people
    began to hear the foolish reports of our enemies, they became
    more and more anxious to know what these things meant....

    “‘Among the many pious who took sides with us were some of
    those uneasy, ever-changing, unstable, insubordinate, and
    self-exalted spirits, who stood ready to jump on and ride
    into notice and power the moment they saw how the case would
    go. This kind of spirits have always seized the reins of
    government, are never satisfied with their present position,
    and will change with every new moon. There are many of this
    class among us, if not of us, at the present time, who are
    trying to lead away followers after them.

    “‘This is a peculiar time. The greatest variety of fanciful
    interpretations of Scripture are now being presented by new
    luminaries, reflecting their rays of light and heat in every
    direction. Some of these are wandering stars, and some emit
    only twilight. I am sick of this everlasting changing; but, my
    dear brother, we must learn to have patience. If Christ comes
    this spring, we shall not need it long; and if he comes not, we
    shall need much more. I am prepared for the worst, and hope for
    the best. God will not forsake us, unless we forsake him....

    “‘It is a small thing to be judged of man’s judgment, says
    the apostle; so that you need not fear man. I have often been
    consigned to perdition, and yet I have a blessed hope. I often
    think, when I hear a brother judging and condemning another,
    what an excellent pope he would make. Therefore, fear them
    not; for if we judge and condemn our brother, we are making
    ourselves “judges of the law, rather than doers of the law.” ...

                                                      “‘WM. MILLER.’

We find in the _Signs of the Times_ for March 12, 1845, a statement
from Mr. Miller relative to himself and the Bible, taken from _The
Investigator_, an infidel paper published in Boston.

    “‘TO THE EDITOR OF THE INVESTIGATOR.

    “‘Sir,—Your kind offer to publish all the letters from those
    who have been converted from infidelity to Millerism, prompts
    me to give you a short account of my own conversion, which may
    enable you the better to judge what Millerism is.

    “‘When I was of age, I settled in a village where all the
    heads of the families were deists, as they were then called,
    and they put into my hands all the deistical writings of that
    age. I soon became one of them, and the consequence was, I
    denied the Bible being of divine origin, calling it a “book of
    priestcraft,” and argued that the professors of it themselves
    must, if honest, concede that it could not be from God; because
    it professed to be a revelation from God, and yet more than
    half was a mystery which could not be understood. And some
    went as far as to say we ought not to try to understand it.
    This, to my mind, was a plain and palpable contradiction. I
    therefore rejected the Bible, when I ought to have rejected
    the expounders of it. Thus, from 1804 to 1816, I was a firm,
    and, as I then thought, a consistent, opposer of the Christian
    faith. In 1816, by the grace of God, my eyes were opened to see
    the weakness and folly of my own faith, founded on nothing but
    the philosophy, assumptions and fancies of erring mortals. I
    saw a great want of evidence for a faith in these matters, more
    substantial and certain than anything I then had. I felt in my
    inmost soul that eternal consequences might hang upon my faith
    in these things, for anything to the contrary which I could
    show. I had often laughed at my Christian friends for having
    a “_blind faith_,” believing what they could not understand.
    I now saw that my faith was as _blind_ as theirs, if not more
    so, for I could prove nothing hereafter, and of course I had no
    reasonable hope.

    “‘This brought me to examine for myself the evidence of the
    Christian’s hope. I therefore laid by my former prejudices,
    prepossessions, commentators, writers, pro and con, and
    determined in my own mind to examine the Bible for myself. And
    if the Bible did prove itself to be of divine origin, I would
    believe it, let the consequences be as they might; but if it
    did not, then I would reject it and be a deist still. Then I
    began the Bible, determined in my own mind to know whether God
    or man was the author. I spent the greater part of two years
    in reading and comparing scripture with scripture, prophecy
    with history, and I had not gone half through with the reading
    of it, before I was perfectly satisfied of its divine origin.
    No mortal man, or men, could have written with such harmony,
    wisdom, and truth, without inspiration. The Bible answered all
    my inquiries, settled all my doubts, established my faith, and
    gave me hope which has been nearly or quite twenty-seven years
    an anchor to my soul. I have seen much of it fulfilled, since
    then, and I can truly say, If there is any one thing on earth
    which I love above all others, it is the Bible.

    “‘And now, sir, let me tell you, _Millerism_ is to believe,
    try to understand, love, and proclaim to others, the good news
    contained in the Bible. This is all I have ever done to call
    down the slander of the several sects which I have received. I
    can say, honestly, I have never designed to proclaim or publish
    any sentiment, word, or doctrine, but such as I found clearly
    taught in that blessed inspired volume. Let God be my judge, I
    know I believe it. And I pray God that you, my dear sir, may
    become a Millerite too.

    “‘For I believe there is no religion in our world that gives
    such a _blessed hope_ as the religion of the Bible. All others
    are dark and incomprehensible concerning a future state.
    “To be, or not to be,” was a question which the ancient
    philosophers of Greece and Rome could never settle among
    themselves. Nor all the wisdom of our modern writers were able
    to settle this important point for our hope. But you will
    acknowledge, if the Bible is the word of inspiration, then that
    point is forever settled, and we have an answer to the question
    of immortality and eternal life.

    “‘I admire your frankness and generosity as an opponent, and
    believe you are not wishing to bind men to your particular
    views or creed; but are willing to search yourself, and to let
    all others search for true light, on so important a subject as
    I think this matter is,—the truth or falsity of what I call the
    blessed Bible. I have strong hope, my dear sir, that you will
    give this subject a thorough investigation. As it respects the
    statement of Bro. Himes, if you will keep open your columns as
    fairly as you hitherto have done, you will soon be convinced
    it was not a very random shot. I am, sir, a lover of an honest
    man. Yours, &c.,

                                                      “‘WM. MILLER.’




CHAPTER XVII.

    MUTUAL CONFERENCE AT ALBANY—DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES—PLAN OF
    OPERATIONS—ADDRESS TO THE BRETHREN—ACTION OF THE CONFERENCE
    DEFENDED BY MR. MILLER, ETC.


“On the 23d of April, Mr. Miller, in company with Mr. Himes, visited
Albany, and commenced a course of lectures on the prophecies. Mr. M.
spoke with his usual clearness and ability, was in good spirits, and was
listened to by a large and respectful audience.

“On the 29th, the Conference assembled at 9 A. M., at the ‘House of
Prayer,’ in Grand street. After singing, and a prayer by Mr. Miller, it
was temporarily organized by the choice of Mr. Miller, Chairman, and Mr.
Himes, Secretary, who stated the objects for which the Conference had
been called, namely, ‘to consult together respecting the condition and
wants of brethren in the several sections of the country; that we may
be better enabled to act in concert, and with more efficiency, in the
promulgation of gospel truths.’

“After the names and residences of members were ascertained, the
Conference was fully organized by the choice of Rev. Elon Galusha, of
Lockport, N. Y., President, and S. Bliss and O. R. Fassett, Secretaries.

“A committee of twelve, consisting of William Miller, Josiah Litch, N. N.
Whiting, J. V. Himes, Sylvester Bliss, L. D. Fleming, Erastus Parker, H.
Caswell, I. R. Gates, I. H. Shipman, Prosper Powell, and Elon Galusha,
were appointed to arrange business for the action of the Conference.
While they were thus engaged, the others were profitably occupied in
listening to statements of the condition of things in different sections
of the country. The committee reported, in part, on the second day, and
in full on the third and last day of the session as follows:—

    “‘REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE TO THE CONFERENCE.

    “‘Your committee, appointed for the purpose of taking into
    consideration the great principles upon which we can unite and
    act in advancing the cause of truth, for the edification of the
    body of Christ, the salvation of souls, and the preparation of
    man for the near advent of the Saviour, submit the following
    report:—

    “‘In view of the many conflicting opinions, unscriptural views,
    leading to unseemly practices, and the sad divisions which have
    been thereby caused by some professing to be Adventists, we
    deem it incumbent on us to declare to the world our belief that
    the Scriptures teach, among others, the following

    “‘IMPORTANT TRUTHS.

    “‘1. That the heavens and earth which are now, by the word of
    God, are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of
    Judgment and perdition of ungodly men. That the day of the Lord
    will come as a thief in the night, in the which the heavens
    shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall
    melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are
    therein, shall be burned up. That the Lord will create new
    heavens and a new earth, wherein righteousness—that is, the
    righteous—will forever dwell.[30] And that the kingdom and the
    dominion under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of
    the saints of the Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting
    kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him.[31]

    “‘2. That there are but two advents or appearings of the
    Saviour to this earth.[32] That both are personal and
    visible.[33] That the first took place in the days of
    Herod,[34] when he was conceived of the Holy Ghost,[35] born
    of the Virgin Mary,[36] went about doing good,[37] suffered
    on the cross, the just for the unjust,[38] died,[39] was
    buried,[40] arose again the third day, the first-fruits of them
    that slept,[41] and ascended into the heavens,[42] which must
    receive him until the times of the restitution of all things,
    spoken of by the mouth of all the holy prophets.[43] That
    the second coming or appearing will take place when he shall
    descend from Heaven, at the sounding of the last trump, to give
    his people rest,[44] being revealed from heaven in flaming
    fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not
    the gospel.[45] And that he will judge the quick and the dead
    at his appearing and kingdom.[46]

    “‘3. That the second coming or appearing is indicated to be now
    emphatically nigh, even at the doors,[47] by the chronology of
    the prophetic periods,[48] the fulfillment of prophecy,[49]
    and the signs of the times.[50] And that this truth should
    be preached both to saints and sinners, that the first may
    rejoice, knowing their redemption draweth nigh,[51] and the
    last be warned to flee from the wrath to come,[52] before the
    Master of the house shall rise up and shut to the door.[53]

    “‘4. That the condition of salvation is repentance toward God,
    and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.[54] And that those who have
    repentance and faith will live soberly, and righteously, and
    godly, in this present world, looking for that blessed hope,
    and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour
    Jesus Christ.[55]

    “‘5. That there will be a resurrection of the bodies of all the
    dead,[56] both of the just and the unjust.[57] That those who
    are Christ’s will be raised at his coming.[58] That the rest of
    the dead will not live again until after a thousand years.[59]
    And that the saints shall not all sleep, but shall be changed
    in the twinkling of an eye at the last trump.[60]

    “‘6. That the only millennium taught in the word of God is
    the thousand years which are to intervene between the first
    resurrection and that of the rest of the dead, as inculcated in
    the 20th of Revelation.[61] And that the various portions of
    scripture which refer to the millennial state are to have their
    fulfillment after the resurrection of all the saints who sleep
    in Jesus.[62]

    “‘7. That the promise, that Abraham should be the heir of the
    world, was not to him, or to his seed, through the law, but
    through the righteousness of faith.[63] That they are not all
    Israel which are of Israel.[64] That there is no difference,
    under the gospel dispensation, between Jew and Gentile.[65]
    That the middle wall of partition that was between them is
    broken down, no more to be rebuilt.[66] That God will render
    to every man according to his deeds.[67] That if we are
    Christ’s, then are we Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to
    the promise.[68] And that the only restoration of Israel, yet
    future, is the restoration of the saints to the earth, created
    anew, when God shall open the graves of those descendants of
    Abraham who died in faith, without receiving the promise, with
    the believing Gentiles who have been grafted in with them into
    the same olive tree; and shall cause them to come up out of
    their graves, and bring them, with the living, who are changed,
    into the land of Israel.[69]

    “‘8. That there is no promise of this world’s conversion.[70]
    That the horn of papacy will war with the saints, and prevail
    against them, until the Ancient of Days shall come, and
    judgment be given to the saints of the Most High, and the
    time come that the saints possess the kingdom.[71] That the
    children of the kingdom, and the children of the wicked one,
    will continue together until the end of the world, when all
    things that offend shall be gathered out of the kingdom, and
    the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of
    their Father.[72] That the man of sin will only be destroyed
    by the brightness of Christ’s coming.[73] And that the nations
    of those which are saved and redeemed to God by the blood of
    Christ, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and
    nation, will be made kings and priests unto God, to reign
    forever on the earth.[74]

    “‘9. That it is the duty of the ministers of the word to
    continue in the work of preaching the gospel to every creature,
    even unto the end,[75] calling upon them to repent, in view of
    the fact that the kingdom of Heaven is at hand;[76] that their
    sins may be blotted out when the times of refreshing shall come
    from the presence of the Lord.[77]

    “‘10. That the departed saints do not enter their inheritance,
    or receive their crowns, at death.[78] That they without
    us cannot be made perfect.[79] That their inheritance,
    incorruptible and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, is
    reserved in Heaven, ready to be revealed in the last time.[80]
    That there are laid up for them and us crowns of righteousness,
    which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give at the day
    of Christ to all that love his appearing.[81] That they will
    only be satisfied when they awake in Christ’s likeness.[82]
    And that, when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all
    the holy angels with him, the King will say to those on his
    right hand, “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
    prepared for you from the foundation of the world.”[83] Then
    they will be equal to the angels, being the children of God and
    of the resurrection.[84]

    “‘ASSOCIATED ACTION.

    “‘We are induced, from present circumstances affecting our
    spiritual interests, to present, for your consideration, a few
    ideas touching associated action.

    “‘Order is Heaven’s first law. All things emanating from
    God are constituted on principles of perfect order. The New
    Testament rules for the government of the church we regard as
    binding on the whole brotherhood of Christ. No circumstances
    can justify us in departing from the usages established by
    Christ and his apostles.

    “‘We regard any congregation of believers, who habitually
    assemble for the worship of God and the due observance of
    gospel ordinances, as a church of Christ. As such, it is an
    independent body, accountable only to the great Head of the
    church. To all such we recommend a careful examination of the
    Scriptures, and the adoption of such principles of association
    and order as are in accordance therewith, that they may enjoy
    the advantages of that church relation which Christ has
    instituted.

    “‘PLAN OF OPERATIONS.

    “‘In the midst of our disappointed hopes of seeing the King of
    glory, and being made like him, and still finding ourselves in
    a world of sin, snares, and death, the question forces itself
    upon us, _What now is our work?_

    “‘To us it seems clear that our first work is to make straight
    paths for our feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of
    the way. We are in duty bound to give the household meat in
    due season, and to build ourselves up in our most holy faith.
    While doing this, we are to continue in obedience to the great
    commission, to preach the gospel to every creature; so long
    as the love of Christ dwells in us, it will constrain us. We
    shall not be released, while in our present state, from our
    obligations to be “workers, together with God,” in saving
    those for whom the Redeemer died. It is evident that the duty,
    which of right devolves on every minister of the gospel, of
    proclaiming the hour of God’s judgment, is, if performed at
    all, to be done by those who are convinced of its truth....’

“The above, after a full discussion and careful examination, was
unanimously adopted; as was also, from the pen of Mr. Miller, the
following

    “‘ADDRESS TO THE BRETHREN.

    “‘The present state of our faith and hope, with the severe
    trials which many of us experience, call for much brotherly
    love, forbearance, patience, and prayer. No cause, be it
    ever so holy, can exist in this present world, without its
    attendant evils. Therefore, it becomes necessary for all who
    are connected with this cause to exercise great charity; for
    charity covers a multitude of sins.

    “‘The cause we advocate calls upon all men to read the word of
    God, and to reason, judge, compare, and digest for themselves.
    This is certainly right, and is the privilege of all rational
    members of the community. Yet this very liberty may become a
    stumbling-block to many, and without charity, be the means of
    scattering, dividing, and causing contention among brethren.
    Human nature is such that those who are governed by a desire
    to rule over others will seize the reins, and think all must
    bow to their decision; while others will think such unfit for
    the station they assume. James foresaw the evils under which we
    labor, and gives us a caution in his third chapter, to which
    we shall do well to take heed. Our present difficulties arise
    more from the multiplicity of masters and leaders among us
    (some of whom are governed by carnal motives) than from any
    want of light. The word of God affords light enough to guide us
    in all cases, “that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
    furnished unto every good work.” But among the thousand-and-one
    expositions of Scripture, which are every day being palmed upon
    us, some of them, at least, must be wrong. Many of them are so
    weak and silly that they bring a stigma on the blessed book,
    confuse the mind of the inquirer after truth, and divide the
    children of God.

    “‘To remedy this evil, we must learn to judge men and
    principles by their fruits, and not be too hasty in receiving
    the exposition which may be presented by every pretender
    to wisdom and sanctity. Any exposition of Scripture which
    conflicts with other texts must be spurious. Any man whose
    object is to obtain followers must be avoided. Whatever
    produces envy and strife, brethren, is of the devil; and
    we must resist his temptations in their beginning. If God
    has been with us from the commencement of our illumination
    respecting the hope of his glorious appearing, shall we
    abandon the truth wherein our souls have been comforted, and
    our brotherly love established, for fables? We ought to be
    careful lest we grieve the Holy Spirit. How did we receive this
    doctrine at first? Was it not by searching the word of God,
    and a careful comparison of scripture with scripture? Yes; our
    faith did not rest on the word of man. We then required chapter
    and verse, or we would not believe. Why should we leave our
    former rule of faith, to follow the vain and changing opinions
    of men? Some are neglecting the lamp, and seeking to walk by
    sparks of their own kindling. There is a propensity in many to
    make all prophecy apply to our time and country. Others have
    split on this rock. Some of the best writers and commentators
    have thus erred. They have, in many instances, considered
    themselves, their sect, or their nation, as the peculiar
    favorites of Heaven; and have therefore often failed to apply
    prophecy aright. An Englishman, writing on prophecy, will
    make the English territory the principal place of action—the
    Frenchman, France—the German, Germany—and an American, the
    United States. So is it with all sectarians. When minds are
    contracted by selfishness and bigotry, they lose sight of the
    glory of God, and his word, and seek only their own glory. On
    the other hand, they neglect, if they do not actually reject,
    such parts of the oracles of God as militate against their
    views, and rush headlong into error. If we are thus liable
    to be deceived by the cunning craftiness of men, we ought to
    be cautious how we are led by every fanciful interpretation
    of Scripture. Let us then be more wary, and, like the noble
    Bereans, search the Scriptures daily, to see whether these
    things are so. Then, if we err, we shall have the consolation
    that we have made a careful examination of the subject, and
    that the error was one of the head, and not of the heart.
    Christians should receive no evidence but the testimony of God
    as a ground of faith.

    “‘We are commanded to be sober, and hope to the end for that
    grace which is to be brought unto us at the revelation of
    Jesus Christ. Our disappointment, as to the time, should have
    no effect on our hope. We know that Christ has not yet been
    revealed, and the object of our hope is yet in the future.
    Therefore, if we believe in God’s word, as we profess, we ought
    to be thankful for the trial of our faith.

    “‘We shall not have to wait long for the glorious appearing
    of Christ. Therefore, let us lift up our heads and rejoice,
    knowing that our redemption draweth nigh. We regret to see
    any impatience manifested among the friends of Jesus. God is
    now trying our graces. How solemn the thought that any should
    lose the crown when near the goal! Let us arise, shake off our
    dullness, redouble our diligence, let all the world know there
    is such a grace as Christian perseverance, and let all see that
    we are truly seeking a better country. Can it be possible,
    after we have run well for a season, loved the appearing of
    Jesus, come to a time when we must expect him, and should
    be ready to cast ourselves into his arms, that we shall go
    back, or again strike hands with a thoughtless world? May God
    forbid! Let us then go forward. It is death to go back; to go
    forward can be no more.

    “‘We are pained to see a disposition to murmur against those
    who have been pioneers in the war—who have sacrificed all
    earthly considerations to support a truth so unpopular as the
    second advent and personal reign of Jesus Christ.

    “‘Brethren, shun such as cause divisions among very friends.
    Remember the admonition of James: “Grudge not one against
    another, brethren, lest ye be condemned; behold, the Judge
    standeth at the door.” We see, by this rule, that when a
    brother loses his fellowship for the saints, he is certainly
    in darkness. We must be careful not to follow what he may term
    “light.” Love for brethren is a test of our interest in Christ,
    without which all gifts and works are like sounding brass, and
    a tinkling cymbal. Let us cultivate, with peculiar care, this
    loveliest of all Christian graces, and frown on the man who
    attempts to cause division. “Offenses must needs come, but woe
    to that man by whom the offense cometh!” What can we say more,
    to stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance?

    “‘We would, therefore, recommend more study of the Scriptures,
    and less writing, and that we be careful not to submit to
    public inspection mere speculations until they are closely
    scrutinized by some judicious friend. Thus we shall avoid
    many errors. We should always be more jealous of ourselves
    than of others. Self-love is the strongest, most dangerous,
    and deceitful foe that we meet in our Christian warfare. We
    have arrived at a period of deep interest and peril. It is
    interesting, because the evidence of the Saviour being at the
    door is plain, so that no sincere student of prophecy can be
    at a loss to know that that day, for which all other days were
    made, is near. How interesting to live in expectation of the
    day which patriarchs, prophets, and apostles, desired to see,
    but died without the sight! Persecution and death lose their
    sting, in prospect of the coming Conqueror, who hath all power,
    and who hath engaged to put all enemies under his feet. We need
    not murmur; for, in this our day, God will bring to pass this
    act, this (to the worldly man) strange act, for which all the
    weary saints, for six thousand years, have lived and prayed.
    We entreat you to hold fast the confidence which you have had
    in the word of God unto the end. “Yet a little while, and he
    that shall come will come, and will not tarry.” “Here is the
    patience and the faith of the saints.” “Be ye also patient;
    stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh.”

                             “‘WM. MILLER, _Chairman of Committee_.’

“The doings of that Conference were unanimously ratified by the annual
Conferences subsequently held, in that year in New York and in Boston;
and the ‘important truths’ there inculcated were often unanimously
re-affirmed, so that they have become the settled principles of those
known as Adventists. Others, dissenting from them, but agreeing in
unimportant particulars, and yet claiming to be Adventists, are not
recognized as such by Adventists.[85]

“Mr. Miller was in Boston, where he arrived on Saturday, May 24, to
attend the annual Conference there of the week following. That commenced
on Monday, May 26, when Mr. M. discoursed from Rev. 6:17: ‘For the
great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand?’ He made
a personal and practical application of this event, and presented the
evidence of its probable nearness.

“During the Conference, he spoke feelingly of the passing of the time. He
remarked that, ‘Ere this, he had been in hopes of meeting all present in
the heavenly kingdom. But, if we love the Lord Jesus Christ, however much
we may be disappointed, we shall not forget Christ’s coming. God may see
fit to disappoint us, sometimes, for our good. We may not see the wisdom
and fullness of the whole of God’s plan; but he never tries us but for
our profit. Therefore, we should not be disheartened or cast down.’ Every
disappointment only made him more strong in the belief of the certainty
of the nearness of Christ’s appearing.

“‘I had,’ he said, ‘denied the Bible for twelve years. I used to read
it to see how curiously men would act, and contradict each other. But
suddenly I became more solemn; its truth began to dawn upon my mind; and
I was in great darkness for six months. I saw that I was a poor sinner;
but I was soon enabled to love Jesus Christ, and have continued to love
him even till the present time. I saw that, if the Bible was true, Christ
was the only Saviour of men. I then began to study the Scriptures more
fully—determined to study, text by text, till I was fully satisfied as
to their import. In comparing scripture with scripture, such a light
broke in upon my mind as I had never before seen. I was about two
years in going through with the Bible in this manner; and I found it
a perfect piece of order and beauty. And, though I have been greatly
disappointed, yet I have never ceased to love and regard the authority of
the Scriptures.

“‘Brethren, we must keep humble. I sometimes tremble when I see
individuals endeavoring to exalt themselves, and denounce others who
do not see just as they do. Be careful not to err in favor of self.
Be careful to avoid self-righteousness. I have noticed that those who
have left the second advent cause are the very ones for whom I used to
tremble, in view of their arrogancy and self-righteousness. We must not
look to ourselves, but must look alone to God. We must cling to our
Heavenly Father’s arm, that we may hold fast our confidence even unto
the end. The word of God teaches us that we are to be guided alone by
him. Had our brethren who have apostatized thus looked to him, they would
never have fallen into the awful errors into which they have been led. I
love those brethren, but I tremble for their errors. Oh! let us depend
wholly on God, that we may be preserved also from departing from the
rectitude of our faith! And may we all be enabled to live out the prayer,
“Not my will, O God, but thine be done.”’




CHAPTER XVIII.

    HIS APOLOGY AND DEFENSE—DEFINITENESS OF PROPHETIC
    TIME—ERRONEOUS VIEWS CONNECTED WITH THE DOCTRINE, ETC.


“After the Boston Conference, Mr. Miller accompanied Mr. Himes to
Portland, Me., where he gave discourses in the afternoon and evening
of Sunday, June 1, to crowded audiences. Many of those present,
doubtless, were drawn to hear him by motives of curiosity, because of the
disappointment in time. The necessity of patience and of watchfulness
were subjects on which he discoursed.

“He returned to Boston, and from thence went to a camp-meeting at
Champlain, N. Y., on the 10th of June. After this, he returned home, in
the enjoyment of good general health, but somewhat afflicted by boils.

“As the author of a movement which had resulted in disappointment, and,
in some respects, disaster, Mr. Miller deemed it proper that he should
make a personal statement to the Christian public, show the motives
that had actuated him, and disavow any sympathy with the extremes into
which some had gone, contrary to his earnest remonstrances. His growing
infirmities made him shrink from the labor of writing, and caused him
to desire an amanuensis. For this purpose, the writer of this visited
him in the month of July, 1845, and Mr. Miller dictated his ‘Apology and
Defense,’ a tract of thirty-six pages, which was published by Mr. Himes,
in Boston. It was addressed ‘To all who love the Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity,’ and commenced with:—

    “‘As all men are responsible to the community for the
    sentiments they may promulgate, the public have a right
    to expect from me a candid statement in reference to my
    disappointment in not realizing the advent of Christ in A. D.
    1843-4, which I had confidently believed. I have, therefore,
    considered it not presumptuous in me to lay before the
    Christian public a retrospective view of the whole question,
    the motives that actuated me, and the reasons by which I was
    guided.’

“He then proceeded to narrate his early history, and gave an account
of his ‘deistical opinions,’ his ‘first religious impressions,’
his ‘connection with the army,’ his ‘removal to Low Hampton,’ his
‘determination to understand the Scriptures,’ his ‘manner of studying
the Bible,’ the ‘results arrived at,’ and his subsequent labors; all of
which have been noticed at greater length in the foregoing pages. He then
summed up his labors as follows:—

    “‘From the commencement of that publication, I was overwhelmed
    with invitations to labor in various places, with which I
    complied as far as my health and time would allow. I labored
    extensively in all the New England and Middle States, in Ohio,
    Michigan, Maryland, the District of Columbia, and in Canada
    East and West, giving about four thousand lectures in something
    like five hundred different towns.

    “‘I should think that about two hundred ministers embraced
    my views, in all the different parts of the United States
    and Canada; and that there have been about five hundred
    public lecturers. In all the sections of country where I
    labored,—not only in the towns I visited, but in those in their
    vicinity,—there were more or less that embraced the doctrine
    of the advent. In some places only a very few, and in other
    places there have been a large number.

    “‘In nearly a thousand places, Advent congregations have been
    raised up, numbering, as nearly as I can estimate, some fifty
    thousand believers. On recalling to mind the several places
    of my labors, I can reckon up about six thousand instances of
    conversion from nature’s darkness to God’s marvelous light,
    the result of my personal labors alone; and I should judge the
    number to be much greater. Of this number I can recall to mind
    about seven hundred, who were, previously to their attending
    my lectures, infidels; and their number may have been twice
    as great. Happy results have also followed from the labors of
    my brethren, many of whom I would like to mention here, if my
    limits would permit.

    “‘In all my labors I never had the desire or thought to
    establish any separate interest from that of existing
    denominations, or to benefit one at the expense of another. I
    thought to benefit all. Supposing that all Christians would
    rejoice in the prospect of Christ’s coming, and that those who
    could not see as I did would not love any the less those who
    should embrace this doctrine, I did not conceive there would
    ever be any necessity for separate meetings. My whole object
    was a desire to convert souls to God, to notify the world of
    a coming judgment, and to induce my fellow-men to make that
    preparation of heart which will enable them to meet their God
    in peace. The great majority of those who were converted under
    my labors united with the various existing churches. When
    individuals came to me to inquire respecting their duty, I
    always told them to go where they would feel at home; and I
    never favored any one denomination in my advice to such.

    “‘But my brethren began to complain that they were not fed
    by their ministers, and wanted expository preaching. I told
    them it was their duty to interest their ministers in the
    prophecies; but, if they could not receive the teachings under
    which they sat, they must act in accordance with their own
    sense of duty. They then began to complain that they had not
    liberty in the churches to present their views freely, or to
    exhort their brethren to prepare for the Judgment. Those in
    the neighborhood of advent preaching felt that, when they
    could listen to these glorious truths, it was their privilege
    so to do. For this, many of them were treated coldly. Some
    came out of their churches, and some were expelled. Where the
    blame lay it is not necessary here to inquire; there was,
    doubtless, wrong on both sides. The result was, that a feeling
    of opposition arose, on the part of many of the ministers and
    churches that did not embrace these views, against those who
    were looking for the blessed hope and the glorious appearing of
    the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ.’

“He then spoke of various points as follows:—

    “‘DEFINITENESS OF PROPHETIC TIME.

    “‘I had never been positive as to any particular _day_ for the
    Lord’s appearing, believing that no man could know the day
    and hour. In all my published lectures will be seen, on the
    title-page, “about the year 1843.” In all my oral lectures I
    invariably told my audiences that the periods would terminate
    in 1843 _if_ there were no mistakes in my calculation; but
    that I could not say the end might not come even before that
    time, and they should be continually prepared. In 1842, some
    of my brethren preached, with great positiveness, the exact
    year, and censured me for putting in an IF. The public press
    had also published that I had fixed upon a definite day, the
    23d of April, for the Lord’s advent. Therefore, in December of
    that year, as I could see no error in my reckoning, I published
    my belief that some time between March 21, 1843, and March
    21, 1844, the Lord would come. Some had their minds fixed on
    particular days; but I could see no evidence for such, unless
    the types of the Mosaic law pointed to the feast of tabernacles.

    “‘During the year 1843, the most violent denunciations were
    heaped upon me, and those associated with me, by the press
    and some pulpits. Our motives were assailed, our principles
    misrepresented, and our characters traduced. Time passed on,
    and the 21st of March, 1844, went by without our witnessing the
    appearing of the Lord. Our disappointment was great, and many
    walked no more with us.

    “‘Previously to this, in the fall of 1843, some of my brethren
    began to call the churches Babylon, and to urge that it was
    the duty of Adventists to come out of them. With this I was
    much grieved, as not only the effect was very bad, but I
    regarded it as a perversion of the word of God, a wresting of
    Scripture.[86] But the practice spread extensively; and, from
    that time, the churches, as might have been expected, were
    closed against us. It prejudiced many against us, and created
    a deep feeling of hostility between Adventists and those who
    did not embrace the doctrine; so that most of the Adventists
    were separated from their respective churches. This was a
    result which I never desired nor expected; but it was brought
    about by unforeseen circumstances. We could, then, only act in
    accordance with the position in which we were thus placed.

    “‘On the passing of my published time, I frankly acknowledged
    my disappointment in reference to the exact period; but my
    faith was unchanged in any essential feature. I therefore
    continued my labors, principally at the West, during the summer
    of 1844, until “the seventh-month movement,” as it is called.
    I had no participation in this, only as I wrote a letter,
    eighteen months previously, presenting the observances under
    the Mosaic law which pointed to that month as a probable time
    when the advent might be expected. This was written because
    some were looking to definite days in the _spring_. I had,
    however, no expectation that so unwarranted a use would be made
    of those types that any should regard a belief in such mere
    inferential evidence a test of salvation. I therefore had no
    fellowship with that movement until about two or three weeks
    previous to the 22d of October, when, seeing it had obtained
    such prevalence, and considering it was at a probable point of
    time, I was persuaded that it was a work of God, and felt that,
    if it should pass by, I should be more disappointed than I was
    in my first published time.

    “‘But that time passed, and I was again disappointed. The
    movement was of such a character that, for a time, it was
    very mysterious to me; and the results following it were so
    unaccountable that I supposed our work might be completed, and
    that a few weeks only might elapse between that time and the
    appearing of Christ. However that might be, I regarded my own
    work completed, and that what was to be done for the extension
    of these views must be done by younger brethren, except an
    occasional discourse from myself.

    “‘As time has progressed, I have been pained to see many
    errors which have been embraced, in different sections of the
    country, by some who have labored in connection with myself;
    errors which I cannot countenance, and of which I wish to
    speak freely, although I may lose the fellowship of some for
    faithfully doing my duty.

    “‘I have been pained to see a spirit of sectarianism and
    bigotry, in some sections, which disfellowships everything that
    does not square with the narrow prejudices of individual minds.
    There is a tendency to exalt individual opinions as a standard
    for all to submit to; a disposition to place the results of
    individual investigation upon a level with solemn conclusions
    to which the great body of brethren have arrived. This is very
    wrong; for, while we are in this world, we are so short-sighted
    that we should never regard our conclusions as infallible,
    should bear with the imperfections of others, and receive those
    that are weak in the faith, but not to doubtful disputations.

    “‘Some have an inclination to indulge in harsh and denunciatory
    remarks against all who do not agree with them. We are all
    liable to err; but we should avoid thus giving occasion of
    offense. We should instruct with meekness those who oppose
    themselves, and avoid foolish and unlearned questions, that
    gender strifes.

    “‘There may be causes operating on the minds of others, of
    which we know nothing, that influence them contrary to the
    truth as we have received it. We should, therefore, in all
    our intercourse with those we deem in error, treat them with
    kindness and affection, and show them that we would do them
    good, and not evil, if God, peradventure, will give them
    repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and that they may
    recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken
    captive by him at his will.

    “‘Some are prone to indulge in a spirit of uneasiness and
    disorder, and looseness with regard to church government and
    doctrine. In all the essential doctrines of the Bible, as they
    have been held by the pious of the church in all ages, were
    given to the saints, and for which we are commanded earnestly
    to contend, I have never seen any reason to change my faith.
    Jesus I regard as my all-sufficient Saviour, by whose merits
    alone I can be saved. No being but him, “whose goings forth
    were of old from everlasting,” who should take upon himself
    our nature, and bear our sins in his own body, could make an
    atonement, on the efficacy of which I should dare to rely. The
    Bible speaks as plainly of my Saviour’s divinity as it does
    of his humanity. He is, therefore, Immanuel, God with us. The
    Bible tells us plainly what the Saviour is. That should satisfy
    us, without venturing beyond the Bible to say what he is not.

    “‘It is in the use of terms not found in the Scriptures that
    disputations arise. For instance, the difference between the
    Calvinist and Armenian I often thus explain: Both are in the
    same dilemma. They are like a company of men in the lower story
    of a house when the tide is entering, and from which there is
    no escape only by a rope by which they may be drawn up. All
    endeavor to lay hold of the rope. The one is continually afraid
    he has not hold of the right rope; if he was sure he had the
    right rope he would have no fears. The other has no fear but he
    has hold of the right rope; he is continually afraid his rope
    will break. Now both are equally fearful they may perchance not
    escape. Their fears arise from different causes. How foolish it
    is, then, for them to begin to quarrel with each other, because
    the one supposes the rope may break, and the other that it is
    the wrong rope!

    “‘Now I have found Christians among those who believed that
    they were born again, but might fall away; and among those
    that believe that, if they were ever born again, they should
    certainly persevere. The difference between them I regard as
    a mere matter of education; both have their fears, and both
    believe that those only who persevere unto the end will be
    saved. I, therefore, look on men as bigots who quarrel with
    others and deny that those are Christians who cannot see just
    as they do....

    “‘I have thus given a plain and simple statement of the
    manner of my arriving at the views I have inculcated, with a
    history of my course up to the present time. That I have been
    mistaken in the time, I freely confess; and I have no desire
    to defend my course any further than I have been actuated by
    pure motives, and it has resulted to God’s glory. My mistakes
    and errors God, I trust, will forgive. I cannot, however,
    reproach myself for having preached definite time; for, as I
    believe that whatsoever was written aforetime was written for
    our learning, the prophetic periods are as much a subject of
    investigation as any other portion of the word.[87]

    “‘I, therefore, still feel that it was my duty to present all
    the evidence that was apparent to my mind; and were I now in
    the same circumstances, I should be compelled to act as I have
    done. I should not, however, have so done, had I seen that
    the time would pass by; but not knowing that it would, I feel
    even now more satisfaction in having warned my fellow-men than
    I should feel, were I conscious that I had believed them in
    danger and had not raised my voice. How keen would have been my
    regret, had I refrained to present what in my soul I believed
    to be truth, and the result had proved that souls must perish
    through my neglect! I cannot, therefore, censure myself for
    having conscientiously performed what I believed to be my duty.

    “‘But while I frankly acknowledge my disappointment in the
    exact time, I wish to inquire whether my teachings have been
    thereby materially affected. My view of exact time depended
    entirely upon the accuracy of chronology; of this I had no
    absolute demonstration; but as no evidence was presented to
    invalidate it, I deemed it my duty to rely on it as certain,
    until it should be disproved. Besides, I not only rested on
    received chronology, but I selected the earliest dates in the
    circle of a few years on which chronologers have relied for the
    date of the events from which to reckon, because I believed
    them to be best sustained, and because I wished to have my eye
    on the earliest time at which the Lord might be expected. Other
    chronologers had assigned later dates for the events from which
    I reckoned; and if they are correct we are only brought into
    the circle of a few years, during which we may rationally look
    for the Lord’s appearing. As the prophetic periods, counting
    from the dates from which I have reckoned, have not brought us
    to the end, and as I cannot tell the exact time that chronology
    may vary from my calculations, I can only live in continual
    expectation of the event. I am persuaded that I cannot be far
    out of the way, and I believe that God will still justify my
    preaching to the world.[88]

    “‘With respect to other features of my views, I can see no
    reason to change my belief. We are living under the last form
    of the divided fourth kingdom, which brings us to the end. The
    prophecies which were to be fulfilled previous to the end have
    been so far fulfilled that I find nothing in them to delay the
    Lord’s coming. The signs of the times thicken on every hand;
    and the prophetic periods must certainly, I think, have brought
    us into the neighborhood of the event.

    “‘There is not a point in my belief in which I am not sustained
    by some one of the numerous writers who have opposed my views.
    Prof. Bush, the most gentlemanly of my opponents, admits that I
    am correct in the time, with the exception of the precise day
    or year; and this is all for which I contend. That the 70 weeks
    are 490 years, and the 1260 and 2300 days are so many years,
    are admitted by Messrs. Bush, Hinton, and Jarvis. That the 2300
    days and 70 weeks commence at the same time, Prof. Bush does
    not deny. And Dr. Jarvis admits that the former carry us to the
    resurrection and Judgment. Prof. Bush, Dr. Jarvis, Mr. Hinton,
    and Mr. Morris, admit that the legs of iron and fourth beast
    are Rome, and that the little horn of Dan. 7 is papacy, while
    Dr. Jarvis and Mr. Hinton admit that the exceeding great horn
    of Daniel 8 is Rome. The literal resurrection of the body, the
    end of the world, and a personal coming of Christ, have not
    been questioned by several who have written against me.

    “‘Thus there is not a point for which I have contended that has
    not been admitted by some of those who have written to disprove
    my opinions. I have candidly weighed the objections advanced
    against these views; but I have seen no arguments that were
    sustained by the Scriptures that, in my opinion, invalidated
    my position. I cannot, therefore, conscientiously refrain
    from looking for my Lord, or from exhorting my fellow-men, as
    I have opportunity, to be in readiness for that great event.
    For my indiscretions and errors I ask pardon; and all who have
    spoken evil of me without cause I freely forgive. My labors are
    principally ended. I shall leave to my younger brethren the
    task of contending for the truth. Many years I toiled alone;
    God has now raised up those who will fill my place. I shall not
    cease to pray for the spread of truth.

    “‘In conclusion, suffer a word of exhortation. You, my
    brethren, who are called by the name of Christ, will you not
    examine the Scriptures respecting the nearness of the advent?
    The great and good of all ages have had their minds directed
    to about this period of time, and a multitude are impressed
    with the solemn conviction that these are emphatically the
    last days. Is not a question of such moment worthy of your
    consideration? I do not ask you to embrace an opinion of mine;
    but I ask you to weigh well the evidence contained in the
    Bible. If I am in any error, I desire to see it, and I should
    certainly renounce it; but look at the question in the light of
    the inspired word, and decide for eternity.

    “‘What shall I say to my unconverted friends? I have faithfully
    exhorted you these many years to believe in Christ. You have
    excused yourselves. What can I say more? Will not all the
    considerations that are presented in the Scriptures of truth
    move your hearts to lay down the weapons of your rebellion? You
    have no lease of your lives, and, if the Lord should not come,
    your eyes may be soon closed in death. Why will you not improve
    the present moment, and flee from the wrath to come? Go to
    Christ, I beseech you; lay hold on the promise of God, trust in
    his grace, and he will cleanse you by his blood.

    “‘I would exhort my Advent brethren to study the word
    diligently. Let no man spoil you through philosophy and vain
    deceit. Avoid everything that shall cause offense. Let your
    lives be models of goodness and propriety. Let the adversary
    get no advantage over you. We have been disappointed; but
    disappointments will work for our good, if we make the right
    use of them. Be faithful. Be vigilant. Exhort with all
    longsuffering and patience. Let your conversation be in Heaven,
    from whence you look for the blessed hope. Avoid unnecessary
    controversy and questions that gender strifes. Be not many
    masters; all are not competent to advise and direct. God will
    raise up those to whom he will commit the direction of his
    cause. Be humble, be watchful, be patient, be persevering. And
    may the God of peace sanctify you wholly, and preserve you
    blameless unto the glorious appearing of the great God and our
    Saviour Jesus Christ!

                                                    WILLIAM MILLER.’

    “‘_Low Hampton, Aug. 1, 1845._’




CHAPTER XIX.

    HIS FAITH IN HIS PAST WORK—VISIT TO NEW YORK CITY—PHILADELPHIA,
    ETC.—ADDRESS TO THE PUBLIC—VISIT TO CANADA, ETC.


“In the month of September, Mr. Miller attended Conferences in Addison
and Bristol, Vt., and lectured in each place. He then took a journey into
Connecticut, and visited Hartford, attended a camp-meeting in Newington,
near Hartford, and one at Square Pond, in Tolland County. He then visited
Middletown. He was much pleased with his journey, and returned home
refreshed.

“After this, in connection with Elder A. Hale, he lectured, in November
in the State of Vermont, at Waterbury, Morristown, Stowe, Waitesfield and
Burlington. Besides at these places, he seems to have labored but little
during the remainder of the year. He occasionally communicated articles
for the _Advent Herald_, giving expositions of Scripture, &c.; but the
approaching infirmities of age admonished him that his labors were nearly
ended.

                                    “‘LOW HAMPTON, JANUARY 13, 1846.

    “‘DEAR BROTHER HIMES:—I am yet in this land of toil, where sin
    has spoiled all the blessings and enjoyments of earth, which
    were appointed by our beneficent Creator for the best good of
    his creatures, and which, had it not been for sin, would have
    led us to reverence and adore that Being who had produced, by
    his power, this earth and all its appurtenances, and placed in
    it man—rational, intelligent, social man—to enjoy this vast
    and wondrous piece of mechanism.

    “‘Perhaps we are unable rightly to appreciate the blessings
    which were placed within the reach of man at his creation,
    when “the sons of God shouted for joy.” Yet I think that we
    do realize some of the evils to which man is heir by reason
    of “sin, and death by sin,” which have entered the world. How
    manifest it is, at the present day, that all the influences
    of the pit are inciting men to crime, bringing in their trail
    consequences ten-fold more dreadful than those entailed upon
    us by the sin of our first parents! If there were one spark of
    philanthropy existing in the world, methinks it must bleed at
    beholding the rapid increase of evil within the last few years.

    “‘I confess that to me it would be but a dismal and appalling
    prospect in the future, did not a ray of light beam forth from
    the word of God, that there should be a glorious and final
    renovation of all things! This “exceeding great and precious
    promise,” to the man of God, is the only hope that cheers him
    in his weary pilgrimage. Every means that the wisdom of man
    could devise for the melioration of the condition of man has
    failed; ministers of the gospel have been sent into every land;
    Bibles have been scattered broadcast in the earth, translated
    into almost every tongue, and placed in the hands of the poor,
    “without money and without price;” schools of every grade,
    from the college to the common, have sprung up, in which have
    been developed the highest mental qualities of man; societies
    have been multiplied for the moral improvement of our race,—to
    Christianize the heathen, to reform the inebriate, to break
    the bonds of the enslaved, to liberate the debtor, to stop
    the horrid practice of legal murder, to promote peace among
    nations, to protect the orphan, to clothe the naked, to feed
    the hungry, to nurse the sick, and even to bury the dead.
    These, and many other noble and benevolent enterprises, have
    been formed within the present century. But how much good have
    they accomplished? That great good has been done, cannot be
    denied. But it is likewise true that evil has predominated in a
    far greater ratio than at any former period.

    “‘When I look back to the period when we began to publish the
    news of a coming Saviour, I think it the happiest time of
    my life. How were our hearts refreshed by the readiness of
    the dear brethren in Christ to hear, believe, and obey, the
    simple gospel of the kingdom! With what delight have I, in
    company with many of the dear, anxious children of God, read
    and re-read the Scriptures, searched diligently and compared
    the prophets, Jesus Christ, and his apostles, to see if these
    things were so! What glorious light I have often seen in that
    holy book while thus engaged! And with what joy have I taken
    sweet communion with kindred hearts in the house of God, where
    our faith was more and more established by the word of his
    grace; where our prayers were mingled at the same altar, and
    arose together, as incense, to the mercy-seat of our Redeemer,
    for a preparation to meet the coming glories, which we then
    expected shortly to realize; where our hearts burned with love
    and gratitude to God for the good news of the near approach of
    the King of kings; where our songs of praise and hallelujahs
    to the Lamb cheered our drooping spirits, and prepared us more
    vigorously to pursue our weary pilgrimage to the land of
    promise, which, from evidence to us conclusive, and which I am
    not ashamed of, we soon expect to reach!

    “‘Then, heart beat in unison with heart, soul mingled with
    soul, and love, holy, heavenly, divine, united us in that
    oneness of gospel truth, and prejudice and party were
    dissipated from our thoughts like midnight darkness, or the
    morning mists by the rising sun. This was a time of love, a
    time of faith, working by love and purifying the heart. It was
    this hope, “the blessed hope,” that made us purify ourselves
    from our sectarian prejudices and bigotry.

    “‘I have often thought that we then enjoyed a foretaste of the
    love and fellowship of the saints in light. Why is it not so
    now? The reason is as obvious as the sun at noonday. We have
    been drawn from our _first principles_ by wicked and designing
    men, who have crept in among us and drawn us into parties, to
    follow men instead of God, and to form new tests instead of
    the Bible. Some of our lecturers first began the confusion by
    declaring an unholy crusade against the sects, which brought in
    men of blood instead of men of peace. True, after the manner
    of men, the sects had provoked us to the course we took by
    all the wicked arts and misrepresentation of our views and
    motives that human and satanic agency could invent—by slander,
    ridicule, and wresting the word of God from the meaning which
    had long been laid down in their own creeds, and departing from
    those rules by which their fathers, for centuries, had applied
    mystic Babylon to the church of Rome. We were not called, in
    my humble opinion, to engage in so universal a war. I think
    we have, in this, “left our first principles,” which were to
    preach the blessed hope, and beseech men to be ready for the
    “glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus
    Christ,” without personal or denominational considerations.
    While we pursued this course, God blessed us in our work. We
    were commanded by the word to be patient, sober, to judge
    not, not to be high-minded, but to fear, and, by so doing,
    manifest the same spirit that was in Christ. What have been the
    fruits of this departure from the plain line of duty? Surely,
    they have not been love, peace, and joy, such as we formerly
    experienced, when we believed in our hearts that Christ was at
    the door. On the contrary, it has, in many instances, separated
    those who had been knit together in the closest friendship,
    fomented jealousies, produced “lo! heres, and lo! theres!”
    while some have blasphemously arrogated to themselves names and
    titles which belong to Christ. With such I have no sympathy,
    no fellowship. I will refer them to Christ’s words, Rev. 3:3:
    “Remember, therefore, how thou hast received and heard, and
    hold fast, and repent. If, therefore, thou shalt not watch, I
    will come on thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour
    I will come upon thee.”

    “‘The glorious appearing of Christ is my only hope; to this
    I cling—it is my anchor; and all who look for and love his
    appearing are my brothers and sisters, and with such I have
    fellowship in the Lord, and exhort them to watch.

                                                  “‘WILLIAM MILLER.’

“On the 11th of March, 1846, in company with Messrs. Himes and Apollos
Hale, Mr. M. lectured at Glenn’s Falls, N. Y. It does not appear that
he visited any other place till about the time of the annual Conference,
which met in New York city on the 12th of May.

“His bodily infirmities rendered it unsafe for him to journey without the
attendance of some one to render him all needful assistance; therefore he
arranged with Elder Henry Buckley, of Hampton, N. Y., to accompany him to
New York city.

“They left home on Saturday, the 9th of May, and proceeded as far as
Lansingburg, N. Y. On the Sabbath he went to Middletown, N. Y., where
he preached twice, returning, after service, to Lansingburg. On Monday,
the 11th, they proceeded to New York city. He took part in the debates
and preaching of the Conference, and, though feeble, seemed to enjoy the
meetings.

“After its adjournment, they visited Philadelphia. On Sunday, the
17th, he preached in the morning and evening to large and attentive
congregations. The next day he visited his former acquaintances, and, on
the 19th, he left for Providence, R. I. There they attended a meeting
of the Friends, which continued four days, and to which Mr. M. preached
four discourses, with his usual interest. On the 25th he visited North
Scituate, R. I., and gave two discourses. On the 26th he preached
twice in North Attleboro’, Mass., and, on the 27th, arrived in Boston.
The Annual Conference was adjourned from New York to meet there, and
commenced on the day previous. He again took part in its debates, but
spent most of his time in visiting friends and acquaintances in the
vicinity. They visited Westminster, Mass., where Mr. M. preached on the
3d of June; and, on the 5th, he arrived home, much fatigued with his
journey, but in good health and spirits.

“On the 24th of June, in company with Elder Buckley, Mr. M. visited
Cranbury Creek, N. Y., where he preached seven discourses in four days.
No other place being open for the meetings, they were held in a large
barn, owned by Judge Gilbert. It was comfortably furnished with seats,
and accommodated very respectable congregations, composed of the more
intelligent and pious portion of the community. Mr. M.’s discourses there
were spoken of by those present as logical and interesting.

“During the warm months he attempted no public labors; and his pen, even,
seems to have lain idle. The next communication received from him was
published in the _Advent Herald_ of September 9, 1846, as follows:—

    “‘ADDRESS TO THE PUBLIC.

    “‘DEAR READER:—Permit me to address you once more by calling
    your attention to the great events which the word of God
    declares are soon to come to pass, that I may faithfully
    perform my duty; and that you may be able to answer, in that
    way which will be satisfactory to your own soul, in the day
    when God shall judge the secret thoughts of men by Jesus Christ.

    “‘In my former communications to you on this subject—which
    is near my heart, fills my soul at times with indescribable
    joy and consolation, and is big with the hope of soon, very
    soon, coming into possession of immortality and eternal
    life—I readily confess I was misled in my calculations;
    not by the word of God, nor by the established principles
    of interpretation I adopted, but by the authorities which
    I followed in history and chronology, and which have been
    generally considered worthy of the fullest confidence. And I
    fear many of you have been blinded to your own interest, which
    may be of eternal consequences to you, by hasty expressions
    of full confidence in these authors, before I had carefully
    and more extensively examined the subject to which I had, in
    the simplicity of my heart, called your candid and serious
    attention.

    “‘The testimony of historians, as to the dates of events,
    cannot affect the testimony of the word of God, that, at
    certain periods from these events, his promises shall be
    fulfilled. They may fail, but his word cannot fail. I confess
    I have been thus mistaken as to the definite time; but what of
    that? Will you or any man dare to take the ground that, because
    Mr. Miller or any other man made a mistake, the word of God
    is not true? No, no. There would be nothing in that worthy of
    being called an argument.

    “‘But, above all things else, I was deceived in the number and
    character of those who, without study, argument, or reason,
    rejected the (to me at least) glorious news of the coming
    Saviour. Neither did I suppose that a man or woman could have
    been found on the habitable earth, who loved the Lord Jesus
    Christ and believed the Bible, who would reject the second
    advent or the redemption of the body; the final salvation of
    the soul, or the inheritance of eternal life, at the appearing
    of Jesus Christ. Yet facts warrant me to say I find more than
    one-half who profess Christianity denying one or more of these
    fundamental pillars of the Christian hope.

    “‘I am thankful to God, although much and sorely disappointed,
    that I never pretended to be divinely inspired, but always
    directed you to the same source from which I obtained all the
    information I then had and now possess on this glorious and
    heart-cheering subject. Let me, then, exhort you, kind reader,
    by the value of truth, by the worth of your own soul, and the
    love of life everlasting, to examine your Bible on the coming
    of Christ, the redemption of the body, the salvation of your
    soul, and the everlasting inheritance. Lay by all prejudice,
    all opinions not founded on the plain and clear declarations
    of God’s word; keep close to that rule which will thoroughly
    furnish you, and make you perfect in every good work; examine
    for yourselves; let no man deceive you in these days of
    deception, when the devil has come, deceiving, if possible,
    the very elect. Now is the time for you to exercise the “sober
    second thought;” a good time for you to come over on the side
    of truth, to choose the good, and refuse the evil. I beseech
    you, do not say, “Nay, I will not examine!” Do not say, “I
    am well enough off, and I have got the truth!” Perhaps you
    have; if so, it will not hurt you to re-examine, for every
    re-examination only makes the truth the brighter, our evidence
    more clear, and our love for the truth more fervent; it helps
    to establish our faith and hope, and keeps us from wavering.

    “‘And now, dear reader, let me propose a few questions, in view
    of what I have said, for you to answer to God and your own
    soul; and I pray you not to trifle with them, or one of them,
    if you can find a plain Scripture text which authorizes the
    question. And I beg of you delay not to answer every question
    which may or can be answered; and let your answers be such
    as you will be willing to meet before the throne of God in
    the day of Judgment, to which day I appeal in thus addressing
    you. I append a text to every question, to show you they are
    scriptural:—

    “‘1. Will Christ appear the second time? Heb. 9:28.

    “‘2. Will he come himself? 1 Thess. 4:16.

    “‘3. Who will see him? 1 John 3:2; Rev. 1:7.

    “‘4. Who will not be ashamed before him at his coming? 1 John
    2:28; 4:17.

    “‘5. What will Christ come to do? 2 Thess. 1:7-10; Heb.
    1:10-12; Rev. 21:5.

    “‘6. When Christ comes, will there be a resurrection? and of
    whom? 1 Cor. 15:23; 1 Thess. 4:14-18.

    “‘7. Where is Christ now? Acts 1:11; 3:21.

    “‘8. At what time will Christ be sent again to earth? Acts
    3:20, 21.

    “‘9. When may we know he is near, even at the door? Matt.
    24:30, 33.

    “‘10. Has any one of the signs been seen which are given by our
    Lord in Matt. 24:29; Mark 13:24, 25, or Luke 21:25, 26; or by
    Paul in 1 Tim. 4:1-3; also 2 Tim. 3:1-9; or by Peter in 2 Pet.
    3:3, 4, by any one living in this generation?

    “‘11. When is the day of redemption? Eph. 4:30; Luke 21:28.

    “‘12. When shall our bodies be redeemed? Rom. 8:23.

    “‘13. When shall our souls be saved? 1 Pet. 1:7-13.

    “‘14. When shall the righteous inherit eternal life? Mark
    10:17; Matt. 19:29; 25:46.

    “‘15. What is the earnest of that inheritance? Eph. 1:13, 14; 2
    Cor. 1:22; 5:4, 5.

    “‘16. If we are to receive all this when Christ appears, and
    not until then, can you blame any Christian for loving his
    appearing? 2 Tim. 4:8.

    “‘17. And, if you were commanded to watch for him, and these
    blessings were promised when he comes, would you not look with
    intense interest until his coming?

    “‘18. And, if you were commanded to watch, would you watch
    without expecting him? Luke 12:35-40.

    “‘19. And, if he did not come when you expected, would you
    not be disappointed in some proportion to your love for his
    appearing?

    “‘Remember this is the situation of your Advent friends; this
    is our experience. And may God help you to love, watch, and
    expect the dear Saviour until he shall come.

                                                  “‘WILLIAM MILLER.’

“On the 4th of September, in view of many contradictory opinions afloat,
he proffered the following advice:—

    “‘When we write to a brother to complain of some of his
    opinions, let us consider of it three days before we write;
    pray God nine times to direct us before we take up the pen;
    read it in the room of our brother three times before we send
    it; seal it only when we love him for being God-like; send it
    when we would delight to be the bearer; while it is going,
    think with what tears of joy he will devour its contents; and
    remember to pay postage.’

“On the 8th of September, Mr. M. commenced a tour into Canada. He went
by way of Lake Champlain to Burlington, Vt., where he preached in the
evening of that day. There he met Elder Buckley, who accompanied him on
his tour. From this place they went to Essex, Vt., where Mr. M. gave
two discourses. On the 12th, they commenced a two-days’ meeting in
Cambridge, Vt., where there was a good attendance. On Tuesday, the 15th,
they commenced a meeting in Montgomery, Vt., which continued over the
following Sabbath, Mr. Miller generally preaching twice a day.

“While at this place he was taken with a severe pain in one of his
toes. He was soon relieved of that, when the pain commenced in his left
shoulder. He then desired to return home, but was persuaded to continue
his journey. On the 22d, he gave two discourses in South Troy, Vt.
The meeting was held in a large hall which had formerly been used for
a ball-room. While he was preaching in the evening, the windows were
pelted with eggs, clubs, and stones, thrown by some ‘rude fellows of the
baser sort,’ who were outside of the building. Some of their missiles
entered the room. One stone, about the size of a hen’s egg, struck the
desk in front of Mr. Miller, where he was speaking. He paused, and, with
emphasis, asked, very composedly:—

“‘Is this Vermont, the State which boasts of its freedom, of its
republicanism? Shame on Vermont!’

“The audience were somewhat agitated; but he requested them to be quiet,
and proceeded with his discourse. No one was injured, and good evidently
resulted from the interruption; for it aroused the old gentleman’s
energy, and gave additional interest to the remainder of the sermon.

“On Thursday, the 24th of September, they commenced a Conference at Derby
Line, Vt., which continued four days. The pain in Mr. M.’s shoulder had
increased considerably, and resulted in a tumor of considerable size,
which was much inflamed. Yet he preached six times, with a good degree of
vigor.

“On Monday, the 28th, a widowed sister of Mr. M., living in Canada,
having met him at Derby Line, he left with her for her residence in
Hatley. He was there confined about three weeks with the tumor on his
shoulder, which was very painful, affecting his neck and head, and
discharged freely for many days. In consequence of this indisposition,
he was unable to fulfill several appointments, which he had made in that
region, much to the disappointment of the inhabitants.

“As soon as they were able to ride, they started for Low Hampton; but
the weather and roads made the traveling very tedious. On his way home
he spent a Sabbath, and preached a discourse of two hours’ duration, at
Rickford, Vt., which left him so weak that it was with difficulty he
could walk. On arriving at Fairfield, Vt., they spent a night, and Mr. M.
preached in the evening. They arrived at Low Hampton after an absence of
about nine weeks, during which he had been treated with great kindness
and respect wherever he visited,—with the exception of the incident at
Troy.

    “‘My tour into Canada,’ he wrote, soon after his return, ‘would
    have been pleasant and agreeable to me, had it not been for
    sickness, which confined me to the house.’

“On the 27th of November following, he wrote to Elder Buckley, who
accompanied him on the above journey:—

    “‘I cannot tell you what I have done since you were here, but I
    can tell you what I have not done.

    “‘1. I have not done with vanity. It is as natural as my
    breath; and if I ever cease from vain and trifling conversation
    in this world, you must place me in society which I have no
    regard for,—either to love or to hate,—where I could be a
    hypocrite without any drawback. For I have often noticed,
    when I am alone and with no one to converse with, that I am
    not tempted to speak words of vanity. This is the reason why
    I choose to be alone much of my time. In my opinion, this
    accounts for the ascetic lives of the early Christians. What
    think you—is it not best for me to become a hermit?

    “‘2. I have not done with _pain_. I have been troubled with
    head-ache, teeth-ache, bones-ache, and heart-ache, since you
    left; but much more of the _last_ ache, when I think of so
    many of my once dearly beloved brethren, who have, since our
    disappointment, gone into fanaticism of every kind, and left
    the first principles of the glorious appearing of the great
    God and our Saviour, Jesus Christ. And now, can you blame me
    for desiring a hermitage, away from these evil tidings and
    shameful acts of our friends in this time of severe trial?

    “‘3. I have not done with corruption. My swelling discharges
    a little every day, and I see myself falling to corruption
    daily. It may be that I am corrupting others who may be brought
    into contact with me,—for instance, the fanatics. If they
    never had heard of “Millerism,” they would have been sober,
    worldly-seeking, church-loving, and sectarian-building men and
    women to this day; and they would have been respected as much
    as other church members are by the rich and popular worldlings.
    Yes, yes; so says the world; and you know that what the world
    says must be true. This is, in these modern times, the best
    evidence. If then, I had been a recluse, instead of running at
    large, it might have saved the world a great deal of trouble,
    and the church the knowledge of a great deal of corruption.

    “‘4. I have done no good thing. I can prove this by every
    writer, Christian and political, editors, doctors of divinity,
    professors and ministers of all denominations,—from the Roman
    Catholic to the Mormon,—save only a few despised Adventists,
    who, in the eyes of the world, are as much below the Mormons as
    Christ was below Barabbas in the Jews’ estimation.

    “‘But,’ say you, ‘you say you have done no good thing. Was it
    not a good thing to tell us, who love Christ’s appearing, that
    he was near to come? Was it not a good thing to read the Bible
    to us, and show by history its fulfillment and truth? Was it
    not a good thing to warn sinners of their danger, which might
    lead them to repentance and a preparation for the Judgment?
    Was it not a good thing to preach the kingdom of Heaven at
    hand and the Judgment? Was it not a good thing to preach the
    resurrection of these bodies, the inheritance of the saints,
    and the reign of Christ and his people on the earth made new
    forever? Was it not a good thing to comfort the saints with
    the words of his coming, and to stir them up to a remembrance
    of the things which Christ, the prophets, and apostles, have
    spoken concerning his coming? And have not you done all this?’

    “‘No, no.’

    “‘Who has then?’

    “‘I answer, it was the grace of God which worked in me of his
    own good pleasure both to will and to do.

    “‘Since I have been preaching this hour, I will give you my
    text, 2 Cor. 12:11, last clause: “_Though I be nothing._” And
    now, lastly, the improvement.

    “‘1. You may learn, by my subject, that I am nothing—like the
    clay in the hands of the potter.

    “‘2. You may learn, if any good has been done, that God has
    done it by his grace; and if any evil, it is a chastisement for
    disobedience; for “shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord
    hath not done it?” Amos 3:6.

    “‘3. We may learn, by the effect of any work, whether it be of
    God. If wicked men, and proud, selfish, popular professors join
    hand in hand to oppose you, you may be sure that God is in the
    work.

    “‘4. You may learn, by my subject, that I am not well of my
    disease, nor do I expect to be till Christ comes; for which
    event I look with great interest and desire. Yours,

                                                      “‘WM. MILLER.’

“With the exception of an occasional article for the press, Mr. Miller
made no public effort during the winter. His health would not permit.
As the time approached for the usual Annual Meeting in New York city in
May, 1847, he made arrangements to be present; but his health was not
sufficient. In writing of his inability to be present, under date of May
6, 1847, he said:—

    “‘I cannot charge myself with any corrupt motive in promoting
    the Second Advent doctrine. If I have any regret, it is because
    I have done so little, and because I have been so inefficient.
    I have lacked in zeal more than I have lacked in faith. I
    believed, and do still, in this glorious and Bible doctrine of
    the second coming of our dear Redeemer, and of his everlasting
    kingdom or reign in paradise restored.

    “‘I fear that I shall not be able to attend at Boston.’

“His health was, however, so much improved, that, with Elder Buckley, his
companion in travel of the previous year, he left home on the 20th of
May, and arrived in Boston on the 22d, three days before the Conference
commenced.

“The day following was Sunday, and he preached two discourses, in the
afternoon and evening, at the saloon, at No. 9 Milk street, where the
Adventists then worshiped. On Monday evening he preached, in the same
place, on the resurrection of the body. He took part in the discussions
of the Conference during the week, preached once on the following
Sabbath, and on Monday left for home, where he arrived on Tuesday, June
1. This was his last visit to Massachusetts.




CHAPTER XX.

    LOSS OF SIGHT—HEALTH DECLINES—EXPRESSION OF SYMPATHY—HIS
    REPLY—HIS LAST SICKNESS AND DEATH—FUNERAL—LETTER OF CONDOLENCE
    TO SURVIVING FRIENDS.


“On the 15th of September, 1847, he was present at a tent-meeting at
Basin Harbor, in Ferrisburg, Vt., which continued four days. In a letter
written on the 27th of the same month, he makes the following reference
to it:—

    “‘DEAR BROTHER HIMES: I cannot refrain from writing a few words
    to you, to let you know how my soul and body prosper since our
    tent-meeting at Basin Harbor.

    “‘That was to me a profitable time. It seemed like former
    times, when the truth cut to the heart all who heard.
    The preaching was plain, powerful, and convincing. The
    prayer-meetings were humble, devotional, and penitent, and very
    properly conducted. No uproar, confusion, or fanaticism, which
    disturb the mind, and leave a bad savor upon the hearts of the
    fastidious. The Conferences were perfect love-feasts, and the
    songs such as the poet describes:—

        “‘My willing soul would stay
            In such a frame as this;
          And sit and sing herself away
            To everlasting bliss.’

    I never expect to enjoy another such a feast of tabernacles in
    the flesh. God was with us. Praise his holy name.’ ...

“Toward the last of January, 1848, Mr. Miller was attacked with a
dimness of sight, which deprived him of his usual privilege of reading
and writing, which, through life, had been to him a source of great
enjoyment. His health, otherwise, continued as good as could be expected,
in his gradually declining age.

“With the loss of his sight, he had to depend on others to read to him,
and to write the letters which he dictated. He desired the continuance of
letters from his correspondents, but requested them to excuse him from
replying.

“The hope of soon meeting them where the lame man shall leap as an hart,
the tongue of the dumb sing, the blind receive their sight, and the deaf
hear, and the belief in the nearness of that day, was a great consolation
to him under his accumulating infirmities. His loss of sight was
communicated by his son, Wm. S. Miller, Esq., in a letter dated February
10, about two weeks after his attack.

“On the 7th of March, a letter, from a daughter-in-law of Mr. Miller,
stated that his general health was then better, but that he had been
unable to read a word for seven weeks anterior to the preceding Sabbath.
On that day, his son Robbins took the glass from the spy-glass, and held
it to his eye, so that he read a few words. She added:—

    “‘His eyes are not sore: the physician whom he has consulted
    says the retina is affected. Father bears his affliction well.
    I have never heard him murmur, nor say that it was hard. I
    think that he feels somewhat “cast down, but not forsaken.”’

“Appended to the above letter, Mr. Miller wrote, without being able to
see a word:—

    “‘God bless you, bless you all, and save you, is my prayer.

                                                        WM. MILLER.’

“After this, his general health was some improved, so that he was able to
be about and to busy himself with light work. He was able to distinguish
one object from another, and could often recognize his friends and
acquaintances; but, with the best glasses he could get, he could not so
distinguish letters as to read words. He sometimes attempted to write
without seeing the letters that he traced.

“On the 14th of September, 1848, he wrote to Mr. Himes:—

    “‘Permit me to write a few words, although you may not be able
    to read them. Yet it may fill up a lonesome hour or two of many
    a wearisome day to think I have indited some of my thoughts
    to my old brother traveler. It would, indeed, be a sad and
    melancholy time with me were it not for the “blessed hope,” of
    soon seeing Jesus. In this I flatter myself that I cannot be
    mistaken. And although my natural vision is dark, yet my mind’s
    vision is lit up with a bright and glorious prospect of the
    future....

                                                      “‘WM. MILLER.’

“About the last of April, 1849, his health began to decline more rapidly.
This being communicated by Mr. Miller’s son to Mr. Himes, and received
by him at New York during the session of the annual Conference there on
the 10th of May, 1849, he stated to the Conference the intelligence,
and moved that they convey to Mr. M. an expression of sympathy. The
following resolution was immediately drawn up by the president, and
unanimously adopted by a rising vote:—

                        “‘ADVENT CONFERENCE, NEW YORK, MAY 10, 1849.

    “‘_Whereas_, Our beloved Brother William Miller has been called
    to endure a great fight of afflictions; and as God has been
    pleased, after employing him in advancing the cause of truth,
    to lay his hand on him, and suspend his labors; therefore,

    “‘_Resolved_, That we deeply sympathize with our brother in his
    sorrows, and assure him that our love to him is steadfast, and
    that he has our earnest prayers that “these light afflictions,
    which are but for a moment, may work out for him a far more
    exceeding and eternal weight of glory;” and that we hope,
    ere long, we may meet with him and all the saints in the new
    heavens and earth, where there will be no more sighing, sorrow,
    or death.

                         “‘(Signed,) NATHAN N. WHITING, _Pres._
                         “‘SYLVESTER BLISS, O. R. FASSETT, _Sec’s_.’

“Mr. Miller received the above on the 12th of May, by the hand of
his biographer. On entering his room, he was reclining on a lounge.
At the mention of his name, he immediately arose, and recognized the
messenger. He was much affected with the expression of sympathy sent by
the Conference, and returned the following reply, which was received by
the Conference at Boston, to which place it had adjourned, where it was
entered on its minutes, May 29, 1849.

                                        “‘LOW HAMPTON, MAY 12, 1849.

    “‘To my beloved brethren in Christ, assembled in Conference,
    and to the saints scattered abroad. Grace be unto you, and
    peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:—

    “‘I give thanks to God for your kind remembrance of me, as
    expressed in the resolution of the 10th of May inst., in
    your late meeting at New York city, and forwarded to me by
    the hand of Bro. Bliss. I have not ceased to make mention
    of you alway in my prayers, that you might walk together
    worthy of your high calling in Christ Jesus, that you may
    be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and
    spiritual understanding, being fruitful in every good work,
    and increasing in the knowledge of God. I feel myself greatly
    revived by your expression of sympathy, and trust that you will
    never have occasion to feel that it has been misplaced.

    “‘My multiplied and increasing infirmities admonish me that the
    time of my departure is drawing nigh. My earthly labors have
    ceased, and I now await the Master’s call, to be ready at his
    appearing, or, if it so please him, for the little while his
    coming may be delayed, to depart and be with Christ, which is
    far better than to abide in the flesh. I feel that I have but
    little choice, whether I shall be continued in life till that
    event, or my spirit be gathered to the spirits of just men
    made perfect. However God may be pleased to deal with me, I
    am sustained by the blessed assurance that, whether I wake or
    sleep, I shall be present with the Lord.

    “‘I daily have you all in grateful remembrance; and rejoice
    that so many of you continue steadfast in the faith once
    delivered to the saints, looking for that blessed hope and the
    glorious appearing of the great God, even our Saviour Jesus
    Christ. I pray God that your faith may fail not, and that you
    may continue working together in harmony, building up one
    another in the most holy faith, and, by your blameless lives
    and godly conversation, commending this gospel of Christ to the
    hearts and consciences of dying men.

    “‘I have but little hope, in my present weakness and
    infirmities, of seeing the faces of many of you in the flesh.
    Permit me, therefore, to exhort you not to be ashamed of the
    doctrine of the kingdom of Christ, nor of acknowledging on all
    proper occasions your confidence in the nearness of his coming.

    “‘My belief is unshaken in the correctness of the conclusions
    I have arrived at and maintained during the last twenty years.
    I see no reason to question the evidence on which rest the
    fundamental principles of our faith. I cannot avoid the belief
    that this earth is to be restored to its Eden state, and
    become the eternal residence of the saints; that Christ is to
    come personally, to reign on the earth; that he will redeem
    us from death, and ransom us from the power of the grave;
    that he will change our vile bodies into the likeness of his
    glorified body, and destroy those who destroy the earth; and
    that at his coming will be the restoration of all things,
    spoken of by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world
    began, the establishment of the new heavens and new earth, the
    resurrection of the righteous, and the change of the living
    wicked from the earth,—whose resurrection will not transpire
    till after one thousand years.

    “‘The evidences of Christ’s coming are continually thickening;
    it hasteth greatly; and should this earthly house of my
    tabernacle be dissolved, my hope is still strong that I shall
    shortly meet him in the air. The political clouds in the
    Eastern horizon indicate to me the near approach of the battle
    of the Lord God Almighty, the destruction of the kingdoms of
    the earth, and the establishment of the kingdom of God. We
    may not know the precise time, but I entreat of you all to be
    prepared for the approaching crisis.

    “‘Grudge not one against another, brethren. Be patient, for the
    coming of the Lord draweth nigh. Be not many masters, but let
    each one do the work which God has fitted him for. Avoid vain
    janglings and questions which gender strife. Keep constantly
    in view the great question of the coming of the Lord,—the hope
    which purifieth the heart, and tends to the unity of the whole
    body of believers. If you do this, you will do well, and will
    each seek the other’s good in preference to his own, and thus
    become living epistles, known and read of all men.

    “‘In unity of effort will be your only strength. Therefore
    I recommend your meeting often in conference, as you have
    done, to consult with and encourage each other, in these
    times of trial and temptation. Be not turned away from your
    great work by friends or foes; but let each one occupy the
    talent intrusted to him—each working in his appropriate field
    of labor. Be charitable to all, and not indulge in harsh and
    bitter denunciations against those who are not enabled to see
    with you. Cultivate that spirit of good will toward all men,
    which shall fit you to be instrumental, in the hands of God, of
    saving some; and be less interested to advance the prosperity
    of party or sect than to extend the cause of truth. Above
    all, keep close to the word of God. And, finally, brethren,
    farewell. Be perfect, be of good cheer, be of one mind, live in
    peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

                                                      “‘WM. MILLER.’

“He was at this time somewhat disposed to melancholy, but while the
writer was with him, which was two days, he partook of his food with the
family, and ate with considerable relish—which was, they stated, what he
had not done before for several weeks. He never doubted his acceptance
through the blood of Jesus, but rather shrank from the expected
sufferings attending the dissolution of the body. Still he was willing to
endure all that for the sake of the prospect beyond. In a letter written
at this date, he said:—

    “‘If the meeting of one kindred spirit is so cheering to a sick
    man here, what must be the joy of our greeting in the other
    world! The thought of death is a chilling one; but a meeting
    with the kindred spirits who are with Christ waiting for the
    consummation of his kingdom reconciles me to the idea of
    passing through the dark valley.’

“In November, 1849, Elder L. Kimball, who had had the charge of the
church in Low Hampton, took his leave of that people. He writes:—

    “‘Agreeably to Bro. Miller’s urgent request, we held the
    evening meeting (of the first Sunday in Nov.) at his house. He
    said he wanted to hear me preach once more. He also desired the
    singers to attend. After assembling, he called me to his room,
    and gave me for a text, “And when they had seen the brethren,
    they comforted them and departed.” Acts 16:40. He was drawn, in
    his easy chair, from his room to the kitchen, where he remained
    till the close of the services. He was unable to take any part,
    but expressed himself gratified, and wished that he could have
    said a few words to the brethren and friends present. It was to
    me a solemn season.’

“About the first of December, Elder D. I. Robinson visited him. He
writes:—

    “‘Such was the state of the roads that I did not arrive there
    till sunset. His house stood in sight of the stage-road to
    Rutland, so that it was a subject for observation to all the
    passengers in the stage. It was pointed out to me by one
    of them, who lived in an adjoining village. It was to me a
    fruitful subject, as I beheld, for the first time, both beauty
    and sublimity in the cultivated vale and snow-capped, venerable
    mountains in the vicinity. I thought how appropriate—how like
    the hills and vales of Judea, where Amos and other shepherds
    and former servants of the Most High lived, were called, and
    sent to warn mankind!

    “‘As I approached across the farm, I passed the grove where he
    had meditated, wept, and prayed, and entered the house of the
    aged, wornout, sick and dying servant of God, who had been so
    scorned by the world. I felt favored of God. I was welcomed in
    the simple, hearty, easy style of a Vermont Christian farmer’s
    family. That pleasant, beaming countenance of his wife, and
    the hearty shake of the hand, told me I was at home; and
    the kettle of hominy, just taken from the fire, was at once
    prophetic of my supper. And all the members of the family,
    intelligent, modest, and cordial, made me feel how really glad
    they were of the call, and to hear from those abroad.

    “‘I was quickly invited into the “east room,” where “Father
    Miller” greeted me, though he could not see so as to know me;
    but, when told, recollected distinctly. He was much changed,
    and yet so changed as to leave all the good outlines of former
    acquaintance behind. His sufferings through the summer and
    fall had been very great. He was much swollen by dropsy. His
    strength and sight were much diminished. His venerable white
    locks were few and thin, and his flesh was like that of a
    child. But his voice was full, his memory good, his intellect
    strikingly strong and clear, and his patience and resignation
    were remarkable. He asked of my welfare, and of the friends;
    and said he was never so strong in his mind that we were right
    as now. He was sure it could not be long before the coming of
    the Lord. He wished him to come soon; but, if not, to be taken
    himself to the Lord.’

“He was drawn to the table in his chair, and ate supper with the family,
probably for the last time. Elder R. left the next morning between
four and five o’clock; but Mr. Miller was awake, and arose to take an
affectionate leave of him.

“For several months he had been confined mostly to his room. During a
part of the time he had been confined to his bed, lounge, or easy chair;
and he suffered excruciating pain, which he endured with Christian
patience. During his greatest sufferings, he solaced himself by
quotations of numerous passages of Scripture, and favorite hymns of Watts
and others, expressive of the hope and joy of the redeemed.

“He had watched all the occurrences in Europe with great interest;
but, giving up the idea of seeing the Saviour before his death, he had
arranged all his business, and waited for the summons when he might
‘depart and be with Christ.’[89]

“On the 13th of December he had one of the most severe attacks of pain
which he was called to endure. It was then thought he would not survive
till the next morning, and Elder Himes was immediately telegraphed for,
at the request of Mr. M. Mr. Himes wrote:—

    “‘On my arrival, early in the morning of the 17th, he
    had obtained some relief, and was quite comfortable. On
    entering his room, he immediately recognized my voice, and,
    on approaching his bed-side, he was able to distinguish my
    features, though his eyes were dim.

    “‘Then you do know me, Father Miller, do you?’

    “‘Oh! yes; I understand,—I know what is passing.’

    “‘He was then silent for a few moments, apparently in a deep
    study. Presently he introduced the subject of my connection
    with the Advent cause, and spoke of my responsibility;
    expressed much anxiety about the cause, and alluded to his own
    departure. I assured him that he had faithfully discharged
    his duty, was clear from the blood of all men, and could now
    leave this matter in the hands of God; and, so far as I was
    concerned, I hoped for grace to enable me to be faithful in the
    ministry I had received. He seemed to assent, and fell into
    a doze,—being weak, and unable to converse longer than a few
    moments at a time.

    “‘He then spoke on the subject of the “spirit of adoption,”
    which we have now, and of the final adoption for which we look
    _at_ the second coming of the blessed Saviour. Last evening he
    said to Bro. Bosworth:—

    “‘Tell them [the brethren] we are right. The coming of the Lord
    draweth nigh; but they must be patient, and wait for him.’

    “‘His mind is still clear and strong on the subject of the
    conscious intermediate state. He believes that when he shall
    be absent from the body he will be present with the Lord. He
    expects that his flesh will slumber in the ground till Jesus
    comes and bids it rise, when he will be perfected. He never
    looked for the crown at death, but at the time when Jesus
    should come in his glory. The intermediate state is not that
    for which he longs most (though, with the apostle, he thinks it
    is “better” than this state of toil and sorrow), but the final,
    the glorified state, when the body shall be redeemed, and made
    like unto the glorious body of Christ, is the subject of this
    hope.

    “‘For some weeks past, his mind dwelt much on the subjects of
    the Judgment, the “adoption,” and the new heavens and earth.

    “‘Such views of the future glory tended to mitigate the pains
    of his body, which, at times, were violent.

        “‘Happy the spirit released from its clay.’

    was one of the hymns in which he was deeply interested during
    the last four weeks of his life. It was sung by his children,
    and those who visited him, repeatedly, at his request. It
    enraptured his soul during his last hours, when he seemed to be
    absent, conversing with God and Heaven. He often repeated:—

        “‘Victory! victory! shouting in death!’

    “‘The closing scene finally came. On the 20th of December, in
    the morning, it was manifest to all that he must soon depart.
    During the morning he made no particular conversation, but
    would break forth in expressions like the following:—

    “‘Mighty to save!’ ‘Oh, I long to be there!’ ‘Victory!
    victory!’ ‘Shouting in death!’ &c.

    “‘He finally sunk down into an easy sleeping or dozing state.
    Occasionally he roused up and opened his eyes, but was not
    able to speak, though perfectly rational, and knew us all. He
    continued to breathe shorter, and shorter, till five minutes
    past three o’clock, P. M., when he calmly and sweetly gave his
    last breath. The silver cord was loosed, the golden bowl was
    broken at the fountain, and the wheel broken at the cistern;
    the dust was left to return to the dust as it was, and the
    spirit returned to God who gave it. Peacefully and happily he
    died, with his wife, children, and friends, about his bed! I
    closed his eyes, while all other eyes were filled with tears.
    It was a solemn scene. While the wife and children and friends
    were weeping the loss of a beloved relative, I was there to
    weep the loss of a father in Israel.

    “‘The funeral service was attended on Sunday, December 23. The
    Advent chapel in Low Hampton being too small to accommodate the
    family, friends, and citizens, who were desirous of attending,
    Mr. Shaw, pastor of the Congregational church in Fairhaven,
    kindly offered the use of his large and commodious house. It
    had been Mr. Miller’s request that the funeral service should
    be held in the Advent chapel; but this being found impossible,
    the family decided to have a short service at their residence,
    to bury the body, and then to proceed to the Congregational
    house, for the performance of the more public service.

    “‘The relatives of the deceased, and a large number of his
    neighbors and others, assembled at the house at 10 A. M. I
    read the following portions of Scripture, namely, 1 Thess.
    4:13-18; Phil. 3:20, 21; Col. 3:1-3. The choir from the
    Fairhaven church then sung the hymn commencing with—

        “‘Unveil thy bosom, faithful tomb.’

    After a prayer, those present took leave of the corpse, and
    the procession—formed under the direction of Dr. Smith, of
    Castleton—proceeded to the old family burying-ground, about
    half a mile distant. The body being lowered into the tomb, the
    following hymn was sung by the choir:—

        “‘Happy the spirit released from its clay,’ &c.

    “‘With a last, lingering look, we turned from the tomb, and
    proceeded with the numerous friends to the meeting-house, to
    attend the more public service. About one hundred sleighs
    followed in the procession.

    “‘On arriving at the house, I found it densely filled with
    people, with the exception of seats reserved for the family,
    and those who had formed the procession. The service was
    commenced by singing the hymn in the “Harp,” beginning with—

        “‘How blest the righteous when he dies.’

    Mr. Shaw, pastor of the church, read the 90th psalm, and
    addressed the throne of grace; after which the hymn—

        “‘Why do we mourn departed friends?’

    was sung. I gave a discourse from Acts 26:6-8: “And now I stand
    and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto
    our fathers; unto which promise our twelve tribes, instantly
    serving God day and night, hope to come. For which hope’s
    sake, King Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews. Why should it be
    thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the
    dead?” With a narration of the prominent events in the history
    of the deceased, and a brief synopsis of his views, the speaker
    presented the hope of the promise of God to the fathers, to
    be consummated at the coming of the Lord. The services lasted
    three hours, and were concluded with the hymn—

        “‘They sleep in Jesus, and are blessed.’

    The audience were attentive and interested to the close.

                                                       J. V. HIMES.’

“Mr. Miller left a wife, six sons, and two daughters.

“At the annual Conference, held in New York, in May following, by a
unanimous vote, the following letter of condolence, prepared by a
committee appointed for that purpose, was addressed to the relatives of
the deceased:—

                             “‘IN CONFERENCE, NEW YORK, MAY 8, 1850.

    “‘_To Mrs. Lucy Miller, her children, and other relatives_—

    “‘AFFLICTED FRIENDS: Since our last meeting, you have been
    called to mourn the death of a beloved husband, a tender
    parent, and an affectionate friend. In your bereavement
    we truly sympathize. In your loss we also have lost a
    friend and brother. But we mourn our loss in view of higher
    considerations. We regard him as a man called of God to a most
    important work; and as a man greatly blessed in the successful
    performance of that work. The unsullied integrity of his life
    was crowned by a peaceful and hopeful death. The deep sense
    of gratitude we feel to God for the benefits conferred on us
    through his instrumentality, we trust will find a response
    in many Christian hearts. Through the divine blessing on his
    teaching, our attention has been directed to a more faithful
    study of the Scriptures, to clearer, more harmonious and
    correct views of divine truth. We have thus been led to rejoice
    in hope of the glory to be revealed at the appearing of Christ.
    We fondly hoped that he might have been spared till our
    expectations were realized. He has passed away. May we remember
    that our obligations are increased by the truth which he
    taught. May we be prepared for a reunion with him and all the
    redeemed in that day. Our sincere and united prayer is, that
    the grace which sustained him under his severe trials, and in
    the closing scene, may support you in your bereavement, and in
    all the afflictions of the present state, and secure to you the
    enjoyment of the glorious future. Tendering to your acceptance
    this expression of our sympathy and condolence, we remain your
    affectionate brethren in the faith once delivered to the saints.

                                “‘(Signed,) N. N. WHITING, _Pres._
                                “‘O. R. FASSETT, S. BLISS, _Sec’s_.’

“The death of Mr. Miller was very generally noticed by the religious
and secular press, many of whom spoke in just terms of his honesty and
ability. Other papers connected with his memory extravagances with which
he had no sympathy and never participated in.”




FOOTNOTES


[1] For a full exposition of the subject of the sanctuary and the nature
of its cleansing, see Thoughts on Daniel, by U. Smith, and The Sanctuary
and Twenty-three Hundred Days, by J. N. Andrews.

[2] See John 14:3; Acts. 1:11; 1 Thess. 4:16; Rev. 1:7; Matt. 16:27;
24:30; Mark. 8:38; 13:26; Dan. 7:13.

[3] Dan. 7:14, 18, 22, 27; Matt. 25:34; Luke 12:32; 19:12, 15; 22:29; 1
Cor. 9:25; 2 Tim. 4:1, 8; James 1:12; 1 Pet. 5:4.

[4] 2 Pet. 3:7-10; Isa. 65:17-19; Rev. 21:22.

[5] 1 Cor. 15:20, 23, 49, 51-53; Phil. 3:20, 21; 1 Thess. 4:14-17; 1 John
3:2.

[6] Isa. 34:8; 40:2, 5; 41:10-12; Rom. 8:21-23; 1 Cor. 1:7, 8; 4:14;
15:54, 56; Eph. 5:27; Col. 1:22; 1 Thess. 3:13; Heb. 2:13-15; Jude 24;
Rev. 20:1-6.

[7] It will be seen that Wm. Miller held the doctrine of consciousness in
death, which most of the Adventists have renounced.

                                                                     J. W.

[8] Ps. 50:3; 97:3; Isa. 60:15, 16; 24:21, 22; Dan. 7:10; Mal. 4:1; Matt.
3:12; John 25:29; Acts 24:15; 1 Cor. 3:13; 1 Thess. 5:2, 3; 2 Thess.
1:7-9; 1 Peter 1:7; 2 Peter 3:7, 10; Jude 6, 7, 14, 15; Rev. 20:3, 13-15.

[9] Ps. 37:9-11, 22, 28, 29, 34; Prov. 2:21, 22; 10:30; Isa. 40:21; Matt.
5:5; 6:10.

[10] Rev. 20:2-7.

[11] Matt. 13:37-43; 24:14; Dan. 7:21, 22; 2 Thess. 2:8.

[12] 2 Pet. 3; Isa. 65:17; Rev. 21:22.

[13] Rom. 2:14, 15; 4:13; 9:6; 10:12; 11:17; Gal. 3:29; Eph. 2:14, 15.

[14] The supposition that two of the periods of Daniel extended to the
second advent constituted Mr. Miller’s mistake, hence the consequent
disappointment.

                                                                     J. W.

[15] At this place they raised, and placed in his hands, quite a sum of
money for his services. He took $1.50 to pay his stage fare to the next
place, and directed them to give the balance to some benevolent object.

[16] A son of Mr. M., who was at that time postmaster in Low Hampton.

[17] Mr. M. was in the habit of replying to those who denied that God
has revealed the time by asking them: “What ‘wonders’ are referred to in
Daniel 12:6?” “Who gave the answer to the inquiry there asked?” and “If
those ‘wonders’ include the resurrection,—and the Lord has sworn with
an oath that it shall be for a time, times, and a half,—is not the time
revealed?” adding. “Whether we understand it correctly or not, is another
question.”

[18] See Introduction, vol. 1, p. 333; vol. 4, pp. 189, 191.

[19] See Harmony of Scripture.

[20] Theol. Dic., p. 228.

[21] A Hebrew scholar, of high reputation, makes the following remarks
upon the word: “The verb _chathak_ (in the Niphal form, passive,
nechtak), is found _only_ in Daniel 9:24. Not another instance of its use
can be traced in the entire Hebrew Testament. As Chaldaic and Rabbinical
usage must give us the true sense of the word: if we are guided by these,
it has the _single_ signification of CUTTING or CUTTING OFF. In the
Chaldeo-Rabbinic dictionary of Stockius, the word ‘_chathak_’ is thus
defined:—

“‘Scidit, abscidit, conscidit, inscidit, excidit.’—_To cut_, to cut away,
to cut in pieces, to cut or engrave, _to cut off_.

“Mercerus, in his ‘Thesaurus,’ furnishes a specimen of Rabbinical usage
in the phrase chathikah shelbasar—‘a piece of flesh,’ or ‘a cut of
flesh.’ He translates the word as it occurs in Daniel 9:24, by ‘præcisa
est’—WAS CUT OFF.

“In the literal version of Arias Montanus it is translated ‘decisa
est’—WAS CUT OFF; in the marginal reading, which is grammatically
correct, it is rendered by the plural ‘decisæ sunt’—_were cut off_.

“In the Latin version of Junius and Tremellius, nechtak is rendered
‘decisæ sunt.’—_were cut off_.

“Again: in Theodotion’s Greek version of Daniel (which is the version
used in the Vatican copy of the Septuagint as being the most faithful),
it is rendered by συνετμἡθησαν—_were cut off_; and in the Venetian copy
by τετμήνται—_have been cut_. The idea of _cutting off_ is pursued in the
Vulgate, where the phrase is ‘abbreviatæ sunt,’ have been shortened.

“Thus _Chaldaic and Rabbinical authority_, and _that of the earliest
versions_,—_the Septuagint and Vulgate_,—_give the SINGLE SIGNIFICATION
OF CUTTING OFF TO THIS VERB_.”

[22] Dowling’s Reply to Miller.

[23] It will be evident to the reader that Mr. Miller held the doctrine
of endless misery in a local hell at the time he gave this discourse. In
fact, there is no evidence that he changed his views on the immortality
question to the time of his death. His writings and his labors give
evidence that his mind was not called to the investigation of the
subject, it being fully occupied with the great second advent question.
The discussion of the immortality theme among the Adventists seems to
have been left to younger men at a later period.

                                                                     J. W.

[24] From personal acquaintance with Mr. Miller, and a thorough knowledge
of his teachings, we are happy to state that during his entire public
life he had no sympathy whatever with those teachings and influences
which lead to fanaticism; and that his broad and liberal feelings of
Christian fellowship are expressed in the following address.

                                                                     J. W.

[25] While it may now appear very evident that the stand taken by
Mr. Miller, relative to the character, and the final results, of the
fanaticism of which he speaks, was a proper and right one, it is not so
clear that he disposed of the question of the gifts and manifestations
of the Spirit of God, in harmony with the general scope of Scripture
testimony upon the subject. The reader will observe that he does not
produce the proof, in his accustomed style of proving his points, that
the great commission, with its duties, and its blessings, was given to
the ministry for only a limited portion of the Christian age. Mr. Miller,
Mr. Himes, and other leading Adventists, failed to show the time when,
and by whom, the gifts were removed from the church of God. This gave the
fanatics great advantage; and as they maintained the scriptural position
upon the perpetuity of spiritual gifts they gained very large numbers to
their ranks. The false positions of those who opposed them added fuel to
the flame of fanaticism already kindled, and resulted in the breaking up
of the once united and happy body of believers.

Seventh-day Adventists have held the scriptural position upon the
perpetuity of the gifts from their first existence. They have taken heed
to the admonition of Paul to “Despise not prophesyings;” but to “Prove
all things;” and “Hold fast that which is good.” 2 Thess. 5:20, 21. They
have with their Bibles in their hands applied the rule of John by which
to test the spirits. “Believe not every spirit; but try the spirits,
whether they are of God.” 1 John 4:1. With this position those who have
held it have been prepared to meet every form of fanaticism that has
sought a place among us, and now our people are reaping the good fruits
of their patient, firm, and energetic efforts upon this point, in the
unparalleled union and order throughout the ranks. We would not encourage
a disposition to blame those who acted according to the best light they
had under the pressure of the trials of the past; but we here express our
solemn conviction that very much of the past fanaticism and confusion
among the Adventists who could not adopt an unscriptural position, is
chargeable to those leaders who took a false position relative to the
perpetuity of spiritual gifts.

                                                                     J. W.

[26] “1. The ark rested on the seventh month, seventeenth day. This has
an appearance of a type, the rest of the gospel ark at the judgment. Gen.
8:4.

“2. The sanctuary and worshipers, and all appertaining to it, were
cleansed on the seventh month, tenth to seventeenth day. Lev. 16:29-34.
Surely this is a type.

“3. The Israelites of God were to afflict their souls, from the evening
of the ninth to the evening of the tenth day, seventh month. Lev.
23:27-32, a type of the troubles, Dan. 12:1.

“4. The holy convocation of all Israel, seventh month, 1-15th day, Lev.
23:24; Num. 29:1. Is not this a type of the gathering of the elect? Ps.
81:3, 4; 98:6-9.

“5. The great feast, seventh month, fifteenth day, all Israel appeared
before the Lord. Lev. 23:34; 1 Kings 8:2. Type of the marriage supper.
Heb. 9:9, 10.

“6. The jubilee trump sounded, seventh month, tenth day, throughout all
the land. Lev. 25:9, 10. Type of final redemption. 1 Thess. 4:14-17.

“7. The time of release of all Hebrews in bondage, seventh month,
fifteenth day. Deut. 15:1-15; 31:10, 11; Jer. 34:8-14, at the feast of
the tabernacles. This evidently is typical of the release of the Israel
of God.

“8. The atonement was made on the tenth day of the seventh month, and
is certainly typical of the atonement Christ is now making for us. Lev.
16:1-34, antitype. Heb. 9:1-28.

“9. When the high priest came out of the holy of holies after making the
atonement, he blessed the people. Lev. 9:22, 23; 2 Sam. 6:18. So will our
great High Priest. Heb. 9:28. This was on the seventh month, tenth day.

“10. This was in harvest time, the feast of harvest was kept in the
seventh month, from the tenth day to the seventeenth. Lev. 23:10. And the
end of the world is compared to the harvest. Matt. 13:30. Christ says
plain in “harvest time.”

“11. Also in the feast of tabernacles, in the great day of the feast
in the last day. John 7:2, 37. So in the last great day, Jesus’ voice
will call forth the righteous dead. John 5:28, 29; 1 Thess. 4:16.”— _Wm.
Miller in Sings of the Times for May 17, 1843_.

[27] Here Mr. Miller expresses the views and feelings of the Adventists
generally for a time after the disappointment in October, 1844. Many of
the leading men in the movement soon became impatient, and backed out of
this position by rashly condemning the time movements of 1843 and 1844 as
the result of error, and they took the majority of believers with them.
This division left those who took good heed to the godly exhortations of
Mr. Miller exposed to great trials and the ravages of fanaticism.

God had the great sanctuary question in reserve for the Adventists,
which, in connection with the three messages of Rev. 14, if they had
waited patiently in the position where his word and providence had
brought them, would have explained the past, given certainty to the then
present, and would have opened before them the future work of the third
message.

                                                                     J. W.

[28] From this communication, the reader will be able to gather much
relative to the trials of the time when it was written. Mr. Miller had
not the true light upon the sanctuary question, consequently held that
the 2300 and 1335 days reached to the second coming of Christ. But at
the same time, his convictions were so very strong that the hand of
God had been in the distinct movements of 1843 and 1844, that leading
Adventists could not influence him to reject the work of God in his past
deep experience. This communication called out a reply nearly twice its
length from the editors of the _Herald_. He respected and loved these his
fellow-laborers; and any statement that he was not influenced by them to
a greater or less extent would be unreasonable. And although at a later
period he did enter the lecturing field, he held firmly, to the day of
his death, that he was fully justified in preaching the time.

                                                                     J. W.

[29] The leading object in giving matter of this kind from the pen of
Mr. Miller is to let the Christian character and tender spirit of the
man appear, whom God had raised up to do a great work. He had been a
brave soldier in the service of his country, and had fearlessly stood in
defense of unpopular truth, and had dared to meet opposition, scoffs, and
even scandal, from the popular churches. But now, under the most trying
circumstances, we see the aged Christian warrior, clothed with humility
as with a garment, and his spirit all softened and sweetened by divine
grace, tenderly entreating his brethren to be patient, gentle, true, and
kind.

                                                                     J. W.

[30] 2 Pet. 3:7, 10, 13.

[31] Dan. 7:27.

[32] Heb. 9:28.

[33] Acts 1:9, 11.

[34] Matt. 2:1.

[35] Matt. 1:18.

[36] Matt. 1:25.

[37] Matt. 11:5.

[38] 1 Pet. 3:18.

[39] Luke 23:46.

[40] Luke 23:53.

[41] 1 Cor. 15:4.

[42] Luke 24:51.

[43] Acts 3:21.

[44] 1 Thess. 4:16, 17; 1 Cor. 15:52.

[45] 2 Thess. 1:7, 8.

[46] 2 Tim. 4:1.

[47] Matt. 24:33.

[48] Dan. 7:25; 8:14; 9:24; 12:7, 11, 12; Rev. 9:10, 15; 11:2, 3; 12:6,
14; 13:5.

[49] Dan. 2d, 7th, 8th, 9th, 11th, and 12th chaps.; Rev. 9th, 11th, 12th,
13th, 14th and 17th chaps.

[50] Matt. 24:29; Luke 21:25, 26.

[51] Luke 21:28; 1 Thess. 4:18.

[52] 2 Cor. 5:11.

[53] Luke 13:24, 25.

[54] Acts 20:21; Mark 1:15.

[55] Titus 2:11-13.

[56] John 5:28, 29.

[57] Acts 24:15.

[58] 1 Cor. 15:23.

[59] Rev. 20:5.

[60] 1 Cor. 15:51, 52.

[61] Rev. 20:2-7.

[62] Isa. 11; 35:1, 2, 5-10; 65:17-25.

[63] Rom. 4:13.

[64] Rom. 9:6.

[65] Rom. 10:12.

[66] Eph. 2:14, 15.

[67] Rom. 2:6.

[68] Gal. 3:29.

[69] Eze. 37:12; Heb. 11:12, 13; Rom. 11:17; John 5:28, 29.

[70] Matt. 24:14.

[71] Dan. 7:21, 22.

[72] Matt. 13:37-43.

[73] 2 Thess. 2:8.

[74] Rev. 5:9, 10; 21:24.

[75] Matt. 28:19, 20.

[76] Rev. 14:7.

[77] Acts 3:19, 20.

[78] Dan. 12:13; Rev. 6:9-11; Rom. 8:22, 23.

[79] Heb. 11:40.

[80] 1 Pet. 1:4, 5.

[81] 2 Tim. 4:8.

[82] Ps. 17:15.

[83] Matt. 25:34.

[84] Luke 20:36.

[85] The great sin of this time evidently was the disposition of the
leading men in the cause to draw back from the clear position, powerful
work, and deep experience, of the time movement. They were disappointed
and greatly embarrassed. And, instead of patiently waiting for God to
open to their minds the great sanctuary question in his own good time,
they impatiently and rashly cast away their confidence in the work of
God, and abandoned themselves to the fearful work described in the
following prophetic exhortation of Paul: “Cast not away therefore your
confidence, which hath great recompense of reward. For ye have need of
patience, that, after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the
promise. For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and
will not tarry. Now the just shall live by faith; but if any man draw
back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. But we are not of them who
draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of the
soul.” Heb. 10:35-39.

The application of this exhortation is so very natural and forcible that
it will hardly be called in question. It was a fearful time. Satan was
in a most powerful manner attaching the fancies and extravagances of
fanaticism to the only true and correct position. This made the gulf
between the two parties still wider. Both in their extreme positions hurt
each other. The course of those who were drawing back filled the other
with terror, while their extremes in turn confirmed the more prudent that
to draw back was the only safe position.

In such a position, with God’s frown upon them, he could not bless their
associated efforts at the Albany Conference to rise above existing
elements of confusion, and shake off the reproach that was being brought
upon the second advent cause. Associated action, upon proper ground,
has been right in all periods of the Christian church; but that work at
the Albany Conference proved itself not of God, in that it has, in the
main, come to nought. The present condition of the surviving leaders in
that compact to facilitate a grand march into Egypt, and who drew Mr.
Miller in a degree into their confederacy, is indeed deplorable. But that
faithful man of God, with the weight of years, and the feebleness of the
terrible strain of labors upon him, could not be induced to deny the hand
of God in the advent movement, to which he had confidingly devoted all.

                                                                     J. W.

[86] With Mr. Miller, there were very many who deplored the spirit in
which the Babylon question was handled by rash spirits, and a very few,
including Mr. Miller, never accepted the view that the term applied to
all corrupted Christianity, Protestant as well as Papal. But we do not
regard the error of these a tithe as injurious to the cause of truth and
religion as the conduct of selfish and rash ones who held the truth in
unrighteousness.

                                                                     J. W.

[87] The reader may now understand the real position of the man whom
God had led in the great movement which occurred in fulfillment of the
first message of Rev. 14. We believe that the third message, now being
proclaimed, and the preparatory work for the coming of the Son of man now
in progress with those who embrace it, is by the direct providence of
God, in fulfillment of certain portions of his word. And this position
makes the conclusions that the first and second messages of the same
series were given under the same providence, and that God raised up
William Miller to bring out the great truths of the first message, appear
very reasonable. Hence we are the more willing to let him speak for
himself, that the candid reader may correctly view this representative
and providential servant of Jesus Christ, whose name is associated in the
public mind with Adventism everywhere.

But few public men “grow old gracefully.” Mr. Miller entered upon his
public labors as a lecturer upon the prophecies in the strength of
manhood, after acquiring habits of self-reliance, firmness, and undaunted
courage, as an army and civil officer. And this stamp of character,
sanctified by the grace of God, constituted one of the important
qualifications necessary to meet the different forms of determined
opposition and persecution which he met. And then, after nerving himself
to the battle for thirteen years, forming the strongest combative habits
at that period of his life when he was about sixty years of age, when
strong men’s habits generally become very strongly established, to
see him calmly and gently laying off the armor, and under his bitter
disappointment, to witness his resignation to the will of God, and his
affectionate appeals and warnings to his younger brethren to be holy men
of God, ready for the coming of the Son of man, carries the strongest
conviction to candid minds that God had raised him up to do the very work
which he did do. As he thus laid his armor off, he said to his brethren
that his work was done. In this we can see the hand of God. He had spent
the strength of his ripe manhood in giving the first message. His burden
fell off, which he interpreted, for a short time, to mean that the work
of warning sinners was done. But the great work of the third message
was then in the future, and had God designed to use him in giving it,
he would have given him a new lease of life, and opened the subject to
his mind. But he did not see this work nor feel its importance; and why
should he? He had done his work faithfully and well, and was soon to
sleep in Jesus.

It is proper here to state that Mr. Miller did not view the second
message as we do. Neither did he change his views upon the immortality
and Sabbath questions. Having finished his mission in giving the first
message, and having reached the point in respect to age and debility,
from his extremely arduous labors as a lecturer for thirteen years, with
no periods of cessation, only when compelled by sickness, the candid
reader can see the love and wisdom of God in not impressing his mind with
those subjects which he could not investigate and vindicate before the
people.

Having done, and well done, the great work given him to do, the probation
of public labor with him successfully past according to the will of God,
he could say in the language of Paul, “I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge,
shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also
that love his appearing.” 2 Tim. 4:7, 8.

It is just what might be expected, that those who understandingly embrace
the principles of the third message, would first inquire relative to the
second and first messages, and would feel the deepest interest in the man
whom God raised up to lead off in the opening work of giving the great
threefold warning to the world.

Those who have been continually publishing a new time upon the heels of a
failure, have been, not only disgusting the public, but, at each effort,
have been virtually condemning the position of Mr. Miller on the time
question, and losing regard for his valuable labors. These can have but
little, if any, interest in his life and views.

And on the other hand, those who stood with him on the time question
in 1844, and have confessed to the world that they were in error, and
have given up their past second-advent experience, virtually condemn his
position and work, and can take, comparatively, but little interest in
the history of his life, views, and labors. Both of these classes have
departed from the position of Mr. Miller, and have denied, or, at least,
hold very lightly their past second-advent experience, and have left the
field to Seventh-day Adventists, who stand upon the “original advent
faith.” And while occupying the position we do relative to the past
movement, the public have reason to expect that, while we hold that Mr.
Miller moved in the providence of God in his work, we should publish the
facts as they existed in his life, views, and labors, in explanation and
defense, so far as such facts constitute a defense, of our position.

We still love the advent name, and hold it very dear. And while we
hold the name, consistency would lead us to cherish and also hold dear
the very means that made us Adventists. To still hold the advent name,
and turn round and curse, or deny, or even hold lightly, the means God
employed to make us what we are, seems the very climax of inconsistency.
When Seventh-day Adventists can no longer honor the great second-advent
movement, but feel called upon to confess to the world that the pioneers
of the cause were mistaken on the very calculation that shook the world,
and which resulted in making Adventists a separate people, then they will
drop “Adventists” from their denominational name, and pass for simply
Sabbatarian Christians.

                                                                     J. W.

[88] God in his providence is justifying the preaching of time by the
light of the heavenly sanctuary, in connection with the third angel’s
message.

                                                                     J. W.

[89] Mr. Bliss, Mr. Miller’s biographer, served a party who held the
popular views of consciousness in death. This is also true of Eld. Himes,
who professed faith in the same views of man in death at that time. This
accounts for the decided efforts of both these friends of Mr. Miller to
use his last experience on the side of natural immortality. It is proper,
however, here to state that Eld. Himes, when differently related to the
Advent people, was suddenly and unexpectedly found on the other side
of the immortality question, and has since given his pen and voice in
support of unconsciousness in death and immortality alone through Christ.
The effort to use the honest convictions of this aged and wornout pilgrim
before and at his last sickness on the side of popular error shows a want
of plain Bible testimony to sustain a sinking cause.

The state between the cessation of the mortal life and the resurrection
to immortal life being unconsciousness, hence no apparent lapse of time
do those who sleep in Jesus, it seems most reasonable that the Holy
Spirit should impress the dying Christian with the scenes of glory which
he is next to witness at the resurrection of the just, whether the time
of that resurrection to consciousness be near or distant. And how very
natural for those who die in the faith of consciousness in death to
suppose that they immediately enter upon the glories of the heavenly
world.

                                                                     J. W.




INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


  Articles of belief, pp. 59-64

  Address to believers in the advent near, 173-176

  Admissions of a lawyer, 155

  Address to Christians of all denominations, 272-277

  Address concerning the disappointment, 282

  An illustration of the Advent message, 304

  Address to believers, after the passing of the time, 320-334

  Answer to letter of N. N. Whiting on the subject of the “shut door”,
        335-338

  Albany Conference—Declaration of principles, 344-350

  Albany Conference—Miller’s address, 350-355

  Associated action, 347

  Apology and defense, 359-362

  Address to the public, 381-385


  _Boston Investigator_, letter in, 101

  _Boston Post_, letter in, 162


  Conversion, 43, 357

  Conviction of duty to preach, 65, 72

  Correspondence on his views, 68

  Calls for labor in many places, 102

  _Christian Secretary_, 159

  _Christian Reflector_, account of labor in, 191

  Camp-meeting, East Kingston, N. H., 162
    Exeter, N. H., 248
    Plainfield, Ct., 254

  Conference address, 249

  Counsel to believers, 315-319

  Conference at Albany, 343

  Conference letter to his family, 407-408


  Deistical Sentiments, 25-32

  Difficulties in his study, 66, 67

  Death of his mother—his impression, 105-107

  Dr. Dowling, 190, 195, 200, 204, 205, 206, 211, 213

  Dr. Chase, 190, 192, 193, 195

  Dr. Jarvis, 190, 193, 196, 199, 205, 211, 215

  Dr. Hamilton, 190, 193, 204, 205

  Disappointment of seventh month movement, 300

  Definiteness of prophetic time, 362

  Death and funeral, 405-407


  Early life, 13-18

  Early Christian life, 64-66

  Eld. Hendryx’ first acquaintance with Miller, 73

  Eld. T. Cole, Lowell, his disappointment, &c., 122

  Eld. Himes’ first acquaintance, 127

  Extension of labors, 128

  Eld. David Millard, testimony of, 131

  Eld. D. I. Robinson, letter of, 133

  Eld. L. D. Fleming, Portland, Me., his account of labor, 139


  Four fundamental points, 7

  First public lecture, 80

  Fanaticism, its commencement, 249

  False reports of Mr. Miller’s property, 267

  Faith in his experience in the work, 369-374


  _Gazette and Advertiser_, Long Island, testimony of, 245


  Home of Mr. Miller, 262

  How to deal with those in error, 385, 386

  His last sickness—described by Eld. Himes, 403-405


  Interview on a Hudson River steamer, 91

  Interesting conversation with ministers, 177

  Illustration by time of Noah, 222

  Interview with Methodist ministers on a steamer, 286-289

  Interesting letter from Harrisburg, 291


  John Starkweather, leader in fanaticism in Boston, 251


  Low Hampton, settlement there, 39

  Labor in a revival, 71

  License to preach, Baptist churches in Hampton and Whitehall, 93

  Letter to Eld. Hendryx, 75, 82, 88, 91, 96, 98, 101, 102, 106, 108

  Letter from Charles Fitch, 113

  Letter from pastor in West Troy, 115

  Letter from pastor of Baptist church in Rome, N. Y., 117

  Letter to his son, from Burlington, Vt., 118

  Letter from Boston, 121

  _Lynn Record_, notice in the, 124

  Letter of S. Hawley, Cong. minister, Groton, Mass., 126

  Lectured on steamboat, 166

  Letter from home, 169

  Letter from Mr. Miller on false reports of time, 182

  Letter of Miller on the fanaticism, 255

  Letter to I. E. Jones in _Advent Herald_, 311

  Letter to the Boston _Investigator_, 339-342

  Loss of sight, 392

  Letter written when he was blind, 394


  Military life, 33-38

  “Monomaniac:” interview with a physician, 76-78

  Memoranda of preaching, 98

  Ministers of various denominations approve his labors, 104

  Maine _Wesleyan Journal_, testimony of, 141

  “Midnight Cry,” letter from a member of Yale College, 168

  Miller and his reviewers, 188

  Mr. Shimeal, 193, 199, 205, 206

  Miller’s views sustained by the great body of expositors, 189-216


  Newark, N. J., meeting in the “big tent”, 166

  _N. Y. Herald’s_ false report of the time set, 181

  _N. Y. Observer_ on same, 181

  Notes on points of doctrine, 52-54
    on prophetic periods, 56
    on money received, 110
    on replying to questions, 177
    on Hebrew word _hhatak_, determined, cut off, Dan. 9:24, 202
    on the fanaticism, 249
    on Miller’s views of spiritual gifts, 256, 257
    from _Signs of Times_ on the types, 295, 296
    on the disappointment, 307
    on Mr. Miller’s humility and kindness of spirit, 337
    on Scripture citations on points of doctrine, 345-349
    on drawing back from Advent faith, 355, 356
    on the subject of Babylon, 363, 364
    on the “shut door”, 368-370
    on the sanctuary and time, 8, 372
    on the intermediate state, 402


  Patriotic sentiments, 21-24

  Prophecies, his first views of the, 51-59

  Public labors, commencement of, 79

  Publication of lectures, 130

  _Pittsburgh Gazette_, testimony of, 186

  Prof. Stuart, 190, 192, 193, 194, 197, 199

  Prof. Hinton, 191, 192

  Prof. Bush, 196, 197, 198
    his letter to Wm. Miller, 8, 9

  Prof. Pond, 196

  Phrenological Examination in Boston, 156-158

  Passing of the time, 278

  Patience under disappointment, 306


  Religious Impressions, 41-43

  Rules of Interpretation, 48-51

  Results of early labors, 83-101

  Reverend, repudiates the title of, 97

  Reproof of various errors, 364-367

  Resolution of sympathy in his blindness, of N. Y. Conf., 395

  Response to resolutions of N. Y. Conf., 396-399


  Study of the Scriptures, 46

  _Signs of The Times_, publication of, 134

  Synopsis of his views, 170-173

  _Sandy Hill Herald_, remarks of, 183-185

  Seventy weeks and 2300 days, 217-221, 372

  Specimens of his preaching, 228-245

  Sickness of Mr. Miller, 247

  Seventh month movement—his view of it, 375-379

  Sickness in Canada, 386-388


  The Scriptures, his love of, 92, 93

  _The Fountain_, temperance paper, testimony of, 167

  _The Countryman_, testimony of, 186

  Treatment of opponents, 217

  The seventh-month movement, 295


  Universalism, letter on, 87

  Universalist exhorted, 95


  Visit of Lafayette, 70

  Visits to Massachusetts, 121

  Visit to his house, by D. I. Robinson, 400


  Way opens for public labors, 102

  Watertown, Mass., account of Mr. Medbury, Baptist minister, 136

  Whittier, the poet, letter of, 163

  Washington City, labors in, 277

  “What I have not done”—an interesting letter, 388-390




CATALOGUE

Of Books, Pamphlets, Tracts, &c., Issued by the Seventh-Day Adventist
Publishing Association.


THE ADVENT REVIEW & HERALD OF THE SABBATH, weekly. Terms, $2.00 a year,
in advance.

THE YOUTH’S INSTRUCTOR, monthly, devoted to moral and religious
instruction. Terms, 50 cts. a year, in advance.

THE HEALTH REFORMER, monthly, devoted to an exposition of the laws of
life, etc. Terms, $1.00 a year, in advance.

THE ADVENT TIDENDE, a religious monthly in the Danish language. Terms,
$1.00 a year, in advance.

THE SVENSK ADVENT HÀROLD, a religious monthly in the Swedish tongue.
Terms, $1.00 a year, in advance.

THE HISTORY OF THE SABBATH AND THE FIRST DAY OF THE WEEK. By J. N.
Andrews. $1.25.

THOUGHTS ON THE BOOK OF DANIEL, critical and practical. By U. Smith.
Bound, $1.00; condensed edition, paper, 35 cts.

THOUGHTS ON THE REVELATION, critical and practical. By U. Smith. 328 pp.,
$1.00.

THE NATURE AND DESTINY OF MAN. By U. Smith. 384 pp., bound, $1.00, paper,
40 cts.

THE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT: or a Discussion between W. H. Littlejohn
and the editor of the _Christian Statesman_ on the Sabbath question.
$1.00.

THE SPIRIT OF PROPHECY, Vols. 1 & 2. By Ellen G. White. Each $1.00.

THE CHRISTIAN LIFE AND PUBLIC LABORS OF WM. MILLER, the noted Lecturer
and Writer upon the Prophecies. $1.00.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF ELD. JOSEPH BATES, with portrait of the author. 318 pp.,
$1.00.

SABBATH READINGS; or Moral and Religious Reading for Youth and Children.
400 pp., 60 cts.; in five pamphlets, 50 cts.

THE GAME OF LIFE, with notes. Three illustrations, 5×6 inches each,
representing Satan playing with man for his soul. In board, 50 cts., in
paper, 30 cts.

HYMNS AND SPIRITUAL SONGS for Camp-meetings and other Religious
Gatherings. Compiled by Eld. James White. 196 pp. Bound, 50 cts., paper,
25 cts.

THE UNITED STATES IN PROPHECY. By U. Smith. Bound, 40 cts.; paper, 20
cts.

THE ADVENT KEEPSAKE; a daily text of Scripture on the Second Advent, etc.
Plain muslin, 25 cts.; gilt, 40 cts.

SERMONS ON THE SABBATH AND LAW; embracing an Outline of the Biblical and
Secular History of the Sabbath for 6000 years. By J. N. Andrews. 25 cts.

THE STATE OF THE DEAD. By U. Smith. 224 pp., 25 cts.

HISTORY of the Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul. By D. M.
Canright. 25 cts.

OUR FAITH AND HOPE, Nos. 1 & 2.—Sermons on the Advent, &c. By James
White. Each 20 cts.

REFUTATION OF THE AGE TO COME. By J. H. Waggoner. Price, 20 cts.

THE ATONEMENT; an Examination of a Remedial System in the light of Nature
and Revelation. By J. H. Waggoner. 20 cts.

THE NATURE AND TENDENCY OF MODERN SPIRITUALISM. By J. H. Waggoner. 20 cts.

THE BIBLE FROM HEAVEN; a Dissertation. 20 cts.

MIRACULOUS POWERS. 20 cts.

THE MINISTRATION OF ANGELS; and the Origin, History, and Destiny of
Satan. By D. M. Canright. 20 cts.

THE DESTINY OF THE WICKED. By U. Smith. 15 cts.

COMPLETE TESTIMONY OF THE FATHERS, concerning the Sabbath and First Day
of the Week. By J. N. Andrews. 15 cts.

THE MESSAGES OF REV. 14, particularly the Third Angel’s Message and
Two-Horned Beast. By J. N. Andrews. 15 cts.

THE RESURRECTION OF THE UNJUST; a Vindication of the Doctrine. By J. H.
Waggoner. 15 cts.

THE SAINTS’ INHERITANCE; or, The Earth Made New. By J. N. Loughborough.
10 cts.

THE SANCTUARY AND TWENTY-THREE HUNDRED DAYS. By J. N. Andrews. 10 cts.

SUNDAY SEVENTH-DAY EXAMINED. A Refutation of Mede, Jennings, Akers, and
Fuller. By J. N. Andrews. 10 cts.

THE TRUTH FOUND; the Nature and Obligation of the Sabbath of the Fourth
Commandment. By J. H. Waggoner. 10 cts.

REVIEW OF GILFILLAN, and other authors, on the Sabbath. By T. B. Brown.
10 cts.

VINDICATION OF THE TRUE SABBATH. By J. W. Morton. 10 cts.

DATE OF THE SEVENTY WEEKS. By J. N. Andrews. 10 cts.

THE SEVEN TRUMPETS; an Exposition of Rev. 8 and 9. 10 cts.

MATTHEW TWENTY-FOUR. By James White. 10 cts.

THE POSITION AND WORK OF THE TRUE PEOPLE OF GOD under the Third Angel’s
Message. By W. H. Littlejohn. 10 cts.

THE HOPE OF THE GOSPEL. By J. N. Loughborough. 10 cts.

SERMON ON THE TWO COVENANTS. 10 cts.

AN APPEAL TO THE BAPTISTS, from the Seventh-day Baptists, for the
Restoration of the Bible Sabbath. 10 cts.

MILTON ON THE STATE OF THE DEAD. 5 cts.

FOUR-CENT TRACTS: The Two Covenants—The Law and the Gospel—The Seventh
Part of Time—Celestial Railroad—Samuel and the Witch of Endor—The Ten
Commandments not Abolished—Address to the Baptists—The Present Truth—The
Second Advent—The Sufferings of Christ—The Two Thrones, Representing the
Kingdoms of Grace and Glory.

THREE-CENT TRACTS: Much in Little—The Lost-Time Question—Spiritualism
a Satanic Delusion—Infidel Cavils Considered—The End of the
Wicked—Scripture References—Who Changed the Sabbath?

TWO-CENT TRACTS: Definite Seventh Day—Seven Reasons for Sunday-Keeping
Examined—Sabbath by Elihu—The Rich Man and Lazarus—Argument on
Sabbaton—The Millennium—Departing and Being with Christ—Fundamental
Principles of S. D. Adventists—The Sanctuary of the Bible—The Judgment,
or the Waymarks of Daniel to the Holy City.

ONE-CENT TRACTS: Appeal on Immortality—Brief Thoughts on
Immortality—Thoughts for the Candid—Sign of the Day of God—The two
Laws—Geology and the Bible—The Perfection of the Ten Commandments—The
Coming of the Lord—Without Excuse—Which Day, and God’s Answers.

THE WAY OF LIFE: a beautiful Allegorical Picture, illustrating the plan
of salvation. Size, 19×24 inches. $1.00.

Works in Other Languages.

The Association also publishes works on some of the above-named subjects
in the German, French, Danish, Swedish, and Holland languages.

☞ Any of the foregoing works will be sent by mail to any part of the
United States, post-paid, on receipt of the prices above stated. Full
Catalogues sent gratis, on application.

⁂ Address

                                                       REVIEW & HERALD,
                                                       BATTLE CREEK, MICH.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 73721 ***
