
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 76599 ***





                             THE MEMOIRS OF
                               ALEXANDER
                                 HERZEN

                                   I




                                  NOTE

                This translation has been made by
                arrangement from the sole complete
                and copyright edition of _My Past
                and Thoughts_, that published in the
                original Russian at Berlin, 1921.




                         _MY PAST AND THOUGHTS_
                             THE MEMOIRS OF
                            ALEXANDER HERZEN
                      _THE AUTHORISED TRANSLATION_
                      _TRANSLATED FROM THE RUSSIAN
                         BY CONSTANCE GARNETT_
                                VOLUME I

[Illustration: [Logo]]

                                NEW YORK
                            ALFRED A. KNOPF




                      PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
                    T. & A. CONSTABLE LTD. EDINBURGH
                                   *
                               ALL RIGHTS
                                RESERVED


                          FIRST PUBLISHED 1924




                           TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


A few words about Herzen’s parentage will make his narrative more
intelligible to the English reader. Herzen’s father, Ivan Yakovlyev, was
a very wealthy nobleman belonging to one of the most aristocratic
families of Russia. In 1811, at the age of forty-two, he married (so
Brückner tells us in his _History of Russian Literature_) at Stuttgart a
girl of sixteen, whose name was Henriette Haag, though she was always in
Russia called Luise Ivanovna, as easier to pronounce. As he neglected to
repeat the marriage ceremony in Russia, their son was there
illegitimate. Yakovlyev is said to have given him the surname Herzen,
because he was the ‘child of his heart.’




                                CONTENTS


                                 PART I
                          NURSERY & UNIVERSITY
                               (1812–1835)
 CHAPTER I:—My Nurse and the _Grande Armée_—The Fire of
 Moscow—My Father with Napoleon—General Ilovaisky—Travelling
 with the French Prisoners—The Patriotism of C. Calot—The
 Common Management of the Property—Dividing it—The Senator      _page 1_

 CHAPTER II:—The Talk of Nurses and of Generals—False
 Position—Russian Encyclopaedists—Boredom—The Maids’ Room and
 the Servants’ Hall—Two Germans—Lessons and Reading—The
 Catechism and the Gospel                                      _page 24_

 CHAPTER III:—The Death of Alexander I. and the Fourteenth of
 December—Moral Awakening—The Terrorist Bouchot—My Kortcheva
 Cousin                                                        _page 55_

 CHAPTER IV:—Nick and the Sparrow Hills                        _page 82_

 CHAPTER V:—Details of Home Life—Eighteenth-Century People in
 Russia—A Day in our House—Visitors and
 _Habitués_—Sonnenberg—The Valet and Others                    _page 93_

 CHAPTER VI:—The Kremlin Department—Moscow University—Our
 Set—The Chemist—The Malov Affair—The Cholera—Filaret—V.
 Passek—General Lissovsky—The Sungurov Affair                 _page 117_

 CHAPTER VII:—The End of My Studies—The Schiller Period—Early
 Youth and Bohemianism—Saint-Simonism and N. Polevoy          _page 174_

 APPENDIX:—A. Polezhaev                                       _page 193_


                                 PART II
                             PRISON & EXILE
                               (1834–1838)
 CHAPTER VIII:—A Prediction—Ogaryov’s Arrest—A Fire—A Moscow
 Liberal—M. F. Orlov—The Graveyard                            _page 197_

 CHAPTER IX:—Arrest—An Impartial Witness—The Office of the
 Pretchistensky Police Station—A Patriarchal Judge            _page 208_

 CHAPTER X:—Under the Watch Tower—The Lisbon Policeman—The
 Incendiaries                                                 _page 215_

 CHAPTER XI:—Krutitsky Barracks—Gendarmes’ Tales—Officers     _page 226_

 CHAPTER XII:—The Investigation—Golitsyn Senior—Golitsyn
 Junior—General Staal—Sokolovsky—Sentence                     _page 236_

 CHAPTER XIII:—Exile—The Mayor at Pokrovo—The Volga—Perm      _page 254_

 CHAPTER XIV:—Vyatka—The Office and Dining-Room of His
 Excellency—K. Y. Tyufyaev                                    _page 273_

 CHAPTER XV:—Officials—Siberian Governors-General—A Rapacious
 Police-Master—An Accommodating Judge—A Roasted
 Police-Captain—A Tatar Missionary—A Boy of the Female
 Sex—The Potato Terror, etc.                                  _page 295_

 CHAPTER XVI:—Alexander Lavrentyevitch Vitberg                _page 327_

 CHAPTER XVII:—The Tsarevitch at Vyatka—The Fall of
 Tyufyaev—I am transferred to Vladimir—The Police-Captain at
 the Posting-Station                                          _page 344_

 CHAPTER XVIII:—The Beginning of my Life at Vladimir          _page 356_




                                 PART I
                          NURSERY & UNIVERSITY
                              (1812–1835)

                ‘_When memories of the past return
                And the old road again we tread,
                Slowly the passions of old days
                Come back to life within the soul;
                Old griefs and joys are here unchanged,
                Again the once familiar thrill
                Stirs echoes in the troubled heart;
                And for remembered woes we sigh._’
                                OGARYOV: Humorous Verse.




                               Chapter 1
   MY NURSE AND THE _GRANDE ARMÉE_—THE FIRE OF MOSCOW—MY FATHER WITH
  NAPOLEON—GENERAL ILOVAISKY—TRAVELLING WITH THE FRENCH PRISONERS—THE
 PATRIOTISM OF C. CALOT—THE COMMON MANAGEMENT OF THE PROPERTY—DIVIDING
                             IT—THE SENATOR


‘Vera Artamonovna, come tell me again how the French came to Moscow,’ I
used to say, rolling myself up in the quilt and stretching in my crib,
which was sewn round with linen that I might not fall out.

‘Oh! what’s the use of telling you, you’ve heard it so many times,
besides it’s time to go to sleep; you had better get up a little earlier
to-morrow,’ the old woman would usually answer, although she was as
eager to repeat her favourite story as I was to hear it.

‘But do tell me a little bit. How did you find out, how did it begin?’

‘This was how it began. You know what your papa is—he is always putting
things off; he was getting ready and getting ready, and much use it was!
Every one was saying “It’s time to set off; it’s time to go; what is
there to wait for, there’s no one left in the town.” But no, Pavel
Ivanovitch[1] and he kept talking of how they would go together, and
first one wasn’t ready and then the other. At last we were packed and
the carriage was ready; the family sat down to lunch, when all at once
our head cook ran into the dining-room as pale as a sheet, and
announced: “The enemy has marched in at the Dragomilovsky Gate.” Our
hearts did sink. “The power of the Cross be with us!” we cried.
Everything was upside down. While we were bustling about, sighing and
groaning, we looked and down the street came galloping dragoons in such
helmets with horses’ tails streaming behind. The gates had all been
closed, and here was your papa left behind for a treat and you with him;
your wet nurse Darya still had you at the breast, you were so weak and
delicate.’

And I smiled with pride, pleased that I had taken part in the war.

‘At the beginning we got along somehow, for the first few days, that is;
it was only that two or three soldiers would come in and ask by signs
whether there was something to drink; we would take them a glass each,
to be sure, and they would go away and touch their caps to us, too. But
then, you see, when fires began and kept getting worse and worse, there
was such disorder, plundering and all sorts of horrors. At that time we
were living in the lodge at the Princess Anna Borissovna’s and the house
caught fire; then Pavel Ivanovitch said, “Come to me, my house is built
of brick, it stands far back in the courtyard and the walls are thick.”

‘So we went, masters and servants all together, there was no difference
made; we went out into the Tverskoy Boulevard and the trees were
beginning to burn—we made our way at last to the Golohvastovs’ house and
it was simply blazing, flames from every window. Pavel Ivanovitch was
dumbfoundered, he could not believe his eyes. Behind the house there is
a big garden, you know; we went into it thinking we should be safe
there. We sat there on the seats grieving, when, all at once, a mob of
drunken soldiers were upon us; one fell on Pavel Ivanovitch, trying to
pull off his travelling coat; the old man would not give it up, the
soldier pulled out his sword and struck him on the face with it so that
he kept the scar to the end of his days; the others set upon us, one
soldier tore you from your nurse, opened your baby-clothes to see if
there were any money-notes or diamonds hidden among them, saw there was
nothing there, and so the scamp purposely tore your clothes and flung
them down. As soon as they had gone away, we were in trouble again. Do
you remember our Platon who was sent for a soldier? He was dreadfully
fond of drink and was very much exhilarated that day; he tied on a sabre
and walked about like that. The day before the enemy entered, Count
Rastoptchin[2] had distributed all sorts of weapons at the arsenal; so
that was how he had got hold of a sabre. Towards the evening he saw a
dragoon ride into the yard; there was a horse standing near the stable,
the dragoon wanted to take it, but Platon rushed headlong at him and,
catching hold of the bridle, said: “The horse is ours, I won’t give it
you.” The dragoon threatened him with a pistol, but we could see it was
not loaded; the master himself saw what was happening and shouted to
Platon: “Let the horse alone, it’s not your business.” But not a bit of
it! Platon pulled out his sabre and struck the man on the head, and he
staggered, and Platon struck him again and again. “Well,” thought we,
“now the hour of our death is come; when his comrades see him, it will
be the end of us.” But when the dragoon fell off, Platon seized him by
the feet and dragged him to a pit full of mortar and threw him in, poor
fellow, although he was still alive; his horse stood there and did not
stir from the place, but stamped its foot on the ground as though it
understood; our servants shut it in the stable; it must have been burnt
there. We all hurried out of the courtyard, the fire was more and more
dreadful; worn out and with nothing to eat, we got into a house that was
still untouched, and flung ourselves down to rest; in less than an hour,
our people were shouting from the street: “Come out, come out! Fire!
Fire!” Then I took a piece of green baize from the billiard table and
wrapped you in it to keep you from the night air; and so we made our way
as far as the Tverskoy Square. There the French were putting the fire
out, because some great man of theirs was living in the governor’s
house; we sat simply in the street; sentries were walking everywhere,
others were riding by on horseback. And you were screaming, straining
yourself with crying, your nurse had no more milk, no one had a bit of
bread. Natalya Konstantinovna was with us then, a wench of spirit, you
know; she saw that some soldiers were eating something in a corner, took
you and went straight to them, showed you and said “_mangé_ for the
little one”; at first they looked at her so sternly and said “_allez,
allez_,” but she fell to scolding them. “Ah, you cursed brutes,” said
she, “you this and that”; the soldiers did not understand a word, but
they burst out laughing and gave her some bread soaked in water for you
and a crust for herself. Early in the morning an officer came up and
gathered together all the men and your papa with them, leaving only the
women and Pavel Ivanovitch who was wounded, and took them to put out the
fire in the houses near by, so we remained alone till evening; we sat
and cried and that was all. When it was dusk, the master came back and
with him an officer....’

Allow me to take the old woman’s place and continue her narrative. When
my father had finished his duties as a fire-brigade man, he met by the
Strastny monastery a squadron of Italian cavalry; he went up to their
officer and told him in Italian the position in which his family was
placed. When the Italian heard _la sua dolce favella_ he promised to
speak to the duc de Trévise,[3] and as a preliminary measure to put a
sentry to guard us and prevent barbarous scenes such as had taken place
in the Golohvastovs’ garden. He sent an officer to accompany my father
with these instructions. Hearing that the whole party had eaten nothing
for two days, the officer led us all to a shop that had been broken
into; the choicest tea and Levant coffee had been thrown about on the
floor, together with a great number of dates, figs, and almonds; our
servants stuffed their pockets full, and had plenty of dessert anyway.
The sentry turned out to be of the greatest use to us: a dozen times
gangs of soldiers began molesting the luckless group of women and
servants encamped in the corner of Tverskoy Square, but they moved off
immediately at his command.

Mortier remembered that he had known my father in Paris and informed
Napoleon; Napoleon ordered him to present himself next morning. In a
shabby, dark blue, short coat with bronze buttons, intended for sporting
wear, without his wig, in high boots that had not been cleaned for
several days, with dirty linen and unshaven chin, my father—who
worshipped decorum and strict etiquette—made his appearance in the
throne room of the Kremlin Palace at the summons of the Emperor of the
French.

Their conversation which I have heard many times is fairly
correctly given in Baron Fain’s[4] _History_ and in that of
Mihailovsky-Danilevsky.

After the usual phrases, abrupt words and laconic remarks, to which a
deep meaning was ascribed for thirty-five years, till men realised that
their meaning was often quite trivial, Napoleon blamed Rastoptchin for
the fire, said that it was Vandalism, declared as usual his invincible
love of peace, maintained that his war was against England and not
against Russia, boasted that he had set a guard on the Foundling
Hospital and the Uspensky Cathedral, complained of Alexander, said that
he was surrounded by bad advisers and that his (Napoleon’s) peaceful
dispositions were not made known to the Emperor.

My father observed that it was rather for a conqueror to make offers of
peace.

‘I have done what I could; I have sent to Kutuzov,[5] he will not enter
into any negotiations and does not bring my offer to the cognizance of
the Tsar. If they want war, it is not my fault—they shall have war.’

After all this comedy, my father asked him for a pass to leave Moscow.

‘I have ordered no passes to be given to any one; why are you going?
What are you afraid of? I have ordered the markets to be opened.’

The Emperor of the French apparently forgot at that moment that, in
addition to open markets, it is as well to have a closed house, and that
life in the Tverskoy Square in the midst of enemy soldiers is anything
but agreeable. My father pointed this out to him; Napoleon thought a
moment and suddenly asked:

‘Will you undertake to convey a letter from me to the Emperor? On that
condition I will command them to give you a permit to leave the town
with all your household.’

‘I would accept your Majesty’s offer,’ my father observed, ‘but it is
difficult for me to guarantee that it will reach him.’

‘Will you give me your word of honour that you will make every effort to
deliver the letter in person?’

‘_Je m’engage sur mon honneur, Sire._’

‘That suffices. I will send for you. Are you in need of anything?’

‘Of a roof for my family while I am here. Nothing else.’

‘The duc de Trévise will do what he can.’

Mortier did, in fact, give us a room in the governor-general’s house,
and gave orders that we should be furnished with provisions; his _maître
d’hôtel_ even sent us wine. A few days passed in this way, after which
Mortier sent an adjutant, at four o’clock one morning, to summon my
father to the Kremlin.

The fire had attained terrific proportions during those days; the
scorched air, murky with smoke, was insufferably hot. Napoleon was
dressed and was walking about the room, looking careworn and out of
temper; he was beginning to feel that his singed laurels would before
long be frozen, and that there would be no escaping here with a jest, as
in Egypt. The plan of the campaign was absurd; except Napoleon,
everybody knew it: Ney, Narbonne, Berthier, and officers of lower rank;
to all objections he had replied with the cabalistic word ‘Moscow’; in
Moscow even he guessed the truth.

When my father went in, Napoleon took a sealed letter that was lying on
the table, handed it to him and said, bowing him out: ‘I rely on your
word of honour.’

On the envelope was written: ‘_A mon frère l’Empereur Alexandre_.’

The permit given to my father was still valid; it was signed by the duc
de Trévise and countersigned by the head police-master Lesseps. A few
outsiders, hearing of our permit, joined us, begging my father to take
them in the guise of servants or relations. An open wagonette was given
us for the wounded old man, my mother and my nurse; the others walked. A
few Uhlans escorted us, on horseback, as far as the Russian rearguard,
on sight of which they wished us a good journey and galloped back.

A minute later the Cossacks surrounded their strange visitors and led
them to the headquarters of the rearguard. There Wintzengerode and
Ilovaisky the Fourth were in command. Wintzengerode, hearing of the
letter, told my father that he would send him on immediately, with two
dragoons, to the Tsar in Petersburg.

‘What’s to be done with your people?’ asked the Cossack general,
Ilovaisky, ‘it is impossible for them to stay here. They are not out of
range of the guns, and something serious may be expected any day.’

My father begged that we should, if possible, be taken to his Yaroslav
estate, but incidentally observed that he had not a kopeck with him.

‘We will settle up afterwards,’ said Ilovaisky, ‘and do not worry
yourself, I give you my word to send them.’

My father was taken by couriers along a road made by laying faggots on
the ground. For us Ilovaisky procured some sort of an old conveyance and
sent us to the nearest town with a party of French prisoners and an
escort of Cossacks; he provided us with money for our expenses until we
reached Yaroslav, and altogether did everything he possibly could in the
turmoil of wartime. Such was my first journey in Russia; my second was
unaccompanied by French Uhlans, Cossacks from the Ural and prisoners of
war—I was alone but for a drunken gendarme sitting by my side.

My father was taken straight to Count Araktcheyev[6] and detained in his
house. The Count asked for the letter, my father told him he had given
his word of honour to deliver it in person; Araktcheyev promised to ask
the Tsar, and, next day, informed him by letter that the Tsar had
charged him to take the letter and to deliver it immediately. He gave a
receipt for the letter (which is still preserved). For a month my father
remained under arrest in Araktcheyev’s house; no one was allowed to see
him except S. S. Shishkov,[7] who came at the Tsar’s command to question
him concerning the details of the fire, of the enemy’s entry into
Moscow, and his interview with Napoleon; he was the first eye-witness to
arrive in Petersburg. At last Araktcheyev informed my father that the
Tsar had ordered his release, and did not hold him to blame for
accepting a permit from the enemy in consideration of the extremity in
which he was placed. On setting him free, Araktcheyev commanded him to
leave Petersburg immediately without seeing anybody except his elder
brother, to whom he was allowed to say good-bye.

On reaching at nightfall the little Yaroslav village my father found us
in a peasants’ hut (he had no house on that estate). I was asleep on a
bench under the window; the window did not close properly, the snow
drifting through the crack, covered part of the bench and lay, not
thawing, on the window-sill.

Every one was in great perturbation, especially my mother. A few days
before my father’s arrival, the village elder and some of the
house-serfs had run hastily in the morning into the hut where she was
living, trying to explain something by gestures and insisting on her
following them. At that time my mother did not speak a word of Russian;
all she could make out was that the matter concerned Pavel Ivanovitch;
she did not know what to think; the idea occurred to her that they had
killed him, or that they meant to kill him and afterwards her. She took
me in her arms, and trembling all over, more dead than alive, followed
the elder. Golohvastov was in another hut, they went into it; the old
man really was lying dead beside the table at which he had been about to
shave; a sudden stroke of paralysis had cut short his life
instantaneously.

My mother’s position may well be imagined (she was then seventeen),
living in a little grimy hut, in the midst of these half-savage bearded
men, dressed in bare sheepskins, and talking in a completely unknown
language; and all this in November of the terrible winter of 1812. Her
one support had been Golohvastov; she wept day and night after his
death. And meanwhile these savages were pitying her from the bottom of
their hearts, showing her all their warm hospitality and good-natured
simplicity; and the village elder sent his son several times to the town
to get raisins, cakes, apples, and bread rings for her.

Fifteen years later the elder was still living and used sometimes, grey
as a kestrel and somewhat bald, to come to us in Moscow. My mother used
specially to regale him with tea and to talk to him about the winter of
1812, saying how she had been so afraid of him and how, without
understanding each other, they had made the arrangements for the funeral
of Pavel Ivanovitch. The old man used still to call my mother—as he had
then—Yuliza Ivanovna, instead of Luise, and used to tell how I was not
at all afraid of his beard and would readily let him take me into his
arms.

From the province of Yaroslav we moved to that of Tver, and at last, a
year later, made our way back to Moscow. By that time my father’s
brother, who had been ambassador to Westphalia and had afterwards gone
on some commission to Bernadotte, had returned from Sweden; he settled
in the same house with us.

I still remember, as in a dream, the traces of the fire, which remained
until early in the ’twenties: great burnt-out houses without window
frames or roofs, tumbledown walls, empty spaces fenced in, with remains
of stoves and chimneys on them.

Tales of the fire of Moscow, of the battle of Borodino, of Beresina, of
the taking of Paris were my cradle-songs, my nursery stories, my Iliad
and my Odyssey. My mother and our servants, my father and Vera
Artamonovna were continually going back to the terrible time which had
impressed them so recently, so intimately, and so acutely. Then the
returning generals and officers began to arrive in Moscow. My father’s
old comrades of the Izmailovsky regiment, now the heroes of a bloody war
scarcely ended, were often at our house. They found relief from their
toils and anxieties in describing them. This was in reality the most
brilliant moment of the Petersburg period; the consciousness of strength
gave new life, all practical affairs and troubles seemed to be put off
till the morrow when work would begin again, now all that was wanted was
to revel in the joys of victory.

From these gentlemen I heard a great deal more about the war than from
Vera Artamonovna. I was particularly fond of the stories told by Count
Miloradovitch[8]; he spoke with the greatest vivacity, with lively
mimicry, with roars of laughter, and more than once I fell asleep, on
the sofa behind him, to the sounds of them.

Of course, in such surroundings, I was a desperate patriot and intended
to go into the army; but an exclusive sentiment of nationality never
leads to any good; it led me to the following incident. Among others who
used to visit us was the Comte de Quinsonas, a French _émigré_ and
lieutenant-general in the Russian service. A desperate royalist, he took
part in the celebrated fête of Versailles, at which the King’s minions
trampled underfoot the revolutionary cockade and at which Marie
Antoinette drank to the destruction of the revolution. This French
count, a tall, thin, graceful old man with grey hair, was the very model
of politeness and elegant manners. There was a peerage awaiting him in
Paris, where he had already been to congratulate Louis XVIII. on getting
his berth. He had returned to Russia to dispose of his estate. Unluckily
for me this most courteous of generals of all the Russian armies began
speaking of the war in my presence.

‘But surely you must have been fighting against us?’ I remarked with
extreme naïveté.

‘_Non, mon petit, non; j’étais dans l’armée russe._’

‘What?’ said I, ‘you, a Frenchman, and fighting in our army!’

My father glanced sternly at me and changed the conversation. The Count
heroically set things right by saying to my father that ‘he liked such
patriotic sentiments.’

My father did not like them, and after the Count had gone away he gave
me a terrible scolding.

‘This is what comes of rushing headlong into conversation about all
sorts of things you don’t understand and can’t understand; it was out of
fidelity to _his_ king that the Count served under _our_ emperor.’

I certainly did not understand that.

My father had spent twelve years abroad and his brother still longer;
they tried to arrange their life in the foreign style while avoiding
great expense and retaining all Russian comforts. Their life never was
so arranged, either because they did not know how to manage or because
the nature of a Russian landowner was stronger in them than their
foreign habits. The management of their land and house was in common,
the estate was undivided, an immense crowd of house-serfs peopled the
lower storeys, and consequently all the conditions conducive to disorder
were present.

Two nurses looked after me, one Russian and one German. Vera Artamonovna
and Madame Proveau were very kind women, but it bored me to watch them
all day long knitting stockings and bickering together, and so on every
favourable opportunity I ran away to the half of the house occupied by
my uncle, the Senator (the one who had been an ambassador), to see my
one friend, his valet Calot.

I have rarely met a kinder, gentler, milder man; utterly alone in
Russia, parted from all his own people, with difficulty speaking broken
Russian, his devotion to me was like a woman’s. I spent whole hours in
his room, worried him, got in his way, did mischief, and he bore it all
with a good-natured smile; cut all sorts of marvels out of cardboard for
me and carved various trifles out of wood (and how I loved him for it!).
In the evenings he used to bring me up picture-books from the
library—the Travels of Gmelin[9] and of Pallas,[10] and a fat book of
_The World in Pictures_, which I liked so much that I looked at it until
the binding, although of leather, gave way; for a couple of hours at a
time, Calot would show me the same pictures, repeating the same
explanation for the thousandth time.

Before my birthday and my name-day Calot would lock himself up in his
room, from which came the sounds of a hammer and other tools; often he
would pass along the corridor with rapid steps, every time locking his
door after him, sometimes carrying a little saucepan of glue, sometimes
a parcel with things wrapped up. It may well be imagined how much I
longed to know what he was making; I used to send the house-serf boys to
try and find out, but Calot kept a sharp look out. We somehow
discovered, on the staircase, a little crack which looked straight into
his room, but it was of no help to us; all we could see was the upper
part of the window and the portrait of Frederick II. with a huge nose
and huge star, and the expression of an emaciated vulture. Two days
before the event the noise would cease and the room would be
opened—everything in it was as usual, except for scraps of coloured and
gold paper here and there; I would flush crimson, devoured with
curiosity, but Calot, with an air of strained gravity, refused to
approach the delicate subject.

I lived in agonies until the momentous day; at five o’clock in the
morning I was awake and thinking of Calot’s preparations; at eight
o’clock he would himself appear in a white cravat, a white waistcoat,
and a dark-blue tail coat—with empty hands. When would it end? Had he
spoiled it? And time passed and the ordinary presents came, and
Elizaveta Alexeyevna Golobvastov’s footman had already appeared with a
costly toy, wrapped up in a napkin, and the Senator had already brought
me some marvel, but the uneasy expectation of the surprise troubled my
joy.

All at once, as it were casually, after dinner or after tea, Nurse would
say to me: ‘Go downstairs just a minute; there is somebody asking for
you.’ At last, I thought, and went down, sliding on my hands down the
banisters of the staircase. The doors into the hall were thrown open
noisily, music was playing. A transparency with my monogram was lighted
up, serf boys dressed up as Turks offered me sweetmeats, then followed a
puppet show or indoor fireworks. Calot, perspiring with his efforts, was
with his own hands setting everything in motion.

What presents could be compared with such an entertainment! I have never
been fond of things, the bump of ownership and acquisitiveness has never
been developed in me at any age, and now, after the prolonged suspense,
the numbers of candles, the tinsel and the smell of gunpowder! Only one
thing was lacking—a comrade of my own age, but I spent all my childhood
in solitude,[11] and certainly was not over-indulged in that respect.

My father and the Senator had another elder brother,[12] between whom
and the two younger brothers there was an open feud, in spite of which
they managed their estate in common or rather ruined it in common. The
triple control and the quarrel together led to glaring disorganisation.
My father and the Senator did everything to thwart the elder brother,
who did the same by them. The village elders and peasants lost their
heads; one brother was demanding wagons; another, hay; a third,
firewood; each gave orders, each sent his authorised agents. The elder
brother would appoint a village elder, the younger ones would remove him
within a month, upon some nonsensical pretext, and appoint another whom
their senior would not recognise. With all this, backbiting, slander,
spies and favourites were naturally plentiful, and under it all the poor
peasants, who found neither justice nor defence, were harassed on all
sides and oppressed with the double burden of work and the impossibility
of carrying out the capricious demands of their owners.

The first consequence of the feud between the brothers that made some
impression upon them, was the loss of their great lawsuit with the
Counts Devier, though justice was on their side. Though their interests
were the same, they could never agree on a course of action; their
opponents naturally profited by this. In addition to the loss of a large
and fine estate, the Senate sentenced each of the brothers to pay costs
and damages to the amount of 30,000 paper roubles. This lesson opened
their eyes and they made up their minds to divide their property. The
preliminary negotiations lasted for about a year, the estate was carved
into three fairly equal parts and they were to decide by casting lots
which was to come to which. The Senator and my father visited their
elder brother, whom they had not seen for several years, to negotiate
and be reconciled; then there was a rumour among us that he would visit
us to complete the arrangements. The rumour of the visit of this elder
brother excited horror and anxiety in our household.

He was one of those grotesquely original creatures who are only possible
in Russia, where life is original to grotesqueness. He was a man gifted
by nature, yet he spent his whole life in absurd actions, often almost
crimes. He had received a fairly good education in the French style, was
very well-read,—and spent his time in debauchery and empty idleness up
to the day of his death. He, too, had served at first in the Izmailovsky
regiment, had been something like an aide-de-camp in attendance on
Potyomkin, then served on some mission, and returning to Petersburg was
made chief prosecutor in the Synod. Neither diplomatic nor monastic
surroundings could restrain his unbridled character. For his quarrels
with the heads of the Church he was removed from his post; for a slap in
the face, which he either tried to give, or gave to a gentleman at an
official dinner at the governor-general’s, he was banished from
Petersburg. He went to his Tambov estate; there the peasants nearly
murdered him for his ferocity and amorous propensities; he was indebted
to his coachman and horses for his life.

After that he settled in Moscow. Deserted by all his relations and also
by his acquaintances, he lived in solitude in his big house in the
Tverskoy Boulevard, oppressing his house-serfs and ruining his peasants.
He amassed a great library of books and collected a regular harem of
serf-girls, both of which he kept under lock and key. Deprived of every
occupation and concealing a passionate vanity, often extremely naïve, he
amused himself by buying unnecessary things, and making still more
unnecessary demands on the peasants, which he exacted with ferocity. His
lawsuit concerning an Amati violin lasted thirty years, and ended in his
losing it. After another lawsuit he succeeded by extraordinary efforts
in winning the wall between two houses, the possession of which was of
no use to him whatever. Being himself on the retired list, he used, on
reading in the newspapers of the promotions of his old colleagues, to
buy such orders as had been given to them, and lay them on his table as
a mournful reminder of the decorations he might have received!

His brothers and sisters were afraid of him and had nothing to do with
him; our servants would go a long way round to avoid his house for fear
of meeting him, and would turn pale at the sight of him; women went in
terror of his impudent persecution, the house-serfs paid for special
services of prayer that they might not come into his possession.

So this was the terrible man who was to visit us. Extraordinary
excitement prevailed throughout the house from early morning; I had
never seen this legendary ‘enemy-brother,’ though I was born in his
house, where my father stayed when he came back from foreign parts; I
longed to see him and at the same time I was frightened, I do not know
why, but I was terribly frightened.

Two hours before his arrival, my father’s eldest nephew, two intimate
acquaintances and a good-natured stout and flabby official who was in
charge of the legal business arrived. They were all sitting in silent
expectation, when suddenly the butler came in, and, in a voice unlike
his own, announced that the brother ‘had graciously pleased to arrive.’
‘Ask him up,’ said the Senator, with perceptible agitation, while my
father took a pinch of snuff, the nephew straightened his cravat, and
the official turned aside and coughed. I was ordered to go upstairs, but
trembling all over, I stayed in the next room.

Slowly and majestically the ‘brother’ advanced, the Senator and my
father rose to meet him. He was holding an ikon with both hands before
his chest, as people do at weddings and funerals, and in a drawling
voice, a little through his nose, he addressed his brothers in the
following words:

‘With this ikon our father blessed me before his end, charging me and
our late brother Pyotr to watch over you and to be a father to you in
his place ... if our father knew of your conduct to your elder
brother!...’

‘Come, _mon cher frère_,’ observed my father in his studiously
indifferent voice, ‘well have you carried out our father’s last wish. It
would be better to forget these memories, painful to you as well as to
us.’

‘How? what?’ shouted the devout brother. ‘Is this what you have summoned
me for ...’ and he flung down the ikon, so that the silver setting gave
a metallic clink.

At this point the Senator shouted in a voice still more terrifying. I
rushed headlong upstairs and only had time to see the official and the
nephew, no less scared, retreating to the balcony.

What was done and how it was done, I cannot say; the frightened servants
huddled into corners out of sight, no one knew anything of what
happened, neither the Senator nor my father ever spoke of this scene
before me. Little by little the noise subsided and the partition of the
estate was carried out, whether then or on another day I do not
remember.

My father received Vassilyevskoe, a big estate in the Ruzsky district,
near Moscow. We spent the whole summer there the following year;
meanwhile the Senator bought himself a house in Arbat, and we returned
to live alone in our great house, deserted and deathlike. Soon
afterwards, my father too bought a house in Old Konyushenny Street.

With the Senator, in the first place, and Calot in the second, all the
lively elements of our household were withdrawn. The Senator alone had
prevented the hypochondriacal disposition of my father from prevailing;
now it had full sway. The new house was gloomy; it was suggestive of a
prison or a hospital; the lower storey was built with pillars supporting
the arched ceiling, the thick walls made the windows look like the
embrasures of a fortress. The house was surrounded on all sides by a
courtyard unnecessarily large.

To tell the truth, it is rather a wonder that the Senator managed to
live so long under the same roof as my father than that they parted. I
have rarely seen two men so complete a contrast as they were.

The Senator was of a kindly disposition, and fond of amusements; he
spent his whole life in the world of artificial light and of official
diplomacy, the world that surrounded the court, without a notion that
there was another more serious world, although he had been not merely in
contact with but intimately connected with all the great events from
1789 to 1815. Count Vorontsov had sent him to Lord Grenville[13] to find
out what General Bonaparte was going to undertake after abandoning the
Egyptian army. He had been in Paris at the coronation of Napoleon. In
1811 Napoleon had ordered him to be detained in Cassel, where he was
ambassador ‘at the court of King Jeremiah,’[14] as my father used to say
in moments of vexation. In fact, he took part in all the great events of
his time, but in a queer way, irregularly.

Though a captain in the Life Guards of the Izmailovsky regiment, he was
sent on a mission to London; Paul, seeing this in the correspondence,
ordered him at once to return to Petersburg. The soldier-diplomat set
off by the first ship and appeared before the Tsar. ‘Do you want to
remain in London?’ Paul asked in his hoarse voice. ‘If it should please
your Majesty to permit me,’ answered the captain-diplomat.

‘Go back without loss of time,’ said Paul in his hoarse voice, and he
did go back, without even seeing his relations, who lived in Moscow.

While diplomatic questions were being settled by bayonets and
grape-shot, he was an ambassador and concluded his diplomatic career at
the time of the Congress of Vienna, that bright festival of all the
diplomats.

Returning to Russia he was appointed court chamberlain in Moscow, where
there is no Court. Though he knew nothing of Russian Law and legal
procedure, he got into the Senate, became a member of the Council of
Trustees, a director of the Mariinsky Hospital, and of the Alexandrinsky
Institute, and he performed all his duties with a zeal that was hardly
necessary, with a censoriousness that only did harm and with an honesty
that no one noticed.

He was never at home, he tired out two teams of four strong horses in
the course of the day, one set in the morning, the other after dinner.
Besides the Senate, the sittings of which he never neglected, and the
Council of Wardens, which he attended twice a week, besides the hospital
and the institute, he hardly missed a single French play, and visited
the English Club three times a week. He had no time to be bored, he was
always busy and interested; he was always going somewhere, and his life
rolled lightly on good springs through a world of official papers and
pink tape.

Moreover, up to the age of seventy-five he was as strong as a young man,
was present at all the great balls and dinners, took part in every
ceremonial assembly and annual function, whether it were of an
agricultural or medical or fire insurance society or of the Society of
Scientific Research ... and, on the top of it all, perhaps because of
it, preserved to old age some degree of human feeling and a certain
warmth of heart.

No greater contrast to the sanguine Senator, who was always in movement
and only occasionally visited his home, can possibly be imagined than my
father, who hardly ever went out of his courtyard, hated the whole
official world and was everlastingly ill-humoured and discontented. We
also had eight horses (very poor ones), but our stable was something
like an almshouse for broken-down nags; my father kept them partly for
the sake of appearances and partly that the two coachmen and the two
postillions should have something to do, besides fetching the _Moscow
News_ and getting up cockfights, which they did very successfully
between the coachhouse and the neighbours’ yard.

My father had scarcely been in the service at all; educated by a French
tutor, in the house of a devout and highly respected aunt, he entered
the Izmailovsky regiment as a sergeant at sixteen, served until the
accession of Paul, and retired with the rank of captain in the Guards.
In 1801 he went abroad and remained abroad until 1811, wandering from
one country to another. He returned with my mother three months before
my birth, and after the fire of Moscow he spent a year on his estate in
the province of Tver, and then returned to live in Moscow, trying to
order his life so as to be as solitary and dreary as possible. His
brother’s liveliness hindered him in this.

After the Senator had left us, everything in the house began to assume a
more and more gloomy aspect. The walls, the furniture, the servants,
everything bore a look of displeasure and suspicion, and I need hardly
say that my father himself was of all the most displeased. The unnatural
stillness, the whispers and cautious footsteps of the servants, did not
suggest attentive solicitude, but oppression and terror. Everything was
immovable in the rooms; for five or six years the same books would lie
in the very same places with the same markers in them. In my father’s
bedroom and study the furniture was not moved nor the windows opened for
years together. When he went away into the country he took the key of
his room in his pocket, that they might not venture to scrub the floor
or wash the walls in his absence.




                               Chapter 2
       THE TALK OF NURSES AND OF GENERALS—FALSE POSITION—RUSSIAN
   ENCYCLOPAEDISTS—BOREDOM—THE MAIDS’ ROOM AND THE SERVANTS’ HALL—TWO
        GERMANS—LESSONS AND READING—THE CATECHISM AND THE GOSPEL


Until I was ten years old I noticed nothing strange or special in my
position; it seemed to me simple and natural that I should be living in
my father’s house; that in his part of it I should be on my good
behaviour, while my mother lived in another part of the house, in which
I could be as noisy and mischievous as I liked. The Senator spoiled me
and gave me presents, Calot carried me about in his arms, Vera
Artamonovna dressed me, put me to bed, and gave me my bath, Madame
Proveau took me out for walks and talked to me in German; everything
went on in its regular way, yet I began pondering on things.

Stray remarks, carelessly uttered words, began to attract my attention.
Old Madame Proveau and all the servants were devoted to my mother, while
they feared and disliked my father. The scenes which sometimes took
place between them were often the subject of conversation between Madame
Proveau and Vera Artamonovna, both of whom always took my mother’s side.

My mother certainly had a good deal to put up with. Being an extremely
kind-hearted woman, with no strength of will, she was completely crushed
by my father, and, as always happens with weak characters, put up a
desperate opposition in trifling matters and things of no consequence.
Unhappily, in these trifling matters, my father was nearly always in the
right, and the dispute always ended in his triumph.

‘If I were in the mistress’s place,’ Madame Proveau would say, for
instance, ‘I would simply go straight back to Stuttgart; much comfort
she gets—nothing but ill-humour and unpleasantness, and deadly
dullness.’

‘To be sure,’ Vera Artamonovna would assent, ‘but that’s what ties her,
hand and foot,’ and she would point with her knitting-needle towards me.
‘How can she take him with her—what to? And as for leaving him here
alone, with our ways of going on, that would be too dreadful!’

Children in general have far more insight than is supposed, they are
quickly distracted and forget for a time what has struck them, but they
go back to it persistently, especially if it is anything mysterious or
dreadful, and with wonderful perseverance and ingenuity they go on
probing until they reach the truth.

Once on the look out, within a few weeks I had found out all the details
of my father’s meeting my mother, had heard how she had brought herself
to leave her parents’ home, how she had been hidden at the Senator’s in
the Russian Embassy at Cassel, and had crossed the frontier, dressed as
a boy; all this I found out without putting a single question to any
one.

The first result of these discoveries was to estrange me from my father
on account of the scenes of which I have spoken. I had seen them before,
but it had seemed to me that all that was in the regular order of
things; for I was so accustomed to the fact that every one in the house,
not excepting the Senator, was afraid of my father and that he was given
to scolding every one, that I saw nothing strange in it. Now I began to
take a different view of it, and the thought that part of all this was
endured on my account sometimes threw a dark oppressive cloud over my
bright, childish imagination.

A second idea that took root in me from that time, was that I was far
less dependent on my father than children are as a rule. I liked this
feeling of independence which I imagined for myself.

Two or three years later, two of my father’s old comrades in the
regiment, P. K. Essen, the governor-general of Orenburg, and A. N.
Bahmetyev, formerly commander in Bessarabia, a general who had lost his
leg at Borodino, were sitting with my father. My room was next to the
drawing-room in which they were sitting. Among other things my father
told them that he had been speaking to Prince Yussupov about putting me
into the service. ‘There’s no time to be lost,’ he added; ‘you know that
he will have to serve for years in order to reach any grade worth
speaking of.’

‘What a strange idea, friend, to make him a clerk,’ Essen said,
good-naturedly. ‘Leave it to me, and I will get him into the Ural
Cossacks. We’ll promote him from the ranks, that’s all that matters,
after that he will make his way as we all have.’

My father did not agree, he said that he had grown to dislike everything
military, that he hoped in time to get me a post on some mission to a
warm country, where he would go to end his days.

Bahmetyev, who had taken little part in the conversation, got up on his
crutches and said: ‘It seems to me that you ought to think very
seriously over Pyotr Kirillovitch’s advice. If you don’t care to put his
name down at Orenburg, you might put him down here. We are old friends
and it’s my way to tell you openly what I think; you will do your young
man no good with the civil service and university, and you will make him
of no use to society. He is quite obviously in a false position, only
the military service can open a career for him and put him right. Before
he reaches the command of a company, all dangerous ideas will have
subsided. Military discipline is a grand schooling, his future depends
on it. You say that he has abilities, but you don’t mean to say that
none but fools go into the army, do you? What about us and all our
circle? There’s only one objection you can make—that he will have to
serve a long time before he gets a commission, but it’s just in that
particular that we can help you.’

This conversation had as much effect as the remarks of Madame Proveau
and Vera Artamonovna. By that time I was thirteen and such lessons,
turned over and over, and analysed from every point of view during weeks
and months of complete solitude, bore their fruit. The result of this
conversation was that, although I had till then, like all boys, dreamed
of the army and a uniform, and had been ready to cry at my father’s
wanting me to go into the civil service, my enthusiasm for soldiering
suddenly cooled, and my love and tenderness for epaulettes, stripes and
gold lace, was by degrees completely eradicated. My smouldering passion
for the uniform had, however, one last flicker. A cousin of ours, who
had been at a boarding-school in Moscow and used sometimes to spend a
holiday with us, had entered the Yamburgsky regiment of Uhlans. In 1825
he came to Moscow as an ensign and stayed a few days with us. My heart
throbbed when I saw him with all his little cords and laces, wearing a
sword and a four-cornered helmet put on a little on one side and
fastened with a chin-strap. He was a boy of seventeen and short for his
age. Next morning I dressed up in his uniform, put on his sword and
helmet and looked at myself in the glass. Oh dear! how handsome I
thought myself in the short blue jacket with red braiding! And the
pompon, and the pouch ... what were the yellow nankeen breeches and the
short camlet jacket which I used to wear at home, in comparison with
these?

The cousin’s visit destroyed the effect of the generals’ talk, but soon
circumstances turned me against the army again, and this time for good.

The spiritual result of my meditations on my ‘false position’ was
somewhat the same as what I had deduced from the talk of my two nurses.
I felt myself more independent of society, of which I knew absolutely
nothing, felt that in reality I was thrown on my own resources, and with
somewhat childish conceit thought I would show the old generals what I
was made of.

With all that it may well be imagined how drearily and monotonously the
time passed in the strange conventlike seclusion of my father’s house. I
had neither encouragement nor distraction; my father had spoilt me until
I was ten, and now he was almost always dissatisfied with me; I had no
companions, my teachers came and went, and, seeing them out of the yard,
I used to run off on the sly, to play with the house-serf boys, which
was strictly forbidden. The rest of my time I spent wandering aimlessly
about the big dark rooms, which had their windows shut all day and were
only dimly lighted in the evening, doing nothing or reading anything
that turned up.

The servants’ hall and the maids’ room provided the only keen enjoyment
left me. There I found perfect peace and happiness; I took the side of
one party against another, discussed with my friends their affairs, and
gave my opinion upon them, knew all their private business, and never
dropped a word in the drawing-room of the secrets of the servants’ hall.

I must pause upon this subject. Indeed, I do not intend to avoid
digressions and episodes; that is the way of every conversation, that is
the way of life itself.

Children as a rule are fond of servants; their parents forbid them,
especially in Russia, to associate with servants; the children do not
obey them because it is dull in the drawing-room and lively in the
maids’ room. In this case, as in thousands of others, parents do not
know what they are about. I cannot conceive that our servants’ hall was
a less wholesome place for children than our ‘tea-room’ or
‘lounge-room.’ In the servants’ hall children pick up coarse expressions
and bad manners, that is true; but in the drawing-room they pick up
coarse ideas and bad feelings.

The very instruction to children to hold themselves aloof from those
with whom they are continually in contact is immoral.

A great deal is said among us about the complete depravity of servants,
especially when they are serfs. They certainly are not distinguished by
exemplary strictness of conduct, and their moral degradation can be seen
from the fact that they put up with too much and are too rarely moved to
indignation and resistance. But that is not the point. I should like to
know what class in Russia is less depraved? Are the nobility or the
officials? the clergy, perhaps?

Why do you laugh? The peasants, perhaps, are the only ones who may claim
to be different....

The difference between the nobleman and the serving man is very small. I
hate the demagogues’ flattery of the mob, particularly since the
troubles of 1848, but the aristocrats’ slander of the people I hate even
more. By picturing servants and slaves as degraded beasts, the planters
throw dust in people’s eyes and stifle the voice of conscience in
themselves. We are not often better than the lower classes, but we
express ourselves more gently and conceal our egoism and our passions
more adroitly; our desires are not so coarse, and the ease with which
they are satisfied and our habit of not controlling them make them less
conspicuous; we are simply wealthier and better fed and consequently
more fastidious. When Count Almaviva reckoned up to the Barber of
Seville the qualities he expected from a servant, Figaro observed with a
sigh: ‘If a servant must have all these virtues, are there many
gentlemen fit to be lackeys?’

Immorality in Russia as a rule does not go deep; it is more savage and
dirty, noisy and coarse, dishevelled and shameless than profound. The
clergy, shut up at home, drink and overeat themselves with the
merchants. The nobility get drunk in the sight of all, play cards until
they are ruined, thrash their servants, seduce their housemaids, manage
their business affairs badly and their family life still worse. The
officials do the same, but in a dirtier way, and in addition are guilty
of grovelling before their superiors and pilfering. As far as stealing
in the literal sense goes, the nobility are less guilty, they take
openly what belongs to others; when it suits them, however, they are
just as smart as other people. All these charming weaknesses are to be
met with in a still coarser form in those who are in private and not
government service, and in those who are dependent not on the Court but
on the landowners. But in what way they are worse than others as a
class, I do not know.

Going over my remembrances, not only of the serfs of our house and of
the Senator’s, but also of two or three households with which we were
intimate for twenty-five years, I do not remember anything particularly
vicious in their behaviour. Petty thefts, perhaps, ... but on that
matter all ideas are so muddled by their position, that it is difficult
to judge; _human property_ does not stand on ceremony with its kith and
kin, and is hail-fellow-well-met with the master’s goods. It would be
only fair to exclude from this generalisation the confidential servants,
the favourites of both sexes, masters’ mistresses and talebearers; but
in the first place they are an exception—these Kleinmihels of the
stable[15] and Benckendorfs[16] from the cellar, Perekusihins[17] in
striped linen gowns, and barelegged Pompadours; moreover, they do behave
better than any of the rest, they only get drunk at night and do not
pawn their clothes at the pot-house.

The simple-hearted immorality of the rest revolves round a glass of
vodka and a bottle of beer, a merry talk and a pipe, absences from home
without leave, quarrels which sometimes end in fights, and sly tricks
played on the masters who expect of them something inhuman and
impossible. Of course, on the one hand, the lack of all education, on
the other, the simplicity of the peasant in slavery have brought out a
great deal that is monstrous and distorted in their manners, but for all
that, like the negroes in America, they have remained half children, a
trifle amuses them, a trifle distresses them; their desires are limited,
and are rather naïve and human than vicious.

Vodka and tea, the tavern and the restaurant, are the two permanent
passions of the Russian servant; for their sake, he steals, for their
sake, he is poor, on their account, he endures persecution and
punishment and leaves his family in poverty. Nothing is easier than for
a Father Matthew[18] from the height of his teetotal intoxication to
condemn drunkenness, and sitting at the tea-table, to wonder why
servants go to drink tea at the restaurant, instead of drinking it at
home, although at home it is cheaper.

Vodka stupefies a man, it enables him to forget himself, stimulates him
and induces an artificial cheerfulness; this stupefaction and
stimulation are the more agreeable the less the man is developed and the
more he is bound to a narrow, empty life. How can a servant not drink
when he is condemned to the everlasting waiting in the hall, to
perpetual poverty, to being a slave, to being sold? He drinks to
excess—when he can—because he cannot drink every day; that was observed
fifteen years ago by Senkovsky in the _Library of Good Reading_.[19] In
Italy and the South of France there are no drunkards, because there is
plenty of wine. The savage drunkenness of the English working man is to
be explained in the same way. These men are broken in the inevitable and
unequal conflict with hunger and poverty; however hard they have
struggled they have met everywhere a blank wall of oppression and sullen
resistance that has flung them back into the dark depths of social life,
and condemned them to the never-ending, aimless toil that consumes mind
and body alike. It is not surprising that after spending six days as a
lever, a cogwheel, a spring, a screw, the man breaks savagely on
Saturday afternoon out of the penal servitude of factory work, and in
half an hour is drunk, for his exhaustion cannot stand much. The
moralists would do better to drink Irish or Scotch whisky themselves and
to hold their tongues, or with their inhuman philanthropy they may
provoke terrible replies.

Drinking tea at the restaurant has a different significance for
servants. Tea at home is not the same thing for the house-serf; at home
everything reminds him that he is a servant; at home he is in the dirty
servants’ room, he must get the samovar himself; at home he has a cup
with a broken handle, and any minute his master may ring for him. At the
restaurant he is a free man, he is a gentleman; for him the table is
laid and the lamps are lit; for him the waiter runs with the tray; the
cup shines, the tea-pot glitters, he gives orders and is obeyed, he
enjoys himself and gaily calls for pressed caviare or a turnover for his
tea.

In all of this there is more of childish simplicity than immorality.
Impressions quickly take possession of them but do not send down roots;
their minds are continually occupied, or rather distracted, by casual
subjects, small desires, trivial aims. A childish belief in everything
marvellous turns a grown-up man into a coward, and the same childish
belief comforts him in the bitterest moments. Filled with wonder, I was
present at the death of two or three of my father’s servants; it was
then that one could judge of the simple-hearted carelessness with which
their lives had passed, of the absence of great sins upon their
conscience; if there were anything, it had all been settled
satisfactorily with the priest.

This resemblance between servants and children accounts for their mutual
attraction. Children hate the aristocratic ideas of the grown-ups and
their benevolently condescending manners, because they are clever and
understand that in the eyes of grown-up people they are children, while
in the eyes of servants they are people. Consequently they are much
fonder of playing cards or loto with the maids than with visitors.
Visitors play for the children’s benefit with condescension, give way to
them, tease them and throw up the game for any excuse; the maids, as a
rule, play as much for their own sakes as for the children’s; and that
gives the game interest.

Servants are extremely devoted to children, and this is not a slavish
devotion, but the mutual affection of the weak and the simple. In old
days there used to be a patriarchal dynastic affection between
landowners and their serfs, such as exists even now in Turkey. To-day
there are in Russia no more of those devoted servants, attached to the
race and family of their masters. And that is easy to understand. The
landowner no longer believes in his power, he does not believe that he
will have to answer for his serfs at the terrible Day of Judgment, but
simply makes use of his power for his own advantage. The servant does
not believe in his subjection and endures violence not as a chastisement
and trial from God, but simply because he is defenceless; it is no use
kicking against the pricks.

I used to know in my youth two or three specimens of those fanatics of
slavery, of whom eighteenth century landowners speak with a sigh,
telling stories of their unflagging service and their great devotion,
and forgetting to add in what way their fathers and themselves had
repaid such self-sacrifice.

On one of the Senator’s estates a feeble old man called Andrey Stepanov
was living in peace, that is, on free rations.

He had been valet to the Senator and my father when they were serving in
the Guards, and was a good, honest, and sober man, who looked into his
young masters’ eyes, and, to use their own words, ‘guessed from them
what they wanted,’ which, I imagine, was not an easy task. Afterwards he
looked after the estate near Moscow. Cut off from the beginning of the
war of 1812 from all communication, and afterwards left alone, without
money, on the ashes of a village which had been burnt to the ground, he
sold some beams to escape starvation. The Senator, on his return to
Russia, proceeded to set his estate in order, and going into details of
the past, came to the sale of the beams. He punished his former valet by
sending him away in disgrace, depriving him of his duties. The old man,
burdened with a family, departed into exile. We used to stay for a day
or two on the estate where Andrey Stepanov was living. The feeble old
man, crippled by paralysis, used to come every time leaning on his
crutch, to pay his respects to my father and to speak to him.

The devotion and the gentleness with which he talked, his grievous
appearance, the locks of yellowish grey hair on each side of his bald
pate, touched me deeply. ‘I have heard, master,’ he said on one
occasion, ‘that your brother has received another decoration. I am
getting old, your honour, I shall soon give up my soul to God, and yet
the Lord has not vouchsafed to me to see your brother in his
decorations, not even once before my end to behold his honour in his
ribbons and all his finery!’

I looked at the old man, his face was so childishly candid, his bent
figure, his painfully twisted face, lustreless eyes, and weak voice—all
inspired confidence; he was not lying, he was not flattering, he really
longed before his death to see, in ‘all his ribbons and finery,’ the man
who could not for fifteen years forgive him the loss of a few beams. Was
this a saint, or a madman? But perhaps it is only madmen who attain
saintliness?

The new generation has not this idolatrous worship, and if there are
cases of serfs not caring for freedom, that is simply due to indolence
and material considerations. It is more depraved, there is no doubt, but
it is a sign that the end is near; if they want to see anything on their
master’s neck, it is certainly not the Vladimir ribbon.

Here I will say something of the position of our servants in general.

Neither the Senator nor my father oppressed the house-serfs
particularly, that is, they did not ill-treat them physically. The
Senator was hasty and impatient, and consequently often rough and
unjust, but he had so little contact with the house-serfs and took so
little notice of them that they scarcely knew each other. My father
wearied them with his caprices, never let pass a look, a word or a
movement, and was everlastingly lecturing them; to a Russian this often
seems worse than blows or abuse.

Corporal punishment was almost unknown in our house, and the two or
three cases in which the Senator and my father resorted to the revolting
method of the police station were so exceptional, that all the servants
talked about it for months afterwards; and it was only provoked by
glaring offences.

More frequently house-serfs were sent for soldiers, and this punishment
was a terror to all the young men; without kith or kin, they still
preferred to remain house-serfs, rather than to be in harness for twenty
years. I was greatly affected by those terrible scenes.... Two soldiers
of the police would appear at the summons of the landowner: they would
stealthily, in a casual, sudden way, seize the appointed victim. The
village elder commonly announced at this point that the master had the
evening before ordered that he was to be taken to the recruiting office,
and the man would try through his tears to put a brave face on it, while
the women wept: every one made him presents and I gave him everything I
could, that is, perhaps a twenty-kopeck piece and a neck-handkerchief.

I remember, too, my father’s ordering some village elder’s beard to be
shaved off, because he had spent the obrok[20] which he had collected. I
did not understand this punishment, but was struck by the appearance of
this old man of sixty; he was in floods of tears, and kept bowing to the
ground and begging for a fine of one hundred roubles in addition to the
obrok if only he might be spared this disgrace.

When the Senator was living with us, the common household consisted of
thirty men and almost as many women; the married women, however,
performed no service, they looked after their own families; there were
five or six maids or laundresses, who never came upstairs. To these must
be added the boys and girls who were being trained in their duties, that
is, in sloth and idleness, in lying and the use of vodka.

To give an idea of the life in Russia of those days, I think it will not
be out of place to say a few words on the maintenance of the
house-serfs. At first, they used to be given five roubles a month for
food and afterwards six. The women had a rouble a month less, and
children under ten had half the full allowance. The servants made up
‘artels’[21] and did not complain of the allowance being too small, and,
indeed, provisions were extraordinarily cheap in those days. The highest
wage was a hundred roubles a year, while others received half that
amount and some only thirty roubles. Boys under seventeen got no wages
at all. In addition to their allowance, servants were given clothes,
greatcoats, shirts, sheets, quilts, towels and mattresses covered with
sailcloth; boys, who did not get wages, were allowed money for their
physical and moral purification, that is, for the bath-house and for
preparing for communion. Taking everything into account, a servant cost
three hundred roubles a year; if to this we add a share of medicine, of
a doctor and of the surplus edibles brought from the village, even then
it is not over 350 roubles. This is only a quarter of the cost of a
servant in Paris or London.

The planters usually take into account the insurance premium of slavery,
that is, the maintenance of wife and children by the owner, and a meagre
crust of bread somewhere in the village for the slave in old age. Of
course this must be taken into account; but the cost is greatly lessened
by the fear of corporal punishment, the impossibility of changing their
position, and a much lower scale of maintenance.

I have seen enough of the way in which the terrible consciousness of
serfdom destroys and poisons the existence of house-serfs, the way in
which it oppresses and stupefies their souls. Peasants, especially those
who pay a fixed sum in lieu of labour, have less feeling of their
personal bondage; they somehow succeed in not believing in their
complete slavery. But for the house-serf, sitting on a dirty locker in
the hall from morning till night, or standing with a plate at table,
there is no room for doubt.

Of course there are people who live in the servants’ hall like fish in
water, people whose souls have never awakened, who have acquired a taste
for their manner of life and who perform their duties with a sort of
artistic relish.

Of that class we had one extremely interesting specimen, our footman
Bakay, a man of tall figure and athletic build, with solid, dignified
features and an air of the greatest profundity; he lived to an advanced
age, imagining that the position of a footman was one of the greatest
consequence.

This worthy old man was perpetually angry or a little drunk, or angry
and a little drunk at once. He took an exalted view of his duties and
ascribed a serious importance to them: with a peculiar bang and crash he
would throw up the steps of the carriage and slam the carriage door with
a report like a pistol shot. With a gloomy air he stood up stiff and
rigid behind the carriage, and every time there was a jolt over a rut he
would shout in a thick and displeased voice to the coachman: ‘Steady!’
regardless of the fact that the rut was already five paces behind.

Apart from going out with the carriage, his chief occupation, a duty he
had voluntarily undertaken, consisted of training the serf boys in the
aristocratic manners of the servants’ hall. When he was sober, things
went fairly well, but when his head was a little dizzy, he became
incredibly pedantic and tyrannical. I sometimes stood up for my friends,
but my authority had little influence on Bakay, whose temper was of a
Roman severity; he would open the door into the drawing-room for me and
say: ‘This is not the place for you; be pleased to leave the room or I
shall carry you out.’ He lost no opportunity of scolding the boys, and
often added a cuff to his words, or, with his thumb and first finger,
gave them a flip on the head with the sharpness and force of a spring.

When at last he had chased the boys out and was left alone, he
transferred his persecution to his one friend, Macbeth, a big
Newfoundland dog, whom he used to feed, comb and groom. After sitting in
solitude for two or three minutes he would go out into the yard, call
Macbeth to join him on the locker, and begin a conversation. ‘What are
you sitting out there in the yard in the frost for, stupid, when there
is a warm room for you? What a beast! What are you rolling your eyes
for, eh? Have you nothing to say?’ Usually a slap would follow these
words. Macbeth would sometimes growl at his benefactor; and then Bakay
would upbraid him in earnest: ‘You may go on feeding a dog, but he will
still remain a dog, he will show his teeth at any one, without caring
who it is ... the fleas would have eaten him up if it had not been for
me!’ And offended by his friend’s ingratitude he would wrathfully take a
pinch of snuff and fling what was left between his fingers on Macbeth’s
nose. Then the dog would sneeze, clumsily brush away the snuff with his
paw, and, leaving the bench indignantly, would scratch at the door;
Bakay would open it with the word ‘Rascal’ and give him a kick as he
went out. Then the boys would come back, and he would set to flipping
them on the head again.

Before Macbeth, we had a setter called Berta; she was very ill and Bakay
took her on to his mattress and looked after her for two or three weeks.
Early one morning I went out into the servants’ hall. Bakay tried to say
something to me, but his voice broke and a big tear rolled down his
cheek—the dog was dead. There is a fact for the student of human nature.
I do not for a moment suppose that he disliked the boys; it was simply a
case of a severe character, accentuated by drink and unconsciously
moulded by the spirit of the servants’ hall.

But besides these amateurs of slavery, what gloomy images of martyrs, of
hopeless victims, pass mournfully before my memory.

The Senator had a cook Alexey, a sober industrious man of exceptional
talent who made his way in the world. The Senator himself got him taken
into the Tsar’s kitchen, where there was at that time a celebrated
French cook. After being trained there, he got a post in the English
club, grew rich, married and lived like a gentleman; but the bonds of
serfdom would not let him sleep soundly at night, nor take pleasure in
his position.

After having a service celebrated to the Iversky Madonna, Alexey plucked
up his courage and presented himself before the Senator to ask for his
freedom for five thousand roubles. The Senator was proud of _his_ cook,
just as he was proud of _his_ painter, and so he would not take the
money, but told the cook that he should be set free for nothing at his
master’s death. The cook was thunderstruck; he grieved, grew thin and
worn, turned grey and ... being a Russian, took to drink. He neglected
his work; the English Club dismissed him. He was engaged by the Princess
Trubetskoy, who worried him by her petty niggardliness. Being on one
occasion extremely offended by her, Alexey, who was fond of expressing
himself eloquently, said, speaking through his nose with his air of
dignity: ‘What a clouded soul dwells in your illustrious body!’ The
princess was furious, she turned the cook away, and, as might be
expected from a Russian lady, wrote a complaint to the Senator. The
Senator would have done nothing to him, but, as a polite gentleman, he
felt bound to send for the cook, gave him a good scolding and told him
to go and beg the princess’s pardon.

The cook did not go to the princess but went to the pot-house. Within a
year he had lost everything from the capital he had saved up for his
ransom to the last of his aprons. His wife struggled and struggled on
with him, but at last went off and took a place as a nurse. Nothing was
heard of him for a long time. Then the police brought Alexey in tatters
and wild-looking; he had been picked up in the street, he had no
lodging, he wandered from tavern to tavern. The police insisted that his
master should take him. The Senator was distressed and perhaps
conscience-stricken, too; he received him rather mildly and gave him a
room. Alexey went on drinking, was noisy when he was drunk and imagined
that he was composing verses; he certainly had some imagination of an
incoherent sort. We were at that time at Vassilyevskoe. The Senator, not
knowing what to do with the cook, sent him there, thinking that my
father would bring him to reason. But the man was too completely
shattered. I saw in his case the concentrated anger and hatred against
the masters which lies in the heart of the serf, and might be
particularly dangerous in a cook; he would grind his teeth and speak
with malignant mimicry. He was not afraid to give full rein to his
tongue in my presence; he was fond of me and would often, patting me
familiarly on the shoulders, say that I was ‘a good branch of a rotten
tree.’

After the Senator’s death, my father gave him his freedom at once. It
was too late and simply meant getting rid of him, he was ruined in any
case.

Besides Alexey, I cannot help recalling another victim of serfdom. The
Senator had a serf aged about five-and-thirty who acted as his
secretary. My father’s eldest brother, who died in 1813, had sent him as
a boy to a well-known doctor to be trained as a feldsher (or doctor’s
assistant) that he might be of use in a village hospital which his
master was intending to found. The doctor procured permission for him to
attend the lectures of the Academy of Medicine and Surgery; the young
man had abilities, he learned Latin, German, and something of doctoring.
At five-and-twenty he fell in love with the daughter of an officer,
concealed his position from her and married her. The deception could not
last long. After his master’s death, the wife learned with horror that
they were serfs. The Senator, his new owner, did not oppress them in any
way, indeed he was fond of young Tolotchanov, but the trouble with the
wife persisted; she could not forgive her husband for the deception and
ran away from him with another man. Tolotchanov must have been devoted
to her, for from that time he sank into a melancholy that bordered upon
madness, spent his nights in debauchery, and, having no means of his
own, squandered his master’s money. When he saw that he could not set
things right, on the 31st of December 1821 he poisoned himself.

The Senator was not at home; Tolotchanov went in to my father in my
presence and told him that he had come to say good-bye to him and to ask
him to tell the Senator that he had spent the money that was missing.

‘You are drunk,’ my father told him. ‘Go and sleep it off.’

‘I shall soon go for a long sleep,’ said the doctor, ‘and I only beg you
not to remember evil against me.’

Tolotchanov’s tranquil air rather alarmed my father and, looking more
intently at him, he asked:

‘What’s the matter with you, are you raving?’

‘Not at all, I have only taken a wine-glassful of arsenic.’

They sent for a doctor and the police, gave him an emetic, and made him
drink milk. When he was on the point of vomiting, he restrained himself
and said: ‘Stay there, stay there, I did not swallow you for that.’

Afterwards, when the poison began to act more freely, I heard his moans
and his voice repeating in agony, ‘It burns! it burns! it’s fire!’

Some one advised him to send for a priest; he refused, and told Calot
that there could not be a life beyond the grave, that he knew too much
anatomy to believe that. At midnight he asked the doctor, in German,
what time it was, then saying, ‘Well, it’s the new year, I wish you a
happy one,’ he died.

In the morning I rushed to the little lodge that served as a bath-house;
Tolotchanov had been taken there; the body was lying on the table,
dressed just as he had died, in a dress-coat without a cravat, with his
chest open, and his features were terribly distorted and had even turned
black. This was the first dead body I had seen; I went away almost
fainting. And the playthings and pictures I had had given me for the New
Year did not comfort me. Tolotchanov’s dark-looking face hovered before
my eyes and I kept hearing his ‘It burns! it’s fire!’

I will say only one thing more, to conclude this gloomy subject: the
servants’ hall had no really bad influence upon me at all. On the
contrary, it awakened in me from my earliest years an invincible hatred
for every form of slavery and every form of tyranny. At times when I was
a child, Vera Artamonovna would say by way of the greatest rebuke for
some naughtiness: ‘Wait a bit, you will grow up and turn into just such
another master as the rest.’ I felt this a horrible insult. The old
woman need not have worried herself—just such another as the rest,
anyway, I have not become.

Besides the servants’ hall and the maids’ room I had one other
distraction, and in that I was not hindered in any way. I loved reading
as much as I hated lessons. My passion for unsystematic reading was,
indeed, one of the chief obstacles to serious study. I never could, for
instance, then or later, endure the theoretical study of languages, but
I very soon learnt to understand and chatter them incorrectly, and at
that stage I remained, because it was sufficient for my reading.

My father and the Senator had between them a fairly large library,
consisting of French books of the eighteenth century. The books lay
about in heaps in a damp, unused room in a lower storey of the Senator’s
house. Calot had the key. I was allowed to rummage in these literary
granaries as I liked, and I read and read to my heart’s content. My
father saw two advantages in it, that I should learn French more quickly
and that I should be occupied, that is, should sit quietly and in my own
room. Besides, I did not show him all the books I read, nor lay them on
the table; some of them were hidden in the sideboard.

What did I read? Novels and plays, of course. I read fifty volumes of
the French and Russian drama; in every volume there were three or four
plays. Besides French novels my mother had the Tales of La Fontaine and
the comedies of Kotzebue, and I read them two or three times. I cannot
say that the novels had much influence on me; though like all boys I
pounced eagerly on all equivocal or somewhat improper scenes, they did
not interest me particularly. A play which I liked beyond all measure
and read over twenty times in the Russian translation, the _Marriage of
Figaro_,[22] had much greater influence on me. I was in love with
Cherubino and the Countess, and what is more, I was myself Cherubino; my
heart throbbed as I read it and without myself clearly recognising it I
was conscious of a new sensation. How enchanting I thought the scene in
which the page is dressed up as a girl, how intensely I longed to hide
somebody’s ribbon in my bosom and kiss it in secret. In reality I had in
those years no feminine society.

I only remember that occasionally on Sundays Bahmetyev’s two daughters
used to come from their boarding-school to visit us. The younger, a girl
of sixteen, was strikingly beautiful. I was overwhelmed when she entered
the room and never ventured to address a word to her, but kept stealing
looks at her lovely dark eyes and dark curls. I never dropped a hint on
the subject and the first breath of love passed unseen by any one, even
by her.

Years afterwards when I met her, my heart throbbed violently and I
remembered how at twelve years old I had worshipped her beauty.

I forgot to say that _Werther_ interested me almost as much as the
_Marriage of Figaro_; half the novel was beyond me and I skipped it, and
hurried on to the terrible _dénouement_, over which I wept like a
madman. In 1839 _Werther_ happened to come into my hands again; this was
when I was at Vladimir and I told my wife how as a boy I had cried over
it and began reading her the last letters ... and when I came to the
same passage, my tears began flowing again and I had to stop.

Up to the age of fourteen I cannot say that my father greatly restricted
my liberty, but the whole atmosphere of our house was oppressive for a
lively boy. The persistent and unnecessary fussiness concerning my
physical health, together with complete indifference to my moral
well-being, was horribly wearisome. There were everlasting precautions
against my taking a chill, or eating anything indigestible, and anxious
solicitude over the slightest cough or cold in the head. In the winter I
was kept indoors for weeks at a time, and when I was allowed to go out,
it was only wearing warm high boots, thick scarves and such things. At
home it was always insufferably hot from the stoves. All this would
inevitably have made me a frail and delicate child but for the iron
health I inherited from my mother. She by no means shared my father’s
prejudices, and in her half of the house allowed me everything which was
forbidden in his.

My education made slow progress without emulation, encouragement, or
approval; I did my lessons lazily, without method or supervision, and
thought to make a good memory and lively imagination take the place of
hard work. I need hardly say that there was no supervision over my
teachers either; once the terms upon which they were engaged were
settled, they might, so long as they turned up at the proper time and
sat through their hour, go on for years without rendering any account to
any one.

One of the queerest episodes of my education at that time was the
engagement of the French actor Dalès to give me lessons in elocution.

‘No attention is paid to it nowadays,’ my father said to me, ‘but my
brother Alexander was every evening for six months reciting “Le récit de
Théramène”[23] with his teacher without reaching the perfection that he
insisted upon.’

So I set to work at recitation.

‘Well, Monsieur Dalès, I expect you can give him dancing lessons as
well?’ my father asked him on one occasion.

Dalès, a fat old man over sixty, who was fully aware of his own
qualities, but no less fully aware of the propriety of being modest
about them, replied: ‘that he could not judge of his own talents, but
that he had often given advice in the ballet dances _au grand Opéra_.’

‘So I supposed,’ my father observed, offering him his open snuff-box, a
civility he would never have shown to a Russian or a German teacher. ‘I
should be very glad if you could _le dégourdir un peu_; after his
recitation he might have a little dancing.’

‘_Monsieur le comte peut disposer de moi._’

And my father, who was excessively fond of Paris, began recalling the
foyer of the opera in 1810, the youth of George,[24] the declining years
of Mars,[25] and inquiring about cafés and theatres.

Now imagine my little room, a gloomy winter evening, the windows frozen
over and water dripping down a string from them, two tallow candles on
the table and our tête-à-tête. On the stage, Dalès still spoke fairly
naturally, but at a lesson thought it his duty to depart further from
nature in his delivery. He read Racine in a sort of chant and at the
cæsura made a parting such as an Englishman makes in his hair, so that
each line seemed like a broken stick.

At the same time he waved his arm like a man who has fallen into the
water and does not know how to swim. He made me repeat every line
several times and always shook his head, saying, ‘Not right, not right
at all, _attention_, “_Je crains Dieu, cher Abner_,”’ then the parting,
at which he would close his eyes and with a slight shake of his head,
tenderly pushing away the waves with his hand, add: ‘_et n’ai point
d’autre crainte_.’

Then the old gentleman who ‘feared nothing but God’ looked at his watch,
shut the book and pushed a chair towards me; this was my partner.

Under the circumstances it was not surprising that I never learned to
dance.

The lessons did not last long; they were cut short very tragically a
fortnight later.

I was at the French theatre with the Senator; the overture was played
once, then a second time and still the curtain did not rise. The front
rows, wishing to show they knew their Paris, began to be noisy in the
way the back rows are there. The manager came before the curtain, bowed
to the right, bowed to the left, bowed straight before him, and said:
‘We ask the kind indulgence of the audience; a terrible calamity has
befallen us, our comrade Dalès’—and the man’s voice was actually broken
by tears—‘has been found in his room stifled by charcoal fumes.’

It was in this violent way that the fumes of a Russian stove delivered
me from recitations, monologues and solo dances with my four-legged
mahogany partner.

At twelve years old I was transferred from feminine to masculine hands.
About that time my father made two unsuccessful attempts to engage a
German to look after me.

A German who looks after children is neither a tutor nor a nurse; it is
quite a special profession. He does not teach the children and he does
not dress them, but sees that they are taught and dressed, takes care of
their health, goes out for walks with them and talks any nonsense to
them so long as it is in German. If there is a tutor in the house, the
German is under his orders; if there is a male-nurse, he takes his
orders from the German. The visiting teachers, who come late owing to
unforeseen causes and leave early owing to circumstances over which they
have no control, do their best to win the German’s favour, and in spite
of his complete ignorance he begins to regard himself as a man of
learning. Governesses employ the German in shopping for them and in all
sorts of commissions, but only allow him to pay his court to them if
they suffer from striking physical defects or a complete lack of other
admirers. Boys of fourteen will go, without their parents’ knowledge, to
the German’s room to smoke, and he puts up with it because he must do
everything he can to remain in the house. Indeed at about that period
the German is thanked, presented with a watch and discharged. If he is
tired of sauntering about the streets with children and receiving
reprimands for their having colds, or stains on their clothes, the
‘children’s German’ becomes simply a German, sets up a little shop,
sells amber cigarette-holders, eau-de-Cologne and cigars to his former
nurslings, and carries out other secret commissions for them.[26]

The first German who was engaged to look after me was a native of
Silesia and was called Jokisch; to my mind the surname was sufficient
reason not to have engaged him. He was a tall, bald man, distinguished
by an extreme lack of cleanliness; he used to boast of his knowledge of
agricultural science, and I imagine it must have been on that account
that my father engaged him. I looked on the Silesian giant with
aversion, and the only thing that reconciled me to him was that he used,
as we walked to the Dyevitchy grounds and to the Pryesnensky ponds, to
tell me indecent anecdotes which I repeated in the servants’ hall. He
stayed no more than a year; he did something disgraceful in the village
and the gardener tried to kill him with a scythe, so my father told him
to take himself off.

He was succeeded by a Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel soldier (probably a
deserter) called Fyodor Karlovitch, who was distinguished by his fine
handwriting and extreme stupidity. He had been in the same position in
two families before and had acquired some experience, so adopted the
tone of a tutor; moreover, he spoke French with the accent invariably on
the wrong syllable.[27]

I had not a particle of respect for him and poisoned every moment of his
existence, especially after I had convinced myself that he was incapable
of understanding decimal fractions and the rule of three. As a rule
there is a great deal of ruthlessness and even cruelty in boys’ hearts;
with positive ferocity I persecuted the poor Wolfenbüttel _Jäger_ with
proportion sums; this so interested me that I triumphantly informed my
father of Fyodor Karlovitch’s stupidity, though I was not given to
discussing such subjects with him.

Moreover, Fyodor Karlovitch boasted to me that he had a new swallow-tail
coat, dark blue with gold buttons, and I actually did see him on one
occasion setting off to attend a wedding in a swallow-tail coat which
was too big for him but had gold buttons. The boy whose duty it was to
wait upon him informed me that he had borrowed the coat from a friend
who served at the counter of a perfumery shop. Without the slightest
sympathy I pestered the poor fellow to tell me where his blue dress-coat
was.

‘There are so many moths in your house,’ he said, ‘that I have left it
with a tailor I know, to be taken care of.’

‘Where does that tailor live?’

‘What is that to you?’

‘Why not tell me?’

‘You needn’t poke your nose into other people’s business.’

‘Well, perhaps not, but it is my name-day in a week, so please do get
the blue coat from the tailor for that day.’

‘No, I won’t, you don’t deserve it because you are so impertinent.’

For his final discomfiture Fyodor Karlovitch must needs one day brag
before Bouchot, my French teacher, of having been a recruit at Waterloo,
and of the Germans having given the French a terrible thrashing. Bouchot
merely stared at him and took a pinch of snuff with such a terrible air
that the conqueror of Napoleon was a good deal disconcerted. Bouchot
walked off leaning angrily on his gnarled stick and never referred to
him afterwards except as ‘_le soldat de Villainton_.’ I did not know at
the time that this pun was perpetrated by Béranger and could not boast
of having sprung from Bouchot’s fertile fancy.

At last Blücher’s companion in arms had some quarrel with my father and
left our house; after that my father did not worry me with any more
Germans.

While our Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel friend held the field I sometimes used
to visit some boys with whom a friend of his lived, also in the capacity
of a German; and with these boys we used to take long walks; after his
departure I was left again in complete solitude. I was bored, struggled
to get out of it, and found no means of escape. As I had no chance of
overriding my father’s will I might perhaps have been broken in to this
existence, if a new intellectual interest and two meetings, of which I
will speak in the following chapter, had not soon afterwards saved me. I
am quite certain that my father had not the faintest notion what sort of
life he was forcing upon me, or he would not have thwarted me in the
most innocent desires, nor have refused me the most natural requests.

Sometimes he allowed me to go with the Senator to the French theatre,
and this was the greatest enjoyment for me; I was passionately fond of
seeing acting, but this pleasure brought me as much pain as joy. The
Senator used to arrive with me when the play was half over, and as he
invariably had an invitation for the evening, would drag me away before
the end. The theatre was in Apraxin’s House, at Arbatsky Gate, and we
lived in Old Konyushenny Street, that is very close by, but my father
sternly forbade my returning without the Senator.

I was about fifteen when my father engaged a priest to give me Scripture
lessons, so far as was necessary for entering the University. The
Catechism came into my hands after I had read Voltaire. Nowhere does
religion play so modest a part in education as in Russia, and that, of
course, is a great piece of good fortune. A priest is always paid
half-price for lessons in religion, and, indeed, if the same priest
gives Latin lessons also, he is paid more for them than for teaching the
Catechism.

My father regarded religion as among the essential belongings of a
well-bred man; he used to say that one must believe in the ‘Holy
Scriptures’ without criticism, because you could do nothing in that
domain with reason, and all intellectual considerations merely obscured
the subject; that one must observe the rites of the religion in which
one was born, without, however, giving way to excessive devoutness,
which was all right for old women, but not proper in men. Did he himself
believe? I imagine that he did believe a little, from habit, from regard
for propriety, and from a desire to be on the safe side. He did not
himself, however, take part in any church observances, sheltering
himself behind the delicate state of his health. He scarcely ever
received a priest, at most he would ask him to perform a service in the
empty drawing-room and would send him there five roubles. In the winter
he excused himself on the plea that the priest and the deacon always
brought such chilliness with them that he invariably caught cold. In the
country he used to go to church and receive the priest, but rather with
a view to secular affairs than religious considerations. My mother was a
Lutheran and therefore one degree more religious; on one or two Sundays
in every month she would drive to her church, or as Bakay persisted in
calling it, to ‘her kirche,’ and, having nothing better to do, I went
with her. There I learned to mimic the German pastors, their declamation
and verbosity with artistic finish, and I retained the talent in riper
years.

Every year my father commanded me to fast, confess, and take the
sacrament. I was afraid of confession, and the church _mise en scène_
altogether impressed and alarmed me. With genuine awe I went up to take
the sacrament, but I cannot call it a religious feeling, it was the awe
which is inspired by everything incomprehensible and mysterious,
especially when a grave and solemn significance is attributed to it;
casting spells and telling fortunes affect one in the same way. I took
the sacrament after matins in Holy Week, and, after devouring eggs
coloured red and Easter cakes, I thought no more of religion for the
rest of the year.

But I used to read the Gospel a great deal and with love, both in the
Slavonic and in the Lutheran translation. I read it without any
guidance, and, though I did not understand everything, I felt a deep and
genuine respect for what I read. In my early youth I was often
influenced by Voltairianism, and was fond of irony and mockery, but I do
not remember that I ever took the Gospel in my hand with a cold feeling;
and it has been the same with me all my life; at all ages and under
various circumstances I have gone back to reading the Gospel, and every
time its words have brought peace and gentleness to my soul.

When the priest began giving me lessons he was surprised to find not
only that I had a general knowledge of the Gospel but that I could quote
texts, word for word; ‘but the Lord God,’ he said, ‘though He has opened
his mind, had not yet opened his heart.’ And my theologian, shrugging
his shoulders, marvelled at my ‘double nature,’ but was pleased with me,
thinking that I should be able to pass my examination.

Soon a religion of a different sort took possession of my soul.




                               Chapter 3
     THE DEATH OF ALEXANDER I. AND THE FOURTEENTH OF DECEMBER—MORAL
          AWAKENING—THE TERRORIST BOUCHOT—MY KORTCHEVA COUSIN


One winter morning the Senator arrived not at the time he usually
visited us; looking anxious, he went with hurried footsteps into my
father’s study and closed the door, motioning me to remain in the
drawing-room.

Luckily I had not long to rack my brains guessing what was the matter.
The door of the servants’ hall opened a little way and a red face,
half-hidden in the wolf-fur of a livery overcoat, called me in a
whisper; it was the Senator’s footman. I rushed to the door.

‘Haven’t you heard?’ he asked.

‘What?’

‘The Tsar has just died at Taganrog.’

The news impressed me; I had never thought of the possibility of the
Tsar’s death; I had grown up with a great respect for Alexander, and
recalled mournfully how I had seen him not long before in Moscow. When
we were out walking, we had met him beyond the Tverskoy Gate; he was
quietly riding along with two or three generals, returning from Hodynki,
where there had been a review. His face was gracious, his features soft
and rounded, his expression tired and melancholy. When he was on a level
with us, I raised my hat, he bowed to me, smiling. What a contrast to
Nicholas, who always looked like a slightly bald Medusa with cropped
hair and moustaches. In the street, at the court, with his children and
ministers, with his couriers and maids of honour, he was incessantly
trying whether his eyes had the power of a rattlesnake, of freezing the
blood in the veins.[28] If Alexander’s external gentleness was assumed,
surely such hypocrisy is better than the naked shamelessness of
despotism.

While vague ideas floated through my mind, while portraits of the new
Emperor Constantine were sold in the shops, while appeals to take the
oath of allegiance were being delivered, and good people were hastening
to do so, rumours were suddenly afloat that the Tsarevitch had refused
the crown. Then that same footman of the Senator’s, who was greatly
interested in political news and had a fine field for gathering it—in
all the public offices and vestibules of senators, to one or other of
which he was always driving from morning to night, for he did not share
the privilege of the horses, who were changed after dinner—informed me
that there had been rioting in Petersburg and that cannons were being
fired in Galerny Street.

On the following evening Count Komarovsky, a general of the gendarmes,
was with us: he told us of the troops in St. Isaac’s Square, of the
Horse Guards’ attack, of the death of Count Miloradovitch.

Then followed arrests; ‘so-and-so has been taken,’ ‘so-and-so has been
seized,’ ‘so-and-so has been brought up from the country’; terrified
parents trembled for their children. The sky was overcast with gloomy
storm-clouds.

In the reign of Alexander political punishments were rare; the Tsar did,
it is true, banish Pushkin for his verses and Labzin for having, when he
was secretary, proposed to elect a coachman, called Ilya Baykov, a
member of the Academy of Arts[29]; but there was no systematic
persecution. The secret police had not yet grown into an independent
body of gendarmes, but consisted of a department under the control of De
Sanglain, an old Voltairian, a wit, a great talker, and a humorist in
the style of Jouy.[30] Under Nicholas, this gentleman himself was under
the supervision of the police and he was considered a liberal, though he
was exactly what he had always been; from this fact alone, it is easy to
judge of the difference between the two reigns.

Nicholas was completely unknown until he came to the throne; in the
reign of Alexander he was of no consequence, and no one was interested
in him. Now every one rushed to inquire about him; no one could answer
questions but the officers of the Guards; they hated him for his cold
cruelty, his petty fussiness and his vindictiveness. One of the first
anecdotes that went the round of the town confirmed the officers’
opinion of him. The story was that at some drill or other the Grand Duke
had so far forgotten himself as to try and take an officer by the
collar. The officer responded with the words: ‘Your Highness, my sword
is in my hand.’ Nicholas drew back, said nothing, but never forgot the
answer. After the Fourteenth of December he made inquiries on two
occasions as to whether this officer was implicated. Fortunately he was
not.[31]

The tone of society changed before one’s eyes; the rapid deterioration
in morals was a melancholy proof of how little the sense of personal
dignity was developed among Russian aristocrats. Nobody (except women)
dared show sympathy, dared utter a warm word about relations or friends,
whose hands had been shaken only the day before they had been carried
off at night by the police. On the contrary, there were savage fanatics
for slavery, some from abjectness, others, worse still, from
disinterested motives.

Women alone did not take part in this shameful abandonment of those who
were near and dear ... and women alone stood at the Cross too, and at
the blood-stained guillotine there stood, first, Lucile Desmoulins,[32]
that Ophelia of the Revolution, always beside the axe, waiting for her
turn, and later, George Sand, who gave the hand of sympathy and
friendship on the scaffold to the youthful fanatic Alibaud.[33]

The wives of men, exiled to hard labour, lost their civil rights,
abandoned wealth and social position, and went to a lifetime of bondage
in the terrible climate of Eastern Siberia, under the still more
terrible yoke of the police there. Sisters, who had not the right to go
with their brothers, withdrew from court, and many left Russia; almost
all of them kept a feeling of love for the victims alive in their
hearts; but there was no such love in the men, terror consumed it in
their hearts, not one of them dared mention the luckless exiles.

While I am touching on the subject, I cannot forbear saying a few words
about one of those heroic stories, of which very little has been heard.
A young French governess was living in the old-fashioned family of the
Ivashevs. Ivashev’s son and heir wanted to marry her. This drove all his
relations frantic; there was an uproar, tears, petitions. The French
girl had not the support of a brother like Tchernov, who on his sister’s
behalf killed Novosiltsov and was killed by him in a duel. She was
persuaded to leave Petersburg, and he to put off for a time his design
of marrying her. Ivashev was one of the more active conspirators and he
was sentenced to penal servitude for life. His relations did not succeed
in saving him from the _mésalliance_. As soon as the dreadful news
reached the young girl in Paris, she set off for Petersburg and asked
permission to go to the province of Irkutsk to join her betrothed.
Benckendorf tried to dissuade her from this criminal intention; he did
not succeed and reported the matter to Nicholas. The Tsar directed that
the position of women who did not desert their exiled husbands should be
explained to her, adding that he would not prevent her going, but that
she must know that, if wives who went to Siberia from fidelity to their
husbands deserved some indulgence, she had not the slightest right to
any since she was wilfully entering into marriage with a criminal.
Nicholas and she both kept their word, she went to Siberia, and he did
nothing to alleviate her fate.

               ‘The Monarch though severe was just.’[34]

In the prison nothing was known of the permission given her, and when
the poor girl arrived she had, while a correspondence was carried on
with the authorities in Petersburg, to wait in a little settlement
inhabited by all sorts of former criminals, with no means of finding out
anything about Ivashev or communicating with him.

By degrees she became acquainted with her new companions. Among them was
an exiled robber who worked in the prison; she told him her story. Next
day the robber brought her a note from Ivashev. A day later he offered
to bring her notes from Ivashev and to take her letters to him. He had
to work in the prison from morning till evening; at nightfall he would
take Ivashev’s letter and would set off with it regardless of snowstorms
and fatigue, and return to his work at dawn.[35]

At last the permission came and they were married. A few years later
penal servitude was exchanged for a settlement. Their position was
somewhat better, but their strength was exhausted; the wife was the
first to sink under the weight of all she had gone through. She faded
away as a flower of southern lands must fade in the Siberian snows.
Ivashev did not survive her, he actually died a year later, but before
then he had left this sphere; his letters (which made some impression on
the Third Section[36]) bear the traces of an infinitely mournful, holy
madness and gloomy poetry; he was not really living after her death, but
slowly and solemnly dying. This chronicle does not end with his death.
After Ivashev’s exile his father made over his estate to his
illegitimate son, begging him to help his poor brother and not to forget
him. The exiles left two little boys, helpless, fatherless and
motherless, who had neither name nor rights and seemed likely to become
cantonists[37] and settlers in Siberia. Ivashev’s brother entreated
Nicholas for permission to take the children. Nicholas granted
permission. A few years later he risked another petition, he moved
heaven and earth for their father’s name to be restored to them; and in
this too he was successful.

The accounts of the rising and of the trial of the leaders, and the
horror in Moscow, made a deep impression on me; a new world which became
more and more the centre of my moral existence was revealed to me. I do
not know how it came to pass, but though I had no understanding, or only
a very dim one, of what it all meant, I felt that I was not on the same
side as the grape-shot and victory, prisons and chains. The execution of
Pestel,[38] and his associates finally dissipated the childish dream of
my soul.

Every one expected some mitigation of the sentence on the condemned men,
the coronation was about to take place. Even my father, in spite of his
caution and his scepticism, said that the death penalty would not be
carried out, and that all this was done merely to impress people. But,
like every one else, he knew little of the youthful monarch. Nicholas
left Petersburg, and, without visiting Moscow, stopped at the Petrovsky
Palace.... The citizens of Moscow could scarcely believe their eyes when
they read in the _Moscow News_ of the terrible event of the fourteenth
of July.

The Russian people had become unaccustomed to the death penalty; since
the days of Mirovitch,[39] who was executed instead of Catherine II.,
and of Pugatchov[40] and his companions, there had been no executions;
men had died under the knout, soldiers had run the gauntlet (contrary to
the law) until they fell dead, but the death penalty _de jure_ did not
exist. The story is told that in the reign of Paul there was some
partial rising of the Cossacks on the Don in which two officers were
implicated. Paul ordered them to be tried by court martial, and gave the
hetman or general full authority. The court condemned them to death, but
no one dared to confirm the sentence; the hetman submitted the matter to
the Tsar. ‘They are a pack of women,’ said Paul; ‘they want to throw the
execution on me, very much obliged to them,’ and he commuted the
sentence to penal servitude.

Nicholas re-introduced the death penalty into our criminal proceedings,
at first illegally, but afterwards he included it in the Code.

The day after receiving the terrible news there was a religious service
in the Kremlin.[41] After celebrating the execution Nicholas made his
triumphal entry into Moscow. I saw him then for the first time; he was
on horseback riding beside a carriage in which the two empresses, his
wife and Alexander’s widow, were sitting. He was handsome, but there was
a coldness about his looks; no face could have more mercilessly betrayed
the character of the man than his. The sharply retreating forehead and
the lower jaw developed at the expense of the skull were expressive of
iron will and feeble intelligence, rather of cruelty than of sensuality;
but the chief point in the face was the eyes, which were entirely
without warmth, without a trace of mercy, wintry eyes. I do not believe
that he ever passionately loved any woman, as Paul loved Anna
Lopuhin,[42] and as Alexander loved all women except his wife; ‘he was
favourably disposed to them,’ nothing more.

In the Vatican there is a new gallery in which Pius VII., I believe, has
placed an immense number of statues, busts, and statuettes, dug up in
Rome and its environs. The whole history of the decline of Rome is there
expressed in eyebrows, lips, foreheads; from the daughters of Augustus
down to Poppaea, the matrons have succeeded in transforming themselves
into cocottes, and the type of cocotte is predominant and persists; the
masculine type, surpassing itself, so to speak, in Antinous and
Hermaphroditus, divides into two. On one hand there is sensual and moral
degradation, low brows and features defiled by vice and gluttony,
bloodshed and every wickedness in the world, petty as in the hetaira
Heliogabalus, or with sunken cheeks like Galba; the last type is
wonderfully reproduced in the King of Naples.... But there is
another—the type of military commander in whom everything social and
moral, everything human has died out, and there is left nothing but the
passion for domination; the mind is narrow and there is no heart at all;
they are the monks of the love of power; force and austere will is
manifest in their features. Such were the Emperors of the Praetorian
Guard and of the army, whom the turbulent legionaries raised to power
for an hour. Among their number I found many heads that recalled
Nicholas before he wore a moustache. I understand the necessity for
these grim and inflexible guards beside what is dying in frenzy, but
what use are they to what is youthful and growing?

In spite of the fact that political dreams absorbed me day and night, my
ideas were not distinguished by any peculiar insight; they were so
confused that I actually imagined that the object of the Petersburg
rising was, among other things, to put the Tsarevitch Constantine on the
throne, while limiting his power. This led to my being devoted for a
whole year to that eccentric creature. He was at that time more popular
than Nicholas; for what reason I do not know, but the masses, for whom
he had never done anything good, and the soldiers, to whom he had done
nothing but harm, loved him. I well remember how during the coronation
he walked beside the pale-faced Nicholas with scowling, light-yellow,
bushy eyebrows, a bent figure with the shoulders hunched up to the ears,
wearing the uniform of the Lettish Guards with a yellow collar. After
giving away the bride at the wedding of Nicholas with Russia, he went
away to complete the disaffection of Warsaw. Nothing more was heard of
him until the 29th of November 1830.[43]

My hero was not handsome and you could not find such a type in the
Vatican. I should have called it the Gatchina type, if I had not seen
the King of Sardinia.

I need hardly say that now solitude weighed upon me more than ever, for
I longed to communicate my ideas and my dreams to some one, to test them
and to hear them confirmed; I was too proudly conscious of being
‘ill-intentioned’ to say nothing about it, or to speak of it
indiscriminately. My first choice of a confidant was my Russian tutor.

I. E. Protopopov was full of that vague and generous liberalism which
often passes away with the first grey hair, with marriage and a post,
but yet does ennoble a man. My teacher was touched, and as he was taking
leave embraced me with the words: ‘God grant that these feelings may
take root and grow stronger in you.’ His sympathy was a great comfort to
me. After this he began bringing me much-dog’s-eared manuscript copies
in small handwriting of Pushkin’s poems, the ‘Ode to Freedom,’ ‘The
Dagger,’ ‘Ryleyev’s Reverie.’ I used to copy them in secret ... (and now
I print them openly!).

Of course, my reading, too, took a different turn. Politics was now in
the foreground, and above all the history of the Revolution, of which I
knew nothing except from Madame Proveau’s tales. In the library in the
basement I discovered a history of the ‘nineties written by a Royalist.
It was so partial that even at fourteen I did not believe it. I happened
to hear from old Bouchot that he had been in Paris during the
Revolution; and I longed to question him; but Bouchot was a stern and
forbidding man with an immense nose and spectacles; he never indulged in
superfluous conversation, he conjugated verbs, dictated copies, scolded
me and went away, leaning on his thick gnarled stick.

‘Why did they execute Louis XVI.?’ I asked him in the middle of a
lesson.

The old man looked at me, frowning with one grey eyebrow and lifting the
other, pushed his spectacles up on his forehead like a visor, pulled out
a large blue handkerchief and, blowing his nose with dignity, said:
‘_Parce qu’il a été traître à la patrie_.’

‘If you had been one of the judges, would you have signed the death
sentence?’

‘With both hands.’

This lesson was of more value to me than all the subjunctives; it was
enough for me; it was clear that the king deserved to be executed.

Old Bouchot did not like me and thought me empty-headed and mischievous,
because I did not prepare my lessons properly, and he often used to say
‘you’ll come to no good,’ but when he noticed my sympathy with his
regicide ideas, he began to be gracious instead of being cross, forgave
my mistakes and used to tell me episodes of the year ’93, and how he had
left France, when ‘the dissolute and the dishonest’ got the upper hand.
He would finish the lesson with the same dignity, without a smile, but
now he would say indulgently: ‘I really did think that you were coming
to no good, but your generous feelings will be your salvation.’

To this encouragement and sympathy from my teacher was soon added a
warmer sympathy which had more influence on me.

The granddaughter[44] of my father’s eldest brother was living in a
little town in the province of Tver. I had known her from my earliest
childhood, but we rarely met; she used to come once a year for Christmas
or for Carnival to stay at Moscow with her aunt. Nevertheless, we became
friends. She was five years older than I, but so small and young-looking
that she might have been taken for the same age. What I particularly
liked her for was that she was the first person who treated me as a
human being, that is, did not continually express surprise at my having
grown, ask me what lessons I was doing, and whether I was good at them,
and whether I wanted to go into the army and into what regiment, but
talked to me as people in general talk to each other; though she
retained that tone of authority which girls like to assume with boys who
are a little younger than themselves. We had written to each other and
after 1824 fairly often, but letters again mean pens and paper, again
the schoolroom table with its blots and pictures carved with a penknife;
I longed to see her, to talk to her about my new ideas, and so it may be
imagined with what joy I heard that my cousin was coming in February
(1826), and would stay with us for some months. I scratched on my table
the days of the month until her arrival and blotted them out as they
passed, sometimes intentionally forgetting three days so as to have the
pleasure of blotting out rather more at once, and yet the time dragged
on very slowly; then the time fixed had passed and her coming was
deferred until a later date, and that passed, as it always does.

I was sitting one evening with my tutor Protopopov in my schoolroom, and
he as usual, taking a sip of fizzing kvass after every sentence, was
talking of the hexameter, horribly with voice and hand chopping up every
line of Gnyeditch’s _Iliad_ at the cæsura, when all of a sudden the snow
in the yard crunched with a different sound from that made by town
sledges, the tied-up bell gave the relic of a tinkle, there was talk in
the yard.... I flushed crimson, I had no more thought for the measured
wrath of ‘Achilles, son of Peleus’; I rushed headlong to the hall and my
cousin from Tver, wrapped in fur coats, shawls, and scarves, wearing a
bonnet and fluffy white high boots, red with the frost and, perhaps,
with joy, rushed to kiss me.

People usually talk of their early childhood, of its griefs and joys
with a smile of condescension, as though, like Sofya Pavlovna in _Woe
from Wit_, they would say with a grimace: ‘Childishness!’ As though they
had grown better in later years, as though their feelings were keener or
deeper. Within three years children are ashamed of their playthings—let
them be, they long to be grown-up, they grow and change so rapidly, they
see that from their jackets and the pages of their schoolbooks; but one
would have thought grown-up people might understand that childhood
together with two or three years of youth is the fullest, most exquisite
part of life, the part that is most our own, and, indeed, almost the
most important, for it imperceptibly shapes our future.

So long as a man is advancing with discreet footsteps forward, without
stopping or taking thought, so long as he does not come to a precipice
or break his neck, he imagines that his life lies before him, looks down
on the past and does not know how to appreciate the present. But when
experience has crushed the flowers of spring and the flush of summer has
cooled, when he begins to suspect that his life is practically over,
though its continuation remains, then he turns with different feelings
to the bright, warm, lovely memories of early youth.

Nature with her everlasting snares and economic devices _gives_ man
youth, but _takes_ the formed man for herself; she draws him on,
entangles him in a web of social and family relations, three-fourths of
which are independent of his will; he, of course, gives his personal
character to his actions, but he belongs to himself far less than in
youth; the lyrical element of the personality is feebler and therefore
also the power of enjoyment—everything is weaker, except the mind and
the will.

My cousin’s life was not a bed of roses. Her mother she lost when she
was a baby. Her father was a desperate gambler, and, like all who have
gambling in their blood, he was a dozen times reduced to poverty and a
dozen times rich again, and ended all the same by completely ruining
himself. _Les beaux restes_ of his property he devoted to a stud-farm on
which he concentrated all his thoughts and feelings. His son, an ensign
in the Uhlans, my cousin’s only brother and a very good-natured youth,
was going the straight road to ruin; at nineteen he was already a more
passionate gambler than his father.

At fifty, the father, for no reason at all, married an old maid who had
been a pupil in the Smolny Convent.[45] Such a complete, perfect type of
the Petersburg boarding-school miss it has never been my lot to meet.
She had been one of the best pupils, and afterwards had become _dame de
classe_ in the school; thin, fair, and short-sighted, she had something
didactic and edifying about her very appearance. Not at all stupid, she
was full of an icy enthusiasm in words, talked in hackneyed phrases of
virtue and devotion, knew chronology and geography by heart, spoke
French with a revolting correctness and concealed an inner vanity which
was like an artificial Jesuitical modesty. In addition to these traits
of the ‘seminarists in yellow shawls’ she had others which were purely
Nevsky or Smolny characteristics. She used to raise her eyes full of
tears to heaven, as she spoke of the visits of their common mother (the
Empress Maria Fyodorovna), was in love with the Emperor Alexander, and,
I remember, used to wear a locket, or a signet ring, with a scrap of a
letter from the Empress Elizabeth in it, ‘_Il a repris son sourire de
bienveillance!_’

The reader can picture the harmonious trio: the father, a gambler,
passionately devoted to horses, gypsies, noise, carousals, races, and
trotting matches; the daughter brought up in complete independence,
accustomed to do what she liked in the house; and the learned lady who,
from an elderly schoolmistress, had been turned into a young wife. Of
course, she did not like her stepdaughter, and of course her
stepdaughter did not like her; as a rule great affection can only exist
between women of five-and-thirty and girls of seventeen when the former,
with resolute self-sacrifice, determine to have no sex.

I am not at all surprised at the common hostility between stepdaughters
and stepmothers, it is natural and it is right. The new person put into
the mother’s place excites aversion in the children, the second marriage
is for them like a second funeral. The children’s love is vividly
expressed in this feeling, it whispers to the orphans: ‘Your father’s
wife is not your mother.’ At first Christianity understood that with the
conception of marriage which it developed, with the immortality of the
soul which it preached, a second marriage was altogether incongruous;
but, making continual concessions to the world, the Church compromised
with its principles and was confronted with the implacable logic of
life, with the simple childish heart that in practice revolts against
the pious incongruity of regarding its father’s companion as its mother.

On her side, too, the woman who comes to her new home from church and
finds a family, children awaiting her, is in an awkward position; she
has nothing to do with them, she must affect feelings which she cannot
have, she must persuade herself and others that another woman’s children
are as dear to her as her own.

And therefore I do not in the least blame the lady from the convent nor
my cousin for their mutual dislike, but I understand how the young girl,
unaccustomed to discipline, was fretting to escape anywhere out of the
parental home. Her father was beginning to get old and was more and more
under the thumb of his learned wife. Her brother, the Uhlan, was going
from bad to worse, and, in fact, life was not pleasant at home, and at
last she persuaded her stepmother to let her come for some months,
possibly even for a year, to us.

The day after her arrival my cousin turned the whole order of my life,
except my lessons, upside down, arbitrarily fixed hours for our reading
together, advised me not to read novels, but recommended Ségur’s
_Universal History_ and the _Travels of Anacharsis_. Her stoical ideals
led her to oppose my marked inclination for smoking in secret, which I
did by wrapping the tobacco in paper (cigarettes did not exist in those
days); she liked preaching morality to me in general, and if I did not
obey her teaching, at least I listened meekly. Luckily she could not
keep up to her own standards, and, forgetting her rules, she read
Zschokke’s[46] tales with me instead of the archæological novel, and
secretly sent a boy out to buy, in winter, buckwheat cakes and
pease-pudding, and, in summer, gooseberries and currants.

I think my cousin’s influence over me was very good; with her a warm
element came into the cell-like seclusion of my youth, it fostered and
perhaps, indeed, preserved the scarcely developing feelings which might
very well have been completely crushed by my father’s irony. I learnt to
be observant, to be wounded by a word, to care about somebody else, to
love; I learnt to talk about my feelings. She supported my political
aspirations, predicted for me an extraordinary future and fame, and I,
with childish vanity, believed her that I was a future ‘Brutus or
Fabricius.’

To me alone she confided the secret of her love for an officer of the
Alexandrinsky Regiment of Hussars, in a black cape and a black dolman;
it was a genuine secret, for the hussar himself, as he commanded his
squadron, never suspected what a pure flame was glowing for him in the
bosom of a girl of eighteen. I do not know whether I envied his lot,
probably I did a little, but I was proud of having been chosen as a
confidant, and imagined (after Werther) that this was one of those
tragic passions, which would have a great _dénouement_ accompanied by
suicide, poison, and a dagger, and the idea even occurred to me that I
might go to him and tell him all about it.

My cousin had brought shuttlecocks from Kortcheva; in one of the
shuttlecocks there was a pin, she would never play with any other, and
whenever it fell to me or any one else she would take it, saying she was
used to playing with it. The demon of mischief, which was always my evil
tempter, prompted me to change the pin, that is, to stick it in another
shuttlecock. The trick was fully successful, my cousin always took to
the one with the pin in it. A fortnight later I told her; her face
changed, she dissolved into tears and went off to her own room. I was
panic-stricken and unhappy and, after waiting for half an hour, went to
her; her door was locked. I begged her to open it; she refused to let me
in and said that she was ill, that I was no friend to her, but a
heartless boy. I wrote her a note and besought her to forgive me; after
tea we made it up, I kissed her hand, she embraced me and at once
explained the full importance of the matter. A year before, the hussar
had dined with them and after dinner played battledore and shuttlecock,
and this was the shuttlecock with which he had played. I had pangs of
conscience, I thought that I had committed a real sacrilege.

My cousin stayed until October. Her father sent for her to come home,
promising to let her come to us at Vassilyevskoe the following year. We
looked forward with horror to parting and, behold, one day a chaise came
for her, and her maid carried off boxes and baskets to pack in it while
our servants filled the chaise with all sorts of provisions for a full
week’s journey, and crowded at the entrance to say good-bye. We embraced
warmly, she wept and I wept—the chaise drove out into the side street
beside the very place where they used to sell us buckwheat cakes and
pease-pudding, and vanished. I crossed the yard, it seemed so cold and
horrid; I went up into my room—and there it seemed cold and empty. I set
to work on my lesson for Protopopov, while I wondered where the chaise
was now, and whether it had passed the town-gate or not.

My only comfort was the thought of our being together again at
Vassilyevskoe the following June!

For me the country was always a time of renewal, I was passionately fond
of country life. The forest, the fields, and the freedom—it was all so
new for me who had been brought up in cotton-wool, within brick walk,
not daring on any pretext to go out beyond the gate without asking leave
and being accompanied by a footman....

‘Are we going this year to Vassilyevskoe or not?’ From early spring I
was greatly interested in this question. My father invariably said that
this year he was going away early, that he longed to see the leaves come
out, but he never could get off before July. Some years he would put it
off so late that we never went at all. He wrote to the country every
winter that the house was to be got ready and thoroughly warmed, but
this was done through deep diplomatic considerations rather than quite
seriously, in order that the village elder and the counting-house clerk
might be afraid he would soon be coming and look after their work more
carefully.

It seemed that we were going. My father told the Senator that he was
longing to rest in the country and that the estate wanted looking after,
but again weeks went by.

Little by little there seemed more ground for hope, provisions began to
be sent off, sugar, tea, all sorts of cereals, and wine—then again there
was a pause, and then at last an order was despatched to the village
elder to send so many peasants’ horses on such a day—and so we were
going, we were going!

I did not think then what the loss of four or five days when work in the
fields was at its height must have meant to the peasants, but rejoiced
with all my heart and hastened to pack my books and exercise books. The
horses were brought, with inward satisfaction I heard their munching and
snorting in the yard, and took great interest in the bustle of the
coachmen, and the wrangling of the servants as to who should sit in
which cart and where each should put his belongings. In the servants’
quarters lights were burning until daybreak, and all were packing,
dragging sacks and bags from place to place, and dressing for the
journey (which was one of over fifty miles). My father’s valet was the
most exasperated of all, he realised the full importance of the packing;
with intense irritation he flung out everything which had been put in by
others, tore his hair with vexation and was quite unapproachable.

My father did not get up a bit earlier next day, in fact I think he got
up later than usual, and drank his coffee just as slowly, but at last,
at eleven o’clock, he ordered the horses to be put in. Behind the
carriage, which had four seats and was drawn by six carriage horses,
there followed three and sometimes four conveyances—a coach, a chaise, a
wagon, or instead of it, two carts; all these were filled with the
house-serfs and their belongings, although wagon-loads had been sent on
beforehand, and everything was so tightly packed that no one could sit
with comfort. We stopped half way to have dinner and to feed the horses
in the big village of Perhushkovo, the name of which occurs in
Napoleon’s bulletins. This village belonged to the son of that elder
brother of my father of whom I have spoken in connection with the
division of the property. The neglected house of the owner stood on the
high-road, surrounded by flat, cheerless-looking fields; but even this
dusty vista delighted me after the stuffiness of town. In the house the
warped boards and stairs shook, sounds and footsteps resounded loudly,
the walls echoed as it were with astonishment. The old-fashioned
furniture from the former owner’s art museum was living out its day in
this exile; I wandered with curiosity from room to room, went upstairs
and downstairs and finally into the kitchen. There our man-cook, with a
cross and ironical expression, was preparing a hasty dinner. The
steward, a grey-haired old man with a swelling on his head, was usually
sitting in the kitchen; the cook addressed his remarks to him and
criticised the stove and the hearth, while the steward listened to him
and from time to time answered laconically: ‘May-be,’ and looked
disconsolately at all the upset, wondering when the devil would carry us
off again.

The dinner was served on a special English service, made of tin or some
composition, bought _ad hoc_. Meanwhile the horses had been put in; in
the hall and vestibule, people who were fond of meetings and
leave-takings were gathering together: footmen who were finishing their
lives on bread and pure country air, old women who had been
prepossessing maids thirty years before, all the locusts of a
landowner’s household who through no fault of their own eat up the
peasants’ substance like real locusts. With them came children with
flaxen hair; barefooted and muddy, they kept poking forward while the
old women pulled them back. They caught me on every opportunity, and
every year wondered that I had grown so much. My father said a few words
to them; some went up to kiss his hand, which he never gave them, others
bowed, and we set off.

A few miles from Prince Golitsyn’s estate of Vyazma the elder of
Vassilyevskoe was waiting for us on horseback at the edge of the forest,
and he escorted us by a cross-road. In the village by the big house,
approached by a long avenue of limes, we were met by the priest, his
wife, the church servitors, the house-serfs, several peasants, and the
village fool, who was the only one to display a feeling of human
dignity, for he did not take off his hat, but stood smiling at a little
distance and took to his heels as soon as any of the town servants
attempted to approach him.

I have seen few places more picturesque than Vassilyevskoe. For any one
who knows Kuntsovo and Yussupov’s Arhangelskoe, or Lopuhin’s estate
facing the Savin monastery, it is enough to say that Vassilyevskoe lies
on a continuation of the same bank of the Moskva, twenty miles from the
same monastery. On the sloping side of the river lie the village, the
church, and the old manor house. On the other side there is a hill and a
small village, and there my father built a new house. The view from it
embraced an expanse of ten miles of country; seas of quivering
cornfields stretched endlessly; homesteads and villages with white
churches could be seen here and there; forests of various hues made a
semicircular setting, and the Moskva like a pale blue ribbon ran through
it all. Early in the morning I opened the window in the room upstairs
and gazed and listened and breathed.

And yet I regretted the old brick house, perhaps because I was there
when I first went to the country; I so loved the long, shady avenue
leading up to it and the garden that had run wild; the house had fallen
into ruins and a slender graceful birch tree was growing out of a crack
in the wall of the hall. On the left an avenue of willows ran along the
riverside, beyond it there were reeds and the white sand down to the
river; on that sand and among those reeds I used at ten and eleven years
old to play for a whole morning. A bent old man, the gardener, used
always to be sitting before the house, he used to distil peppermint
water, cook berries, and secretly regale me on all sorts of vegetables.
There were great numbers of rooks in the garden: the tops of the trees
were covered with their nests, and they used to circle round them,
cawing; sometimes, especially in the evening, they used to fly up in
regular hundreds racing after one another with a great clamour;
sometimes one would fly hurriedly from tree to tree and then all would
be still.... And towards night an owl would wail somewhere in the
distance like a child, or go off into a peal of laughter.... I was
afraid of these wild wailing sounds and yet I went to listen to them.

Every year, or, at least, every alternate year, we used to go to
Vassilyevskoe. As I went away, I used to measure my height on the wall
by the balcony, and I went at once on arriving to find how much I had
grown. But in the country I could measure not only my physical growth,
these periodical returns to the same objects showed me clearly the
difference in my inner development. Other books were brought, other
objects interested me. In 1823 I was quite a child, I had children’s
books with me, and even those I did not read, but was much more
interested in a hare and a squirrel which were living in the loft near
my room. One of my principal enjoyments consisted in my father’s
permission to shoot from a falconet every evening, which operation of
course entertained all the servants, and grey-haired old men of fifty
were as much diverted as I was. In 1827 I brought with me Plutarch and
Schiller; early in the morning I used to go out into the forest as far
as I could and, imagining that I was in the Bohemian forests, read aloud
to myself. Nevertheless, I was greatly interested in a dam which I was
making on a small stream with the help of a serf-boy and would run a
dozen times a day to look at it and repair it. In 1829 and 1830 I was
writing a philosophical article on Schiller’s _Wallenstein_, and of my
old toys none but the falconet retained its charm.

Besides shooting there was, however, another enjoyment for which I
retained an unalterable passion—watching the evenings in the country;
now as then, such evenings are still times of devoutness, peace, and
poetry. One of the last serenely-bright moments in my life reminds me
also of those village evenings. The sun was sinking majestically,
brilliantly, into an ocean of fire, was dissolving into it.... All at
once the rich purple was followed by deep blue dusk, everything was
covered with a smoky mist: in Italy the darkness falls quickly. We
mounted our mules; on the way from Frascati to Rome we had to ride
through a little village; here and there lights were already twinkling;
everything was still, the mules’ hoofs rang musically on the stone, a
fresh and rather damp wind was blowing from the Apennines. As we came
out of the village, there was a little Madonna standing in a niche with
a lamp burning before her; some peasant girls as they came from work
with white kerchiefs on their heads sank on their knees and chanted a
prayer; they were joined by some strolling flute-players who were
passing by. I was deeply affected, deeply touched. We looked at each
other ... and with slow steps rode on to the inn where a carriage was
waiting for us. As we drove homewards I talked of the evenings at
Vassilyevskoe, and what was there to tell?

                ‘In silence stood the garden trees,
                Among the hills the village lay,
                And thither at the fall of night
                The lingering cattle wend their way.’
                                OGARYOV: Humorous Verse.

... The shepherd cracks his long whip and plays on his birch-bark pipe;
there is the lowing and bleating and stamping of the herds returning
over the bridge, the dog with a bark chases a straying sheep while she
runs with a sort of wooden gallop; and then the songs of the peasant
girls, on their way home from the fields, come closer and closer; but
the path turns off to the right and the sounds retreat again. From the
houses children run out at the creaking gates to meet their cows and
sheep; work is over. The children are playing in the street and on the
river-bank, their voices ring out with shrill clearness over the river
in the evening glow; the parched smell of corn-kilns mingles in the air,
the dew begins little by little to lie like smoke over the fields, the
wind moves over the forest with a sound as though the leaves were
boiling and the summer lightning, quivering, lights up the landscape
with a dying, tremulous azure, and Vera Artamonovna, grumbling rather
than cross, says, coming upon me under a lime tree: ‘How is it there is
no finding you anywhere, and tea has been ready long ago and every one
is at the table, here I have been looking and looking for you until my
legs are tired. I can’t go running about at my age; and why are you
lying on the damp grass like that? ... you’ll have a cold to-morrow,
I’ll be bound.’

‘Oh, come, come,’ I say, laughing to the old woman, ‘I shan’t have a
cold and I don’t want any tea, but you steal me the best of the cream
from the very top.’

‘Well, you really are a boy, there’s no being angry with you ... that’s
a queer thing to ask for! I have got the cream ready for you without
your asking. Look at the lightning ... well, that’s right! It’s good for
the corn.’

And I go home skipping and whistling.

We did not visit Vassilyevskoe after 1832. My father sold it while I was
in exile. In 1843 we stayed at another estate in the Moscow province, in
the district of Zvenigorod, about fourteen miles from Vassilyevskoe. I
could not help going over to visit my old home. And here we were again
riding along the same cross-road; the familiar fir-wood and the hill
covered with nut trees came into view, and then the ford over the river,
the ford that had so delighted me twenty years before, the gurgling of
the water, the crunching of the pebbles, the shouting coachmen and the
struggling horses ... and here was the village and the priest’s house
where he used to sit on a bench in a dark-brown cassock, simple-hearted,
good-natured, red-haired, always in a sweat, always nibbling something
and always afflicted with a hiccup; and here was the counting-house
where the clerk Vassily Epifanov, who was never sober, used to write his
accounts, huddled up over the paper, holding the pen by the very end
with his third finger bent tightly under it. The priest was dead and
Vassily Epifanov was keeping accounts and getting drunk in another
village. We stopped at the village elder’s hut, but found only the wife
at home, the man himself was in the fields.

A strange element had crept in during those ten years; instead of our
house on the hill there was a new one, and a new garden was laid out
beside it. As we turned by the church and the graveyard, we met a
deformed-looking figure, dragging itself along almost on all fours; it
was showing me something, I went up: it was a hunchback and paralytic
old woman, half-crazy, who used to live on charity and work in the
former priest’s garden. She had been about seventy then and death seemed
to have overlooked her. She recognised me, shed tears, shook her head
and kept saying: ‘Ough! why even you are getting old, I only knew you
from your walk, while I—there, there, ough! ough! don’t talk of it!’

As we were driving back, I saw in the fields in the distance the village
elder, the same as in our time. At first he did not know me, but when we
had driven by, as though suddenly coming to himself with a start, he
took off his hat and bowed low. When we had driven a little further I
turned round; the village elder, Grigory Gorsky, was still standing in
the same place, looking after us; his tall, bearded figure, bowing in
the midst of the cornfield, gave us a friendly send-off from the home
which had passed into strangers’ hands.




                               Chapter 4
                       NICK AND THE SPARROW HILLS

    ‘_Write how here on that spot (the Sparrow Hills) the story of
    our lives, yours and mine, developed._’—A Letter, 1833.


Three years before the time of my cousin’s visit we were walking on the
banks of the Moskva at Luzhniki, _i.e._ on the other side of the Sparrow
Hills. At the river’s edge we met a French tutor of our acquaintance
dressed in nothing but his shirt; he was panic-stricken and was
shouting, ‘He is drowning, he is drowning!’ But before our friend had
time to take off his shirt or put on his trousers, an Ural Cossack ran
down from the Sparrow Hills, dashed into the water, vanished, and a
minute later reappeared with a frail-looking man, whose head and arms
were flopping about like clothes hung out in the wind. He laid him on
the bank, saying, ‘We had better roll him or else he will die.’

The people standing round collected fifty roubles and offered it to the
Cossack. The latter without affectation said very simple-heartedly:
‘It’s a sin to take money for such a thing, and it was no trouble
either; come to think of it, he is no more weight than a cat. But we are
poor people, though,’ he added. ‘Ask, we don’t; but, there, if people
give, why not take; we are humbly thankful.’ Then tying up the money in
a handkerchief he went to graze his horses on the hill. My father asked
his name and wrote about the incident next day to Essen. Essen promoted
him to be a non-commissioned officer. A few months later the Cossack
came to see us and with him a pock-marked bald German, smelling of scent
and wearing a curled fair wig; he came to thank us on behalf of the
Cossack, it was the drowned man. From that time he took to coming to see
us.

Karl Ivanovitch Sonnenberg, that was his name, was at that time
completing the German part of the education of two young rascals; from
them he went to a landowner of Simbirsk, and from him to a distant
relative of my father’s. The boy, the care of whose health and German
accent had been entrusted to him and whom Sonnenberg called Nick,
attracted me. There was something kind, gentle, and dreamy about him; he
was not at all like the other boys it had been my luck to meet, but,
nevertheless, we became close friends. He was silent and dreamy; I was
playful but afraid to tease him.

About the time when my cousin went back to Kortcheva, Nick’s grandmother
died; his mother he had lost in early childhood. There was a great upset
in the house, and Sonnenberg who really had nothing to do was very busy
too, and imagined that he was run off his legs; he brought Nick in the
morning and asked that he might remain with us for the rest of the day.
Nick was sad and frightened; I suppose he had been fond of his
grandmother. He so poetically recalled her in after years:

              “When even’s golden beams are blent
              With rosy vistas, radiant hued,
              I call to mind how in our home
              The ancient customs we pursued.
              On every Sunday’s eve there came
              Our grey and stately priest arrayed,
              And, bowing to the holy shrine,
              With his assistants knelt and prayed.
              Our grandmamma, the honoured dame,
              Would lean upon her spacious chair
              And, fingering her rosary,
              Would bend her head in whispered prayer.
              And through the doorway we could see
              The house-servants’ familiar faces,
              As praying for a ripe old age
              They knelt in their accustomed places.
              Meantime, upon the window-panes
              The evening glow would shine, reflected,
              While incense floated through the hall
              By censers, swinging wide, projected.
              Amid the silence so profound
              No sound was heard except the praying
              Of mingled voices. On my heart
              Some feeling undefined was weighing,
              A wistful sadness, dim and vague,
              Of fleeting, childish dreams begot.
              Unknown to me my heart was full
              Of yearning for I knew not what.”—
                              OGARYOV: Humorous Verse.[47]

... After we had been sitting still a little I suggested reading
Schiller. I was surprised at the similarity of our tastes; he knew far
more by heart than I did and knew precisely the passages I liked best;
we closed the book and, so to speak, began sounding our mutual
sympathies.

From Möros who went with a dagger in his sleeve ‘to free the city from
the tyrant,’ from Wilhelm Tell who waited for Vogt on the narrow path to
Küsznacht, the transition to Nicholas and the Fourteenth of December was
easy. These thoughts and these comparisons were not new to Nick; he,
too, knew Pushkin’s and Ryleyev’s[48] unpublished poems. The contrast
between him and the empty-headed boys I had occasionally met was
striking.

Not long before, walking to the Pryesnensky Ponds, full of my Bouchot
terrorism, I had explained to a companion of my own age the justice of
the execution of Louis XVI. ‘Quite so,’ observed the youthful Prince O.,
‘but you know he was God’s anointed!’ I looked at him with compassion,
ceased to care for him and never asked to go and see him again.

There were no such barriers with Nick, his heart beat as mine did. He,
too, had broken loose from the grim conservative shore, and we had but
to shove off more vigorously together and almost from the first day we
resolved to work in the interests of the Tsarevitch Constantine!

Before that day we had had few long conversations. Karl Ivanovitch
pestered us like an autumn fly and spoilt every conversation with his
presence; he interfered in everything without understanding, made
observations, straightened Nick’s shirt collar, was in a hurry to get
home, in fact, was detestable. A month later we could not pass two days
without seeing each other or writing letters; with all the impulsiveness
of my nature I devoted myself more and more to Nick, while he had a
quiet and deep love for me.

From the very beginning our friendship took a serious tone. I do not
remember that mischievous pranks ever took a foremost place with us,
particularly when we were alone. Of course we did not sit still, our
boyish years showed themselves in laughing and playing the fool, teasing
Sonnenberg and playing with bows and arrows in the yard; but at the
bottom of it all there was something very different from idle
companionship. Besides our being of the same age, besides our ‘chemical
affinity,’ we were united by our common faith. Nothing in the world so
purifies and ennobles early youth, nothing keeps it so safe as a keenly
alert interest of a purely human character. We respected our future in
ourselves, we looked at each other as ‘chosen vessels,’ predestined.

Nick and I often walked out into the country. We had our favourite
places, the Sparrow Hills, the fields beyond the Dragomilovsky Gate. He
would come with Sonnenberg to fetch me at six or seven in the morning,
and if I were asleep would throw sand and little pebbles at my window. I
would wake up smiling and hasten to go out to him.

The indefatigable Karl Ivanovitch had instituted these walks.

In the old-fashioned patriarchal education of Ogaryov Sonnenberg plays
the part of Biron.[49] When he made his appearance the influence of the
old peasant who had looked after the boy was put aside; the discontented
oligarchy of the servants’ hall were forced against the grain to
silence, knowing that there was no overcoming the damned German who fed
at the master’s table. Sonnenberg made violent changes in the old order
of things. The old man who had been nurse positively grew tearful when
he learned that the wretched German had taken the young master _himself_
to buy ready-made boots at a shop! Sonnenberg’s revolution, like Peter
the Great’s, was distinguished by a military character even in the most
peaceful matters. It does not follow from that that Karl Ivanovitch’s
thin little shoulders had ever been adorned with epaulettes. But nature
has so made the German, that if he does not reach the slovenliness and
_sans-gêne_ of a philologist or a theologian, he is inevitably of a
military mind, even though he be a civilian. By virtue of this
peculiarity Karl Ivanovitch liked tight-fitting clothes, buttoned up and
cut with a waist, by virtue of it he was a strict observer of his own
rules, and if he proposed to get up at six o’clock in the morning, he
would get Nick up at one minute before six, and in no case later than
one minute after six, and would go out into the open air with him.

The Sparrow Hills, at the foot of which Karl Ivanovitch had been so
nearly drowned, soon became our ‘Holy Mountain.’

One day after dinner my father proposed to drive out into the country.
Ogaryov was with us and my father invited him and Sonnenberg to go too.
These expeditions were not a joking matter. Before reaching the
town-gate we had to drive for an hour or more in a four-seated carriage,
built by ‘Joachim,’ which had not saved it from becoming disgracefully
shabby in its fifteen years of tranquil service and being heavier than a
siege cannon. The four horses of different sizes and colours who had
grown fat and lazy in idleness were covered with sweat and foam within a
quarter of an hour; the coachman Avdey was forbidden to let them get
into this condition, and so had no choice but to let them walk. The
windows were usually closed, however hot it might be; and with all this,
we had the indifferently oppressive supervision of my father and the
restlessly fussy and irritating supervision of Karl Ivanovitch. But we
gladly put up with everything for the sake of being together.

At Luzhniki we crossed the river Moskva in a boat at the very spot where
the Cossack had pulled Karl Ivanovitch out of the water. My father
walked, as always, bent and morose; beside him Karl Ivanovitch tripped
along, entertaining him with gossip and scandal. We went on in front of
them, and getting far ahead ran up to the Sparrow Hills at the spot
where the first stone of Vitberg’s temple was laid.

Flushed and breathless, we stood there mopping our faces. The sun was
setting, the cupolas glittered, the city lay stretched further than the
eye could reach; a fresh breeze blew on our faces, we stood leaning
against each other and, suddenly embracing, vowed in sight of all Moscow
to sacrifice our lives to the struggle we had chosen.

This scene may strike others as very affected and very theatrical, and
yet twenty-six years afterwards I am moved to tears recalling it; there
was a sacred sincerity in it, and that our whole life has proved. But
apparently a like destiny awaits all vows made on that spot; Alexander
was sincere, too, when he laid the first stone of that temple, which, as
Joseph II.[50] said (though then mistakenly) when laying the first stone
in some town in Novorossia, was destined to be the last.

We did not know all the strength of the foe with whom we were entering
into battle, but we took up the fight. That strength broke much in us,
but it did not crush us, and we did not surrender to it in spite of all
its blows. The wounds received from it were honourable. Jacob’s strained
thigh was the sign that he had wrestled in the night with a God.

From that day the Sparrow Hills became a place of worship for us and
once or twice a year we went there, and always by ourselves. There, five
years later, Ogaryov asked me timidly and shyly whether I believed in
his poetic talent, and wrote to me afterwards (1833) from his country
house: ‘I have come away and feel sad, sad, as I have never been before.
And it’s all the Sparrow Hills. For a long time I hid my enthusiasm in
myself; shyness or something else, I don’t myself know what, prevented
me from uttering it, but on the Sparrow Hills that enthusiasm was not
weighed down by solitude. You shared it with me and those were moments
that I shall never forget, like memories of past happiness they have
haunted me on my journey, while all around I saw nothing but forest; it
was all so dark blue and in my soul was darkness, darkness.

‘Write,’ he concluded, ‘how on that spot (that is, on the Sparrow Hills)
the history of our lives, yours and mine, developed.’

Five more years passed. I was far from the Sparrow Hills, but near me
their Prometheus, A. L. Vitberg, stood, austere and gloomy. In 1842
returning finally to Moscow, again I visited the Sparrow Hills, once
more we stood on the site of the foundation stone and gazed at the same
view, two together, but the other was not Nick.

From 1827 we were not parted. In every memory of that time, general and
particular, he with his boyish features and his love for me was
everywhere in the foreground. Early could be seen in him that sign of
grace, which is vouchsafed to few, whether for woe or for bliss I know
not, but certainly for being apart from the crowd. A large portrait of
Ogaryov as he was at that time (1827–8), painted in oils, remained for
many years afterwards in his father’s house. In later days I often stood
before it and gazed at him. He was painted with a turned-down shirt
collar; the painter had wonderfully reproduced the luxuriant chestnut
hair, the youthfully soft beauty of his irregular features and his
rather swarthy colouring; there was a dreaminess in the portrait that
gave promise of intense thought, a vague melancholy and extreme
gentleness shone in his big grey eyes that suggested the future
greatness of a mighty spirit; such indeed he grew to be. This portrait,
presented to me, was taken by a woman who was a stranger; perhaps these
lines will meet her eyes and she will send it to me.

I do not know why the memories of first love are given such precedence
over the memories of youthful friendship. The fragrance of first love
lies in the fact that it forgets the difference of sex, that it is
passionate friendship. On the other hand, friendship between the young
has all the ardour of love and all its character, the same delicate fear
of touching on its feelings with a word, the same mistrust of self and
boundless devotion, the same agony at separation, and the same jealous
desire for exclusive affection.

I had long loved Nick and loved him passionately, but did not venture to
call him my friend, and when he was spending the summer at Kuntsovo I
wrote to him at the end of a letter: ‘Whether your friend or not, I
don’t know yet.’ He first used the second person singular in writing to
me and used to call me his Agathon after Karamzin,[51] while I called
him my Raphael after Schiller.[52]

You may smile if you like, but let it be a mild, good-natured smile, as
men smile when they think of being fifteen. Or would it not be better to
muse over the question, ‘Was I like that when I was developing?’ and to
bless your fate if you have had youth (merely being young is not enough
for it), to bless it doubly if you had a friend then.

The language of that period seems affected and bookish to us now, we
have become unaccustomed to its vague enthusiasm, its confused fervour
that passes suddenly into yearning tenderness or childish laughter. It
would be as absurd in a man of thirty as the celebrated _Bettina will
schlafen_,[53] but in its proper time this language of youth, this
_jargon de la puberté_, this change of the psychological voice is very
sincere, even the bookish tone is natural to the age of theoretical
knowledge and practical ignorance.

Schiller remained our favourite.[54] The characters of his dramas were
for us living persons; we analysed them, loved and hated them, not as
poetic creations but as living men. Moreover we saw ourselves in them. I
wrote to Nick, somewhat troubled by his being too fond of Fiesco, that
behind every Fiesco stands his Verrina. My ideal was Karl Moor, but I
soon changed it in favour of the Marquis of Posa. I imagined in a
hundred variations how I would speak to Nicholas, and how afterwards he
would send me to the mines or the scaffold. It is a strange thing that
almost all our day-dreams ended in Siberia or the scaffold and hardly
ever in triumph; can this be characteristic of the Russian imagination,
or is it the effect of Petersburg with its five gallows and its penal
servitude reflected on the young generation?

And so, Ogaryov, hand in hand we moved forward into life! Fearlessly and
proudly we advanced, lavishly we responded to every appeal and sincerely
we gave ourselves up to every enthusiasm. The path we chose was a thorny
one, we have never left it for one moment, wounded and broken we have
gone forward and no one has turned us aside. I have reached ... not the
goal but the spot where the road goes downhill, and involuntarily I seek
thy hand that we may go down together, that I may press it and say
smiling mournfully, ‘So this is all!’

Meanwhile in the dull leisure to which the events of life have condemned
me, finding in myself neither strength nor freshness for new labours, I
am writing down our memories. Much of that which united us so closely
has taken shape in these pages. I present them to thee. For thee they
have a double value, the value of tombstones on which we meet familiar
names.[55]

... And is it not strange to think that had Sonnenberg known how to
swim, or had he been drowned then in the Moskva, had he been pulled out
not by a Cossack of the Urals but by some soldier of the Apsheronsky
infantry, I should not have met Nick or should have met him later,
differently, not in that room in our old house, where, smoking cigars on
the sly, we entered so deeply into each other’s lives and drew strength
from each other. He did not forget our ‘old house.’

            ‘Old Home! My old friend! I have found thee,
            Thy cold desolation I see;
            The past is arising before me,
            And sadly I gaze upon thee.
            Unswept and untended the courtyard,
            Neglected and fallen the well,
            Green leaves that once whispered and murmured
            Lie yellow and dead where they fell.
            The house is dismantled and empty,
            The plaster is spread on the grass,
            The heavy grey clouds wander sadly
            And weep for thy plight as they pass.
            I entered. The rooms were familiar:
            ’Twas here—when we children were young—
            The peevish old man sat and grumbled,
            We feared his malevolent tongue.
            And this room, my friend, oh! my comrade!
            We shared, one in heart and in mind,
            What bright golden thoughts were conceived here
            In days that lie dimly behind!
            A star shimmered faint through the window:
            The words that are left on the wall
            Were written when youth was triumphant,
            Inspirer, dictator of all!
            In this little room love and friendship
            Were fostered. What joys did they bring!
            But now, in its drear empty corners
            The spiders’ webs broaden and cling.
            And suddenly, smitten with terror,
            Methought in the graveyard near by
            I stood and I called on my loved ones,
            The dead did not answer my cry....’
                                OGARYOV: Humorous Verse.[56]




                               Chapter 5
 DETAILS OF HOME LIFE—EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY PEOPLE IN RUSSIA—A DAY IN OUR
     HOUSE—VISITORS AND _HABITUÉS_—SONNENBERG—THE VALET AND OTHERS


The insufferable dreariness of our house grew greater every year. If my
University time had not been approaching, if it had not been for my new
friendship, my political enthusiasm and the liveliness of my
disposition, I should have run away or perished.

My father was hardly ever in a good humour, he was perpetually
dissatisfied with everybody. A man of great intelligence and great
powers of observation, he had seen, heard, and remembered an immense
amount; an accomplished man of the world, he could be extremely polite
and interesting, but he did not care to be and sank more and more into
ill-humoured unsociability.

It is hard to say exactly what it was that put so much bitterness and
spleen into his blood. Periods of passion, of great unhappiness, of
mistakes and losses were completely absent from his life. I could never
fully understand what was the origin of the spiteful mockery and
irritability that filled his soul, the mistrustful unsociability and the
vexation that consumed him. Did he bear with him to the grave some
memory which he confided to no one, or was this simply the result of the
combination of two elements so absolutely opposed as the eighteenth
century and Russian life, with the assistance of a third, terribly
conducive to the development of ill-humour, the idleness of the
slave-owner?

Last century produced in the West, particularly in France, a wonderful
crop of men endowed with all the weak points of the Regency and all the
strong points of Rome and Sparta. These mixtures of Faublas[57] and
Regulus opened wide the doors of the Revolution and were the first to
rush in, crowding each other in their haste to reach the ‘window’ of the
guillotine. Our age no longer produces these single-minded powerful
natures; the eighteenth century on the contrary called them forth
everywhere, even where they were not needed, even where they could not
develop except into something grotesque. In Russia men exposed to the
influence of this mighty Western movement became original, but not
historical figures. Foreigners at home, foreigners in other lands, idle
spectators, spoilt for Russia by Western prejudices and for the West by
Russian habits, they were a sort of intellectual superfluity and were
lost in artificial life, in sensual pleasure and in unbearable egoism.

To this class belonged the Tatar Prince, N. B. Yussupov, a Russian
grandee and a European _grand seigneur_, a foremost figure in Moscow,
conspicuous for his intelligence and his wealth. About him gathered a
perfect galaxy of grey-headed gallants and _esprits forts_, all the
Masalskys and Santis and _tutti quanti_. They were all rather cultured
and well-educated people; having no work in life they flung themselves
upon pleasure, pampered themselves, loved themselves, good-naturedly
forgave themselves all transgressions, exalted their gastronomy to the
level of a Platonic passion and reduced love for women to a sort of
voracious gourmandise.

The old sceptic and Epicurean Yussupov, a friend of Voltaire and
Beaumarchais,[58] of Diderot and Casti,[59] really was gifted with
artistic taste. To see this, one need but go to Arhangelskoe and look at
his galleries, that is, if they have not yet been sold bit by bit by his
heir. He was magnificently fading out of life at eighty, surrounded by
marble, painted and living beauty. In his house near Moscow Pushkin
conversed with him and addressed a wonderful epistle to him, and there,
too, pictures were painted by Gonzaga,[60] to whom Yussupov dedicated
his theatre.

By his education, by his service in the Guards, by position and
connections, my father belonged to this circle, but neither his
character nor his health permitted him to lead a frivolous life to the
age of seventy: and he passed to the opposite extreme. He tried to lead
a solitary life and found in it a deadly dullness, the mare because he
tried to arrange it entirely _for himself_. His strength of will changed
into obstinate caprice, his unemployed energies spoilt his character,
making him insufferable.

When he was being educated, European civilisation was still so new in
Russia that to be educated was equivalent to being so much the less
Russian. To the end of his days he wrote more freshly and correctly in
French than in Russian. He had literally not read one single book in
Russian, not even the Bible. Though, indeed, he had not read the Bible
in other languages either; he knew the subject-matter of the Holy
Scriptures generally from hearsay and from extracts, and had no
curiosity to look into it. He had, it is true, a respect for
Derzhavin[61] and Krylov[62]: Derzhavin because he had written an ode on
the death of his uncle, Prince Meshtchersky, Krylov because he had been
with him as second at N. N. Bahmetyev’s duel. My father did once pick up
Karamzin’s _History of the Russian Empire_, having heard that the
Emperor Alexander was reading it, but he laid it aside, saying
contemptuously: ‘It is nothing but Izyaslavitches and Olgovitches, to
whom can it be of interest?’

For men he had an open, undisguised contempt—for all. Never under any
circumstances did he reckon upon anybody, and I do not remember that he
ever applied to any one with any serious request. He himself did nothing
for any one. In his relations with outsiders he demanded one thing only,
the observance of the proprieties; _les apparences, les convenances_
made up the whole of his moral religion. He was ready to forgive much,
or rather to overlook it, but breaches of good form and good manners
made him beside himself, and in such cases he was without any tolerance,
without the slightest indulgence or compassion. I so long raged inwardly
against this injustice that at last I understood it. He was convinced
beforehand that every man is capable of any evil act; and that, if he
does not commit it, it is either that he has no need to, or that the
opportunity does not present itself; in the disregard of formalities he
saw a personal affront, a disrespect to himself; or a ‘plebeian
education,’ which in his opinion cut a man off from all human society.

‘The soul of man,’ he used to say, ‘is darkness, and who knows what is
in any man’s soul? I have too much business of my own to be interested
in other people’s, much less to judge and criticise their intentions;
but I cannot be in the same room with an ill-bred man, he offends me,
grates upon me; of course he may be the best-hearted man in the world
and for that he will have a place in paradise, but I don’t want him.
What is most important in life is _esprit de conduite_, it is more
important than the most lofty intellect or any kind of learning. To know
how to be at ease everywhere, to put yourself forward nowhere, the
utmost courtesy with all and no familiarity with any one.’

My father disliked every sort of _abandon_, every sort of openness; all
that he called familiarity, just as he called every feeling
sentimentality. He persistently posed as a man superior to all such
petty trifles; for the sake of what, with what object? What was the
higher interest to which the heart was sacrificed?—I do not know. And
for whom did this haughty old man, who despised men so genuinely and
knew them so well, play his part of impartial judge?—For a woman whose
will he had broken although she sometimes contradicted him; for an
invalid who lay always at the mercy of the surgeon’s knife; for a boy
whose high spirits he had developed into disobedience; for a dozen
lackeys whom he did not reckon as human beings!

And what patience was spent on it, what perseverance, and how
wonderfully well the part was played in spite of age and illness. Truly
the soul of man is darkness.

Later on when I was arrested, and afterwards when I was sent into exile,
I saw that the old man’s heart was more open to love and even to
tenderness than I had thought. I never thanked him for it, not knowing
how he would take my gratitude.

Of course he was not happy; always on his guard, always dissatisfied, he
saw with a pang the hostile feelings he roused in all his household; he
saw the smile pass from the face and the words checked at his entrance;
he spoke of it with mockery, with vexation, but made not a single
concession and went his way with the utmost persistence. Mockery, irony,
cold, malignant and scornful, was a weapon which he used like an artist;
he employed it equally against us and against the servants. In early
youth one can bear many things better than sarcasm, and until I went to
prison I was really estranged from my father, and joined with the maids
and men-servants in leading a little war against him.

Moreover, he had persuaded himself that he was dangerously ill and was
continually undergoing treatment; besides our own household doctor, he
was visited by two or three others and had three or four consultations a
year at least. Visitors, seeing always his unfriendly face and hearing
nothing but complaints of his health, which was far from being so bad as
he thought, left off coming. He was angry at this but never reproached a
single person nor invited one. A terrible dullness reigned in the house,
particularly on the endless winter evenings—two lamps lighted a whole
suite of rooms; wearing felt or lamb’s-wool high boots, a velvet cap,
and a coat lined with white lambskin, bowed, with his hands clasped
behind his back, the old man walked up and down, followed by two or
three brown dogs, and never uttering a word.

A carefulness spent on worthless objects grew with his melancholy. He
managed the estate badly for himself and badly for his peasants. The
village elders and his _missi dominici_ robbed their master and the
peasants; on the other hand, everything that met the eye was subjected
to redoubled supervision, candles were saved and the thin _vin de
Graves_ was replaced by sour Crimean wine at the very time when a whole
forest was cut down in one village, and in another his own oats were
sold to him. He had his privileged thieves; the peasant whom he made
collector of _obrok_ (payment from a serf in lieu of labour) in Moscow
and whom he sent every summer to supervise the village elder, the
market, the garden, the forest, and the field labours, saved enough in
ten years to buy a house in Moscow. From a child I hated this minister
without portfolio; on one occasion he beat an old peasant in the yard in
my presence. I was so furious that I hung on to his beard and almost
fainted. From that time I could not look at him without dislike until he
died in 1845. I several times asked my father where did Shkun get the
money to buy a house.

‘That’s what sobriety does,’ the old man answered, ‘he never takes a
drop of liquor.’

Every year near the time of carnival, the peasants from the Penza
province used to bring from near Kerensk _obrok_ in kind. For a
fortnight a trail of poor-looking wagons were on the road, laden with
pork, sucking pigs, geese, fowls, grain, rye, eggs, butter, and linen.
The arrival of the Kerensk peasants was a holiday for all the
house-serfs; they robbed the peasants and fleeced them at every step
without the slightest right to do so. The coachmen charged them for the
water in the well, and would not let their horses drink without payment.
The women made them pay for warmth in the house, they had to pay homage
to one aristocrat of the servants’ hall with a sucking pig and a towel,
to another with a goose and butter. All the time they stayed in the yard
the servants kept up a feast, holiday dishes were made, sucking pigs
were roasted, and the hall was continually full of the fumes of onion,
burnt fat, and the drink which had just been consumed. For the last two
days of these junketings Bakay did not go into the hall and did not
finish dressing, but sat in the outer kitchen with an old livery coat
thrown over his shoulders, without his waistcoat and jacket. He was
growing visibly thinner and becoming darker and older. My father put up
with all this pretty calmly, knowing that it was inevitable and could
not be altered.

After the dead provisions had been received, my father—and the most
remarkable point about it is that the practice was repeated yearly—used
to call the cook, Spiridon, and send him to the poultry bazaar and the
Smolensky market to find out the prices; the cook returned with
fabulously small prices, less than half the real ones. My father would
tell him he was a fool and send for Shkun or Slyepushkin. The latter had
a fruit stall at the Ilyinsky Gate. And both considered the cook’s
prices terribly low, made inquiries and brought back prices rather
higher. At last Slyepushkin offered to take the whole lot, eggs and
sucking pigs and butter and rye ‘to save all disturbance to your health,
sir.’ He gave a price I need hardly say somewhat higher than the cook’s.
My father agreed. Slyepushkin would bring him oranges and little cakes
in honour of the bargain, and brought the cook a note for two hundred
roubles.

This Slyepushkin was in great favour with my father and often borrowed
money from him; he showed his originality in his thorough understanding
of the old man’s character.

He would ask for five hundred roubles for two months, and a day before
the two months were over would appear in the hall with an Easter cake on
a dish and the five hundred roubles on the Easter cake. My father would
take the money, Slyepushkin would make a bow and ask for his hand to
kiss, which was never given. But three days later Slyepushkin would come
again to borrow money and ask for fifteen hundred roubles. My father
would give it and Slyepushkin would again bring it by the time fixed. My
father used to hold him up as an example, but a week later he would ask
for a bigger sum, and in that way enjoyed the use of an extra five
thousand roubles a year for his business, for the trifling interest of
two or three Easter cakes, a few pounds of figs and Greek nuts and a
hundred oranges and apples from the Crimea.

In conclusion, I will mention how some hundreds of acres of building
timber were lost in Novoselye. In the ‘forties, M. F. Orlov who, I
remember, had been commissioned by the Countess Anna Alexeyevna to
purchase an estate for her children, began treating for the Tver estate
which had come to my father from the Senator. They agreed on the price
and the business seemed to be settled. Orlov went to look at the land
and then wrote to my father that on the map he had shown him a forest,
but that there was no such forest.

‘That’s a clever man,’ said my father, ‘he took part in the conspiracy
and wrote a book on finance, but as soon as it comes to business you can
see what a silly fellow he is. These Neckers! Well, I’ll ask Grigory
Ivanovitch to ride over, he’s not a conspirator, but he’s an honest man
and knows his work.’

Grigory Ivanovitch, too, went over to Novoselye and brought the news
that there was no forest, but only a semblance of one rigged up; so that
neither from the big house nor the high-road could the clearing catch
the eye. After the land was assigned to him the Senator had been at
least five times to Novoselye, and yet the secret had never leaked out.

To give a full idea of our manner of life I will describe a whole day
from the morning; the monotony of the days was precisely what was most
deadly; our life went like an English clock regulated to go slowly,
quietly, evenly, loudly recording each second.

At nine o’clock in the morning the valet who sat in the room next the
bedroom informed Vera Artamonovna, my ex-nurse, that the master was
getting up. She went to prepare the coffee which he always drank alone
in his study. Everything in the house assumed a different aspect, the
servants began sweeping the rooms, or at any rate made a show of doing
something. The hall, until then empty, filled up, and even the big
Newfoundland dog Macbeth sat before the stove and watched the fire
without blinking.

Over his coffee the old man read the _Moscow News_ and the _Journal de
St. Pétersbourg_. I may mention that he had given orders for the _Moscow
News_ to be warmed, that his hands might not be chilled by the dampness
of the paper, and that he read the political news in the French text,
finding the Russian obscure. At one time he used to get a Hamburg
newspaper, but could not reconcile himself to the fact that the Germans
printed in German characters, and was always pointing out to me the
difference between the French print and the German, saying that these
grotesque Gothic letters with their little tails were bad for the eyes.
Afterwards he subscribed to the _Journal de Francfort_, but in the end
he confined himself to the journals of his own country.

When he had finished reading he would observe that Karl Ivanovitch
Sonnenberg was in the room. When Nick was fifteen Karl Ivanovitch had
set up a shop, but having neither goods nor customers, after wasting on
this profitable undertaking the money he had somehow scraped up, he
retired from it with the honourable title of ‘merchant of Reval.’ He was
by then over forty, and at that agreeable age he led the life of a bird
of the air or a boy of fourteen, that is, did not know where he would
sleep next day nor on what he would dine. He took advantage of my
father’s being somewhat well-disposed towards him; we shall see at once
what that meant.

In 1830 my father bought near our house another, bigger, better, and
with a garden. The house had belonged to the Countess Rastoptchin, wife
of the celebrated governor of Moscow. We moved into it; after that he
bought a third house which was quite unnecessary, but was next it. Both
these houses stood empty; they were not let for fear of fire (the houses
were insured) and disturbance from tenants. Moreover they were not kept
in repair, so they were on the sure road to ruin. In one of them the
homeless Karl Ivanovitch was permitted to live on condition that he did
not open the gates after ten o’clock (not a difficult condition, since
the gates were never closed), and that he bought firewood and did not
get it from our household supplies (as a matter of fact he bought it
from our coachman), and that he waited upon my father in the capacity of
a clerk of special commissions, _i.e._ came in the morning to inquire
whether there were any orders, turned up at dinner and, if there were no
one else dining with him, spent the evening entertaining him with news
and conversation.

Simple as Karl Ivanovitch’s duties might appear to be, my father knew
how to inject so much bitterness into them that my poor merchant of
Reval, accustomed to all the calamities which can fall upon the head of
a man with no money, with no brains, of small stature, pock-marked face
and German nationality, could not always endure it. At intervals of two
years or a year and a half, Karl Ivanovitch, deeply offended, would
declare that ‘this is utterly unbearable,’ would pack up, buy or
exchange various articles of suspicious value and dubious quality, and
set off for the Caucasus. Ill-luck usually pursued him with ferocity. On
one occasion his wretched nag—he was driving with his own horse in
Tiflis and in the Redoubt Kali—fell down not far from the region of the
Don Cossacks; on another, half his luggage was stolen from him; on
another, his two-wheeled gig upset and his French perfumes were spilt
over the broken wheel, unappreciated by any one, at the foot of Elborus;
then he would lose something, and when he had nothing left to lose he
lost his passport. Ten months later Karl Ivanovitch, a little older, a
little more battered, a little poorer, with still fewer teeth and less
hair, would as a rule meekly present himself before my father with a
store of Persian insect powder, of faded silks and rusty Circassian
daggers, and would settle in the empty house again on the condition of
fulfilling the same duties and heating his stove with his own firewood.

Observing Karl Ivanovitch, my father would at once begin a small attack
upon him. Karl Ivanovitch would inquire after his health, the old man
would thank him with a bow and then after a moment’s thought would
inquire, for instance: ‘Where do you buy your pomade?’ I must here
mention that Karl Ivanovitch, the ugliest of mortals, was a terrible
flirt, considered himself a Lovelace, dressed with an effort at
smartness and wore a curled golden wig. All this, of course, had long
ago been weighed and taken account of by my father. ‘At Bouïs’s on
Kuznitsky Bridge,’ Karl Ivanovitch would answer abruptly, somewhat
piqued, and he would cross one leg over the other like a man ready to
defend himself.

‘What’s the scent called?’

‘Nacht-Violette,’ answered Karl Ivanovitch.

‘He cheats you, violet is a delicate scent.’ Then in French, ‘_C’est un
parfum_, but that’s something strong, disgusting, they embalm bodies
with something of that sort! My nerves have grown so weak it makes me
positively sick; tell them to give me the eau-de-Cologne.’

Karl Ivanovitch would himself dash for the flask.

‘Oh no, you must call some one else or you will come still closer; I
shall be ill, I shall faint.’

Karl Ivanovitch, who was reckoning on the effect of his pomade in the
maids’ room, would be deeply offended.

After sprinkling the room with eau-de-Cologne my father would invent
commissions; to buy some French snuff and some English magnesia, and to
look at a carriage advertised for sale in the papers (he would never buy
it). Karl Ivanovitch, bowing himself out agreeably and inwardly relieved
to get off, would go away till dinner.

After Karl Ivanovitch, the cook made his appearance; whatever he bought
or whatever he ordered, my father thought it extremely expensive.

‘Ough, ough, how expensive! Why, is it because no supplies have come
in?’

‘Just so, sir,’ answered the cook, ‘the roads are so bad.’

‘Oh very well, till they are in better condition we will buy less.’

After this he would sit down to his writing-table and write reports and
orders to the villages, make up his accounts, between whiles scolding
me, receiving the doctors and above all quarrelling with his valet. The
latter was the greatest victim in the whole house. A little, sanguine
man, hasty and hot-tempered, he seemed as though created expressly to
irritate my father and provoke his reprimands. The scenes that were
repeated between them every day might have filled a farce, but it was
all perfectly serious. My father knew very well that the man was
necessary to him and often put up with rude answers from him, but never
ceased trying to train him, in spite of his efforts having been
unsuccessful for thirty-five years. The valet on his side would not have
put up with such a life if he had not had his own recreations; he was as
a rule rather tipsy by dinner-time. My father noticed this, but confined
himself to roundabout allusions to it, advising him, for instance, to
munch a little black bread and salt that he might not smell of vodka.
Nikita Andreyevitch had the habit when he was a little drunk of scraping
with his feet in a peculiar way when he handed the dishes. As soon as my
father noticed this, he would invent some commission for him, would send
him, for instance, to ask the barber Anton if he had changed his
address, adding to me in French, ‘I know that he has not moved, but the
fellow is not sober, he will drop the soup-tureen end smash it, spill
the soup on the cloth and frighten me. Let him go out for an airing. _Le
grand air_ will do him good.’

Usually on such occasions the valet made some answer; but if he could
find nothing to say he would go out, muttering between his teeth. Then
his master would call him and in the same calm voice ask him ‘what did
he say?’

‘I didn’t address a word to you.’

‘To whom were you speaking, then? There is no one but you and me in this
room or the next.’

‘To myself.’

‘That’s very dangerous, that’s the way madness begins.’

The valet would depart in a rage and go to his room; there he used to
read the _Moscow News_ and plait hair for wigs for sale. Probably to
relieve his anger he would take snuff furiously; whether his snuff was
particularly strong or the nerves of his nose were weak I cannot say,
but this was almost always followed by his sneezing violently five or
six times.

The master rang the bell, the valet flung down his handful of hair and
went in.

‘Was that you sneezing?’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘I wanted to bless you.’ And he would make a motion with his hand for
the valet to withdraw.

On the last day of carnival, all the servants would, according to
custom, come in the evening to beg the master’s forgiveness: on these
solemn occasions my father used to go out into the great drawing-room,
accompanied by his valet. Then he would pretend not to recognise some of
them.

‘Who is that venerable old man standing there in the corner?’ he would
ask the valet.

‘The coachman Danilo,’ the valet would answer abruptly, knowing that all
this was only a dramatic performance.

‘Good gracious! how he has changed. I really believe that it is entirely
from drink that men get old so quickly; what does he do?’

‘He hauls the firewood in for the stoves.’

The old man assumed an expression of insufferable pain.

‘How is it you have not learned to talk in thirty years?... Hauls—how
can he haul the firewood in?—firewood is carried in, not hauled in.
Well, Danilo, thank God, the Lord has been pleased to let me see you
once more. I forgive you all your sins for this year, all the oats which
you waste so immoderately, and for not brushing the horses, and do you
forgive me. Go on hauling in firewood while you have the strength, but
now Lent is coming, so take less drink, it is bad for us at our age, and
besides it is a sin.’ He conducted the whole inspection in this style.

We used to dine between three and four o’clock. The dinner lasted a long
time and was very boring. Spiridon was an excellent cook, but my
father’s economy on the one hand, and his own on the other, rendered the
dinner somewhat meagre, in spite of the fact that there were a great
many dishes. Beside my father stood a red clay bowl into which he
himself put all sorts of pieces for the dogs; moreover, he used to feed
them with his own fork, which was deeply resented by the servants and
consequently by me. Why, it is hard to say....

Visitors rarely called upon us and more rarely dined. I remember out of
all those who visited us one man whose arrival to dinner would sometimes
smooth the wrinkles out of my father’s face, N. N. Bahmetyev. He was the
brother of the lame general of that name and was himself a general also,
though long on the retired list. My father and he had been friends as
long ago as the time when both had been officers in the Izmailovsky
regiment. They had both been gay young rakes in the days of Catherine,
and in the reign of Paul had both been court-martialled, Bahmetyev for
having fought a duel with some one and my father for having been his
second; then one of them had gone away to foreign lands as a tourist,
while the other went to Ufa as Governor. There was no likeness between
them. Bahmetyev, a stout, healthy and handsome old man, was fond of
having a good dinner and getting a little drunk after it; was fond of
lively conversation and many other things. He used to boast that in his
day he had eaten as many as a hundred hearth-cakes, and he could when
about sixty devour up to a dozen buckwheat pancakes drowned in a pool of
butter with complete impunity. I have been a witness of these
achievements more than once.

Bahmetyev had some shadowy influence over my father, or at any rate did
keep him in check. When Bahmetyev noticed that my father’s ill-humour
was beyond bounds, he would put on his hat and say with a military
scrape: ‘Good-bye—you are ill and stupid to-day; I meant to stay to
dinner but I cannot endure sour faces at table! _Gehorsamer
diener!_’ ... and my father by way of explanation would say to me: ‘What
a lively impresario. N. N. still is! Thank God, he’s a healthy man and
cannot understand a suffering Job like me; there are twenty degrees of
frost, but he dashes here all the way from Pokrovka in his sledge as
though it were nothing ... while I thank the Creator every morning that
I wake up alive, that I am still breathing. Oh ... oh ... ough ...! it’s
a true proverb; the well-fed don’t understand the hungry!’ This was the
utmost condescension that could be expected from him.

From time to time there were family dinners at which the Senator, the
Golohvastovs and others were present, and these dinners were not
casually given, nor for the sake of any pleasure to be derived from
them, but were due to profound considerations of economy and diplomacy.
Thus on the 20th February, the Senator’s name-day, we gave a dinner in
his honour, while on the 24th June, my father’s name-day, a dinner was
given at the Senator’s, an arrangement which, besides setting a moral
example of brotherly love, saved each of them from giving a much bigger
dinner at home.

Then there were various _habitués_; Sonnenberg would appear _ex
officio_, and having just before dinner swallowed a glass of vodka and a
Reval sardine at home he would refuse a minute glass of some specially
flavoured vodka; sometimes my last French tutor, a miserly old fellow
with an insolent face, fond of talking scandal, would come. Monsieur
Thirié so often made mistakes, pouring wine into his tumbler instead of
beer and drinking it off apologetically, that at last my father said to
him, ‘The _vin de Graves_ stands on your right side, so you won’t make a
mistake again,’ and Thirié, stuffing a huge pinch of snuff into his
broad nose that turned up on one side, scattered the snuff on his plate.

Among these visitors one was an extremely funny individual. A little
bald old man, invariably dressed in a short and narrow swallow-tail
coat, and in a waistcoat that ended precisely where the waistcoat now
begins, and carrying a thin little cane, he was in his whole figure the
embodiment of a period twenty years earlier, in 1830 of 1810 and in 1840
of 1820. Dmitri Ivanovitch Pimenov, a civil councillor by grade, was one
of the superintendents of the Sheremetyevsky Almshouse, and was,
moreover, a literary man. Scantily endowed by nature and brought up on
the sentimentalism of Karamzin, on Marmontel[63] and Marivaux,[64]
Pimenov might be said to take a position midway between Shalikov and V.
Panaev.[65] The Voltaire of this honourable phalanx was the head of the
secret police under Alexander, Yakov Ivanovitch de Sanglain; its
promising young man, Pimen Arapov.[66] They were all in close relation
with the universal patriarch Ivan Ivanovitch Dmitriev;[67] he had no
rivals, but there was Vassily Lvovitch Pushkin.[68] Pimenov went every
Thursday to the ancient Dmitriev to discuss beauties of style and the
deterioration of the language of to-day in his house in Sadovy Street.
Pimenov himself had tried the slippery career of Russian literature; at
first he had edited the _Thoughts of the Duc de La Rochefoucauld_, then
he wrote a treatise on feminine beauty and charm. Of this treatise,
which I have not taken in my hand since I was sixteen, I remember only
long comparisons in the style in which Plutarch compares his heroes; of
the fair with the dark, ‘though a fair woman is this and that and the
other, on the other hand a dark woman is this and that and the
other....’ Pimenov’s chief peculiarity lay not in his having edited
books which no one ever read, but in the fact that if he began laughing
he could not stop, and his mirth would grow into a regular fit of
hysterics with sudden outbursts and hollow peals of laughter. He knew
this, and so, when he saw something laughable coming, began to take
measures; brought out a pocket-handkerchief, looked at his watch,
buttoned up his coat, hid his face in his hands, and when the crisis
came, stood up, turned to the wall, leaned against it and writhed in
agony for half an hour or more, then, crimson and exhausted by the
paroxysm, he would sit down mopping the perspiration from his bald head,
though the fit would seize him again long afterwards. Of course my
father had not the faintest respect for him: he was gentle, kind,
awkward, a literary man and poor, and therefore not worth considering on
any ground: but he was fully aware of his convulsive risibility. On the
strength of it he would make him laugh until every one else in the room
was, under his influence, also moved to a sort of unnatural laughter.
The instigator of our mirth would look at us, smiling innocently, as a
man looks at a crowd of noisy puppies.

Sometimes my father played dreadful tricks on the unfortunate amateur of
feminine charm and beauty. ‘Colonel So-and-so,’ the servant would
announce.

‘Ask him in,’ my father would say, and turning to Pimenov he would add:
‘Please be on your guard when he is here, Dmitri Ivanovitch; he has an
unfortunate tic and when he talks he makes a strange sound as though he
had a chronic hiccup.’ Thereupon he would give a perfect imitation of
the Colonel. ‘I know you are ready to laugh, please restrain yourself.’

This was enough. At the second word the Colonel uttered, Pimenov would
take out his handkerchief, make a parasol of his hands, and at last jump
up.

The Colonel would look at him in amazement, while my father would say to
me with great composure: ‘What is the matter with Dmitri Ivanovitch? _Il
est malade_, he has spasms; tell them to make haste and get him a glass
of cold water and give him eau-de-Cologne.’ On such occasions Pimenov
would snatch up his hat and go, laughing, until he had reached the
Arbatsky Gates, halting at the cross-roads and leaning against
lamp-posts.

For several years he came regularly every alternate Sunday to dine with
us, and his punctuality in coming and his unpunctuality if he missed a
Sunday angered my father equally and impelled him to worry Pimenov. Yet
the good-natured man went on coming, and coming on foot from the Red
Gate to old Konyushenny Street till he died, and not at all funnily.
After ailing for a long time, the solitary old bachelor, as he lay
dying, saw his housekeeper carry off all his things, his clothes, even
the linen from his bed, leaving him entirely uncared for.

But the real _souffre-douleur_ at dinner were various old women, the
poor and casual dependents of Princess Hovansky, my father’s sister. For
the sake of a change, and also partly to find out how everything was
going on in our house, whether there were quarrels in the family,
whether the cook had had a fight with his wife, and whether the master
had found out that Palashka or Ulyasha were about to bring an addition
to the household, they would sometimes come on holidays to spend a whole
day. It must be noted that these widows had forty or fifty years ago,
before they were married, been attached to the household of my father’s
aunt, old Princess Meshtchersky, and afterwards to that of her niece,
and had known my father since those days; that in this interval between
their dependence in their youth and their return in old age, they had
spent some twenty years quarrelling with their husbands, keeping them
from drink, looking after them when they were paralysed, and escorting
them to the cemetery. Some had been trailing from one place to another
in Bessarabia with a garrison officer and a crowd of children, others
had spent years with a criminal charge hanging over their husbands, and
all these experiences of life had left upon them the traces of
government offices and provincial towns; a dread of the powerful of this
earth, a cringing spirit and a sort of dull-witted bigotry.

Amazing scenes took place with them.

‘Why is this, Anna Yakimovna; are you ill that you don’t eat anything?’
my father would ask. Huddling herself together the widow of some
overseer in Kremenchug, a wretched old woman with a worn and faded face,
who always smelt strongly of some plaster, would answer with cringing
eyes and deprecating fingers: ‘Forgive me, Ivan Alexeyevitch, sir, I am
really ashamed, but there, it is my old-fashioned ways, sir. Ha, ha, ha,
it’s the Fast of the Assumption now.’

‘Oh, how tiresome! You are always so devout! It’s not what goes into the
mouth, my good woman, that defiles, but what comes out of it; whether
you eat one thing or another, it all goes the same way; now what comes
out of the mouth, you must watch over ... your judgments of your
neighbours. Come, you had better dine at home on such days, or we shall
have a Turk coming next asking for pilau; I don’t keep a restaurant _à
la carte_.’

The frightened old woman, who had intended to ask for some dish made of
flour or cereals, would fall upon the kvass and salad, making a great
show of eating a great deal.

But it is noteworthy that she, or any of the others, had only to eat
meat during a fast for my father, though he never touched Lenten dishes
himself, to say, shaking his head mournfully: ‘I should not have thought
it was right for you, Anna Yakimovna, to forsake the habits of your
forefathers for the last few years of your life. I sin and eat meat,
owing to my many infirmities; but you, thank God, have kept the fasts
all your life and suddenly at your age ... what an example for _them_,’
and he motioned towards the servants. And the poor old woman had to
attack the kvass and the salad again.

These scenes made me very indignant; sometimes I was so bold as to
intervene and remind him of the contrary opinion he had expressed. Then
my father would rise from his seat, take off his velvet cap by the
tassel, and, holding it in the air, thank me for the lesson and beg
pardon for his forgetfulness, and then would say to the old lady: ‘It’s
a terrible age! It’s no wonder you eat meat in the fast, since children
teach their parents! What are we coming to? It’s dreadful to think of
it! Luckily you and I won’t live to see it.’

After dinner my father lay down to rest for an hour and a half. The
servants at once dispersed to beer-shops and eating-houses. At seven
o’clock tea was served; then sometimes some one would come in, the
Senator more often than any one; it was a time of leisure for all of us.
The Senator usually brought various items of news and told them eagerly.
My father affected complete inattention as he listened to him: he
assumed a serious face, when his brother had expected him to be dying of
laughter, and would cross-question him as though he had not heard the
point, when the Senator had been describing something striking.

The Senator came in for it in a very different way when he contradicted
or was not of the same opinion as his younger brother (which rarely
happened, however), and sometimes, indeed, when he did not contradict,
if my father was particularly ill-humoured. In these tragi-comic scenes,
what was funniest was the Senator’s genuine heat and my father’s
affected artificial coolness.

‘Well, you are ill to-day,’ the Senator would say impatiently, and he
would snatch his hat and rush off. Once in his vexation he could not
open the door and kicked it with all his might, saying ‘the confounded
door!’

My father went up, coolly opened the door inwards, and in a perfectly
composed voice observed: ‘The door does its duty, it opens inwards, and
you try to open it outwards, and are cross with it.’ It may not be out
of place to mention that the Senator was two years older than my father
and addressed him in the second person singular, while the latter as the
younger brother used the plural form, ‘you.’

After the Senator had gone, my father would retire to his bedroom, would
every day inquire whether the gates were closed, would receive an answer
in the affirmative, would express doubts on the subject but do nothing
to make certain. Then began a lengthy routine of washings, fomentations,
and medicines; his valet made ready on a little table by the bed a
perfect arsenal of different objects—medicine-bottles, night-lights,
pill-boxes. The old man as a rule read for an hour Bourienne’s _Mémorial
de Sainte Helène_ and other memoirs; then came the night.

Such was our household when I left it in 1834, so I found it in 1840,
and so it continued until his death in 1846.

At thirty when I returned from exile I realised that my father had been
right in many things, that he had unhappily a distressingly good
understanding of men. But it was not my fault that he preached even what
was true in a way so revolting to a youthful heart. His mind chilled by
a long life in a circle of depraved men put him on his guard against
every one, and his callous heart did not crave for reconciliation, and
so he remained in a hostile attitude to every one on earth.

I found him in 1839, and still more markedly in 1842, weak and really
ill. The Senator was dead, the desolation about him was greater than
ever and he even had a different valet; but he himself was just the
same, only his physical powers were changed, there was the same spiteful
intelligence, the same tenacious memory, he still worried every one over
trifles, and Sonnenberg, still unchanged, camped out in the old house as
before and carried out commissions.

Only then I appreciated all the desolateness of his life; I looked with
an aching heart at the mournful significance of this lonely abandoned
existence, dying out in the arid, barren, stony wilderness which he had
created about himself, but which it was not in his power to change; he
knew that, he saw death approaching, and, overcoming weakness and
infirmity, he jealously and obstinately controlled himself. I was
dreadfully sorry for the old man, but I could do nothing, he was
unapproachable.

... Sometimes I passed softly by his study where, sitting in a rough,
uncomfortable, deep armchair, surrounded by his dogs, he would all alone
play with my three-year-old boy. It seemed as though the clenched hands
and stiffened nerves of the old man relaxed at the sight of the child,
and he found rest from the incessant agitation, conflict, and vexation
in which he had kept himself, as his dying hand touched the cradle.




                               Chapter 6
 THE KREMLIN DEPARTMENT—MOSCOW UNIVERSITY—OUR SET—THE CHEMIST—THE MALOV
  AFFAIR—THE CHOLERA—FILARET—V. PASSEK—GENERAL LISSOVSKY—THE SUNGUROV
                                 AFFAIR

              ‘_Oh, years of boundless ecstasies,
              Of visions bright and free!
              Where now your mirth untouched by spite,
              Your hopeful toil and noisy glee?_’
                                  OGARYOV: Humorous Verse.


In spite of the lame general’s sinister predictions my father put my
name down with N. B. Yussupov for a berth in the Kremlin department. I
signed a paper and there the matter ended; I heard nothing more of the
service, except that three years later Yussupov sent the Palace
architect, who always shouted as though he were standing on the
scaffolding of the fifth storey and there giving orders to workmen in
the basement, to announce that I had received the first grade in the
service. These amazing incidents were, I may remark in passing, useless,
for I rose above the grades received in the service by taking my
degree—it was not worth while taking so much trouble for the sake of two
or three years’ seniority. And meanwhile this supposed post in the
service almost prevented me from entering the university. The Council,
seeing that I was reckoned as in the office of the Kremlin department,
refused me the right to go in for the examination.

For those in the government service, there were special after-dinner
courses of study, extremely limited in scope and only qualifying for
entrance into the so-called ‘committee examinations.’ All the wealthy
idlers, the young snobs who had learnt nothing, all those who did not
want to serve in the army and were in a hurry to get the grade of
assessor went in for the ‘committee examinations’; they were gold mines
for the old professors, who coached them privately for twenty roubles
the lesson.

To begin my life in these Caudine Forks of learning was far from suiting
my ideas. I told my father resolutely that if he could not find some way
out of it, I should resign my post in the service.

My father was angry, said that with my caprices I was preventing him
from making a career for me, and abused the teachers who had put this
nonsense into my head, but, seeing that all this had very little effect
upon me, he made up his mind to go to Yussupov.

The latter settled the matter in a trice, after the fashion of a great
nobleman and a Tatar. He called his secretary and told him to write me a
leave of absence for three years. The secretary hesitated and hesitated,
and at last, half in terror, submitted that leave of absence for longer
than four months could not be given without the sanction of the Most
High.

‘What nonsense, my man,’ the prince said to him. ‘Where is the
difficulty? Well, if leave of absence is impossible, write that I
commission him to attend the university courses for three years to
perfect himself in the sciences.’

His secretary wrote this and next day I was sitting in the amphitheatre
of the Physico-Mathematical auditorium.

The University of Moscow and the Lyceum of Tsarskoe Syelo play a
significant part in the history of Russian education and in the life of
the last two generations.

The Moscow University grew in importance together with the city itself
after 1812. Degraded by Peter the Great from being the royal capital,
Moscow was promoted by Napoleon (partly intentionally, but still more
unintentionally) to being the capital of the Russian people. The people
realised their ties of blood with Moscow from the pain felt at the news
of its being taken by the enemy. From that time a new epoch began for
the city. Its university became more and more the centre of Russian
culture. All the conditions necessary for its development were
combined—historical significance, geographical position, and the absence
of the Tsar.

The intensified mental activity of Petersburg after the death of Paul
came to a gloomy close on the Fourteenth of December. Nicholas appeared
with five gibbets, with penal servitude, with the white strap and the
light-blue uniform of Benckendorf.[69]

The tide turned, the blood rushed to the heart, the activity that was
outwardly concealed was surging inwardly. Moscow University remained
firm and was the foremost to stand out in sharp relief against the
general darkness. The Tsar began to hate it from the time of the
Polezhaev affair.[70] He sent A. Pissarev, the major-general of the
‘Kaluga Evenings,’ as director, commanded the students to be dressed in
uniform, commanded them to wear a sword, then forbade them to wear a
sword, condemned Polezhaev to be a common soldier for his verses and
punished Kostenetsky and his comrades for their prose, destroyed the
Kritskys[71] for a bust, sentenced us to exile for Saint-Simonism, then
made Prince Sergey Mihailovitch Golitsyn director, and then took no
further notice of that ‘hot-bed of vice,’ piously advising young men who
had finished their studies at the Lyceum or at the School of
Jurisprudence not to enter it.

Golitsyn was a surprising person, it was long before he could accustom
himself to the irregularity of there being no lecture when a professor
was ill; he thought the next on the list ought to take his place, so
that it sometimes happened to Father Ternovsky to lecture in the clinic
on women’s diseases and the gynæcologist Richter to discourse on the
Immaculate Conception.

But in spite of that the university that had fallen into disgrace grew
in influence; the youthful strength of Russia streamed to it from all
sides, from all classes of society, as into a common reservoir; in its
halls they were purified from the superstitions they had picked up at
the domestic hearth, reached a common level, became like brothers and
dispersed again to all parts of Russia and among all classes of its
people.

Until 1848 the organisation of our universities was purely democratic.
Its doors were open to every one who could pass the examination, who was
neither a serf, a peasant, nor a man excluded from his commune. Nicholas
spoilt all this; he put restrictions on the admission of students,
increased the fees of those who paid their own expenses, and permitted
none to be relieved of payment but poor _noblemen_. All these belonged
to the series of senseless measures which will disappear with the last
breath of that drag on the Russian wheel, together with passports,
religious intolerance and so on.[72]

The young men of all sorts and conditions coming from above and from
below, from the south and from the north, were quickly fused into a
compact mass of comrades. Social distinctions had not among us the
distressing influence which we find in English schools and barracks; I
am not speaking of the English universities. They exist exclusively for
the aristocracy and for the rich. A student who thought fit to boast
among us of his blue blood or his wealth would have been sent to
Coventry and made the butt of his comrades.

The external distinctions—and they did not go very deep—that divided the
students arose from other causes. Thus, for instance, the medical
section which was on the other side of the garden was not so closely
united with us as the other faculties; moreover, the majority of the
medical students consisted of seminarists and Germans. The Germans kept
a little apart and were deeply imbued with the Western bourgeois spirit.
All the education of the luckless seminarists, all their ideas were
utterly different from ours, we spoke different languages; brought up
under the yoke of monastic despotism, weighed down by rhetoric and
theology, they envied us our ease and freedom; we were vexed at their
Christian meekness.[73]

I entered in the section of physics and mathematics in spite of the fact
that I had never had a marked ability, nor much liking for mathematics.
Nick and I had been taught mathematics together by a teacher whom we
loved for his anecdotes and stories; interesting as he was, he could
hardly have developed a passion for his subject. His knowledge of
mathematics extended only to conic sections, _i.e._ exactly as far as
was necessary for preparing High School boys for the university; a real
philosopher, he never had the curiosity to glance at the ‘university
grades’ of mathematics.

What was particularly remarkable was that he had never read more than
one book on the subject, and that book, Francoeur’s Course, he studied
over and over again for ten years; but being continent by temperament
and disliking superfluous luxury, he never went beyond a certain page.

I chose the Faculty of Physics and Mathematics because the natural
sciences were taught in that Faculty, and just at that time I developed
a great passion for natural science.

A rather strange meeting had led me to those studies.

After the famous division of the family property in 1822, which I have
described, my father’s ‘elder brother’ went to live in Petersburg. For a
long time nothing was heard of him, then suddenly a rumour came that he
was getting married. He was at that time over sixty, and every one knew
that he had a grown-up son besides other children. He married the mother
of his eldest son; the bride, too, was over fifty. With this marriage he
legitimised his son. Why not all the children? It would be hard to say
why, if we had not known the chief object of it all; his one desire was
to deprive his brothers of the inheritance, and this he completely
attained by legitimising the son.

In the famous inundation of Petersburg in 1824 the old man was drenched
with water in his carriage. He caught cold, took to his bed, and in the
beginning of 1825 he died.

Of the son there were strange rumours. It was said that he was
unsociable, refused to make acquaintances, sat alone for ever absorbed
in chemistry, spent his life at his microscope, read even at dinner and
hated feminine society. Of him it is said in _Woe from Wit_,[74]

                 ‘He is a chemist, he is a botanist,
                 Our nephew, Prince Fyodor,
                 He flies from women and even from me.’

His uncles, who transferred to him the grudge they had against his
father, never spoke of him except as ‘the Chemist,’ using this word as a
term of disparagement, and assuming that chemistry was a subject that
could not be studied by a gentleman.

His father used to oppress him dreadfully, not merely insulting him with
the spectacle of grey-headed cynical vice, but actually being jealous of
him as a possible rival in his seraglio. The Chemist on one occasion
tried to escape from this ignoble existence by taking laudanum. The
comrade with whom he used to work at chemistry by chance saved him. His
father was thoroughly frightened, and before his death had begun to
treat his son better.

After his father’s death the Chemist released the luckless odalisques,
halved the heavy _obrok_ laid by his father on the peasants, forgave all
arrears and presented them gratis with the army receipt for the full
quota of recruits, which the old man used to sell them after sending his
serfs as soldiers.

A year and a half later he came to Moscow. I longed to see him, for I
liked him both for the way he treated his peasants and on account of the
undeserved dislike his uncles felt for him.

One morning a small man in gold spectacles, with a big nose, with hair
somewhat thin on the top, and with hands burnt by chemical reagents,
called upon my father. My father met him coldly, sarcastically; his
nephew responded in the same coin and gave him quite as good as he got:
after taking each other’s measure, they began speaking of extraneous
matters with external indifference, and parted politely but with
concealed dislike. My father saw that he was an opponent who would not
give in to him.

They did not become more intimate later. The Chemist very rarely visited
his uncles; the last time he saw my father was after the Senator’s
death, when he came to ask him for a loan of thirty thousand roubles for
the purchase of land. My father would not lend it. The Chemist was moved
to anger and, rubbing his nose, observed with a smile, ‘There is no risk
whatever in it; my estate is entailed; I am borrowing money for its
improvement. I have no children and we are each other’s heirs.’ The old
man of seventy-five never forgave his nephew for this sally.

I took to visiting the Chemist from time to time. He lived in an
extremely original way. In his big house on the Tverskoy Boulevard he
used one tiny room for himself and one as a laboratory. His old mother
occupied another little room on the other side of the corridor, the rest
of the house was abandoned and remained exactly as it had been when his
father left it to go to Petersburg. The blackened candelabra, the
wonderful furniture among which were rarities of all sorts, a
grandfather clock said to have been bought by Peter the Great in
Amsterdam, an armchair said to have come from the house of Stanislav
Leszcynski,[75] frames without pictures in them, pictures turned to the
wall, were all left anyhow, filling up three big, unheated and unlighted
drawing-rooms. Servants were usually playing some musical instrument and
smoking in the hall, where in old days they had scarcely dared to
breathe nor say their prayers. A man-servant would light a candle and
escort one through this museum of antiquities, observing every time that
there was no need to take my cloak off as it was very cold in the
drawing-rooms. Thick layers of dust covered the horns and various
curios, the reflections of which moved together with the candle in the
elaborately carved mirrors, straw left from the packing lay undisturbed
here and there together with scraps of paper and bits of string.

At last we reached the door hung with a rug which led to the terribly
overheated study. In it the Chemist, in a soiled dressing-gown lined
with squirrel fur, was invariably sitting, surrounded by books, phials,
retorts, crucibles, and other apparatus. In that study where Chevalier’s
microscope now reigned supreme and there was always a smell of chlorine,
and where a few years before terrible infamous deeds were perpetrated—in
that study I was born. My father on his return from foreign parts before
his quarrel with his brother stayed for some months in his house, and in
the same house, too, my wife was born in 1817. The Chemist sold the
house two years later, and it chanced that I was in the house again at
evening parties, at Sverbeyev’s, arguing there about Pan-Slavism and
getting angry with Homyakov, who never lost his temper about anything.
The rooms had been done up, but the front entrance, the vestibule, the
stairs, the hall were all untouched, and so was the little study.

The Chemist’s housekeeping was even less complicated, especially when
his mother had gone away for the summer to their estate near Moscow and
with her the cook. His valet used to appear at four o’clock with a
coffee-pot, pour into it a little strong broth and, taking advantage of
the chemical furnace, would set it there to warm, together with various
poisons. Then he would bring bread and half a woodcock from the
restaurant, and that made up the whole dinner. When it was over the
valet would wash the coffee-pot and it would return to its natural
duties. In the evening, the valet would appear again, take from the sofa
a heap of books, and a tiger-skin that had come down to the Chemist from
his father, bring sheets, pillows and bedclothes, and the study was as
easily transformed into a bedroom as it had been into a kitchen and a
dining-room.

From the very beginning of our acquaintance the Chemist saw that I was
interested in earnest, and began to persuade me to give up the ‘empty’
study of literature and the ‘dangerous and quite useless pursuit of
politics,’ and take to natural science. He gave me Cuvier’s speech on
_Geological Cataclysms_ and De Candolle’s _Plant Morphology_. Seeing
that these were not thrown away upon me he offered me the use of his
excellent collection, apparatus, herbariums, and even his guidance. He
was very interesting on his own ground, extremely learned, witty and
even polite; but one could not go beyond the monkeys with him; from
stones to ourangoutangs, everything interested him, but he did not care
to be drawn beyond them, particularly into philosophy, which he regarded
as twaddle. He was neither a conservative nor a reactionary, he simply
did not believe in people, that is, believed that egoism is the sole
source of all action, and thought that it was restrained merely by the
senselessness of some and the ignorance of others.

I was revolted by his materialism. The superficial, timid,
half-Voltairianism of our fathers was not in the least like the
Chemist’s materialism. His outlook was calm, consistent, complete. He
reminded me of the celebrated answer made by Lalande[76] to Napoleon:
‘Kant accepts the hypothesis of God,’ Bonaparte said to him. ‘Sire,’
replied the astronomer, ‘in my studies I have never had occasion to make
use of that hypothesis.’

The Chemist’s atheism went far beyond the sphere of theology. He
considered Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire[77] a mystic and Oken[78] simply a
degenerate. He closed the works of the natural philosophers with the
same contempt with which my father had closed Karamzin’s _History_.
‘They have invented first causes, spiritual powers, and then are
surprised that they can neither find them nor understand them,’ he said.
This was a second edition of my father, in a different age and
differently educated.

His views on all the problems of life were still more comfortless. He
thought that there was as little responsibility for good and evil in man
as in the beasts; that it was all a matter of organisation,
circumstances, and the general condition of the nervous system, of which
he said _more was expected than it was capable of giving_. He did not
like family life, spoke with horror of marriage, and naïvely
acknowledged that in the thirty years of his life he had never loved one
woman. However, one warm spot in this frozen man still remained; it
could be seen in his attitude to his old mother; they had suffered a
great deal together at the hands of his father, and their troubles had
united them; he touchingly surrounded her solitary and infirm old age
with tranquillity and attention, as far as he knew how.

He never advocated his theories, except those that concerned chemistry;
they came out casually or were called for by me. He even showed
reluctance in answering my romantic and philosophic objections; his
answers were brief, and he made them with a smile and with that delicacy
with which a big old mastiff plays with a puppy, allowing him to tease
and only pushing him off with a light pat of his paw. But it was just
that which provoked me most and I would return to the charge without
weariness, never gaining an inch of ground, however. Later on, namely
twelve years afterwards, just as I recalled my father’s observations I
frequently recalled the Chemist’s. Of course, he had been right in
three-quarters of everything against which I argued, but of course I was
right too. There are truths (we have spoken of this already) which like
political rights are not given to those under a certain age.

The Chemist’s influence made me choose the Faculty of Physics and
Mathematics; perhaps I should have done better to enter in the Medical
Faculty, but there was no great harm in my first acquiring some degree
of knowledge of the differential and integral calculus and then
completely forgetting it.

Without the natural sciences there is no salvation for the modern man.
Without that wholesome food, without that strict training of the mind by
facts, without that closeness to the life surrounding us, without
humility before its independence, the monastic cell remains hidden in
the soul, and in it the drop of mysticism which may flood the whole
understanding with its dark waters.

Before I completed my studies the Chemist had gone away to Petersburg,
and I did not see him again until I came back from Vyatka. Some months
after my marriage I went half secretly for a few days to the estate near
Moscow where my father was then living. The object of my going was to
effect a complete reconciliation with him, for he was still angry with
me for my marriage.

On the way I halted at Perhushkovo where we had so many times broken our
journey in old days. The Chemist was expecting me there and had actually
got a dinner and two bottles of champagne ready for me. In those four or
five years he had not changed at all except for being a little older.
Before dinner he asked me quite seriously: ‘Tell me, please, openly, how
do you find married life, is there anything good in it, or not much?’ I
laughed. ‘What boldness it is on your part,’ he went on. ‘I wonder at
you; in a normal condition a man can never venture on such a terrible
step. Two or three very good matches have been proposed to me, but when
I imagine a woman taking up her abode in my room, setting everything in
order according to her ideas, perhaps forbidding me to smoke my tobacco,
making a fuss and an upset, I am so panic-stricken that I prefer to die
in solitude.’

‘Shall I stay the night with you or go on to Perhushkovo?’ I asked him
after dinner.

‘I have plenty of room here,’ he answered, ‘but for you I think it would
be better to go on, you will reach your father at ten o’clock. You know,
of course, that he is still angry with you; well—in the evening before
going to bed old people’s nerves are usually exhausted and feeble—he
will probably receive you much better this evening than to-morrow; in
the morning you will find him quite ready for battle.’

‘Ha, ha, ha! I recognise my teacher in physiology and materialism,’ said
I, laughing heartily, ‘how your remark recalls those blissful days when
I used to go to you like Goethe’s _Wagner_ to weary you with my idealism
and listen with some indignation to your chilling opinions.’

‘Since then,’ he answered, laughing too, ‘you have lived enough to know
that all men’s doings depend simply on their nerves and their chemical
composition.’

Later on we had some sort of disagreement, probably we were both to
blame.... Nevertheless in 1846 he wrote me a letter. I was then
beginning to be the fashion after the publication of the first part of
_Who is to Blame?_ The Chemist wrote to me that he saw with grief that I
was wasting my talent on ‘idle pursuits!... I forgive you everything for
the sake of your letters on the study of nature. In them I understood
the German philosophy (so far as it is possible for the mind of man to
do so)—why then instead of going on with serious work are you writing
tales?’ I sent him a few friendly lines in reply, and with that our
relations ended.

If the Chemist’s own eyes ever rest upon these lines, I would beg him to
read them just before going to sleep at night when his nerves are
exhausted, and then I am sure he will forgive me this affectionate
gossip, especially as I keep a very warm and good memory of him.

And so at last the seclusion of the parental home was over. I was _au
large_. Instead of solitude in our little room, instead of quiet and
half-concealed interviews with Ogaryov alone, I was surrounded by a
noisy family, seven hundred in number. I was more at home in it in a
fortnight than I had been in my father’s house from the day of my birth.

But the parental roof pursued me even to the university in the shape of
a footman whom my father ordered to accompany me, particularly when I
went on foot. For a whole session I was trying to get rid of my escort
and only with difficulty succeeded in doing so officially. I say
‘officially,’ because Pyotr Fyodorovitch, upon whom the duty was laid,
very quickly grasped, first, that I disliked being accompanied, and,
secondly, that it was a great deal more pleasant for him in various
places of entertainment than in the hall of the Faculty of Physics and
Mathematics, where the only pleasures open to him were conversation with
the two porters and regaling them and himself with snuff.

With what object was an escort sent with me? Could Pyotr, who from his
youth had been given to getting drunk for several days at a time, have
prevented me from doing anything? I imagine that my father did not even
suppose so, but for his own peace of mind took steps, which were
insufficient but were still steps, like people who do not believe but
take the sacrament. It was part of the old-fashioned education of
landowners. Up to seven years old, it was the rule that I should be led
by the hand up the staircase, which was rather steep; up to eleven, I
was washed in my bath by Vera Artamonovna; therefore, very consistently,
a servant was sent with me when I was a student; until I was twenty-one,
I was not allowed to be out after half-past ten. I was inevitably in
freedom and on my own feet when in exile; had I not been exiled,
probably the same regime would have continued up to twenty-five or even
thirty-five.

Like the majority of lively boys brought up in solitude, I flung myself
on every one’s neck with such sincerity and impulsiveness, made
propaganda with such senseless imprudence, and was so candidly fond of
every one, that I could not fail to call forth a warm response from lads
almost of the same age. (I was then in my seventeenth year.)

The sage rule—to be courteous to all, intimate with no one and to trust
no one—did as much to promote this readiness to make friends as the
persistent thought with which we entered the university, the thought
that here our dreams would be accomplished, that here we should sow the
seeds and lay the foundation of a league. We were persuaded that out of
this lecture-room would come the company which would follow in the
footsteps of Pestel and Ryleyev, and that we should be in it.

They were a splendid set of young men in our year. It was just at that
time that theoretical tendencies were becoming more and more marked
among us. The scholastic method of learning and aristocratic indolence
were alike disappearing, and not yet replaced by that German
utilitarianism which enriches men’s minds with science, as the fields
with manure, for the sake of an increased crop. A considerable group of
students no longer regarded science as a necessary but wearisome
short-cut by which they would come to be collegiate assessors. The
problems that were arising amongst us had no reference whatever to
grades in the service.

On the other hand, the interest in science had not yet had time to
degenerate into doctrinarianism; science did not draw us away from the
life and suffering around us. Our sympathy with it raised the social
morality of the students, too, in an extraordinary way. We said openly
in the lecture-room everything that came into our heads; manuscript
copies of prohibited poems passed from hand to hand, prohibited books
were read with commentaries, but for all that I do not remember a single
case of tale-bearing or treachery. There were timid young men who turned
away and held aloof, but they too were silent.[79]

One silly boy, questioned by his mother on the Malov affair, under
threat of the birch told her something. The fond mother—an aristocrat
and a princess—flew to the rector and told him her son’s tale as proof
of his penitence. We heard of this and tormented him so that he could
not remain until the end of his session.

This affair, for which I too was imprisoned, deserves to be described.

Malov was a stupid, coarse, and uncultured professor in the political
section. The students despised him and laughed at him. ‘How many
professors have you in your section?’ asked the director of a student in
the political lecture-room. ‘Nine, not counting Malov,’ answered the
student.[80] Well, this professor, who had to be left out of the
reckoning when the others were counted, began to be more and more
insolent in his treatment of the students; the latter made up their
minds to turn him out of the lecture-room. After deliberating together
they sent two delegates to our section to invite me to come with an
auxiliary force. I at once gave the word to go out to battle with Malov,
and several students went with me; when we went into the lecture-room
Malov was on the spot and saw us come in.

On the faces of all the students could be seen the same fear: that on
that day he might say nothing rude to them. This anxiety was soon over.

The overflowing lecture-room was restless and a vague subdued hum rose
from it. Malov made some observations; there began a scraping of feet.
‘You express your thoughts like horses, with your legs,’ observed Malov,
probably imagining that horses think with a trot and a gallop, and a
storm arose, whistling, hisses, shouts; ‘Out with him, _pereat_!’ Malov,
pale as a sheet, made a desperate effort to control the uproar but could
not; the students jumped on to the benches, Malov quietly left his chair
and, shrinking together, began to make his way to the door; the students
went after him, saw him through the university court into the street and
flung his goloshes after him. The last circumstance was important, for
the case at once assumed a very different character in the street; but
where in the world are there lads of seventeen or eighteen who would
consider that?

The University Council was alarmed and persuaded the director to present
the affair as completely closed, and for that reason to put the
ringleaders, or at least some of them, in prison. This was prudent; it
might otherwise easily have happened that the Tsar would have sent an
aide-de-camp who, with a view to gaining a cross, would have turned the
affair into a plot, a conspiracy, a mutiny, and would have suggested
sending all the culprits to penal servitude, which the Tsar would
graciously have commuted to service as common soldiers. Seeing that vice
was punished and virtue triumphant, the Tsar confined himself to
graciously confirming the students’ wishes by authority of the Most High
and dismissed the professor. We had driven Malov out as far as the
university gates and he put him outside them. It was _vae victis_ with
Nicholas, but on this occasion it was not for us to complain.

And so the affair went on merrily; after dinner next day the porter from
the head office, a grey-headed old man, who conscientiously assumed _à
la lettre_ that the students’ tips were for vodka and therefore kept
himself continually in a condition approximating to drunkenness rather
than sobriety, came to me bringing in the cuff of his coat a note from
the rector; I was instructed to present myself before him at seven
o’clock. After he had gone, a pale and frightened student appeared, a
baron from the Baltic provinces, who had received a similar invitation
and was one of the luckless victims led on by me. He began showering
reproaches upon me and then asked advice as to what he was to say.

‘Lie desperately, deny everything, except that there was an uproar and
that you were in the lecture-room.’

‘But the rector will ask why I was in the political lecture-room and not
in my own.’

‘What of it? Why, don’t you know that Rodion Heiman did not come to give
his lecture, so you, not wishing to waste your time, went to hear
another.’

‘He won’t believe it.’

‘Well, that’s his affair.’

As we were going into the university courtyard I looked at my baron, his
plump little cheeks were very pale and altogether he was in a bad way.

‘Listen,’ I said, ‘you may be sure that the rector will begin with me
and not with you, so you say exactly the same with variations. You did
not do anything in particular, as a matter of fact. Don’t forget one
thing, for making an uproar and for telling lies ever so many of you
will be put in prison, but if you go and tell tales and mix anybody else
up in it before me, I’ll tell the others and we’ll poison your
existence.’

The baron promised and kept his word honestly.

The rector at that time was Dvigubsky, one of the surviving specimens of
the professors before the flood, or to be more accurate, before the
fire, that is, before 1812. They are extinct now; with the directorship
of Prince Obolensky the patriarchal period of Moscow University ended.
In those days the government did not trouble itself about the
university; the professors lectured or did not lecture, the students
attended or did not attend, and went about, not in uniform jackets _ad
instar_ of light-cavalry officers, but in all sorts of outrageous and
eccentric garments, in tiny little caps that would scarcely keep on
their virginal locks. The professors consisted of two groups or classes
who placidly hated each other. One group was composed exclusively of
Germans, the other of non-Germans. The Germans, among whom were
good-natured and learned men such as Loder, Fischer, Hildebrand, and
Heym himself, were as a rule distinguished by their ignorance of the
Russian language and disinclination to learn it, their indifference to
the students, their spirit of Western exclusiveness, their immoderate
smoking of cigars and the immense quantity of decorations which they
invariably wore. The non-Germans for their part knew not a single living
language except Russian, were servile in their patriotism, as uncouth as
seminarists, and, with the exception of Merzlyakov,[81] were treated as
of little account, and instead of an immoderate consumption of cigars
indulged in an immoderate consumption of liquor. The Germans for the
most part hailed from Göttingen and the non-Germans were sons of
priests.

Dvigubsky was one of the non-Germans: his appearance was so venerable
that a student from a seminary, who came in for a list of classes, went
up to kiss his hand and ask for his blessing, and always called him ‘The
Father Rector.’ At the same time he was wonderfully like an owl with an
Anna ribbon on its neck, in which form another student, who had received
a more worldly education, drew his portrait. When he came into our
lecture-room either with the dean Tchumakov, or with Kotelnitsky, who
had charge of a cupboard inscribed _Materia Medica_, kept for some
unknown reason in the mathematical lecture-room, or with Reiss, who was
bespoken from Germany because his uncle was a very good chemist, and
who, when he read French, used to call a lamp-wick a _bâton de coton_,
and poison, _poisson_, and so cruelly distorted the word ‘lightning’
that many people supposed he was swearing—we looked at them with round
eyes as at a collection of antiquities, as at the last of the
Abencerrages,[82] representatives of a different age not so near to us
as to Tredyakovsky[83] and Kostrov[84]; the times in which Heraskov[85]
and Knyazhnin[86] were still read, the times of the good-natured
Professor Diltey, who had two little dogs, one which always barked and
the other which never barked, for which reason he very justly called one
Bavardka and the other Prudentka.

But Dvigubsky was not at all a good-natured professor; he received us
extremely curtly and was rude. I reeled off a fearful rigmarole and was
disrespectful; the baron served up the same story. The rector,
irritated, told us to present ourselves next morning before the Council,
where in the course of half an hour they questioned, condemned and
sentenced us and sent the sentence to Prince Golitsyn for ratification.

I had scarcely had time to rehearse the trial and the sentence of the
University Senate to the students five or six times in the lecture-room
when all at once the inspector, who was a major in the Russian army and
a French dancing-master, made his appearance with a non-commissioned
officer, bringing an order to seize me and conduct me to prison. Some of
the students went to see me on my way, and in the courtyard there was
already a crowd of young men, so evidently I was not the first taken; as
we passed, they all waved their caps and their hands; the university
soldiers moved them back but the students would not go.

In the dirty cellar which served as a prison I found two of the arrested
men, Arapetov and Olov; Prince Andrey Obolensky and Rozenheim had been
put in another room; in all, there were six of us punished for the Malov
affair. Orders were given that we should be kept on bread and water; the
rector sent some sort of soup, which we refused, and it was well we did
so. As soon as it got dark and the lecture-rooms emptied, our comrades
brought us cheese, game, cigars, wine, and liqueurs. The soldier in
charge was angry and grumbled, but accepted twenty kopecks and carried
in the provisions. After midnight he went further and let several
visitors come in to us; so we spent our time feasting by night and
sleeping by day.

On one occasion it somehow happened that the assistant-director Panin,
the brother of the Minister of Justice, faithful to his Horse-Guard
habits, took it into his head to go the round of the Imperial prison in
the university cellars by night. We had only just lighted a candle and
put it under a chair so that the light could not be seen from outside,
and were beginning on our midnight repast, when we heard a knock at the
outer door; not the sort of knock which weakly begs a soldier to open,
which is more afraid of being heard than of not being heard; no, this
was a peremptory knock, a knock of authority. The soldier was petrified;
we hid the bottles and the students in a little cupboard, blew out the
candle and threw ourselves on our trestle-beds. Panin entered. ‘I
believe you are smoking?’ he said, so lost in thick clouds of smoke that
we could hardly distinguish him and the inspector who was carrying a
lantern. ‘Where do they get a light, do you give it them?’ The soldier
swore that he did not. We answered that we had tinder with us. The
inspector undertook to remove it and to take away the cigars, and Panin
withdrew without observing that the number of caps in the room was
double the number of heads.

On Saturday evening the inspector made his appearance and announced that
I and another one might go home, but that the rest would remain until
Monday. This distinction seemed to me insulting and I asked the
inspector whether I might remain; he drew back a step, looked at me with
the threateningly majestic air with which tsars and heroes in a ballet
depict anger in a dance, and saying, ‘Stay by all means,’ walked away. I
got more into trouble at home for this last sally than for the whole
business.

And so the first nights I slept away from home were spent in prison. Not
long afterwards it was my lot to have experience of a very different
prison, and there I stayed not eight days but nine months, after which I
went not home but into exile. All that comes later, however.

From that time forward I enjoyed the greatest popularity in the
lecture-room. From the first I had been accepted as a good comrade.
After the Malov affair, I became, like Gogol’s famous lady, a comrade
‘agreeable in all respects.’

Did we learn anything with all this going on, could we study? I imagine
that we did. The teaching was more meagre and its scope narrower than in
the ’forties. It is not the function of a university, however, to give a
complete training in any branch of knowledge; its work is to put a man
in a position to continue study on his own account; its work is to
provoke inquiry, to teach men to ask questions. And this was certainly
done by such professors as M. G. Pavlov, and on the other side, by such
as Katchenovsky.

But contact with other young men in the lecture-rooms and the exchange
of ideas and opinions did more to develop the students than lectures and
professors.... The Moscow University did its work; the professors whose
lectures contributed to the development of Lermontov, Byelinsky,[87]
Turgenev, Kavelin,[88] and Pirogov[89] may play their game of boston in
tranquillity and still more tranquilly lie under the earth.

And what original figures, what marvels there were among them—from
Fyodor Ivanovitch Tchumakov, who made formulas to fit in with those in
the text-book with the reckless freedom of the privileged landowner,
adding and removing letters, taking powers for roots and _x_ for the
known quantity, to Gavril Myagkov, who lectured on military tactics.
From perpetually dealing with heroic subjects, Myagkov’s very appearance
had acquired an air of drill and discipline; buttoned up to the throat
and wearing a cravat entirely free from curves, he delivered his
lectures as though giving words of command. ‘Gentlemen!’ he would shout;
‘in the field—of artillery!’ This did not mean that cannons were
advancing into the field of battle, but simply that such was the heading
in the margin. What a pity Nicholas avoided visiting the University! If
he had seen Myagkov, he would certainly have made him Director.

And Fyodor Fyodorovitch Reiss, who in his chemistry lectures never went
beyond the second person of the chemical divinity, _i.e._ hydrogen!
Reiss, who had actually been made Professor of Chemistry because not he,
but his uncle, had at one time studied that science! Towards the end of
the reign of Catherine, the old uncle had been invited to Russia; he did
not want to come, so sent his nephew instead....

Among the exceptional incidents of my course, which lasted four years
(for the University was closed for a whole session during the cholera),
were the cholera itself, the arrival of Humboldt and the visit of
Uvarov.

Humboldt was welcomed on his return to Moscow from the Urals in a solemn
assembly, held in the precincts of the University by the Society of
Scientific Research, the members of which were various senators and
governors—people, in fact, who took no interest in science, either
natural or unnatural. The fame of Humboldt, a privy councillor of his
Prussian Majesty, on whom the Tsar had graciously bestowed the Anna, and
to whom he had also commanded that equipment and diploma should be
presented free of charge, had reached even them. They were determined
not to disgrace themselves before a man who had been to Mount Chimborazo
and had lived at Sans-Souci.

To this day we look upon Europeans and upon Europe in the same way as
provincials look upon those who live in the capital, with deference and
a feeling of our own inferiority, flattering them and imitating them,
taking everything in which we are different for a defect, blushing for
our peculiarities and concealing them. The fact is that we were
intimidated by the jeers of Peter the Great, by the insults of Biron, by
the haughty superiority of German officers and French tutors, and we
have not recovered from it. They talk in Western Europe of our duplicity
and wily cunning; they mistake the desire to show off and swagger a bit
for the desire to deceive. Among us the same man is ready to be naïvely
Liberal with a Liberal or to play the Legitimist with a reactionary, and
this with no ulterior motive, simply from politeness and a desire to
please; the bump _de l’approbativité_ is strongly developed in our
skulls.

‘Prince Dmitri Golitsyn,’ observed Lord Durham, ‘is a true Whig, a Whig
in soul!’

Prince D. V. Golitsyn is a respectable Russian gentleman, but why he was
a Whig and in what way he was a Whig I don’t understand. You may be
certain that in his old age the prince wanted to please Durham and so
played the Whig.

The reception of Humboldt in Moscow and in the University was no jesting
matter. The Governor-General, various military and civic chiefs, and the
members of the Senate, all turned up with ribbons across their
shoulders, in full uniform, and the professors wore swords like warriors
and carried three-cornered hats under their arms. Humboldt, suspecting
nothing, came in a dark-blue coat with gold buttons, and, of course, was
overwhelmed with confusion. From the vestibule to the hall of the
Society of Scientific Research, ambushes were prepared for him on all
sides: here stood the rector, there a dean, here a budding professor,
there a veteran whose career was over and who for that reason spoke very
slowly; every one welcomed him in Latin, in German, in French, and all
this took place in those awful stone tubes, called corridors, in which
one cannot stay for a minute without being laid up with a cold for a
month. Humboldt, hat in hand, listened to everybody and answered
everybody—I feel certain that all the savages among whom he had been,
red-skinned and copper-coloured, caused him less trouble than his Moscow
reception.

As soon as he reached the hall and sat down, he had to get up again. The
Director, Pissarev, thought it necessary, in brief but vigorous
language, to lay down the law in Russian concerning the services of his
Excellency, the celebrated traveller; after which Sergey Glinka,[90]
‘the officer,’ with a voice of the year 1812, deep and hoarse, recited
his poem which began:

                  ‘_Humboldt—Prométhée de nos jours!_’

Whilst Humboldt wanted to talk about his observations on the magnetic
needle and to compare his meteorological records on the Urals with those
of Moscow, the rector came up to show him instead something plaited of
the imperial hair of Peter the Great ... and Ehrenberg and Rosa had
difficulty in finding a chance to tell him something about their
discoveries.[91]

Things are not much better among us in the nonofficial world: ten years
ago Liszt was received in Moscow society in much the same way. Silly
enough things were done in his honour in Germany, but here it took quite
a different character. In Germany, it was all old-maidish exaltation,
sentimentality, all _Blumenstreuen_, while with us it was all servility,
homage paid to power, rigid standing at attention, with us it was all ‘I
have the honour to present myself to your Excellency.’ And in that case,
unfortunately, there was Liszt’s fame as a celebrated Lovelace to add to
it all. The ladies flocked round him, as peasant-boys at the cross-roads
flock round a traveller while his horses are being harnessed,
inquisitively examining himself, his carriage, his cap.... No one
listened to anybody but Liszt, no one spoke to anybody else, nor
answered anybody else. I remember that at one evening party,
Homyakov,[92] blushing for the honourable company, said to me, ‘Please
let us argue about something, that Liszt may see that there are people
in the room not exclusively occupied with him.’ For the consolation of
our ladies I can only say one thing, that in just the same way
Englishwomen dashed about, crowded round, pestered and obstructed other
celebrities such as Kossuth and afterwards Garibaldi. But alas for those
who want to learn good manners from Englishwomen and their husbands!

Our second ‘famous’ visitor was also in a certain sense ‘the Prometheus
of our day,’ only he stole the light not from Jupiter but from men. This
Prometheus, sung not by Glinka but by Pushkin himself, in his ‘Epistle
to Lucullus,’ was the Minister of Public Instruction, S. S. Uvarov. He
amazed us by the multitude of languages and the variety of subjects with
which he was acquainted; a veritable shopman in the stores of
enlightenment, he had committed to memory patterns of all the sciences,
samples or rather snippets of them. In the reign of Alexander, he wrote
Liberal brochures in French; later on, corresponded on Greek subjects
with Goethe in German. When he became Minister, he discoursed upon
Slavonic poetry of the fourth century, upon which Katchenovsky observed
to him that in those days our forefathers had enough to do to fight the
bears, let alone singing ballads about the gods of Samothrace and the
mercy of tyrants. He used to carry in his pocket, by way of a
testimonial, a letter from Goethe, in which the latter paid him an
extremely odd compliment, saying: ‘There is no need for you to apologise
for your style; you have succeeded in what I never can succeed in
doing—forgetting the German grammar.’

So this actual civil Pic-de-la-Mirandole[93] introduced a new kind of
torture. He ordered that the best students should be selected to deliver
a lecture, each on his own subject, instead of the professor. The deans,
of course, selected the liveliest.

These lectures went on for a whole week. The students had to prepare in
all the subjects of their course, and the deans picked out the student’s
name and the subject by lot. Uvarov invited all the distinguished people
of Moscow. Archimandrites and senators, the Governor-General and Ivan
Ivanovitch Dmitriev—all were present.

I had to lecture on mineralogy in Lovetsky’s place—and already he is
dead!

                ‘Where’s our old comrade Langeron!
                Where’s our old comrade Benigsen!
                  You, too, are nowhere to be seen,
                  And you, too, might have never been!’

Alexey Leontyevitch Lovetsky was a tall, roughly-hewn, heavily-moving
man with a big mouth and a large face, entirely devoid of expression.
Removing in the corridor his pea-green overcoat adorned with a number of
collars of varying size, such as were worn during the First Consulate,
he would begin, before entering the lecture-room, in an even,
passionless voice (which was in perfect keeping with his stony subject):
‘We concluded in the last lecture all that is necessary concerning the
Siliceous Rocks.’ Then he would sit down and go on: ‘The Argillaceous
Rocks....’ He had created an invariable system for formulating the
qualities of each mineral, from which he never departed; so that it
sometimes happened that the characteristics were entered in the
negative:

‘Crystallisation—does not crystallise.

‘Employment—is not employed for any purpose.

‘Use—injurious to the organism....’

He did not, however, avoid poetry, nor moral reflections, and every time
he showed us artificial stones and told us how they were made, he added:
‘Gentlemen, it’s a fraud!’ In dealing with husbandry, he found moral
qualities in a good cock if he ‘crowed well and was attentive to the
hens,’ and a distinct virtue in an aristocratic ram if he had ‘bald
knees.’ He would also tell us touching tales in which flies describe how
on a fine summer evening they walked about a tree and were covered with
resin which turned into amber, and he always added: ‘That, gentlemen, is
prosopopeia!’

When the dean summoned me, the audience was rather exhausted; two
mathematical lectures had reduced the listeners, who did not understand
a single word, to apathy and depression. Uvarov asked for something a
little livelier and for a student with a ‘well-balanced tongue.’
Shtchepkin pointed to me.

I mounted the platform. Lovetsky was sitting near, motionless, with his
arms on his knees like a Memnon or Osiris, and was looking uneasy. I
whispered to him, ‘What luck that I have to lecture in your room. I
won’t give you away.’

‘Don’t boast when you are going into action,’ the worthy professor
responded, scarcely moving his lips and not looking at me. I almost
burst out laughing; but when I looked before me, there was a mist before
my eyes, I felt that I was turning pale and there was a sort of dryness
on my tongue. I had never spoken in public before, the lecture-room was
full of students—they relied upon me; at the table below were the
‘mighty of this world’ and all the professors of our section. I picked
up the question and read in an unnatural voice, ‘Crystallisation, its
conditions, laws and forms.’

While I was thinking how to begin, the happy thought occurred to me that
if I made a mistake, the professors might notice it, but they would not
say a word, while the rest of the audience knew nothing about the
subject themselves, and the students would be satisfied so long as I did
not break down in the middle, because I was a favourite. And so in the
name of Haüy, Werner, and Mitscherlich, I delivered my first lecture,
concluding it with philosophic reflections, and all the time addressing
myself to the students and not to the Minister. The students and the
professors shook hands with me and thanked me. Uvarov led me off to be
introduced to Prince Golitsyn and the latter said something, of which I
could catch nothing but the vowel sounds. Uvarov promised me a book in
honour of the occasion, but never sent it.

The second and third occasions of my appearance in public were very
different. In 1836 I played the part of ‘Ugar’ in the old Russian farce,
while the wife of the colonel of gendarmes was ‘Marfa,’ before all the
_beau-monde_ of Vyatka, including Tyufyaev. We had been rehearsing for a
month, but yet my heart beat violently and my hands trembled, when a
deathly silence followed the overture and the curtain began rising with
a sort of horrid shudder; Marfa and I were waiting behind the scenes.
She was so sorry for me, or else so afraid that I should spoil the
performance, that she gave me an immense glass of champagne, but even
with that I was half dead.

After making my début under the auspices of a Minister of Education and
a colonel of gendarmes, I appeared without any nervousness or
self-conscious shyness at a Polish meeting in London and that was my
third public appearance. The place of the Minister Uvarov was on that
occasion filled by the ex-Minister, Ledru-Rollin.[94]

But is not this enough of student reminiscences? I am afraid it may be a
sign of senility to linger so long over them; I will only add a few
details concerning the cholera of 1831.

Cholera—the word so familiar now in Europe and so thoroughly at home in
Russia that a patriotic poet calls the cholera the one faithful ally of
Nicholas—was heard then for the first time in the North. Every one
trembled before the terrible plague that was moving up the Volga towards
Moscow. Exaggerated rumours filled the imagination with horror. The
disease advanced capriciously, halting, skipping over places, and it
seemed to have missed Moscow, when suddenly the terrible news, ‘The
cholera is in Moscow!’ was all over the city.

In the morning a student in the political section felt ill, next day he
died in the university hospital. We rushed to look at his body. He was
emaciated, as though after a long illness, the eyes were sunk, the
features were distorted, beside him lay a porter, who had been taken ill
in the night.

We were informed that the university was to be closed. This order was
read to our section by the professor of technology, Denisov; he was
melancholy, perhaps frightened. Next morning he too died.

We assembled together from all sections in the big university courtyard;
there was something touching in this crowd of young people bidden to
disperse before the plague. Their faces were pale and particularly full
of feeling; many were thinking of friends and relations. We said
good-bye to the government scholars, who had been separated from us by
quarantine measures, and were being distributed in small numbers in
different houses. And at home we were all met by the stench of chloride
of lime, vinegar—and a diet such as might well have laid a man up, apart
from chloride and cholera.

Strange to say those gloomy days have remained as it were a time of
ceremonial solemnity in my memory.

Moscow assumed quite a different aspect. The public activities, unknown
at ordinary times, gave it a new life. There were fewer carriages in the
streets, and gloomy crowds of people stood at the cross-roads and talked
about poisoners. The conveyances that were taking the sick moved at a
walking pace, escorted by police; people drew aside from black hearses
with the dead. Bulletins concerning the disease were printed twice a
day. The town was surrounded by a cordon as in time of war, and the
soldiers shot a poor sacristan who was making his way across the river.
All this absorbed men’s minds, terror of the plague ousted terror of the
authorities; the people murmured, and then there came one piece of news
upon another, that so-and-so had been taken ill, that so-and-so had
died....

The Metropolitan, Filaret, arranged a universal service of prayer. On
the same day and at the same hour, all the priests made the round of
their parishes in procession with banners. The terrified inhabitants
came out of their houses and fell on their knees, as the procession
passed, praying with tears for the remission of sins. Even the priests,
accustomed to address God on intimate terms, were grave and moved. Some
of them went to the Kremlin. There in the open air, surrounded by the
higher clergy, knelt the Metropolitan praying that this cup might pass
away. On the same spot six years before, he had held a thanksgiving for
the hanging of the Decembrists.

Filaret was by way of being a high priest in opposition; on behalf of
what he was in opposition, I never could make out. Perhaps on behalf of
his own personality. He was an intelligent and learned man, and a master
of the Russian language, successfully introducing Church Slavonic into
it; but all this gave him no ground for opposition. The common people
did not like him and called him a freemason, because he was closely
associated with Prince A. N. Golitsyn and was preaching in Petersburg in
the palmy days of the Bible Society. The Synod forbade his catechism
being used in teaching. The clergy under his sway went in terror of his
despotism; possibly it was as rivals that Nicholas and he hated each
other.

Filaret was very clever and ingenious in humiliating the temporal power;
in his sermons there was the light of that vague Christian socialism for
which Lacordaire and other far-sighted Catholics were distinguished.
From his exalted ecclesiastical tribune, Filaret declared that a man can
never lawfully be the tool of another, that there can be nothing between
men but an exchange of services, and this, he said, in a state in which
half the population were slaves.

He said to the fettered convicts in the forwarding prison on the Sparrow
Hills: ‘The civil law has condemned you and drives you away, but the
Church hastens after you, longing to say one more word, one more prayer
for you and to give you her blessing on your journey.’ Then comforting
them, he added ‘that they, condemned convicts, had broken with their
past, that a new life lay before them, while among others (probably
there were no others except officials present) there were far greater
criminals,’ and he quoted the example of the robber at Christ’s side.

Filaret’s sermon at the service on the occasion of the cholera surpassed
all his other efforts; he took as his text how the angel offered David
the choice of war, famine or plague as a punishment; David chose plague.
The Tsar came to Moscow furious, sent the Court Minister, Prince
Volkonsky, to give Filaret a good ‘dressing down’ and threatened to send
him to be Metropolitan in Georgia. The Metropolitan meekly submitted and
sent a new message to all the churches, in which he explained that they
would be wrong to look in the text of his first sermon for an
application to their beloved Emperor, that by David was meant ourselves
defiled by sin. Of course, this made the first sermon intelligible even
to those who had not grasped its meaning at first.

This was how the Metropolitan of Moscow played at opposition.

The service had as little effect on the cholera as the chloride of lime;
the disease spread further and further.

I was in Paris during the severest visitation of cholera in 1849. The
plague was terrible. The hot days of June helped to spread it: the poor
died like flies, the tradespeople fled from Paris while others sat
behind locked doors. The government, exclusively occupied with its
struggles against the revolutionaries, did not think of taking active
measures. The scanty collections raised for relief were insufficient for
the emergency. The poor working people were left abandoned to the
caprice of destiny, the hospitals had not beds enough, the police had
not coffins enough, and in the houses, packed to overflowing with
families, the bodies remained two or three days in inner rooms. In
Moscow it was not like that.

Prince D. V. Golitsyn, at that time governor-general, a weak but
honourable man, cultured and much respected, aroused the enthusiasm of
Moscow society, and somehow everything was arranged in a private way,
that is, without the special interference of government. A committee was
formed of citizens of standing—wealthy landowners and merchants. Every
member undertook one quarter of Moscow. Within a few days twenty
hospitals had been opened; they did not cost the government a farthing,
everything was done by subscription. Shopkeepers gave gratis everything
needed for the hospitals, bedclothes, linen, and warm clothing for the
patients on recovery. Young men volunteered as superintendents of the
hospitals to ensure that half of these contributions should not be
stolen by the attendants.

The university did its full share. The whole medical faculty, students
and doctors _en masse_, put themselves at the disposal of the cholera
committee; they were assigned to the different hospitals and remained
there until the cholera was over. For three or four months these
admirable young men lived in the hospitals as orderlies, assistants,
nurses, secretaries, and all this without any remuneration and at a time
when there was such an exaggerated fear of the infection. I remember one
student, a Little Russian, who at the very beginning of the cholera had
asked for leave of absence on account of important family affairs. Leave
is rarely given in term-time, but at last he obtained it; just as he was
about to set off, the students went to the hospitals. The Little Russian
put his leave in his pocket and went with them. When he came out of the
hospital his leave was long overdue and he was the first to laugh over
his trip.

Moscow, apparently so drowsy and apathetic, so absorbed in scandal and
piety, weddings, and nothing at all, always wakes up when it is
necessary, and is equal to the occasion when the storm breaks over
Russia.

In 1612 she was joined in blood-stained nuptials with Russia, and their
union was welded in fire in 1812.

She bowed her head before Peter because the future of Russia lay in his
brutal clutch. But with murmurs and disdain Moscow received within her
walls the woman stained with her husband’s blood, that impenitent Lady
Macbeth, that Lucretia Borgia without her Italian blood, the Russian
Empress of German birth[95]—and scowling and pouting, she quietly
withdrew from Moscow.

Scowling and pouting, Napoleon waited for the keys of Moscow at the
Dragomilovsky Gate, impatiently playing with his cigar-holder and
tugging at his glove. He was not accustomed to enter foreign towns
unescorted.

‘But my Moscow came not forth,’ as Pushkin says; but set fire to
herself.

The cholera came and again the people’s city showed itself full of heart
and energy!

In August 1830, we went to Vassilyevskoe, stopped, as we always did, at
the Radcliffian[96] castle of Perhushkovo, and, after feeding ourselves
and our horses, were preparing to continue our journey. Bakay, with a
towel round his waist like a belt, had already shouted: ‘Off!’ when a
man galloped up on horseback, signalling to us to stop, and one of the
Senator’s postillions, covered with dust and sweat, leapt off his horse
and handed my father an envelope. In the envelope was the news of the
Revolution of July! There were two pages of the _Journal des Débats_
which he had brought with a letter; I read them over a hundred times and
got to know them by heart, and for the first time I was bored in the
country.

It was a glorious time, events came quickly. Scarcely had the meagre
figure of Charles X. had time to disappear behind the mists of Holyrood,
when Belgium flared up, the throne of the Citizen King tottered, and a
warm revolutionary spirit began to be apparent in debates and
literature. Novels, plays, poems, all once more became propaganda and
conflict.

At that time we knew nothing of the artificial stage-setting of the
revolution in France, and we took it all for the genuine thing.

Any one who cares to see how strongly the news of the revolution of July
affected the younger generation should read Heine’s description of how
he heard in Heligoland ‘that the great Pan of the Pagans is dead.’ There
was no sham ardour there, Heine at thirty was as enthusiastic, as
childishly excited, as we were at eighteen.

We followed step by step every word, every event, the bold questions and
abrupt answers, the doings of General Lafayette, and the doings of
General Lamarque; we not only knew every detail concerning them but
loved all the leading men (the Radical ones, of course) and kept their
portraits, from Manuel[97] and Benjamin Constant to Dupont de l’Eure[98]
and Armand Carrel.[99]

In the midst of this ferment all at once, like a bomb exploding close
by, the news of the rising in Warsaw overwhelmed us. This was not far
away, this was at home, and we looked at each other with tears in our
eyes, repeating our favourite line:

                  ‘Nein! es sind keine leere Träume!’

We rejoiced at every defeat of Dibitch; refused to believe in the
failures of the Poles, and I at once added to my shrine the portrait of
Thaddeus Kosciuszko.

It was just then that I saw Nicholas for the second time and his face
was still more strongly imprinted on my memory. The nobles were giving a
ball in his honour. I was in the gallery of the Assembly Hall and could
stare at him to my heart’s content. He had not yet begun to wear a
moustache. His face was still young, but the change in it since the time
of the Coronation struck me. He stood morosely by a column, staring
coldly and grimly before him, without looking at any one. He had grown
thinner. In those features, in those pewtery eyes one could read the
fate of Poland and indeed of Russia also. He was shaken, frightened, he
doubted[100] the security of his throne and was ready to revenge himself
for what he had suffered, for his fear and his doubts.

With the pacification of Poland all the restrained malignancy of the man
was let loose. Soon we, too, felt it.

The network of espionage cast about the university from the beginning of
the reign began to be drawn tighter. In 1832 a Pole who was a student in
our section was a victim. Sent to the university as a government
scholar, not at his own initiative, he had been put in our course; we
made friends with him; he was discreet and melancholy in his behaviour,
we never heard a rash word from him, but we never heard a word of
weakness either. One morning he was missing from the lectures, next day
he was missing still. We began to make inquiries; the government
scholars told us in secret that he had been fetched away at night, that
he had been summoned before the authorities, and then people had come
for his papers and belongings and had told them not to speak of it.
There the matter ended, _we never heard anything of the fate of this
luckless young man_.[102]

A few months passed when suddenly there was a report in the lecture-room
that several students had been seized in the night; among them were
Kostenetsky, Kolreif, Antonovitch and others; we knew them well, they
were all excellent fellows. Kolreif, the son of a Protestant pastor, was
an extremely gifted musician. A court martial was appointed to try them;
this meant in plain language that they were doomed to perish. We were
all in a fever of suspense to know what would happen to them, but from
the first they too vanished without trace. The storm that was crushing
the rising blades of corn was everywhere. We no longer had a foreboding
of its approach, we felt it, we saw it, and we huddled closer and closer
together.

The danger strung up our tense nerves, made our hearts beat faster and
made us love each other with greater devotion. There were five of us at
first and now we met Vadim Passek.

In Vadim there was a great deal that was new to us. We had all with
slight variations had a similar bringing up, that is, we knew nothing
but Moscow and our country estates, we had all learned out of the same
books, had lessons from the same tutors, and been educated at home or at
a boarding-school preparatory for the university. Vadim had been born in
Siberia during his father’s exile, in the midst of want and privation.
His father had been himself his teacher. He had grown up in a large
family of brothers and sisters, under a crushing weight of poverty but
in complete freedom. Siberia had put its imprint on him, which was quite
unlike our provincial stamp; he was far from being so vulgar and petty,
he was distinguished by more sturdiness and a tougher fibre. Vadim was a
savage in comparison with us. His daring was of another kind, unlike
ours, more that of the _bogatyr_, and sometimes conceited; the
aristocracy of misfortune had developed a peculiar self-respect in him;
but he knew how to love others too, and gave himself to them without
stint. He was bold—even reckless to excess—a man born in Siberia, and in
an exiled family too, has an advantage over us in not being afraid of
Siberia.

Vadim from family tradition hated the autocracy with his whole soul, and
he took us to his heart as soon as we met. We made friends very quickly.
Though, indeed, at that time, there was neither ceremony nor reasonable
precaution, nothing like it, to be seen in our circle.

‘Would you like to make the acquaintance of Ketscher, of whom you have
heard so much?’ Vadim said to me.

‘I certainly should.’

‘Come to-morrow, then, at seven o’clock; don’t be late, he’ll be with
me.’

I went—Vadim was not at home. A tall man with an expressive face and a
good-naturedly menacing look behind his spectacles was waiting for him.
I took up a book, he took up a book. ‘But perhaps you,’ he said as he
opened it, ‘perhaps you are Herzen?’

‘Yes; and you Ketscher?’

A conversation began and grew more and more eager....

And from that minute (which may have been about the end of 1831) we were
inseparable friends; from that minute the anger and sweetness, the laugh
and shout of Ketscher have resounded at all the stages, in all the
incidents of our life.

Our meeting with Vadim introduced a new element into our fraternity.

We met as before most frequently at Ogaryov’s. His invalid father had
gone to live on his estate in Penza. Ogaryov lived alone on the lowest
storey of their house at the Nikitsky Gate. This was not far from the
University, and all were particularly attracted there. Ogaryov had that
magnetic attraction which forms the first thread of crystallisation in
every mass of casually meeting atoms, if only they have some affinity.
Wherever such men are flung down, they imperceptibly become the heart of
the organism.

But besides his bright, cheerful room, furnished with red and gold
striped hangings, always haunted by the smoke of cigars and the smell of
punch and other—I was going to say—edibles and beverages, but I stopped,
because there rarely were any edibles except cheese—well, besides
Ogaryov’s ultra-student-like abode where we argued for nights together,
and sometimes caroused for nights also, another house, in which almost
for the first time we learnt to respect family life, became more and
more our favourite resort.

Vadim often left our conversations and went off home; he missed his
mother and sisters if he did not see them for long together. To us who
lived heart and soul in comradeship, it was strange that he could prefer
his family to our company.

He introduced us to it. In that family everything bore traces of the
Tsar’s _persecution_; only yesterday it had come from Siberia, it was
ruined, harassed, and at the same time full of that dignity which
misfortune lays, not upon every sufferer, but on the faces of those who
have known how to bear it.

Their father had been seized in the reign of Paul in consequence of some
political treachery, flung into the Schlüsselburg and exiled to Siberia.
Alexander brought back thousands of those exiled by his insane father,
but Passek was forgotten. He was the nephew of that Passek who took part
in the murder of Peter III., and who was afterwards governor-general in
the Polish provinces, and he might have claimed part of an inheritance
which had already passed into other hands, and it was those ‘other
hands’ which kept him in Siberia.

While in the Schlüsselburg Passek married the daughter of one of the
officers in the garrison there. The young girl knew that things would go
hard with her, but she was not deterred by fear of exile. At first they
struggled on somehow in Siberia, selling the last of their belongings,
but their poverty grew more and more terrible, and the more rapidly so
as their family increased. Weighed down by privation, by hard work,
deprived of warm clothing and at times even of bread, they yet succeeded
in coming through and in bringing up a whole family of young lions; the
father transmitted to them his proud, indomitable spirit and faith in
himself, the secret of fortitude in misfortune; he educated them by his
example, the mother by her self-sacrifice and bitter tears. The sisters
were in no way inferior to the brothers in heroic fortitude. Yes—why be
afraid of words—they were a family of heroes. What they had all borne
for one another, what they had done for the family was incredible, and
always with head erect, not in the least crushed.

In Siberia the three sisters had only one pair of shoes; they used to
keep them for going on walks, that strangers might not see the extremity
of their need.

At the beginning of 1826 Passek received permission to return to Russia.
It was winter, and it was no easy matter to move with such a family,
without fur coats, without money, from the province of Tobolsk, while on
the other hand the heart yearned for Russia: exile is more than ever
insufferable after it is over. Our martyrs struggled back somehow; a
peasant woman, who had nursed one of the children during the mother’s
illness, brought her hard-earned savings to help them on the way, asking
only that they would take her too; the drivers brought them to the
Russian frontier for a trifle, or for nothing; some of the family walked
while others were driven, and the young people took turns; so they made
the long winter journey from the Urals to Moscow. Moscow was the dream
of the young ones, their hope—and there hunger awaited them.

While forgiving Passek, the government never thought of returning him
some part of his property. Exhausted by his efforts and privations, the
old man took to his bed; they knew not where to find bread for the
morrow.

At that moment Nicholas celebrated his coronation, banquet followed upon
banquet, Moscow was like a heavily decorated ballroom, everywhere
lights, shields, and gay attire.... The two elder sisters, without
consulting any one, wrote a petition to Nicholas, describing the
position of the family, and begged him to inquire into the case and
restore their property. They left the house secretly in the morning and
went to the Kremlin, squeezing their way to the front, and awaited the
Tsar, ‘crowned and exalted on high.’ When Nicholas came down the steps
of the red staircase, the two girls quietly stepped forward and offered
the petition. He passed by, pretending not to see them; an aide-de-camp
took the paper and the police led them away.

Nicholas was about thirty at the time and already was capable of such
heartlessness. This coldness, this caution is characteristic of little
commonplace natures, cashiers, and petty clerks. I have often noticed
this unyielding firmness of character in postal officials, salesmen of
theatre and railway tickets, and people who are continually bothered and
interrupted at every minute. They learn not to see a man, though he is
standing by. But how did this autocratic clerk train himself not to see,
and what need had he not to be a minute late for a function?

The girls were kept in custody until evening. Frightened and insulted,
they besought the police superintendent to let them go home, where their
absence must have upset the whole family. Nothing was done about the
petition.

The father could endure no more, his sufferings had been too great; he
died. The children were left with their mother, struggling on from day
to day. The greater the need, the harder the sons worked; all three
finished their university course brilliantly and took their degrees. The
two elder ones went off to Petersburg; there, being excellent
mathematicians, they gave lessons in addition to their work in the
service (one in the Admiralty and the other in the Engineers) and,
denying themselves everything, sent the money they earned home to the
family.

I vividly remember the old mother in her dark gown and white cap; her
thin, pale face was covered with wrinkles, she looked far older than she
was, only her eyes retained something of her youth; so much gentleness,
love, anxiety, and so many past tears could be seen in them. She adored
her children; she was rich, famous, young in them; with deep and devout
feeling she spoke of them in her weak voice, which sometimes broke and
quivered with suppressed tears.

When they were all gathered together in Moscow and sitting round their
simple repast, the old woman was beside herself with joy; she walked
round the table, looked after their wants, and, suddenly stopping, would
gaze at all her young people with such pride, with such happiness, and
then lift her eyes to me as though asking: ‘They really are fine, aren’t
they?’ At such times I longed to throw myself on her neck and kiss her
hands; and, moreover, they really were all of them very handsome, too.

She was happy then, why did she not die at one of those dinners?...

In two years, she had lost the three elder sons. One died, gloriously,
his heroism acknowledged by his enemies in the midst of victory and
glory, though it was not for his own cause he sacrificed his life. He
was the young general killed by the Circassians at Dargo. Laurels do not
heal a mother’s grief.... The others did not have so happy an end; the
hardness of Russian life weighed upon them, weighed upon them till it
crushed them. Poor mother! and poor Russia!

Vadim died in February 1843. I was with him at the end, and for the
first time looked upon the death of a man dear to me, and at the same
time death in its full horror, in all its meaningless fortuitousness, in
all its blind, immoral injustice.

Ten years before his death Vadim married my cousin[103] and I was best
man at his wedding. Married life and the change in his habits parted us
somewhat. He was happy in his private life, but unfortunate in his
outward circumstances, and unsuccessful in his undertakings. Not long
before our arrest, he went to Harkov, where he had been promised a
lecturer’s chair at the university. His going there saved him indeed
from prison, but his name was not forgotten by the police. Vadim was
refused the post. The assistant-director admitted to him that they had
received a document by which they were forbidden to give him the chair,
on account of connections with evilly-disposed persons of which the
government had obtained knowledge.

Vadim was left without a post, that is, without bread—that was his
Vyatka.

We were exiled. Relations with us were dangerous. Black years of poverty
followed for him; in seven years of struggle to get a bare living, in
mortifying contact with coarse and heartless people, far from friends
and from all possibility of corresponding with them, his health gave
way.

‘Once we had spent all our money to the last farthing,’ his wife told me
afterwards; ‘on the previous evening I had tried to get hold of ten
roubles somehow, but had not succeeded. I had already borrowed from
every one from whom it was possible to borrow a little. In the shops
they refused to give us provisions except for cash, we thought of
nothing but what would the children have to eat next day. Vadim sat
gloomily by the window, then he got up, took his hat and said he would
like a walk. I saw that he was very much depressed; I felt frightened,
but still I was glad that he should distract his mind a little. When he
was gone I flung myself on the bed and wept very bitterly, then I began
thinking what to do—everything we had of the slightest value, our rings
and our spoons, had long ago been pawned; I saw no resource left but to
apply to my people and beg their bitter, cold assistance. Meanwhile
Vadim wandered aimlessly about the streets and so reached Petrovsky
Boulevard. As he passed by Shiryaev’s shop it occurred to him to inquire
whether the bookseller had sold even one copy of his book; he had been
in the shop five days before, but had found nothing for him; he walked
despondently into the shop.

‘Very glad to see you,’ Shiryaev said to him, ‘there is a letter from
our Petersburg agent, he has sold three hundred roubles’ worth of your
book; would you like to have the money?’ And Shiryaev counted him out
fifteen gold roubles. Vadim lost his head in his delight, rushed into
the first restaurant for provisions, bought a bottle of wine and fruit
and dashed home in a cab in triumph. At the moment I was watering the
remainder of some broth for the children, and was meaning to put a
little aside for him and to assure him that I had already had some, when
he suddenly came in with the parcel and the bottle, gay and joyous.’ And
she sobbed and could not utter another word.

After my exile I met him casually in Petersburg and found him very much
changed. He kept his convictions, but he kept them like a warrior who
will not let the sword drop out of his hand, though he feels that he is
wounded to death. He was by then exhausted and looked coldly into the
future. So, too, I found him in Moscow in 1842, his circumstances had
somewhat improved, his work had begun to be appreciated; but all this
came too late—it was like the epaulettes of Polezhaev or the release of
Kolreif—granted not by the Russian Tsar but by Russian life.

Vadim was wasting away; in the autumn of 1842 tuberculosis was
discovered, that terrible disease which I was destined to see once
again.

A month before his death I began to notice with horror that his mental
faculties were growing dimmer and weaker, like candles smouldering out
and leaving the room darker and gloomier. Soon it was with difficulty
and effort that he could find the words for incoherent speech, then he
scarcely spoke at all and only inquired anxiously for his medicines and
whether it was not time to take them.

At three o’clock one night in February, Vadim’s wife sent for me; the
sick man was very bad, he had asked for me. I went in to him and gently
took his hand, his wife mentioned my name; he gazed long and wearily at
me but did not recognise me and closed his eyes. The children were
brought in; he looked at them but I think did not recognise them either.
His moaning became more painful, he would subside for minutes and then
suddenly give a prolonged sigh and groan; then a bell pealed in a
neighbouring church, Vadim listened and said, ‘That’s matins,’ after
that he did not utter another word.... His wife knelt sobbing by the
dead man’s bedside; a good, kind lad, one of their university comrades,
who had been looking after him of late, bustled about, moving back the
medicine table, raising the curtains.... I went away—it was bright and
frosty, the rising sun shone brilliantly on the snow as though something
good had happened; I went to order the coffin.

When I went back a deathlike stillness reigned in the little house, the
dead man in accordance with Russian custom lay on a table in the
drawing-room, at a little distance from it sat his friend, the artist
Rabus, making a pencil sketch of him through his tears; beside the dead
man stood a tall woman with silently folded arms and an expression of
infinite sorrow; no artist could have moulded a nobler and finer figure
of grief. The woman was not young, but retained traces of a stern,
majestic beauty; she stood motionless, wrapped in a long black velvet
cloak lined with ermine fur.

I stopped in the doorway.

Two or three minutes passed in the same stillness, when all at once she
bent down, warmly kissed the dead man on the forehead, and said,
‘Farewell! farewell, friend Vadim,’ and with resolute steps walked into
the inner rooms. Rabus went on drawing, he nodded to me, we had no
inclination to speak. I sat down by the window in silence.

That woman was Madame E. Tchertkov, the sister of Count Zahar
Tchernyshev, exiled for the Fourteenth of December.

The Simonovsky archimandrite, Melhisedek, of his own accord offered a
grave within the precincts of his monastery. Melhisedek had once been a
humble carpenter and a desperate dissenter, had afterwards gone back to
orthodoxy, become a monk, been made Father Superior and afterwards
archimandrite. With all that, he remained a carpenter, that is, he kept
his heart and his broad shoulders and his red, healthy face. He knew
Vadim and respected him for his historical researches concerning Moscow.

When the dead man’s body arrived before the monastery gates, they were
opened and Melhisedek came out with all the monks to meet the martyr’s
poor coffin with soft, mournful chanting, and to follow it to the grave.
Not far from Vadim’s grave lie the ashes of another dear friend,
Venevitinov,[104] with the inscription ‘How well he knew life, how
little he lived!’ How well Vadim, too, knew life!

This was not enough for fate. Why did the old mother live so long? She
had seen the end of their exile, had seen her children in all the beauty
of their youth, in all the brilliance of their talent, what more had she
to live for! Who prizes happiness should seek an early death. Happiness
that lasts is no more to be found than ice which never melts.

Vadim’s eldest brother died a few months after the second, Diomid, had
been killed; he caught cold, neglected his illness, and his undermined
organism succumbed. He was barely forty and he was the eldest.

These three graves of three friends cast long dark shadows over the
past; the last months of my youth are seen through funeral crape and the
smoke of incense....

A year passed, the trial of my university comrades was over. They were
found guilty (just as we were later on, and later still the Petrashevsky
group[105]) of a design to form a secret society, and of criminal
conversations; for this they were sent as common soldiers to Orenburg.
Nicholas made an exception of one of them, Sungurov. He had completed
his studies and was in the service, married and had children. He was
condemned to deprivation of rights of property and exile to Siberia.

‘What could a handful of young students do, they ruined themselves for
nothing!’ All that is very sensible, and people who argue in that way
ought to be gratified at the _good sense_ of the young generation that
followed us. After our affair which followed that of Sungurov, fifteen
years passed in tranquillity before the Petrashevsky affair, and it was
those fifteen years from which Russia is only just beginning to recover
and by which two generations were ruined, the elder lost in debauchery,
and the younger, poisoned from childhood, whose sickly representatives
we are seeing to-day.

After the Decembrists, all attempts to form societies were, indeed,
unsuccessful; the scantiness of our forces and the vagueness of our aims
pointed to the necessity for another kind of work—preparatory,
spiritual. All that is true.

But what would young men be made of who could wait for solutions to
theoretical problems while calmly looking on at what was being done
around them, at the hundreds of Poles clanking their fetters on the
Vladimir Road, at serfdom, at the soldiers flogged in the Hodynsky Field
by some General Lashkevitch, at fellow-students lost and never heard of
again? For the moral purification of the generation, as a pledge of the
future, they were bound to be so indignant as to be senseless in their
attempts and disdainful of danger. The savage punishments inflicted on
boys of sixteen or seventeen served as a terrible lesson and in a way a
hardening process; the cruel blows aimed at every one of us by a
heartless monster dispelled for good all rosy hopes of indulgence for
youth. It was dangerous to jest with Liberalism, and no one could dream
of playing at conspiracy. For one carelessly concealed tear over Poland,
for one boldly uttered word, there were years of exile, of the white
strap,[106] and sometimes even of the fortress; that was why it was
important that those words were uttered and that those tears were shed.
Young people perished sometimes, but they perished without checking the
mental activity that was solving the sphinx riddle of Russian life,
indeed they even justified its hope.

Our turn came now. Our names were already on the list of the secret
police. The first play of the light-blue cat with the mouse began as
follows.

When our condemned comrades were being sent off to Orenburg by étape, on
foot without sufficient warm clothing, Ogaryov in our circle, I.
Kireyevsky in his, got up subscriptions. All the condemned men were
without money. Kireyevsky brought the money collected to the commander,
Staal, a good-natured old man of whom I shall have more to say later.
Staal promised to give the money and asked Kireyevsky, ‘But what are
these lists for?’ ‘The names of those who subscribed,’ answered
Kireyevsky, ‘and the amounts.’ ‘You do believe that I will give them the
money?’ asked the old man. ‘Of course.’ ‘And I imagine that those who
have given it to you trust you. And so what is the use of our keeping
their names?’ With these words Staal threw the lists into the fire, and,
of course, he did very well.

Ogaryov himself took the money to the barracks, and this went off
without a hitch, but the prisoners took it into their heads to send
their thanks from Orenburg to their comrades, and, as a government
official was going to Moscow, they seized the opportunity and asked him
to take a letter, which they were afraid to trust to the post. The
official did not fail to take advantage of this rare chance for proving
all the ardour of his loyal sentiments and presented the letter to the
general of gendarmes in Moscow.

The general of gendarmes at this time was Lissovsky, who was appointed
to the post when A. A. Volkov went out of his mind imagining that the
Poles wanted to offer him the crown of Poland (an ironical trick of
destiny to send a general of gendarmes mad over the crown of the
Jagellons![107]).

Lissovsky, himself a Pole, was neither spiteful nor ill-disposed: having
wasted his property over cards and a French actress, he philosophically
preferred the place of general of gendarmes in Moscow to a place in the
debtors’ prison of the same city.

Lissovsky summoned Ogaryov, Ketscher, S. Vadim, I. Obolensky and others,
and charged them with being in relations with political criminals. On
Ogaryov’s observing that he had not written to any one, and that if any
one had written to him he could not be responsible for it, and that,
moreover, no letter had reached him, Lissovsky answered: ‘You got up a
subscription for them, _that’s still worse_. As it is the first offence
the Sovereign is _so merciful_ as to _pardon_ you; only I warn you,
gentlemen, a strict supervision will be kept over you; be careful.’

Lissovsky looked round at all with a significant glance, and his eyes
resting upon Ketscher, who was taller and a little older than the rest
and who raised his eyebrows so fiercely, he added: ‘You, my good sir,
ought to be ashamed in your position.’ It might have been supposed that
Ketscher was vice-chancellor of the Russian Heraldry Office, while as a
matter of fact he was only a humble district doctor.

I was not sent for, probably my name was not in the letter.

This threat was like a promotion, a consecration, a winning of our
spurs. Lissovsky’s advice threw oil on the fire, and as though to make
their future task easier for the police we put on velvet _bérets à la_
Karl Sand[108] and tied tricolor scarves round our necks.

Colonel Shubensky, who was quietly and softly with velvet steps creeping
into Lissovsky’s place, pounced upon his weakness with us; we were to
serve him for a step in his promotion—and we did so serve him.

But first I will add a few words concerning the fate of Sungurov and his
companions. Nicholas let Kolreif return ten years later from Orenburg,
where his regiment was stationed. He pardoned him on the ground of his
being in consumption, just as, because he was in consumption, Polezhaev
was promoted to be an officer, and because he was dead Bestuzhev was
given a cross. Kolreif returned to Moscow and died in the arms of his
old, grief-stricken father.

Kostenetsky distinguished himself in the Caucasus and was promoted to
the rank of an officer. It was the same with Antonovitch. The fate of
the luckless Sungurov was incomparably more dreadful. On reaching the
first étape on the Sparrow Hills, Sungurov asked leave from the officer
in charge to go out into the fresh air, as the hut, packed to
overflowing with exiles, was suffocating. The officer, a young man of
twenty, went out himself into the road with him. Sungurov, choosing a
favourable moment, turned off the road and disappeared. Probably he knew
the locality well. He succeeded in getting away from the officer, but
next day the gendarmes got on his track. When Sungurov saw that it was
impossible to escape, he cut his throat. The gendarmes took him to
Moscow unconscious and losing blood.

The unfortunate officer was degraded to the ranks.

Sungurov did not die. He was tried again, this time not as a political
prisoner, but as a runaway convict: half his head was shaved: it is an
original method (probably inherited from the Tatars) in use for
preventing escapes and it shows even more than corporal punishment the
complete contempt for human dignity of the Russian legislature. To this
external disgrace the sentence added one stroke of the lash within the
walls of the prison. Whether this sentence was carried out I do not
know. After that, Sungurov was sent to Nertchinsk to the mines.

I heard his name pronounced once more and then it vanished for ever.

In Vyatka I once met in the street a young doctor, a fellow-student at
the university, who was on his way to some post in a factory. We talked
of old days and common acquaintances.

‘My God!’ said the doctor, ‘do you know whom I saw on my way here in the
Nizhni-Novgorod Province? I was sitting in the posting-station waiting
for horses. It was very nasty weather. An étape officer, in charge of a
party of convicts, came in to get warm. We got into conversation;
hearing that I was a doctor, he asked me to go to the étape to look at
one of the convicts and see whether he were shamming or really were
seriously ill. I went, of course, with the intention of declaring in any
case that the convict was ill. In the small étape there were eighty men
in chains, shaven and unshaven, women and children; they all moved apart
as the officer went up, and we saw, lying on straw in a corner on the
dirty floor, a figure wrapped in a convict’s greatcoat.

‘“This is the invalid,” said the officer.

‘I had no need to lie, the poor wretch was in a high fever; emaciated
and exhausted by prison and the journey, with half his head shaven and
his beard uncut, he looked terrible as he stared about aimlessly, and
continually asked for water.

‘“Well, brother, are you very bad?” I said to the sick man, and added to
the officer: “it is impossible for him to go on.”

‘The sick man fixed his eyes upon me and muttered “Is that you?”—he
mentioned my name. “You don’t know me?” he added in a voice which went
to my heart like a knife.

‘“Forgive me,” I said, taking his dry and burning hand, “I can’t recall
you.”

‘“I am Sungurov,” he answered.

‘Poor Sungurov!’ repeated the doctor, shaking his head.

‘Well, did they leave him?’ I asked.

‘No, but they got a cart for him.’

After I had written this I learned that Sungurov died at Nertchinsk. His
property which consisted of two hundred and fifty souls in the
Bronnitsky district near Moscow, and four hundred souls in the Arzamas
district of the Nizhni-Novgorod Province, _went to pay for the keep of
him and his comrades in prison while awaiting trial_.

His family was ruined; the first care of the authorities, however, was
to diminish it. _Sungurov’s wife was seized with her two children, and
spent six months_ in the Pretchistensky prison, and her baby died there.
May the rule of Nicholas be damned for ever and ever! Amen!




                               Chapter 7
       THE END OF MY STUDIES—THE SCHILLER PERIOD—EARLY YOUTH AND
               BOHEMIANISM—SAINT-SIMONISM AND N. POLEVOY


Before the storm had broken over our heads my time at the university was
coming to an end. The ordinary anxieties, the nights without sleep spent
in trying to learn useless things by heart, the superficial study in a
hurry and the thought of the examination stifling all interest in
science—all that was as it always is. I wrote a dissertation on
astronomy for the gold medal, but only got the silver one. I am certain
that I am incapable of understanding now what I wrote then, and that it
was worth its weight—in silver.

It sometimes happens to me to dream that I am a student going in for an
examination—I think with horror how much I have forgotten and feel that
I shall be plucked,—and I wake up rejoicing from the bottom of my heart
that the sea and passports, and years and crimes cut me off from the
university, that no one is going to torture me, and no one dare give me
a disgusting minimum. And, indeed, the professors would be surprised
that I should have gone so far back in so few years. One did, indeed,
express this to me.[109]

After the final examination the professors shut themselves up to reckon
the marks, while we, excited by hopes and doubts, hung about the
corridors and entrance in little groups. Sometimes some one would come
out of the council-room. We rushed to learn our fate, but for a long
time it was not settled. At last Heiman came out. ‘I congratulate you,’
he said to me, ‘you are a graduate.’ ‘Who else, who else?’ ‘So-and-so,
and So-and-so.’ I felt at once sad and gay; as I went out at the
university gates I thought that I should not go out at them again as I
had yesterday and every day; I was shut out of the university, of that
common home where I had spent four years, so youthfully and so well; on
the other hand I was comforted by the feeling of being accepted as
completely grown-up, and, why not admit it? by the title of graduate I
had gained all at once.[110]

Alma Mater! I am so greatly indebted to the university, and lived in its
life and with it so long after I had finished my studies, that I cannot
think of it without love and respect. It cannot charge me with
ingratitude, though in relation with the university gratitude is easy,
it is inseparable from the love and bright memories of youth ... and I
send it my blessing from this far-off foreign land!

The year we spent after taking our degrees made a glorious end to early
youth. It was one prolonged feast of friendship, exchange of ideas,
inspiration, carousing....

A little group of university friends who had succeeded in surviving did
not part, but went on living in their common sympathies and fancies, and
no one thought of his material prospects or future career. I should not
think well of this in men of mature age, but I prize it in the young.
Youth when it has not been sapped by the moral corruption of
petty-bourgeois ideas is everywhere impractical, and is especially bound
to be so in a young country which is full of such great strivings and
has attained so little. Moreover, to be impractical need not imply
anything false, everything turned toward the future is bound to have a
share of idealism. If it were not for the impractical characters, all
the practical people would remain at the same dull stage of perpetual
repetition.

Some enthusiasm preserves a man from real degradation far more than all
the moral admonitions in the world. I remember youthful orgies, moments
of revelry that sometimes went beyond bounds, but I do not remember one
really immoral affair in our circle, nothing of which a man would have
to feel seriously ashamed, which he would try to forget and conceal.
Everything was done openly, and what is bad is rarely done openly. Half,
more than half, of the heart was turned away from idle sensuality and
morbid egoism, which concentrate on impure thoughts and accentuate vice.

I consider it a great misfortune for a nation when their young
generation has no youth; we have already observed that being young is
not enough. The most grotesque period of German student life is a
hundred times better than the petty-bourgeois maturity of young men in
France and England. To my mind the elderly Americans of fifteen are
simply disgusting.

In France there was at one time a brilliant aristocratic youth, and
later on a brilliant revolutionary youth. All the St. Justs[111] and
Hoches,[112] Marceaux and Desmoulins,[113] the heroic children who grew
up on the gloomy poetry of Jean-Jacques, were real youth. The Revolution
was the work of young men, neither Danton nor Robespierre nor Louis XVI.
himself outlived their thirty-fifth year. With Napoleon the young men
were turned into orderlies, with the Restoration, ‘the revival of old
age,’—youth was utterly incompatible—everything became mature,
businesslike, that is, petty-bourgeois.

The last youths of France were the Saint-Simonists and the Fourierists.
The few exceptions cannot alter the prosaically dull character of French
youth. Escousse and Lebras[114] shot themselves because they were young
in a society of old men. Others struggled like fish thrown out of the
water on to the muddy bank, till some fell at the barricades, others
were caught in the Jesuit snares.

But since youth asserts its rights, the greater number of young
Frenchmen work off their youth in a Bohemian period, that is, if they
have no money, live in little cafés with little grisettes in the
Quartier Latin, and in grand cafés with grand lorettes, if they have
money. Instead of a Schiller period, they have a Paul de Kock period; in
it, strength, energy, everything young is rapidly and rather wretchedly
wasted and the man is ready—for a _commis_ in a commercial house. The
Bohemian period leaves at the bottom of the soul one passion only—the
thirst for money, and the whole future is sacrificed to it, there are no
other interests; these practical people laugh at theoretical questions
and despise women (the result of numerous conquests over those whose
trade it is to be conquered). As a rule, the Bohemian period is passed
under the guidance of some worn-out sinner, of some faded celebrity,
_d’un vieux prostitué_, living at some one else’s expense, an actor who
has lost his voice, or a painter whose hands tremble, and he is the
model who is imitated in accent, in dress, and above all in a haughty
view of human affairs and a profound understanding of good fare.

In England the Bohemian period is replaced by a paroxysm of charming
originalities and amiable eccentricities. For instance, senseless
tricks, absurd squandering of money, ponderous practical jokes, heavy,
but carefully concealed vice, profitless trips to Calabria or Quito, to
the North and to the South—with horses, dogs, races, and stuffy dinners
by the way, then a wife and an enormous number of fat and rosy babies;
business transactions, the _Times_, Parliament, and the old port which
weighs them to the earth.

We played pranks too and we caroused, but the fundamental tone was not
the same, the diapason was too elevated. Mischief and dissipation never
became our goal. Our goal was faith in our vocation; supposing that we
were mistaken, still, believing it as a fact, we respected in ourselves
and in each other the instruments of the common cause. And in what did
our feasts and orgies consist? Suddenly it would occur to us that in
another two days it would be the sixth of December, St. Nikolay’s day.
The supply of Nikolays was terrific, Nikolay Ogaryov, Nikolay S——,
Nikolay Ketscher, Nikolay Sazonov....

‘I say, who is going to celebrate the name-day?’

‘I! I!...’

‘I will next day then.’

‘That’s all nonsense, what’s the good of next day? We will keep it in
common, by subscription! And what a feast it will be!’

‘Yes! yes! at whose rooms are we to assemble?’

‘S—— is ill, so it’s clear it must be at his.’

And so plans and calculations are made, and it is incredibly absorbing
for the future guests and hosts. One Nikolay drives off to Yar’s to
order supper, another to Materne’s for cheese and salami. Wine, of
course, is bought in Petrovka from Depré’s, on whose price-list Ogaryov
wrote the epigram:

                       ‘De près ou de loin,
                       Mais je fournis toujours.’

Our inexperienced taste went no further than champagne, and was so young
that we sometimes even preferred _Rivesaltes mousseux_ to champagne. I
once saw the name on a wine-list in Paris, remembered 1833 and tried a
bottle, but, alas, even my memories did not help me to drink more than a
glass.

Before the festive day, the wines would be tried, and so it would be
necessary to send a messenger for more, as it appeared they were liked.

While we are on the subject, I cannot refrain from describing what
happened to Sokolovsky. He was perpetually without money and immediately
spent everything he received. A year before his arrest, he arrived in
Moscow and stayed with S——. He had, I remember, succeeded in selling the
manuscript of _Heveri_, and so resolved to give a feast not only for us
but also _pour les gros bonnets_, _i.e._ invited Polevoy, Maximovitch,
and others. On the morning of the previous day, he set out with
Polezhaev, who was at that time in Moscow with his regiment, to make
purchases, bought cups and even a samovar and all sorts of unnecessary
things and finally wines and eatables, that is, pasties, stuffed
turkeys, and soon. In the evening we arrived at S——’s. Sokolovsky
suggested uncorking one bottle, and then another, and by the end of the
evening, it appeared that there was no more wine and no more money.
Sokolovsky had spent everything he had left over after paying some small
debts. Sokolovsky was mortified, but controlled his feeling; he thought
and thought, then wrote to the _gros bonnets_ that he had been taken
seriously ill and was putting off the feast.

For the celebration of the four name-days, I wrote out a complete
programme, which was deemed worthy of the special attention of the
inquisitor Golitsyn, who asked me at the committee whether the programme
had really been carried out.

‘_À la lettre_,’ I replied. He shrugged his shoulders as though he had
spent his whole life in the Smolny Convent or keeping Good Friday.

After supper as a rule a vital question, a question that aroused
controversy arose, _i.e._ how to prepare the punch. Other things were
usually eaten and drunk in good faith, like the voting in Parliament,
without dispute, but in this every one must have a hand and, moreover,
it was after supper.... ‘Light it—don’t light it yet—light it how?—put
it out with champagne or Sauterne?—put the fruit and pineapple in while
it is burning or afterwards?’

‘Evidently when it is burning, and then the whole aroma will go into
punch.’

‘But, I say, the pineapple will swim, the edges will be scorched, it is
simply a waste.’

‘That’s all nonsense,’ Ketscher would shout louder than all, ‘but what’s
not nonsense is that you must put out the candles.’

The candles were put out; all the faces looked blue, and the features
seemed to quiver with the movement of the flame. And meantime the
temperature in the little room was becoming tropical. Every one was
thirsty and the punch was not ready. But Joseph the Frenchman sent from
Yar’s was ready; he had prepared something, the antithesis of punch, an
iced beverage of various wines _à la base de cognac_. A genuine son of
the ‘_grand peuple_,’ he explained to us, as he put in the French wine,
that it was so good because it had twice passed the Equator. ‘_Oui, oui,
messieurs, deux fois l’équateur, messieurs!_’

When the beverage remarkable for its arctic iciness had been finished
and in fact there was no need of more drink, Ketscher shouted, stirring
the fiery lake in the soup-tureen and making the last lumps of sugar
melt with a hiss and a wail, ‘It’s time to put it out! time to put it
out!’

The flame turns red with the champagne, and races over the surface of
the punch with a look of despair and foreboding.

Then comes a voice of despair, ‘But I say, old man, you’re mad, the wax
is melting right into the punch.’

‘Well, you try holding the bottle yourself in such heat so that the wax
does not melt.’

‘Well, something ought to have been wrapped round it first,’ the
distressed voice continues.

‘Cups, cups, have you enough? How many are there of us? Nine, ten,
fourteen, yes, yes!’

‘Where’s one to find fourteen cups?’

‘Well any one who hasn’t got a cup must take a glass.’

‘The glasses will crack.’

‘Never, never, you’ve only to put a spoon in them.’

Candles are brought, the last flicker of flame runs across the middle,
makes a pirouette and vanishes.

‘The punch is a success!’

‘It is a great success!’ is said on all sides.

Next day my head aches—I feel sick. That’s evidently from the punch, too
mixed! And on the spot I make a sincere resolution never to drink punch
for the future; it is a poison.

Pyotr Fyodorovitch comes in.

‘You came home in somebody else’s hat, our hat is a much better one.’

‘The devil take it entirely.’

‘Should I run to Nikolay Mihailovitch’s Kuzma?’

‘Why, do you imagine some one went home without a hat?’

‘It would be just as well anyway.’

At this point I guess that the hat is only a pretext, and that Kuzma has
invited Pyotr Fyodorovitch to the field of battle.

‘You go and see Kuzma; only first ask the cook to let me have some sour
cabbage.’

‘So, Alexandr Ivanitch, the gentlemen kept their name-days in fine
style?’

‘Yes, indeed, there hasn’t been such a supper in our time.’

‘So we shan’t be going to the university to-day?’

My conscience pricks me and I make no answer.

‘Your papa was asking me, “How is it,” says he, “he is not up yet?”
Without thinking, I said, “His honour’s head aches; he complained of it
from early morning, so I did not even pull up the blinds.” “Well,” said
he, “you did right there.”’

‘But do let me go to sleep, for Christ’s sake. You want to go and see
Kuzma, so go.’

‘This minute, this minute, sir; first I’ll run for the cabbage.’

A heavy sleep closes my eyes again; two or three hours later I wake up
much better. What are they doing there? I wonder. Ketscher and Ogaryov
stayed the night. It’s vexatious that punch has such an effect on the
head, for it must be owned it’s very nice. It is a mistake to drink
punch by the glassful; henceforth and for ever I will certainly drink no
more than a small cupful.

Meantime my father has already finished interviewing the cook and
reading the newspapers.

‘You have a headache to-day?’

‘Yes, a bad one.’

‘Perhaps you have been working too hard?’ And as he asks the question I
can see that he has his doubts already.

‘I forgot though, I believe you spent the evening with Nikolasha[115]
and Ogaryov.’

‘Of course.’

‘Did they regale you with anything ... for the name-day? Madeira in the
soup again? Ah, I don’t like all that. Nikolasha is too fond of wine I
know, and where he gets that weakness from I don’t understand. Poor
Pavel Ivanovitch ... why, on the twenty-ninth of June, his name-day, he
would invite all the relations and have a dinner in the regular way,
quiet and proper. But the fashion nowadays, champagne and sardines in
oil, it’s a disgusting sight. As for that luckless young Ogaryov, I say
nothing about him, he is alone and abandoned! Moscow ... with plenty of
money, his coachman Eremey “goes to fetch wine.” The coachman’s glad to,
he gets ten kopecks at the shop for it.’

‘Yes, I lunched with Nikolay Pavlovitch. But I don’t think that that’s
why my head aches. I will go for a little walk; that always does me
good.’

‘By all means; you will dine at home, I hope.’

‘Of course, I am only going out for a little.’

To explain the Madeira in the soup, it must be said that about a year
before the famous celebration of the four name-days, Ogaryov and I had
gone off for a spree in Easter-week and, to get out of dining at home, I
had said that I had been invited to dinner by Ogaryov’s father.

My father disliked my friends as a rule; he used to call them by the
wrong surnames, invariably making the same mistake, thus he never failed
to call S—— Sakeny and Sazonov, Snaziny. He liked Ogaryov least of all,
both because he wore his hair long and because he smoked without asking
his leave. On the other hand, he regarded him as a distant cousin and so
could not distort the name of a relation. Moreover, his father, Platon
Bogdanovitch, belonged both by family and by fortune to the little
circle of persons recognised by my father, and he liked my being
intimate with the family. He would have liked it better still, if Platon
Bogdanovitch had had no son.

And so to refuse the invitation was considered impossible.

Instead of settling ourselves in Platon Bogdanovitch’s respectable
dining-room, we set off first to the Prices’ booth (I was delighted
later on to meet this family of acrobats in Geneva and in London). There
was a little girl there, over whom we raved and whom we had named
Mignon.

After gazing at Mignon and resolving to see her again in the evening, we
set off to dine at Yar’s. I had a gold piece and Ogaryov about the same.
We were at that time complete novices and so, after long consultation,
we ordered fish soup with champagne in it, a bottle of Rhine-wine, and
some tiny bird, so that when we got up from the dinner, which was
frightfully expensive, we were quite hungry and so went off to look at
Mignon again.

When my father said good-night to me, he observed that he thought I
smelt of wine.

‘That must be because there was Madeira in the soup.’ ‘_Au madère_—that
must be Platon Bogdanovitch’s son-in-law’s idea; _cela sent les casernes
de la garde_.’

From that time forth, if my father fancied that I had been drinking, or
that my face was red, he would be sure to say to me, ‘I suppose you have
had Madeira in your soup to-day!’

And so I hastened off to S——’s.

Ogaryov and Ketscher were, of course, on the spot. Ketscher, looking
tousled, was displeased with some arrangements that were being made and
was criticising them severely. Ogaryov, on the homeopathic system of
driving out one nail with another, was drinking up what was left, not
merely after the supper but after the foraging of Pyotr Fyodorovitch,
who was already singing, whistling, and playing a tattoo in S——’s
kitchen.

Recalling the days of our youth, of all our circle, I do not remember a
single incident which would weigh on the conscience, which one would be
ashamed to think of. And that applies to all our friends without
exception.

There were, of course, Platonic dreamers and disillusioned youths of
seventeen among us. Vadim even wrote a drama in which he tried to depict
‘the terrible ordeal of his spent heart.’ The drama began like this: ‘A
garden—house in distance—windows lighted—storm raging—no one in
sight—garden gate not fastened, it flaps to and fro and creaks.’

‘Are there any characters in the drama besides the gate in the garden?’
I asked Vadim.

And Vadim, rather nettled, said, ‘You’re always playing the fool! It’s
not a jest, it’s the record of my heart; if you go on like that I won’t
read it’—and proceeded to read it.

There were follies, too, that were not at all Platonic; even some that
ended not in writing plays but in the chemist’s shop. But there were no
vulgar intrigues ruining a woman or humiliating a man, there were no
kept mistresses (indeed the vulgar word for them did not exist among
us). Tranquil, secure, prosaic, petty-bourgeois vice, vice by contract,
passed our circle by.

‘Then you do admit the worse form of vice, prostitution?’ I shall be
asked.

Not I, but you do! that is, not you individually, but all of you. It is
so firmly established in the social structure that it asks for no
sanction from me.

Social enthusiasm, general theories, were our salvation; and not they
alone but also a high development of scientific and artistic interest.
Like fumigating paper, they burnt out the grease spots. I have preserved
some of Ogaryov’s letters of that period, and the background of our
lives can be easily judged from them. On June 7, 1833, Ogaryov, for
instance, wrote to me:

‘I believe we know each other, I believe we can be open. You will not
show my letters to any one else. And so tell me—for some time past I
have been so absolutely brimming over, I may say, suffocated with
sensations and thoughts, that I fancy, it’s more than fancy, the idea
sticks in my head, that it is my vocation to be a poet, a creative
artist or a musician, _alles eins_, but I feel that I must live in that
thought, for I have a feeling in myself that I am a poet;—granted that I
have written rubbish so far, yet the fire in my soul, the exuberance of
my feelings, gives me the hope that I shall write decently (excuse the
vulgar expression). Tell me, friend, am I to believe in my vocation? You
know me, maybe, better than I know myself, and will not make a
mistake.’—_June 7, 1833._

‘You write: but you are a poet, a real poet! Friend, can you conceive
all that those words do for me? And so all that I feel, to which I
strive, in which I live is not an illusion! It is not an illusion! Are
you telling the truth? It is not the delirium of fever—that I feel. You
know me better than any one, don’t you? I certainly feel that you do.
No, this exalted life is not the delirium of fever, not the illusion of
imagination, it is too exalted for deception, it is real, I live in it,
I cannot imagine myself with any other life. Why don’t I understand
music, what a symphony would rise out of my soul now! One can catch the
stately _adagio_, but I have no power to express myself; I want to say
more than has been said, _presto, presto_, I want a tempestuous,
irrepressible _presto_. _Adagio_ and _presto_, the two extremes. Away
with these compromises, _andante_, _allegro_, _moderato_, faltering or
feeble-minded, they can neither speak strongly nor feel
strongly.’—TCHERTKOVO, _Aug. 18, 1833_.


We have grown out of the habit of this enthusiastic bubble of youth and
it is strange to us, but in these lines, written by a youth under
twenty, it can clearly be seen that he is insured against vulgar vice
and vulgar virtue, and that even if he is not saved from the mire, he
will come out of it unsullied.

It is not lack of self-confidence, it is the hesitation of faith, it is
the passionate desire for confirmation, for the superfluous word of
love, so precious to us. Yes, it is the uneasiness of creative
conception, it is the anxious searchings of a soul in travail.

‘I cannot yet,’ he writes in the same letter, ‘catch the notes which are
resounding in my soul, physical incapacity limits the imagination. But,
hang it all! I am a poet, poetry whispers the truth to me where I could
not have grasped it with cold reason.’

So ends the first part of our youth; the second begins in prison. But
before we go on to it, I must say something of the tendencies, of the
ideas, with which it found us.

The period that followed the suppression of the Polish insurrection
educated us rapidly. We were not merely troubled that Nicholas had grown
to his full stature and was firmly established in severity; we began
with inward horror to discover that in Europe, too, and especially in
France, to which we looked for our political watchword and battle-cry,
things were not going well; we began to look upon our theories with
suspicion.

The childish liberalism of 1826, which gradually passed into the French
political theory expounded by the Lafayettes and Benjamin Constant and
sung by Béranger, lost its magic power over us after the ruin of Poland.

Then one section of the young people, and among them Vadim, threw
themselves into a close and earnest study of Russian history.

Another set took to the study of German philosophy.

Ogaryov and I belonged to neither of these sets. We had grown too
closely attached to certain ideas to part with them readily.

Our faith in revolution of the festive Béranger stamp was shaken, but we
looked for something which we could find neither in the _Chronicle_ of
Nestor[116] nor in the transcendental idealism of Schelling.

In the midst of this ferment, in the midst of surmises, of confused
efforts to understand the doubts which frightened us, the pamphlets of
Saint Simon and his followers, their tracts and their trial came into
our hands. They impressed us.

Critics, superficial and not superficial, have laughed enough at Father
Enfantin[117] and his apostles; the time has now come for some
recognition of these forerunners of socialism.

These enthusiastic youths with their strange waistcoats and their
budding beards made a magnificent and poetic appearance in the midst of
the petty-bourgeois world. They heralded a new faith, they had something
to say, they had something in the name of which to judge the old order
of things, fain to judge them by the Code Napoleon and the religion of
Orleans.

On the one hand came the emancipation of woman, the call to her to join
in common labour, the giving of her destiny into her own hands, alliance
with her as with an equal.

On the other hand the justification, the _redemption_ of the flesh,
_Réhabilitation de la chair_!

Grand words, involving a whole world of new relations between human
beings; a world of health, a world of spirit, a world of beauty, the
world of natural morality, and therefore of moral purity. Many have
scoffed at emancipation of women and at the recognition of the rights of
the flesh, giving to those words a filthy and vulgar meaning; our
monastically depraved imagination fears the flesh, fears woman.
Simple-hearted people grasped that the purifying sanctification of the
flesh is the death knell of Christianity; the religion of life had come
to replace the religion of death, the religion of beauty to replace the
religion of castigation and mortification by prayer and fasting. The
crucified body had risen again in its turn and was no longer ashamed;
man attained a harmonious unity and divined that he was a whole being
and not made up like a pendulum of two different metals restraining each
other, that the enemy bound up with him had disappeared.

What courage was needed in France to proclaim in the hearing of all
those words of deliverance from the spiritual ideas which are so strong
in the minds of the French and so completely absent from their conduct!

The old world, ridiculed by Voltaire, undermined by the Revolution, but
fortified, patched up and made secure by the petty-bourgeois for their
own personal convenience, had never experienced this before. It tried to
judge the heretics on the basis of its secret conspiracy of hypocrisy,
but these young men unmasked it. They were accused of being apostates
from Christianity, and they pointed above their judge’s head to the holy
picture that had been covered with a curtain after the Revolution of
1830. They were charged with justifying sensuality, and they asked their
judge, was his life chaste?

The new world was pushing at the door, and our hearts opened wide to
meet it. Saint-Simonism lay at the foundation of our convictions and
remained so in its essentials unalterably.

Impressionable, genuinely youthful, we were easily caught up in its
mighty current and passed early over that boundary at which whole crowds
of people remain standing with their hands folded, go back or seek from
side to side a ford—to cross the ocean!

But not all ventured with us. Socialism and Realism remain to this day
the touchstones flung on the paths of revolution and science. Groups of
travellers, tossed up against these rocks by the current of events, or
by process of reasoning, immediately divide and make two everlasting
parties which, in various disguises, cut across the whole of history,
across all upheavals, across innumerable political parties and even
circles of no more than a dozen youths. One stands for logic, the other
for history; one for dialectics, the other for embryology. One is more
correct, the other more practical.

There can be no talk of choice; it is harder to bridle thought than any
passion, it leads one on unconsciously; any one who can chain it by
feeling, by dreams, by dread of consequences, will chain it, but not all
can. If thought gets the upper hand in any one, he does not inquire
about its practicability, or whether it will make things easier or
harder; he seeks the truth, and inflexibly, impartially lays down his
principles, as the Saint-Simonists did at one time, as Proudhon does to
this day.

Our circle drew in closer. Even then, in 1833, the Liberals looked at us
askance, as having strayed from the true path. Just before we went to
prison, Saint-Simonism became a barrier between N. A. Polevoy and me.
Polevoy was a man of extraordinarily ingenious and active mind, which
readily absorbed every kind of nutriment; he was born to be a
journalist, a chronicler of successes, of discoveries, of political and
learned controversies. I made his acquaintance at the end of my time at
the university—and was sometimes in his house and at his brother
Ksenofont’s. This was the time when his reputation was at its highest,
the period just before the prohibition of the _Telegraph_.

This man who lived in the latest discovery, in the question of the hour,
in the last novelty, in theories and in events, and who changed like a
chameleon, could not, for all the liveliness of his mind, understand
Saint-Simonism. For us Saint-Simonism was a revelation, for him it was
insanity, a silly Utopia, hindering social development. To all my
rhetoric, my expositions and arguments, Polevoy was deaf; he lost his
temper and grew vindictive. Opposition from a student was particularly
annoying to him, for he greatly prized his influence on the young, and
saw in this dispute that it was slipping away from him.

On one occasion, offended by the absurdity of his objections, I observed
that he was just as old-fashioned a Conservative as those against whom
he had been fighting all his life. Polevoy was deeply offended by my
words and, shaking his head, said to me: ‘The time will come when you
will be rewarded for a whole lifetime of toil and effort by some young
man’s saying with a smile, “Be off, you are behind the times.”’ I felt
sorry for him and ashamed of having hurt his feelings, but at the same
time I felt that his sentence could be heard in his melancholy words.
They were not those of a mighty champion, but of an exhausted and aged
gladiator. I realised then that he would not advance, and was incapable
of standing still at the same point with a mind so active and a basis so
insecure.

You know what happened to him afterwards: he set to work upon his
_Parasha, the Siberian_.[118]

What luck a timely death is for a man who can at the right moment
neither leave the stage nor move forward! I have thought that looking at
Polevoy, looking at Pius IX., and at many others!




                                Appendix
                              A. POLEZHAEV


To complete the gloomy record of that period, I ought to add a few
details about A. Polezhaev.

As a student, Polezhaev was renowned for his excellent verses. Amongst
other things he wrote a humorous parody of ‘_Onyegin_,’ called
‘_Sashka_,’ in which, regardless of proprieties, he attacked many things
in a jesting tone, in very charming verses.

In the autumn of 1826, Nicholas, after hanging Pestel, Muravyov, and
their friends, celebrated his coronation in Moscow. For other sovereigns
these ceremonies are occasions for amnesties and pardons: Nicholas,
after celebrating his apotheosis, proceeded again to ‘strike down the
foes of the father-land,’ like Robespierre after his ‘Fête-Dieu.’

The secret police brought him Polezhaev’s poem.

And so at three o’clock one night, the rector woke Polezhaev, told him
to put on his uniform and go to the office. There the director was
awaiting him. After looking to see that all the necessary buttons were
on his uniform and no unnecessary ones, he invited Polezhaev without any
explanation to get into his carriage and drove off with him.

He conducted him to the Minister of Public Instruction. The latter put
Polezhaev into his carriage and he too drove him off—but this time
straight to the Tsar.

Prince Lieven left Polezhaev in the drawing-room—where several courtiers
and higher officials were already waiting although it was only six
o’clock in the morning—and went into the inner apartments. The courtiers
imagined that the young man had distinguished himself in some way and at
once entered into conversation with him. A senator suggested that he
might give lessons to his son.

Polezhaev was summoned to the study. The Tsar was standing leaning on
the bureau and talking to Lieven. He flung a searching and malignant
glance at the newcomer; there was a manuscript in his hand.

‘Did you write these verses?’ he inquired.

‘Yes,’ answered Polezhaev.

‘Here, prince,’ the Tsar continued, ‘I will give you a specimen of
university education, I will show you what young men learn there. Read
the manuscript aloud,’ he added, addressing Polezhaev.

The agitation of the latter was so great that he could not read.
Nicholas’s eyes were fixed immovably upon him. I know them and know
nothing so terrible, so hopeless, as those colourless, cold, pewtery
eyes.

‘I cannot,’ said Polezhaev.

‘Read!’ shouted the imperial drum-major.

That shout restored Polezhaev’s faculties; he opened the manuscript.
Never, he told us, had he seen ‘_Sashka_’ so carefully copied and on
such splendid paper.

At first it was hard for him to read; then as he got more and more into
the spirit of the thing, he read the poem in a loud and lively voice. At
particularly startling passages, the Tsar made a sign with his hand to
the Minister and the latter covered his eyes with horror.

‘What do you say to that?’ Nicholas inquired at the end of the reading.
‘I will put a stop to this corruption; these are the _last traces, the
last remnants_; I will root them out. What is his record?’

The minister, of course, knew nothing of his record, but some human
feeling must have stirred in him, for he said: ‘He has an excellent
record, your Majesty.’

‘That record has saved you, but you must be punished, as an example to
others. Would you like to go into the army?’

Polezhaev was silent.

‘I give you a chance of clearing your name in the army. Well?’

‘I must obey,’ answered Polezhaev.

The Tsar went up to him, laid his hand on his shoulder and, saying to
him, ‘Your fate is in your own hands, if I forget you you can _write_ to
me,’ _kissed him on the forehead_.

I made Polezhaev repeat the story of the kiss a dozen times, it seemed
to me so incredible. He swore that it was true.

From the Tsar, he was led off to Dibitch, who lived on the spot in the
palace. Dibitch was asleep; he was awakened, came out yawning, and,
after reading the paper handed to him, asked the aide-de-camp: ‘Is this
he?’—‘Yes, your Excellency.’

‘Well! it’s a capital thing; you will serve in the army. I have always
been in the army, and you see what I’ve risen to, and maybe you’ll be
made a field-marshal.’ This stupid, inappropriate, German joke was
Dibitch’s equivalent to a kiss. Polezhaev was led off to the camp and
handed over to the soldiers.

Three years passed. Polezhaev remembered the Tsar’s words and wrote him
a letter. No answer came. A few months later he wrote a second; again
there was no answer. Convinced that his letters did not reach the Tsar,
he ran away, and ran away in order to present a petition in person. He
behaved carelessly, saw his old friends in Moscow and was entertained by
them; of course, that could not be kept secret. In Tver he was seized
and sent back to his regiment, as a runaway soldier, on foot and in
chains. The court martial condemned him to run the gauntlet; the
sentence was despatched to the Tsar for ratification.

Polezhaev wanted to kill himself before the punishment. After searching
in vain in his prison for a sharp instrument, he confided in an old
soldier who liked him. The soldier understood him and respected his
wishes. When the old man learned that the answer had come, he brought
him a bayonet and, as he gave him it, said through his tears: ‘I have
sharpened it myself.’

The Tsar did not confirm Polezhaev’s sentence.

Then it was that he wrote the fine poem beginning:

                        ‘I perished lonely,
                        No help was nigh.
                        My evil genius
                        Passed mocking by.’[119]

Polezhaev was sent to the Caucasus. There for distinguished service he
was promoted to be a non-commissioned officer. Years and years passed;
his hopeless, dreary position broke him down; become a police poet and
sing the glories of Nicholas he could not, and that was the only way of
escape from the army.

There was, however, another means of escape, and he preferred it; he
drank to win forgetfulness. There is a terrible poem of his, ‘To Vodka.’

He succeeded in getting transferred to a regiment of the Carabineers
stationed in Moscow. This was a considerable alleviation of his lot, but
malignant consumption had already laid its grip upon him.

It was at this period that I made his acquaintance, about 1833. He
struggled on another four years and died in the military hospital.

When one of his friends went to ask for the body for burial, no one knew
where it was; the military hospital did a trade in corpses; they sold
them to the university and to the Medical Academy, made them into
skeletons, and so on. At last he found poor Polezhaev’s body in a
cellar; he was lying under a heap of others and the rats had gnawed off
one foot.

After his death, his poems were published, and his portrait in a
soldier’s uniform was to have been included in the edition. The censor
thought this unseemly, and the poor martyr was portrayed with the
epaulettes of an officer—he had been promoted in the hospital.




                                PART II
                             PRISON & EXILE
                              (1834–1838)




                               Chapter 8
 A PREDICTION—OGARYOV’S ARREST—A FIRE—A MOSCOW LIBERAL—M. F. ORLOV—THE
                               GRAVEYARD


One day in the spring of 1834, I arrived at Vadim’s in the morning and
found neither him nor any of his brothers and sisters at home. I went
upstairs to his little room and sat down to write.

The door softly opened and Vadim’s mother came in; her footsteps were
barely audible; looking weary and ill she went up to an armchair and
said to me, as she sat down: ‘Go on writing, go on writing, I came to
see whether Vadya had come in; the children have gone for a walk and
downstairs it is so empty, I felt sad and frightened. I’ll stay here a
little, I won’t hinder you, go on with your work.’

Her face was pensive and I could see in it even more clearly than usual
the imprint of what she had suffered in the past and of that suspicious
apprehensiveness in regard to the future, that distrust of life, which
is always left after great and prolonged misfortunes.

We began to talk. She told me something about Siberia: ‘I have had very
many troubles to bear and I have more to see yet,’ she added, shaking
her head, ‘my heart bodes nothing good.’

I thought how sometimes, after hearing our bold talk and demagogic
conversation, she would turn pale, sigh softly, go out of the room and
for a long time not utter a word.

‘You and your friends,’ she went on, ‘you are going the sure road to
ruin. You will ruin Vadya, yourself, and all of them; I love you, too,
you know, like a son.’ A tear ran down her wasted cheek.

I did not speak. She took my hand and, trying to smile, added: ‘Don’t be
angry, my nerves are overwrought; I understand it all, you go your path,
there is no other for you, and, if there were, you would none of you be
the same. I know that, but I cannot get over my alarm; I have been
through so many troubles that I have no strength to face fresh ones.
Mind you don’t say a word to Vadya about this, he would be distressed,
he would talk to me.... Here he is,’ she added, hurriedly wiping away
her tears and once more asking me with her eyes to say nothing.

Poor mother! Noble, great-hearted woman! It is as fine as Corneille’s
‘qu’il mourût!’

Her prediction was soon fulfilled; happily this time the storm passed
over the heads of her family, but it brought the poor woman much sorrow
and alarm.

‘Taken? What do you mean?’ I asked, jumping out of bed and feeling my
head to make sure that I was awake.

‘The police-master came in the night with the district policeman and
Cossacks, about two hours after you left, seized all the papers and took
Nikolay Platonovitch.’ It was Ogaryov’s valet speaking. I could not
imagine what pretext the police had invented; of late everything had
been quiet. Ogaryov had only arrived a day or two before ... and why had
they taken him and not me?

It was impossible to remain doing nothing; I dressed and went out of the
house with no definite aim. It was the first trouble that had befallen
me. I felt sick, I was tortured by my impotence.

As I wandered about the streets, I thought, at last, of a friend V——
whose social position made it possible for him to find out what was the
matter and, perhaps, to help. He lived a terrible distance away in a
summer villa beyond the Vorontsov Field; I got into the first cab I came
across and galloped off to him. It was before seven in the morning.

I had made the acquaintance of V—— about a year and a half before; he
was in his way a lion in Moscow. He had been educated in Paris, was
wealthy, intelligent, cultured, witty, free-thinking, had been clapped
into the Peter-Paul fortress over the affair of the Fourteenth of
December and was among those afterwards acquitted; he had had no
experience of exile, but the glory of the affair clung to him. He was in
the government service and had great influence with the
governor-general, Prince Golitsyn, who was fond of men of a free way of
thinking, particularly if they expressed their views fluently in French.
The prince was not strong in Russian.

V—— was ten years older than we, and surprised us by his practical
remarks, his knowledge of political affairs, his French eloquence and
the ardour of his Liberalism. He knew so much and in such detail, talked
so charmingly and so easily; his opinions were so clearly defined; he
had answers, good advice, explanations for everything. He had read
everything, all the new novels, treatises, magazines, and poetry, was
moreover a devoted student of zoology, wrote out schemes of reform for
Prince Golitsyn and drew out plans for children’s books. His Liberalism
was of the purest, trebly-distilled essence, of the left wing between
that of Mauguin and of General Lamarque.

His study was hung with portraits of all the revolutionary celebrities
from Hampden and Bailly[120] to Fieschi[121] and Armand Carrel. A whole
library of prohibited books was to be found under this revolutionary
shrine.

A skeleton, a few stuffed birds, some dried amphibians, and insides of
animals preserved in spirit, gave a serious tone of study and reflection
to the over-impetuous character of the room.

We used to look with envy at his experience and knowledge of men; his
refined ironical manner of arguing had a great influence on us. We
looked upon him as a capable revolutionary, as a statesman _in spe_.

I did not find V—— at home, he had gone to town overnight for an
interview with Prince Golitsyn. His valet told me he would certainly be
home within an hour and a half. I waited.

V——’s summer villa was a splendid one. The study in which I sat waiting
was a lofty, spacious room, and an immense door led to the verandah and
into the garden. It was a hot day, the fragrance of trees and flowers
came in from the garden, children were playing in front of the house
with ringing laughter. Wealth, abundance, space, sunshine and shadow,
flowers and greenery ... while in prison it is cramped, stifling, dark.
I do not know how long I had been sitting there absorbed in bitter
thoughts, when suddenly the valet called me from the verandah with a
peculiar animation.

‘What is it?’ I inquired.

‘Oh, come here and look.’

I went out to the verandah, not to wound him by refusal, and stood
petrified. A whole semi-circle of houses were blazing away, as though
they had been set fire to at the same moment. The fire was spreading
with incredible rapidity.

I remained on the verandah; the valet gazed with a sort of nervous
pleasure at the fire, saying: ‘It’s going finely—look, that house on the
right is beginning to burn, it’s certainly beginning to burn.’

A fire has something revolutionary about it; it laughs at property and
levels fortunes. The valet understood that instinctively.

Half an hour later half the horizon was covered with smoke, red behind
and greyish-black above. That day Lefortovo was burned down. It was the
first of a series of cases of incendiarism, which went on for five
months, and we shall speak of them again.

At last V—— arrived. He was at his best, charming and cordial; he told
me about the fire by which he had driven and about the general belief
that it was a case of arson, and added, half in jest: ‘It’s
Pugatchovism. You’ll see, we shan’t escape, they will put us on a
stake.’

‘Before they put us on a stake,’ I answered, ‘I am afraid they will put
us on a chain. Do you know that last night the police seized Ogaryov?’

‘The police—what are you saying?’

‘That’s what I have come to you about. Something must be done; go to
Prince Golitsyn, find out what’s the matter and ask permission for me to
see him.’

Receiving no answer, I glanced at V——, but where he had been, it seemed
as though an elder brother were sitting with a livid face and sunken
features; he was moaning and moving uneasily.

‘What’s the matter?’

‘There, I told you; I always said what it would lead to.... Yes, yes, we
might have expected it. Oh dear, oh dear!... I am not to blame in
thought nor in act, but very likely they will put me in prison too, and
that is no joking matter; I know what the fortress is like.’

‘Will you go to the prince?’

‘Upon my word, whatever for? I advise you as a friend, don’t even speak
of Ogaryov; keep as quiet as you can, or it will be bad for you. You
don’t know how dangerous these things are; my sincere advice is, keep
out of it, do your utmost and you won’t help Ogaryov, but you will ruin
yourself. That’s what autocracy means—no rights, no defence; are the
lawyers and judges any use?’

On this occasion I was not disposed to listen to his bold opinions and
startling criticisms. I took my hat and went away.

At home I found everything in agitation. Already my father was angry
with me on account of Ogaryov’s arrest. Already the Senator was on the
spot, rummaging among my books, taking away what he thought dangerous,
and in a very bad humour.

On the table I found a note from M. F. Orlov inviting me to dinner.
Could he not do something for us? I was beginning to be discouraged by
experience: still there was no harm in trying.

Mihail Fyodorovitch Orlov was one of the founders of the celebrated
League of Welfare,[122] and that he had not reached Siberia was not his
own fault, but was due to his brother, who enjoyed the special favour of
Nicholas and had been the first to gallop with his Horse Guards to the
defence of the Winter Palace on December the Fourteenth. Orlov was sent
to his estate in the country, and a few years later was allowed to live
in Moscow. During his solitary life in the country he studied political
economy and chemistry. The first time I met him he talked of his new
system of nomenclature in chemistry. All energetic people who begin
studying a subject late in life show an inclination to move the
furniture about and rearrange it to suit themselves. His nomenclature
was more complicated than the received French system. I wanted to
attract his attention, and by way of gaining his favour began proving to
him that his system was good, but the old one was better.

Orlov contested the point and then agreed.

My effort to please succeeded: from that time we were on intimate terms.
He saw in me a rising possibility; I saw in him a veteran of our views,
a friend of our heroes, a noble figure in our lives.

Poor Orlov was like a lion in a cage. Everywhere he knocked himself
against the bars, he had neither space to move nor work to do and was
consumed by a thirst for activity.

After the fall of France, I more than once met people of the same sort,
people who were disintegrated by the craving for public activity and
incapable of occupying themselves within the four walls of their study
or in home life. They do not know how to be alone; in solitude they are
attacked with ennui, they become whimsical, quarrel with their last
friends, see intrigues against them on all hands, and themselves
intrigue to find out all these non-existent plots.

A stage and spectators are as necessary to them as the air they breathe;
in the public view they really are heroes and will endure the
unendurable. They must have noise, clamour, applause, they want to make
speeches, to hear their enemies’ replies, they crave the stimulus of
struggle, the fever of danger, and without these tonics they are
miserable, they pine, let themselves go and grow heavy, break out and
make mistakes. Such is Ledru-Rollin, who, by the way, has a look of
Orlov in the face, particularly since he has grown moustaches.

Orlov was very handsome; his tall figure, fine carriage, handsome, manly
features and completely bare skull, altogether gave an indescribable
attractiveness to his appearance. His bust would make a good contrast to
the bust of A. P. Yermolov, whose frowning, quadrangular brow, thick
thatch of grey hair, and eyes piercing the distance gave him that beauty
of the warrior chieftain, grown old in battles, which won Maria
Kotcheby’s heart in Mazeppa.

Orlov was so bored that he did not know what to begin upon. He tried
founding a glass factory, in which mediæval stained glass was made,
costing him more than he sold it for; and began writing a book ‘on
credit’—no, that was not the way his heart yearned to go, and yet it was
the only way open to him. The lion was condemned to wander idly between
Arbat and Basmanny Street, not even daring to let his tongue move
freely.

It was terribly pitiful to see Orlov trying to become a learned man, a
theorist. His intelligence was clear and brilliant, but not at all
speculative, and he got entangled at once among newly invented systems
in long-familiar subjects—like his chemical nomenclature for instance.
He was a complete failure in everything abstract, but with intense
exasperation applied himself to metaphysics.

Careless and incontinent of speech, he was continually making mistakes;
carried away by his first impression, which was always chivalrously
lofty, he would suddenly remember his position and turn back half way.
He was an even greater failure in these diplomatic countermarches than
in metaphysics and nomenclature; and, having got into one difficulty, he
would get into two or three more in trying to right himself. He was
blamed for this; people are so superficial and inattentive that they
look more to words than to acts, and attach more weight to separate
mistakes than to the drift of the whole character. What is the use of
blaming a man from the point of view of Roman virtue, one must blame the
melancholy surroundings in which any noble feeling must be communicated
by contraband, underground, and behind locked doors; and, if one says a
word aloud, one is wondering all day how soon the police will come....

There was a large party at the dinner. I happened to sit beside General
Raevsky, the brother of Orlov’s wife. He too had been under a ban since
the Fourteenth of December; the son of the celebrated N. N. Raevsky, he
had as a boy of fourteen been with his brother at Borodino by his
father’s side; later on, he died of wounds in the Caucasus. I told him
about Ogaryov, and asked him whether Orlov could do anything and whether
he would care to do it.

A cloud came over Raevsky’s face, but it was not the look of tearful
cowardice which I had seen in the morning, but a mixture of bitter
memories and repulsion.

‘There is no question of caring or not caring,’ he answered, ‘only I
doubt whether Orlov can do much; after dinner go to the study and I will
bring him to you. So then,’ he added after a pause, ‘your turn has come;
all are dragged down to that black pit.’

After questioning me, Orlov wrote a letter to Prince Golitsyn asking for
an interview.

‘The prince,’ he told me, ‘is a very decent man; if he won’t do
anything, he will at least tell us the truth.’

Next day I went for an answer. Prince Golitsyn said that Ogaryov had
been arrested by order of the Tsar, that a committee of inquiry had been
appointed, and that the material evidence was some supper on the 24th
June, at which seditious songs had been sung. I could make nothing of
it. That day was my father’s name-day; I had spent the whole day at home
and Ogaryov had been with us.

It was with a heavy heart that I left Orlov; he, too, was troubled; when
I gave him my hand he stood up, embraced me, pressed me warmly to his
broad chest and kissed me.

It was as though he felt that we were parting for long years.

I only saw him once afterwards, six years later. He was smouldering out.
The look of illness on his face, the melancholy and a sort of new
angularity in it struck me; he was gloomy, was conscious that he was
breaking up, knew things were all going wrong—and saw no way of
salvation. Two months later, he died, the blood curdled in his veins.

... There is a wonderful monument in Lucerne; carved by Thorwaldsen in
natural rock. A dying lion is lying in a hollow; he is wounded to death,
the blood is streaming from a wound, in which the fragment of an arrow
is sticking; he has laid his gallant head upon his paw, he is moaning,
there is a look in his eyes of unbearable pain; around there is a
wilderness, with a pond below, all shut in by mountains, trees, and
greenery; people pass by without seeing that here a royal beast is
dying.

Once after sitting some time on the seat facing the stone agony, I was
suddenly reminded of my last visit to Orlov.

Driving home from Orlov, I passed the house of the chief police-master,
and the idea occurred to me to ask him openly for permission to see
Ogaryov.

I had never in my life been in the house of a police official. I was
kept waiting a long time; at last the head police-master came out. My
request surprised him.

‘What grounds have you for asking this permission?’

‘Ogaryov is my cousin.’

‘Your cousin?’ he asked, looking straight into my face. I did not
answer, but I, too, looked straight into his Excellency’s face.

‘I cannot give you permission,’ he said; ‘your cousin is _au secret_. I
am very sorry!’

Uncertainty and inactivity were killing me. I had hardly a friend in
town, I could find out absolutely nothing. It seemed as though the
police had forgotten or overlooked me. It was very, very dreary. But
just when the whole sky was overcast with grey storm-clouds and the long
night of exile and prison was approaching, a ray of light came to me.

A few words of deep sympathy uttered by a girl of seventeen whom I had
looked upon as a child raised me up again.

For the first time in my story a woman’s figure appears ... and
precisely one woman’s figure appears throughout all my life.

The passing fancies of youth and spring that had stirred my soul paled
and vanished before it, like pictures in the mist; and no fresh ones
came.

We met in a graveyard. She stood leaning against a tombstone and spoke
of Ogaryov, and my grief was comforted.

‘Till to-morrow,’ she said and gave me her hand, smiling through her
tears.

‘Till to-morrow,’ I answered ... and stood a long time looking after her
retreating figure.

That was on the nineteenth of July 1834.




                               Chapter 9
  ARREST—AN IMPARTIAL WITNESS—THE OFFICE OF THE PRETCHISTENSKY POLICE
                      STATION—A PATRIARCHAL JUDGE


‘Till to-morrow,’ I repeated, as I fell asleep.... I felt
extraordinarily light-hearted and happy.

Between one and two in the night, my father’s valet woke me; he was not
dressed and was panic-stricken.

‘An officer is asking for you.’

‘What officer?’

‘I don’t know.’

‘Well, I do,’ I told him and flung on my dressing-gown.

In the doorway of the drawing-room, a figure was standing wrapped in a
military greatcoat; by the window I saw a white plume, behind there were
other persons,—I distinguished the cap of a Cossack.

It was the police-master, Miller.

He told me that by an order of the military governor-general, which he
held in his hand, he must look through my papers. Candles were brought.
The police-master took my keys; the district police superintendent and
his lieutenant began rummaging among my books and my linen. The
police-master busied himself among my papers; everything seemed to him
suspicious, he laid them all on one side and all at once turned to me
and said: ‘I must ask you to dress meanwhile; you’ll come along with
me.’

‘Where?’ I asked.

‘To the Pretchistensky police station,’ answered the police-master in a
soothing voice.

‘And then?’

‘There is nothing more in the governor-general’s instructions.’

I began to dress.

Meanwhile the panic-stricken servants had awakened my mother. She rushed
out of her bedroom and was coming to my room, but was stopped by a
Cossack at the drawing-room door. She uttered a shriek, I shuddered and
ran to her. The police-master left the papers and came with me to the
drawing-room. He apologised to my mother, let her pass, swore at the
Cossack, who was not to blame, and went back to the papers.

Then my father came up. He was pale but tried to maintain his studied
indifference. The scene was becoming painful. My mother sat in the
corner, weeping. My old father spoke of irrelevant matters with the
police-master, but his voice shook. I was afraid that I could not stand
this for long and did not want to afford the local police superintendent
the satisfaction of seeing me in tears.

I pulled the police-master by the sleeve, ‘Let us go!’

‘Let us go,’ he said with relief. My father went out of the room and
returned a minute later. He brought a little ikon and put it round my
neck, saying that his father had given it to him with his blessing on
his deathbed. I was touched: this _religious_ gift showed me the degree
of terror and distress in the old man’s heart. I knelt down while he was
putting it on; he helped me up, embraced me and blessed me.

The ikon was a picture in enamel of the head of John the Baptist on a
charger. What this was—example, advice, or prophecy?—I don’t know, but
the significance of the ikon struck me.

My mother was almost unconscious.

All the servants accompanied me down the staircase weeping and rushing
to kiss me or my hand. I felt as though I were present at my own
funeral. The police-master scowled and hurried on.

When we went out at the gate he collected his company; he had with him
four Cossacks, two police superintendents and two ordinary policemen.

‘Allow me to go home,’ a man with a beard who was sitting in front of
the gate asked the police-master.

‘You can go,’ said Miller.

‘What man is that?’ I asked, getting into the droshky.

‘The impartial witness; you know that without an impartial witness the
police cannot enter a house.’

‘Then why did you leave him at the gate?’

‘It’s a mere form! It’s simply keeping the man out of bed for nothing,’
observed Miller

We drove accompanied by two Cossacks on horseback.

There was no special room for me in the police station. The
police-master directed that I should be put in the office until the
morning. He himself took me there; he flung himself in an easy chair
and, yawning wearily, muttered: ‘It’s a damnable service. I’ve been at
the races since three o’clock in the afternoon, and here I’ll be busy
with you till morning. I bet it’s past three already and to-morrow I
must go with the report at nine.’

‘Good-bye,’ he added a minute later, and went out. A non-commissioned
officer locked me in, observing that if I wanted anything I could knock
at the door.

I opened the window. The day was already beginning and the wind of
morning was rising; I asked the non-commissioned officer for water and
drank off a whole jugful. There was no thinking of sleep. Besides there
was nowhere to lie down; apart from the dirty leather chair and one easy
chair, there was nothing in the office but a big table heaped up with
papers and in the corner a little table still more heaped up with
papers. The dim night-light hardly lighted the room, but made a
flickering patch of light on the ceiling that grew paler and paler with
the dawn.

I sat down in the place of the police superintendent and took up the
first paper that was lying on the table, a document relating to the
funeral of a serf of Prince Gagarin’s and a medical certificate that he
had died according to all the rules of medical science. I picked up
another—it was a set of police regulations. I ran through it and found a
paragraph which stated that ‘Every arrested man has the right within
three days after his arrest to know the ground of his arrest or to be
released.’ I noted this paragraph for my own benefit.

An hour later I saw through the window our butler bringing me a pillow,
bedclothes, and a greatcoat. He asked something of the non-commissioned
officer, probably permission to come in to me; he was a grey-headed old
man, to two or three of whose children I had stood godfather as a small
boy. The non-commissioned officer gave him a rough and abrupt refusal;
one of our coachmen was standing near. I shouted to them from the
window. The non-commissioned officer fussed about and told them to be
off. The old man bowed to me and shed tears; the coachman, as he lashed
the horses, took off his hat and wiped his eyes, the droshky rattled
away and my tears fell in streams, my heart was brimming over; they were
the first and last tears I shed while I was in prison.

Towards morning the office began to fill up, the clerk arrived still
drunk from the evening before, a consumptive-looking individual with red
hair, a look of brutal vice on his pimpled face. He wore a very dirty,
badly-cut and shiny coat of a brick colour. After him another extremely
free-and-easy individual in the greatcoat of a non-commissioned officer
arrived. He at once addressed me with the question:

‘Were you taken at the theatre or what?’

‘I was arrested at home.’

‘Did Fyodor Ivanovitch himself arrest you?’

‘Who’s Fyodor Ivanovitch?’

‘Colonel Miller.’

‘Yes.’

‘I understand.’ He winked to the red-haired man who showed no interest
whatever. The free-and-easy individual did not continue the
conversation—he saw that I had been taken neither for disorderly conduct
nor drunkenness, so lost all interest in me, or perhaps was afraid to
enter into conversation with a dangerous prisoner.

Not long afterwards various sleepy-looking police officials made their
appearance and then came people with grievances and legal complaints.

The keeper of a brothel brought a complaint against the owner of a
beer-shop, that he had publicly insulted her in his shop in such
language, as, being a woman, she could not bring herself to utter before
the police. The shopkeeper swore that he had not used such language. The
woman swore that he had uttered the words more than once and very
loudly, and added that he had raised his hand against her and that, if
she had not ducked, he would have cut her face open. The shopkeeper
declared that, in the first place, she had not paid what she owed him,
and, in the second, had insulted him in his own shop and, what’s more,
threatened that he should be thrashed within an inch of his life by her
followers.

The brothel-keeper, a tall, untidy woman with puffy eyes, screamed in a
loud shrill voice and was extremely talkative. The man made more use of
mimicry and gesture than of words.

The police Solomon, instead of judging between them, scolded them both
vigorously.

‘The dogs are too well fed, that’s why they run mad,’ he said; ‘the
beasts should sit quiet at home and be thankful we say nothing and leave
them in peace. An important matter, indeed! They quarrel and run at once
to trouble the police. And you’re a fine lady! as though it were the
first time—what’s one to call you if not a bad word with the trade you
follow?’

The shopkeeper shook his head and shrugged his shoulders to express his
profound gratification. The police officer at once pounced upon him and
said, ‘What do you go barking behind your counter for, you dog? Do you
want to go to the lock-up? You’re a foul-tongued brute, and lifting your
ugly paw too—do you want a taste of the birch, eh?’

For me this scene had all the charm of novelty and it remained imprinted
on my memory for ever, it was the first case of patriarchal Russian
justice I had seen.

The brothel-keeper and the police continued shouting until the police
superintendent came in. Without inquiring why these people were there or
what they wanted, he shouted in a still more savage voice: ‘Get out, be
off, this isn’t a public bath-house or a pot-house!’

Having driven ‘the scum’ out he turned to the police, ‘You ought to be
ashamed to allow such disorder! How many times I have said to you the
place won’t be held in proper respect, low creatures like that will turn
it into a perfect Bedlam, you are too easy-going with these scoundrels.
What man is this?’ he asked about me.

‘A prisoner brought in by Fyodor Ivanovitch, here is the document
concerning him.’

The superintendent ran through the document, looked at me, met with
disapproval the direct and unflinching gaze which I fixed upon him,
prepared at the first word to give as good as I got, and said ‘Excuse
me.’

The affair of the brothel-keeper and the beer-shop man began again. She
insisted on making a deposition on oath. A priest arrived. I believe
they both made sworn statements; I did not see the end of it. I was
taken away to the head police-master’s. I do not know why; no one said a
word to me; then again I was brought back to the police station, where a
room had been prepared for me under the watch tower. The
non-commissioned officer observed that if I wanted anything to eat, I
had better send out to buy it, that the government ration had not been
fixed yet and that it would not be for another two days; moreover, that
it consisted of two or three kopecks of silver and that the better-class
prisoners did not claim it.

There was a dirty sofa standing by the wall; it was past midday, I felt
fearfully tired, flung myself on the sofa and slept like the dead. When
I woke up, all was quiet and serene in my heart. I had been worn out of
late by uncertainty about Ogaryov, now my turn too had come, the danger
was no longer far off, but was all about me, the storm-cloud was
overhead. This first persecution was to be our consecration.




                               Chapter 10
      UNDER THE WATCH TOWER—THE LISBON POLICEMAN—THE INCENDIARIES


A man soon becomes used to prison, if he only has some inner resources.
One quickly becomes used to the peace and complete freedom in one’s
cage—no anxieties, no distractions.

At first, books were not allowed; the superintendent assured me that it
was forbidden to take books from my home. I asked him to buy me some.
‘Something instructive, a grammar now, I might get, perhaps, but for
anything more you must ask the general.’ The suggestion that I should
wile away the time by reading a grammar was extremely funny,
nevertheless I caught at it eagerly, and asked the superintendent to buy
me an Italian grammar and lexicon. I had two red notes with me, I gave
him one; he at once sent an officer for the books and gave him a letter
to the chief police-master in which, on the strength of the paragraph I
had read, I asked him to let me know the cause of my arrest or to
release me.

The local superintendent, in whose presence I wrote the letter, tried to
persuade me not to send it.

‘It’s a mistake, sir, upon my soul, it’s a mistake to trouble the
general; he’ll say “they are restless people,” it will do you harm and
be no use whatever.’

In the evening the policeman appeared and told me that the head
police-master had bidden him tell me that I should know the cause of my
arrest in due time. Then he pulled out of his pocket a greasy Italian
grammar, and added, smiling, ‘it luckily happened that there was a
dictionary in it so there was no need to buy one.’ Not a word was said
about the change. I was on the point of writing to the chief
police-master again, but the rôle of a miniature Hampden at the
Pretchistensky police station struck me as too funny.

Ten days after my arrest a little swarthy, pock-marked policeman
appeared at ten o’clock in the evening with an order for me to dress and
set off to the committee of inquiry.

While I was dressing the following ludicrously vexatious incident
occurred. My dinner was sent me from home, a servant gave it to the
non-commissioned officer below and he sent it up to me by a soldier.
They were allowed to send me from home about a bottle of wine a day. N.
Sazonov took advantage of this permission to send me a bottle of
excellent Johannisberg. The soldier and I ingeniously uncorked the
bottle with two nails, the wine had a delicate fragrance that was
apparent at a distance. I looked forward to enjoying it for the next
three or four days.

One must be in prison to know how much childishness remains in a man and
what comfort can be found in trifles, from a bottle of wine to a trick
at the expense of one’s guard.

The pock-marked policeman sniffed out my bottle and turning to me asked
permission to taste a little. I was vexed; however, I said that I should
be delighted. I had no wine-glass. The monster took a tumbler, filled it
incredibly full and drank it without taking breath; this way of imbibing
spirits and wine only exists among Russians and Poles; I have seen no
other people in all Europe who could empty a tumbler at a gulp or even
toss off a wine-glassful. To make the loss of the wine still more
bitter, the pock-marked policeman wiped his lips with a snuffy blue
handkerchief, adding ‘First-class Madeira.’ I looked at him with hatred
and spitefully rejoiced that he had not been vaccinated and nature had
not spared him the smallpox.

This connoisseur of wines conducted me to the chief police-master’s
house in Tverskoy Boulevard, showed me into a side-room and left me
alone there. Half an hour later, a stout man with a lazy, good-natured
air came into the room from the inner apartments; he threw a portfolio
of papers on the table and sent the gendarme standing at the door away
on some errand.

‘I suppose,’ he said to me, ‘you are concerned with the case of Ogaryov
and the other young men who have lately been arrested?’

I said I was.

‘I happened to hear about it,’ he went on, ‘it’s a strange case, I don’t
understand it.’

‘I’ve been a fortnight in prison in connection with the case and I don’t
understand it, and, what’s more, I simply know nothing about it.’

‘A good thing, too,’ he said, looking intently at me; ‘and mind you
don’t know anything about it. You must forgive me, if I give you a bit
of advice; you’re young, your blood is still hot, you long to speak out,
that’s the trouble, don’t forget that you know nothing about it, that’s
the only safe line.’

I looked at him in surprise, his face expressed nothing evil; he guessed
what I felt and with a smile said, ‘I was a Moscow student myself twelve
years ago.’

A clerk of some sort came in; the stout man addressed him and, after
giving him his orders, went out with a friendly nod to me, putting his
finger on his lips. I never met the gentleman afterwards and I do not
know who he was, but I found out the value of his advice.

Then a police-master came in, not Miller, but another called Tsinsky,
and summoned me to the committee. In a large rather handsome room, five
men were sitting at a table, all in military uniform, with the exception
of one decrepit old man. They were smoking cigars and gaily talking
together, lolling in easy chairs, with their uniforms unbuttoned. The
chief police-master was presiding.

When I went in, he turned to a figure sitting meekly in a corner, and
said, ‘If you please, father.’ Only then I noticed that there was
sitting in a corner an old priest with a grey beard and a reddish-blue
face. The priest was half-asleep and yawning with his hand over his
mouth; his mind was far away and he was longing to get home. In a
drawling, somewhat chanting voice he began exhorting me, talking of the
sin of concealing the truth before the persons appointed by the Tsar,
and of the uselessness of such duplicity considering the all-hearing ear
of God; he did not even forget to refer to the everlasting texts, to the
effect that all power is from God and that we must render to Cæsar the
things that are Cæsar’s. In conclusion, he said that I must put my lips
to the Gospel and the Holy Cross in confirmation of the oath (which,
however, I had not given, and he did not insist on my taking) to reveal
the whole truth sincerely and openly.

When he had finished he began hurriedly wrapping up the Gospel and the
Cross. Tsinsky, barely rising from his seat, told him that he could go.
After this he turned to me and translated the spiritual advice into
secular language: ‘I will only add one thing to the priest’s words—it’s
useless for you to deny the truth, even if you wish to do so.’ He
pointed to the heaps of papers, letters, and portraits which were
intentionally scattered about the table. ‘Only an open confession can
mitigate your lot; to be at liberty or in Bobruisk in the Caucasus
depends on yourself.’

The questions were put to me in writing: the naïveté of some of them was
amazing: ‘Do you know of the existence of any secret society? Do you
belong to any secret society, literary or otherwise? Who are its
members? Where do they meet?’

To all these it was extremely easy to answer by the single word: ‘No.’

‘I see you know nothing,’ said Tsinsky after looking through the
answers. ‘I have warned you, you are making your position more
difficult.’

With that the first examination ended.

... Eight years later, in a different part of the very house in which
this took place, there was living the sister of the new chief
police-master, a woman who had once been very handsome, and whose
daughter was a beauty.

I used to visit there; and every time I passed through the room in which
Tsinsky and Co. had tried and examined us; then and afterwards, there
hung in it the portrait of Paul, whether as a reminder of the depths of
degradation to which a man may be brought by unbridled passion and the
misuse of power, or as an incitement of the police to every sort of
brutality, I do not know, but there he was, cane in hand, snub-nosed and
scowling. I stopped every time before that portrait, in old days as a
prisoner, later on as a visitor. The little drawing-room close by, full
of the fragrance of beauty and femininity, seemed somehow out of place
in this stern house of strict discipline and police examinations; I felt
unable to be myself there, and somehow regretful that the blossom that
was unfolding so beautifully should flower against the gloomy brick wall
of a police office. The things that we said and that were said by the
little circle of friends that gathered round them sounded so ironical,
so surprising to the ear, within those walls accustomed to hear
interrogations, secret information, and reports of wholesale police
raids, within those walls which alone separated us from the whisper of
policemen, the sighs of prisoners, the clank of gendarmes’ spurs and
Cossacks’ sabres....

A week or two later, the little pock-marked policeman came and took me
to Tsinsky again. In the vestibule several men in fetters, surrounded by
soldiers with guns, were sitting or lying down; in the lobby also there
were several men of different classes, unchained but strictly guarded.
The little policeman told me that they were all incendiaries. Tsinsky
was out at the fire and we had to await his return; we had arrived
between nine and ten in the evening; no one had asked for me by one
o’clock in the night, and I was still sitting very quietly in the lobby
with the incendiaries. First one and then another of them was sent for,
the police ran backwards and forwards, chains clanked, and the soldiers
were so bored that they rattled their guns and did drill exercises.
About one o’clock Tsinsky arrived, sooty and grimy, and hurried straight
to his study without stopping. Half an hour passed, my policeman was
sent for; he came back looking pale and upset, with his face twitching
convulsively. Tsinsky poked his head out of the door after him and said:
‘The whole committee has been waiting for you all the evening, Monsieur
Herzen; this blockhead brought you here when you were wanted at Prince
Golitsyn’s. I am very sorry you have had to wait here so long, but it is
not my fault. What is one to do with such men? I believe he has been
fifty years in the service and he is still an idiot. Come, be off home
now,’ he added, changing to a much ruder tone as he addressed the
policeman.

The little man repeated all the way home: ‘O Lord, what a misfortune! a
man has no thought, no notion what is happening to him, he will be the
death of me now, he would take no notice if you had not been kept
waiting there, but of course it is a disgrace to him. O Lord, how
unlucky!’

I forgave him my wine, particularly when he told me that he had not been
nearly so frightened when he had been almost drowned near Lisbon. This
last remark was so unexpected that I was overcome with senseless
laughter: ‘Dear me, how very strange! However did you get to Lisbon?’
The old man had been for over twenty-five years a naval officer. One
cannot but agree with the minister who assured Captain Kopeykin[123]
that: ‘It has never happened yet among us in Russia that a man who has
deserved well of his country should be left without recognition.’

Fate had saved him at Lisbon only to be abused by Tsinsky like a boy,
after forty years’ service.

He was scarcely to blame.

The committee of inquiry formed by the governor-general did not please
the Tsar; he appointed a new one presided over by Prince Sergey
Mihailovitch Golitsyn. The members of this committee were the Moscow
Commandant, Staal, the other Prince Golitsyn, the colonel of gendarmes,
Shubensky, and Oransky, the ex-auditor.

In the instructions from the chief police-master nothing was said about
the committee having been changed; it was very natural that the hero of
Lisbon should have taken me to Tsinsky.

There was great excitement at the police station also; three fires had
taken place that evening—and the committee had sent twice to inquire
what had become of me and whether I had escaped. Anything that Tsinsky
had left unsaid in his abuse the police station superintendent made up
now to the hero of Lisbon; which, indeed, was only to be expected, since
the superintendent was himself partly to blame, not having inquired
where I was to be sent. In a corner in the office, some one was lying on
the chairs, moaning; I looked, it was a young man of handsome
appearance, neatly dressed, he was spitting blood and moaning; the
police doctor advised his being taken to the hospital as early as
possible in the morning.

When the non-commissioned officer took me to my room, I extracted from
him the story of the wounded man. He was an ex-officer of the Guards, he
had an intrigue with some maid-servant and had been with her when a
lodge of the house caught fire. This was the time of the greatest panic
in regard to arson; indeed, not a day passed without my hearing the bell
ring the alarm three or four times; from my window I saw the glare of
two or three fires every night. To avoid compromising the girl, the
officer climbed over the fence as soon as the alarm was sounded, and hid
in the stable of the next house, waiting for an opportunity to get off.
A little girl who was in the yard saw him and told the first policeman
who galloped up that he was hidden in the stable; they rushed in with a
crowd of people and dragged the officer out in triumph. He was so badly
beaten that he died next morning.

The people who had been captured were sorted out; about half were
released, the others were detained on suspicion. The police-master,
Bryantchaninov, used to ride over every morning and cross-examine them
for three or four hours. Sometimes the victims were thrashed or beaten,
then their wailing, screams and entreaties, and the moaning of the women
reached me, together with the harsh voice of the police-master and the
monotonous reading of the clerk. It was awful, intolerable. At night I
dreamed of those sounds and woke in a frenzy at the thought that the
victims were lying on straw only a few paces from me, in chains, with
lacerated wounds on their backs, and in all probability quite innocent.

To know what the Russian prisons, the Russian law-courts and the Russian
police are like, one must be a peasant, a house-serf, a workman, or an
artisan.

Political prisoners, who for the most part belong to the nobility, are
kept in close custody and punished savagely, but their fate cannot be
compared with the fate of the poor. With them the police do not stand on
ceremony. To whom can the peasant or the workman go afterwards to
complain, where can he find justice?

So terrible is the disorder, the brutality, the arbitrariness and the
corruption of Russian justice and of the Russian police that a man of
the humbler class who falls into the hands of the law is more afraid of
the process of law itself than of any punishment. He looks forward with
impatience to the time when he will be sent to Siberia; his martyrdom
ends with the beginning of his punishment. And let us remember that
three-quarters of the people taken up by the police on suspicion are
released on trial, and that they have passed through the same agonies as
the guilty.

Peter III. abolished torture and the Secret Chamber.

Catherine II. abolished torture.

Alexander I. abolished it once more.

Answers given ‘under intimidation’ are not recognised by law. The
officer who tortures the accused man renders himself liable to severe
punishment.

And yet all over Russia, from the Behring Straits to Taurogen, men are
tortured; where it is dangerous to torture by flogging, they are
tortured by insufferable heat, thirst, and salted food. In Moscow the
police put an accused prisoner with bare feet on a metal floor in a
temperature of ten degrees of frost; he died in the hospital which was
under the supervision of Prince Meshtchersky, who told the story with
indignation. The government knows all this, the governors conceal it,
the Senate connives at it, the ministers say nothing, the Tsar, and the
synod, the landowners and the priests all agree with Selifan[124] that
‘there must be thrashing for the peasants are too fond of their ease,
order must be kept up.’

The committee appointed to investigate the cases of incendiarism was
investigating, that is, thrashing, for six months and had thrashed out
nothing in the end. The Tsar was incensed and ordered that the thing was
to be finished in three days. The thing was finished in three days.
Culprits were found and condemned to punishment by the knout, by
branding, and by exile to penal servitude. The porters from all the
houses gathered together to look at the terrible punishment of ‘the
incendiaries.’ By then it was winter and I was at that time in the
Krutitsky Barracks. The captain of gendarmes, a good-natured old man who
had been present at the punishment, told me the details. The first man
condemned to the knout told the crowd in a loud voice that he swore he
was innocent, that he did not know himself what he had answered under
torture, then taking off his shirt he turned his back to the crowd and
said: ‘Look, good Christians!’

A moan of horror ran through the crowd, his back was a dark-blue striped
wound, and on that wound he was to be beaten with the knout. The murmurs
and gloomy aspect of the crowd made the police hurry. The executioners
dealt the legal number of blows, while others did the branding and
others riveted fetters, and the business seemed to be finished. But this
scene impressed the inhabitants; in every circle in Moscow people were
talking about it. The governor-general reported upon it to the Tsar. The
Tsar ordered a new trial to be held, and the case of the incendiary who
had protested before the punishment to be particularly inquired into.

Several months afterwards, I read in the papers that the Tsar, wishing
to compensate two who had been punished by the knout, though innocent,
ordered them to be given two hundred roubles a lash, and to be provided
with a special passport testifying to their innocence in spite of the
branding. These two were the man who had spoken to the crowd and one of
his companions.

The story of the fires in Moscow in 1834, cases similar to which
occurred ten years later in various provinces, remains a mystery. That
the fires were caused by arson there is no doubt; fire, ‘the red cock,’
is in general a very national means of revenge among us. One is
continually hearing of the burning by peasants of their owners’ houses,
cornstacks, and granaries, but what was the cause of the incendiarism in
Moscow in 1834 no one knows, and, least of all, the members of the
committee of inquiry.

Before 22nd August, Coronation Day, some practical jokers dropped
letters in various places in which they informed the inhabitants that
they need not bother about an illumination, that there would be a fine
flare-up.

The cowardly Moscow authorities were in a great fluster. The police
station was filled with soldiers from early morning and a squadron of
Uhlans were stationed in the yard. In the evening patrols on horse and
on foot were incessantly moving about the streets. Artillery was kept in
readiness. Police-masters galloped up and down with Cossacks and
gendarmes. Prince Golitsyn himself rode about the town with his
aides-de-camp. The military appearance of modest Moscow was strange and
affected the nerves. Till late at night I lay in the window under my
watch tower and looked into the yard.... The Uhlans who had been hurried
to the place were sitting in groups, near their horses, some were
mounted on their horses. Officers were walking about; looking
disdainfully at the police, aides-de-camp with yellow collars arrived
continually, looking anxious and, after doing nothing, went away again.

There were no fires.

After this the Tsar himself came to Moscow. He was displeased with the
inquiry into our case which was only beginning, was displeased that we
were left in the hands of the ordinary police, was displeased that the
incendiaries had not been found—in fact, he was displeased with
everything and with every one.

We soon felt the presence of the Most High.




                               Chapter 11
              KRUTITSKY BARRACKS—GENDARMES’ TALES—OFFICERS


Three days after the Tsar’s arrival, late in the evening—all these
things are done in darkness to avoid disturbing the public—a police
officer came to me with instructions to collect my belongings and set
off with him.

‘Where are we going?’ I asked.

‘You will see,’ was the policeman’s intelligent and polite reply. After
this, of course, I collected my things and set off without continuing
the conversation.

We drove on and on for an hour and a half, at last we passed the Simonov
Monastery and stopped at a heavy stone gate, before which two gendarmes
with carbines were pacing up and down. This was the Krutitsky Monastery,
converted into a barracks of gendarmes.

I was led into a little office. The clerks, the adjutants, the officers
were all in light blue. The officer on duty, in a casque and full
uniform, asked me to wait a little and even suggested that I should
light the pipe I held in my hand. After this he proceeded to write an
acknowledgment of having received a prisoner; giving it to the
policeman, he went away and returned with another officer. ‘Your room is
ready,’ said the latter, ‘come along.’ A gendarme held a candle for us,
we went down the stairs and took a few steps across the courtyard into a
long corridor lighted by a single lantern; on both sides were little
doors, one of them the officer on duty opened; it led into a tiny
guardroom behind which was a small, dark, cold room that smelt like a
cellar. The officer who conducted me then turned to me, saying in French
that he was ‘_désolé d’être dans la nécessité_’ of searching my pockets,
but military service, duty, his instructions.... After this eloquent
introduction, he very simply turned to the policeman and indicated me
with his eyes. The policeman on the spot thrust an incredibly large and
hairy hand into my pockets. I observed to the police officer that this
was quite unnecessary, that I would myself, if he liked, turn my pockets
inside out without such violent measures; moreover, what could I have
after six weeks imprisonment?

‘We know,’ said the polite officer with a smile of inimitable
self-complacency, ‘how things are done in the police station.’ The
officer on duty also smiled sarcastically. However, they told the
policeman he need only look. I pulled out everything I had.

‘Scatter all your tobacco on the table,’ said the officer who was
_désolé_.

In my tobacco pouch I had a penknife and a pencil wrapped up in paper;
from the very beginning I had been thinking about them and, as I talked
to the officer, I played with the tobacco pouch, until I got the
penknife into my hand. I held it through the material of the pouch, and
boldly shook the tobacco out on the table. The policeman poured it in
again. The penknife and pencil had been saved; so there was a lesson for
the officer for his proud disdain of the ordinary police.

This incident put me in the best of humours and I began gaily
scrutinising my new domain.

Some of the monks’ cells, built three hundred years ago and sunk into
the earth, had been turned into secular cells for political prisoners.

In my room there was a bedstead without a mattress, a little table, on
it a jug of water, and beside it a chair, a thin tallow candle was
burning in a big copper candlestick. The damp and cold pierced to one’s
bones; the officer ordered the stove to be lighted, and then they all
went away. A soldier promised to bring some hay; meanwhile, putting my
greatcoat under my head, I lay down on the bare bedstead and lit my
pipe.

A minute later I noticed that the ceiling was covered with ‘Prussian’
beetles. They had seen no light for a long time and were running towards
it from all directions, crowding together, hurrying, falling on to the
table, and then racing headlong, backwards and forwards, along the edge
of the table.

I disliked black beetles, as I did every sort of uninvited guest; my
neighbours seemed to me horribly disgusting, but there was nothing to be
done, I could not begin by complaining about the black beetles and my
nerves had to submit. Two or three days later, however, all the
‘Prussians’ moved next door to the soldier’s room, where it was warmer;
only occasionally a stray beetle would run in, prick up his whiskers and
scurry back to get warm.

Though I continually asked the gendarme, he still kept the stove closed.
I began to feel unwell and giddy, I tried to get up and knock to the
soldier; I did actually get up, but with that all I remember ended....

When I came to myself I was lying on the floor with a splitting
headache. A tall gendarme was standing with his hands folded, staring at
me blankly, as in the well-known bronze statuettes a dog stares at a
tortoise.

‘You have been finely suffocated, your honour,’ he said, seeing that I
had recovered consciousness. ‘I’ve brought you horse-radish with salt
and kvass; I have already made you sniff it, now you must drink it up.’
I drank it, he lifted me up and laid me on the bed; I felt very faint,
there were double windows and no pane that opened in them; the soldier
went to the office to ask permission for me to go into the yard; the
officer on duty told him to say that neither the colonel nor the
adjutant were there, and that he could not take the responsibility. I
had to remain in the room full of charcoal fumes.

I got used even to the Krutitsky Barracks, conjugating the Italian verbs
and reading some wretched little books. At first my confinement was
rather strict; at nine o’clock in the evening, at the last note of the
bugle, a soldier came into my room, put out the candle and locked the
door. From nine o’clock in the evening until eight next morning I had to
sit in darkness. I have never been a great sleeper, and in prison where
I had no exercise, four hours’ sleep was quite enough for me; and not to
have candles was a real affliction. Moreover, the sentry uttered every
quarter of an hour from both sides of the corridor a loud, prolonged
shout.

A few weeks later Colonel Semyonov (brother of the celebrated actress,
afterwards Princess Gagarin) allowed them to leave me a candle, forbade
anything to be hung over the window, which was below the level of the
courtyard, so that the sentry could see everything that was being done
in the cell, and gave instructions that the sentries should not shout in
the corridor.

Then the commanding officer gave us permission to have ink and to walk
in the courtyard. Paper was given in a fixed amount on condition that
none of the leaves were torn. I was allowed once in twenty-four hours to
go, accompanied by a soldier and the officer on duty, into the yard,
which was enclosed by a fence and surrounded by a cordon of sentries.

Life passed quietly and monotonously, the military punctuality gave it a
mechanical regularity like the cæsura in verse. In the morning, with the
assistance of the gendarme, I prepared coffee on the stove; at nine
o’clock the officer on duty, in gloves, enormous gauntlets, in a casque
and a greatcoat, appeared, clanking his sabre and bringing in with him
several cubic feet of frost. At one, the gendarme brought a dirty napkin
and a bowl of soup, which he always held by the edge, so that his two
middle fingers were perceptibly cleaner than the others. We were fed
fairly decently, but it must not be forgotten that we were charged two
roubles a day for our keep, which in the course of nine months’
imprisonment ran up to a considerable sum for persons of no means. The
father of one prisoner said quite simply that he had not the money; he
received the cool reply that it would be stopped out of his salary. If
he had not been receiving a salary, it is extremely probable that he
would have been put in prison.

In conclusion, I ought to observe that a rouble and a half was sent to
Colonel Semyonov at the barracks for our board from the ordnance house.
There was almost a fuss about this; but the adjutant, who got the
benefit of it, presented the gendarmes’ division with boxes for first
performances or benefit nights, and with that the matter ended.

After sunset there followed a complete stillness, which was not
disturbed by the footsteps of the soldiers crunching over the snow
before the window, nor the far-away calls of the sentries. As a rule I
read until one o’clock and then put out my candle. Sleep carried me into
freedom, sometimes it seemed as though I woke up feeling—ough, what a
horrible dream I have had—prison and gendarmes—and I would rejoice that
it was all a dream; and then, all at once, there would be the clank of a
sabre in the corridor, or the officer on duty would open the door,
accompanied by a soldier with a lantern, or the sentry would shout
inhumanly, ‘Who goes there?’ or a bugle under my very window would
outrage the morning air with its shrill reveille....

In moments of dullness when I was disinclined to read, I would talk with
the gendarmes who guarded me, particularly with the old fellow who had
looked after me when I was overcome by the charcoal fumes. The colonel
used, as a sign of favour, to free his old soldiers from regular
discipline, and set them to the easy duty of guarding a prisoner; a
corporal, who was a spy and a rogue, was set over them. Five or six
gendarmes made up the whole staff.

The old man, of whom I am speaking, was a simple, good-hearted creature,
given to all sorts of kind actions, for which he had probably had to pay
a good deal in his life. He had passed through the campaign of 1812, his
chest was covered with medals, he had served his full time and remained
in the army of his own free will, not knowing where to go. ‘Twice,’ he
told me, ‘I wrote to my home in the Mogilev province, but I got no
answer, so it seems as though there were none of my people left: and so
I feel a little uneasy to go home, one would stay there a bit and then
wander off like a lost spirit, going hither and thither to beg one’s
bread.’ How barbarously and mercilessly the army is organised in Russia
with its monstrous term of service! A man’s private life is everywhere
sacrificed without the slightest scruple and with no compensation.

Old Filimonov had pretensions to a knowledge of German which he had
studied in winter quarters after the taking of Paris. He very
felicitously adapted German words to the Russian spirit, calling a
horse, _fert_, eggs, _yery_, fish, _pish_, oats, _ober_, pancakes,
_pankutie_.

There was a naïveté about his stories which made me sad and
thoughtful. In Moldavia during the Turkish campaign of 1805 he was in
the company of a captain, the most good-natured man in the world, who
looked after every soldier as though he were his own son and was
always foremost in action. ‘A Moldavian girl had captivated him and
then we saw our captain was in trouble, for, do you know, he noticed
that the girl was making up to another officer. So one day he called
me and a comrade—a splendid soldier, he had both his legs blown off
afterwards at Maly-Yaroslavets—and began telling us how the Moldavian
girl had treated him and asked would we care to help him and give her
a lesson. “To be sure, sir,” we said, “we are always glad to do our
best for your honour.” He thanked us and pointed out the house in
which the officer lived, saying, “You wait on the bridge at night; she
will certainly go to him, you seize her without any noise and drop her
in the river.” “That is easily done, your honour,” we said, and my
comrade and I got a sack ready. We were sitting there when towards
midnight the Moldavian girl runs up. “Why, you are in a hurry, madam,”
said we, and gave her one on the head. She never uttered a squeal,
poor dear, and we popped her into the sack and over into the river;
and next day the captain went to the officer and said: “Don’t you be
angry with your Moldavian girl, we detained her a little, and now she
is in the river, and I am ready for a little fun with you with the
sabre or with pistols, which you like.” So they hacked at each other.
The officer gave our captain a bad cut on the chest, the poor, dear
man pined away and a few months later gave up his soul to God.’

‘And the Moldavian girl was drowned, then?’ I asked.

‘Yes, she was drowned,’ answered the soldier.

I looked with surprise at the childish carelessness with which the old
gendarme told me this story. And he, as though guessing what I felt or
thinking of it for the first time, added, to soothe me and pacify his
conscience: ‘A heathen woman, sir, as good as not christened, that sort
of people.’

On every Imperial holiday the gendarmes are given a glass of vodka. The
sergeant allowed Filimonov to refuse his share for five or six times and
to receive them all at once. Filimonov scored on a wooden tally-stick
how many glasses he had missed, and on the most important holiday would
go for them. He would pour this vodka into a bowl, would crumble bread
into it and eat it with a spoon. After this meal he would light a big
pipe with a tiny mouthpiece, filled with tobacco of incredible strength
which he used to cut up himself, and therefore rather wittily call
‘Self-Cut.’ As he smoked he would fold himself up in a little window,
bent double—there were no chairs in the soldiers’ rooms—and sing this
song:

                  ‘The maids come out into the meadow
                  Where was an anthill and a flower.’

As he got more drunk the words would become more inarticulate until he
fell asleep. Imagine the health of a man who had been twice wounded and
at over sixty could still survive such feasts!

Before I leave these Flemish barrack scenes _à la_ Wouverman[125] and _à
la_ Callot,[126] and this prison gossip, which is like the reminiscences
of all prisoners, I will say a few words about the officers.

The greater number among them were rather good-natured men, by no means
spies, but men who had by chance come into the gendarmes’ division.
Young noblemen with little or no education and no fortune, who did not
know where to lay their heads, they were gendarmes because they had
found no other job. They performed their duties with military
exactitude, but I never observed a trace of zeal in any of them, except
the adjutant, but then he, of course, was an adjutant.

When the officers had made my acquaintance, they did all sorts of little
things to alleviate my lot, and it would be a sin to complain of them.

One young officer told me that in 1831 he was sent to find and arrest a
Polish landowner, who was in hiding somewhere in the neighbourhood of
his estate. He was charged with being in relations with revolutionary
emissaries. From evidence that the officer collected, he found out where
the landowner must be hidden, went there with his company, put a cordon
round the house and entered it with two gendarmes. The house was
empty—they walked through the rooms, peeping into everything and found
no one anywhere, but yet some traces showed clearly that there had been
persons in the house lately. Leaving the gendarmes below, the young man
went a second time up to the attic; looking round attentively he saw a
little door which led to a loft or some little cupboard; the door was
fastened on the inside, he pushed it with his foot, it opened, and a
tall, handsome woman stood facing him. She pointed in silence to a man
who held in his arms a girl of about twelve, who was almost unconscious.
This was the Pole with his wife and child. The officer was embarrassed.
The tall woman noticed this and asked him: ‘And will you have the
cruelty to ruin them?’ The officer apologised, saying the usual
commonplaces about the inviolability of his military oath, and his duty,
and, at last, in despair, seeing that his words had no effect, ended
with the question: ‘What am I to do?’ The woman looked proudly at him
and said, pointing to the door: ‘Go down and say there is no one here.’
‘Upon my word, I don’t know how it happened and what was the matter with
me, but I went down from the attic and told the corporal to collect the
men. A couple of hours later we were looking vigorously in another part,
while he was making his way over the frontier. Well, woman! I admit it!’

Nothing in the world can be more narrow-minded and more inhuman than
wholesale condemnation of entire classes in accordance with the label,
the moral catalogue, the leading characteristics of the class. Names are
dreadful things. Jean Paul Richter says with absolute truth: ‘If a child
tells a lie, frighten him with his bad conduct, tell him he has told a
lie, but don’t tell him he is a liar. You destroy his moral confidence
in himself by defining him as a liar. “That is a murderer,” we are told,
and at once we fancy a hidden dagger, a brutal expression, evil designs,
as though murder were a permanent employment, the trade of the man who
has happened once in his life to kill some one. One cannot be a spy or
trade in the vice of others and remain an honest man, but one may be a
police officer without losing all human dignity; just as one may
conceivably find women of a tender heart and even nobility of character
in the unhappy victims of “public incontinence.”’

I have an aversion for people who cannot, or will not, take the trouble
to go beyond the name, to step across the barrier of crime, of a
complicated false position, but either chastely turn aside, or harshly
thrust it all away from them. This is usually done by cold, abstract
natures, egoistic and revolting in their purity, or base, vulgar natures
who have not yet happened, or have not needed, to show themselves in
practice. They are through sympathy at home in the dirty depths into
which others have sunk.




                               Chapter 12
       THE INVESTIGATION—GOLITSYN SENIOR—GOLITSYN JUNIOR—GENERAL
                       STAAL—SOKOLOVSKY—SENTENCE


But with all this what of our case, what of the investigation and the
trial?

They were no more successful in the new committee than in the old. The
police had been on our track for a long time, but in their zeal and
impatience could not wait to find anything adequate, and did something
silly. They had sent a retired officer called Skaryatka to lead us on
and catch us; he made acquaintance with almost all of our circle, but we
very soon guessed what he was and held aloof from him. Other young men,
for the most part students, had not been so cautious, but these others
had no serious connection with us.

One student, on completing his studies, gave a supper to his friends on
24th June 1834. Not one of us was at the festivity, indeed not one of us
had been invited. The young men drank too much, played the fool, danced
the mazurka, and among other things sang Sokolovsky’s well-known song on
the accession of Nicholas:

                     ‘The Emperor of Russia
                     Has gone to realms above,
                     The operating surgeon
                     Slit his belly open.

                     ‘The Government is weeping
                     And all the people weep;
                     There’s coming to rule over us
                     Constantine the freak.

                     ‘But to the King of Heaven,
                     Almighty God above,
                     Our Tsar of blessed memory
                     Has handed a petition.

                     ‘When He read the paper,
                     Moved to pity, God
                     Gave us Nicholas instead,
                     The blackguard, the....’[127]

In the evening Skaryatka suddenly remembered that it was his name-day,
told a tale of how advantageously he had sold a horse, and invited the
students to his quarters, promising them a dozen of champagne. They all
went, the champagne appeared, and the host, staggering, proposed that
they should once more sing Sokolovsky’s song. In the middle of the
singing the door opened and Tsinsky with the police walked in. All this
was crude, stupid, clumsy, and at the same time unsuccessful.

The police wanted to catch us; they were looking for external evidence
to involve in the case some five or six men whom they had already
marked, and only succeeded in catching twenty innocent persons.

It is not easy, however, to disconcert the Russian police. Within a
fortnight they arrested us as implicated in the supper case. In
Sokolovsky’s possession they found letters from S——, in S——’s possession
letters from Ogaryov, and in Ogaryov’s possession my letters.
Nevertheless, nothing was discovered. The first investigation failed. To
ensure the success of the second, the Tsar sent from Petersburg the
choicest of the inquisitors, A. F. Golitsyn.

This kind of person is rare in Russia. It is represented among us by
Mordvinov, the famous head of the Third Section, Pelikan, the rector of
Vilna, and a few accommodating Letts and degraded Poles.[128] But
unluckily for the inquisition, Staal, the Commandant of Moscow, was
appointed the first member. Staal, a straightforward military man, a
gallant old general, went into the case and found that it consisted of
two circumstances that had no connection with each other: the affair of
the supper party, for which the police ought to be punished, and the
arrest for no apparent reason of persons whose only guilt, so far as
could be seen, lay in certain half-expressed opinions, for which it
would be both difficult and absurd to try them.

Staal’s opinion did not please Golitsyn junior. The dispute between them
took a bitter character; the old warrior flared up, wrathfully struck
the floor with his sabre and said: ‘Instead of ruining people, you had
better draw up a report on the advisability of closing all the schools
and universities; that would warn other unfortunate youths; however, you
can do what you like, but you must do it without me. I won’t set foot in
the committee again.’ With these words the old man hurriedly left the
room.

The Tsar was informed of this the same day.

In the morning when the commandant appeared with his report, the Tsar
asked him why he would not attend the committee; Staal told him why.

‘What nonsense!’ replied the Tsar, ‘to quarrel with Golitsyn, for shame!
I trust you will attend the committee as before.’

‘Sire,’ answered Staal, ‘spare my grey hairs. I have lived to reach them
without the slightest stain on my honour. My zeal is known to your
Majesty, my blood, the remnant of my days are yours, but this is a
question of my honour—my conscience revolts against what is being done
in the committee.’

The Tsar frowned. Staal bowed himself out, and was not once in the
committee afterwards.

This anecdote, the accuracy of which is not open to the slightest doubt,
throws great light on the character of Nicholas. How was it that it did
not enter his head that if a man whom he could not but respect, a brave
warrior, an old man who had won his position, so obstinately besought
him to spare his honour, the case could not be quite clean? He could not
have done less than insist on Staal’s explaining the matter in the
presence of Golitsyn. He did not do this, but gave orders that we should
be confined more strictly.

When he had gone there were only enemies of the accused in the
committee, presided over by a simple-hearted old man, Prince S. M.
Golitsyn, who knew as little about the case nine months after it had
begun as he did nine months before it began. He preserved a dignified
silence, very rarely put in a word, and at the end of an examination
invariably asked: ‘May we let him go?’ ‘We may,’ Golitsyn junior would
answer, and the senior would say with dignity to the prisoner, ‘You may
go.’

My first examination lasted four hours.

The questions were of two kinds. The object of the first was to discover
a manner of thinking, ‘in opposition to the spirit of government,
revolutionary opinions, imbued with the pernicious doctrines of Saint
Simon,’ as Golitsyn junior and the auditor Oransky expressed it.

These questions were easy, but they were hardly questions. In the papers
and letters that had been seized, the opinions were fairly simply
expressed; the questions could in reality only relate to the substantial
fact of whether a man had or had not written the words in question. The
committee thought it necessary to add to every written phrase, ‘How do
you explain the following passage in your letter?’

Of course it was useless to explain; I wrote evasive and empty phrases
in reply. In one letter the auditor discovered the phrase: ‘All
constitutional parties lead to nothing, they are contracts between a
master and his slaves; the problem is not to make things better for the
slaves, but to put an end to their being slaves.’ When I had to explain
this phrase I observed that I saw no obligation to defend constitutional
government, and that, if I had defended it, it would have been charged
against me.

‘A constitutional form of government may be attacked from two sides,’
Golitsyn junior observed in his nervous hissing voice; ‘you do not
attack it from the point of view of monarchy, or you would not talk
about slaves.’

‘In that I err in company with the Empress Catherine II., who ordered
that her subjects should not be called slaves.’

Golitsyn, breathless with anger at this ironical reply, said: ‘You seem
to imagine that we are assembled here to conduct scholastic arguments,
that you are defending a thesis in the university.’

‘With what object, then, do you ask for explanations?’

‘You appear not to understand what is wanted of you.’

‘I don’t understand.’

‘What obstinacy there is in all of them,’ Golitsyn senior, the
president, added, shrugging his shoulders and glancing at Shubensky, the
colonel of gendarmes. I smiled. ‘Just like Ogaryov,’ the simple-hearted
president observed.

A pause followed, the committee was assembled in Golitsyn senior’s
library; I turned to the bookshelves and began examining the books.
Among other things there was an edition in many volumes of the works of
Saint Simon. ‘Here,’ I said, turning to the president, ‘is it not
unjust? I am being tried on account of Saint-Simonism, while you,
prince, have twenty volumes of his works.’

As the good-natured old man had never read anything in his life, he
could not think what to answer. But Golitsyn junior looked at me with
the eyes of a viper and asked: ‘Don’t you see that those are the memoirs
of the Duc de Saint Simon of the time of Louis XIV.?’

The president with a smile gave me a nod that signified, ‘Well, my boy,
you put your foot in it, didn’t you?’ and said, ‘You can go.’

While I was in the doorway the president asked: ‘Is he the one who wrote
about Peter the Great, that thing you were showing me?’

‘Yes,’ answered Shubensky.

I stopped.

‘_Il a des moyens_,’ observed the president.

‘So much the worse. Poison in clever hands is all the more dangerous,’
added the inquisitor; ‘a very pernicious and quite incorrigible young
man.’

My sentence lay in those words.

Apropos of Saint Simon. When the police-master seized Ogaryov’s books
and papers, he laid aside a volume of Thiers’ _History of the French
Revolution_, then found a second volume, a third, up to an eighth. At
last he could bear it no longer, and said: ‘Good Lord, what a number of
revolutionary books ... and here is another,’ he added, giving the
policeman Cuvier’s _Discours sur les Révolutions du Globe Terrestre_.’

The second kind of question was more complicated. In them all sorts of
police traps and inquisitional tricks were made use of to confuse,
entangle, and involve one in contradictions. Hints of evidence given by
others and all sorts of moral tests were employed. It is not worth while
to repeat them, it is enough to say that all their devices did not draw
any of the four of us into conflicting statements.

After I had received my last question, I was sitting alone in the little
room in which we wrote. All at once the door opened and Golitsyn junior
walked in with a gloomy and anxious face. ‘I have come,’ he said, ‘to
have a few words with you before your evidence is completed. My late
father’s long connection with yours makes me take a special interest in
you. You are young and may still make a career; to do so you must clear
yourself of this affair ... and fortunately it depends on yourself. Your
father has taken your arrest deeply to heart and is living now in the
hope that you will be released: Prince Sergey Mihailovitch and I have
just been speaking about it and we are genuinely ready to do all we can;
give us the means of assisting you.’

I saw the drift of his words, the blood rushed to my head, I gnawed my
pen with vexation. He went on: ‘You are going straight under the white
strap, or to the fortress, on the way you will kill your father; he will
not survive the day when he sees you in the grey overcoat of a soldier.’

I tried to say something but he interrupted me:

‘I know what you want to say. Have a little patience! That you had
designs against the government is evident. To merit the mercy of the
Most High you must give proofs of your penitence. You are obstinate, you
give evasive answers and from a false sense of honour you spare men of
whom we know more than you do and _who have not been so discreet as
you_[129]; you will not help them, and they will drag you down with them
to ruin. Write a letter to the committee, simply, frankly, say that you
feel your guilt, that you were led away by your youth, name the
unfortunate, misguided men who have led you astray.... Are you willing
at this easy price to purchase your future and your father’s life?’

‘I know nothing and have not a word to add to my evidence,’ I replied.

Golitsyn got up and said coldly: ‘As you please, it is not our fault!’
With that the examination ended.

In the January or February of 1835 I was before the committee for the
last time. I was summoned to read through my answers, to add to them if
I wished, and to sign them.

Only Shubensky was present. When I had finished reading them over I said
to him: ‘I should like to know what charge can be made against a man
upon these questions and upon these answers? Under what article of the
Code do you bring me?’

‘The Imperial Code is drawn up for criminals of a different kind,’
observed the light-blue colonel.

‘That’s a different point. After reading over all these literary
exercises, I cannot believe that that makes up the whole charge on
account of which I have been in prison over six months.’

‘But do you really imagine,’ replied Shubensky, ‘that we believe you
that you have not formed a secret society?’

‘Where is the society?’

‘It is your luck that no traces have been found, that you have not
succeeded in doing anything. We stopped you in time, that is, to speak
plainly, we have saved you.’

It was the story of the locksmith’s wife and her husband in Gogol’s
_Inspector General_ over again.

When I had signed, Shubensky rang the bell and told them to summon the
priest. The priest came up and wrote below my signature that all the
evidence had been given by me voluntarily and without any compulsion. I
need hardly say that he had not been present at the examination, and
that he had not even the decency to ask me how it had been. (It was my
impartial witness outside the gate again!)

At the end of the investigation, prison conditions were somewhat
relaxed. Members of our families could obtain permits for interviews. So
passed another two months.

In the middle of March our sentence was ratified. No one knew what it
was; some said we were being sent to the Caucasus, others that we should
be taken to Bobruisk, others again hoped that we should all be released
(this was the sentence which was proposed by Staal and sent separately
by him to the Tsar; he advised that our imprisonment should be taken as
equivalent to punishment).

At last, on 20th March, we were all assembled at Prince Golitsyn’s to
hear our sentence. This was a gala day for us. We saw each other for the
first time after our arrest.

Noisily, gaily embracing and shaking hands, we stood surrounded by a
cordon of gendarmes and garrison officers. This meeting cheered us all
up; there was no end to the questions and the anecdotes.

Sokolovsky was present, pale and somewhat thinner, but as brilliantly
amusing as ever.

The author of _The Fabric of the World_ and of _Heveri_ and other rather
good poems, had naturally great poetic talent, but was not wildly
original enough to dispense with culture, nor sufficiently well-educated
to develop his talent. A charming rake, a poet in life, he was not in
the least a political man. He was amusing, charming, a merry companion
in merry moments, a ‘bon vivant,’ fond of having a good time, as we all
were, perhaps a little too much so.

Having dropped accidentally from a carousal into prison, Sokolovsky
behaved extremely well, he grew up in confinement. The auditor of the
committee, a pedant, a pietist, a detective, who had grown thin and
grey-headed in envy and slander, not daring from religion and devotion
to the throne to understand the last two verses of his poem in their
grammatical sense, asked Sokolovsky ‘to whom do those rude words at the
end of the song refer?’

‘Rest assured,’ said Sokolovsky, ‘not to the Tsar, and I would
particularly draw your attention to that extenuating circumstance.’

The auditor shrugged his shoulders, turned up his eyes to the ceiling
and after gazing a long time in silence at Sokolovsky took a pinch of
snuff.

Sokolovsky was arrested in Petersburg and sent to Moscow without being
told where he was being taken. The police often perpetrate these jests
among us, and quite unnecessarily. It is the form their creative fancy
takes. There is no occupation in the world so prosaic, so revolting that
it has not its artistic yearnings, its craving for decoration and
adornment. Sokolovsky was taken straight to prison and put into a dark
cell. Why was he put in prison while we were kept in barracks?

He had two or three shirts with him and nothing else at all. In England
every one on being brought into prison is at once put into a bath, but
with us they take every precaution against cleanliness.

If Dr. Haas had not sent Sokolovsky a bundle of his own linen he would
have been crusted with dirt.

Dr. Haas was a very original eccentric person. The memory of this ‘crazy
and fanatical’ man ought not to be lost in the rubbish heap of official
necrologies describing the virtues of persons of the first two grades
which no one ever heard of before their death.

A thin little, waxen-looking old man, in a black, swallow-tail coat,
short trousers, black silk stockings and shoes with buckles, he looked
as though he had just come out of some drama of the eighteenth century.
In this _grand gala_ of funerals and weddings, and in the agreeable
climate of the northern latitude of fifty-nine degrees, Haas used every
week to drive to the étape on the Sparrow Hills when a batch of convicts
were being sent off. In the capacity of prison doctor he had access to
them, he used to go to inspect them and always brought with him a basket
full of all manner of things, provisions and dainties of all
sorts—walnuts, cakes, oranges, and apples, for the women. This aroused
the wrath and indignation of the benevolent ladies who were afraid of
giving pleasure by philanthropy, and afraid of being more charitable
than was necessary to save the convicts from dying of hunger and cold.

But Haas was not easy to move, and after listening mildly to reproaches
for his ‘foolish spoiling of the female convicts,’ would rub his hands
and say: ‘Be so kind to see, gracious madam, a bit of bread, a copper
every one will give them, but a sweet or an orange for long they will
see not, no one gives them, that I can from your words deduce; I do them
this pleasure for that it will not a long time be repeated.’

Haas lived in the hospital. A patient came before dinner to consult him.
Haas examined him and went into his study to write some prescription. On
his return he found neither the patient nor the silver forks and spoons
which had been lying on the table. Haas called the porter and asked him
if any one had come in besides the patient. The porter grasped the
position, rushed out and returned a minute later with the spoons and the
patient, whom he had stopped with the help of another hospital porter.
The rascal fell at the doctor’s feet and besought mercy. Haas was
overcome with confusion.

‘Go for the police,’ he said to one of the porters, and to the other,
‘and you send the secretary here at once.’

The porters, pleased at the capture and at their share in the business
altogether, ran off, and Haas, taking advantage of their absence, said
to the thief, ‘You are a false man, you have deceived and tried to rob
me. God will judge you ... and now run quickly to the back gates before
the porters come back ... but stay, perhaps you have no money, here is
half a rouble, but try to reform your soul; from God you will not escape
as from the policeman.’

At this even the members of his own household protested. But the
incorrigible doctor maintained his point: ‘Theft is a great vice; but I
know the police, I know how they torment them—they will question him,
they will flog him; to give up one’s neighbour to the lash is a far
worse vice; besides, who can tell, perhaps what I have done may touch
his heart!’

His friends shook their heads and said, ‘_Er hat einen raptus_’; the
benevolent ladies said, ‘_C’est un brave homme mais ce n’est pas tout à
fait en règle, cela_,’ and tapped their foreheads. And Haas rubbed his
hands and went his own way.

... Sokolovsky had hardly finished his anecdotes, when several others
speaking at once began to tell theirs; it was as though we had all
returned from a long journey—there was no end to the questions, jokes,
and witticisms.

Physically, S—— had suffered more than the rest; he was thin and had
lost part of his hair. He had been at his mother’s in the country in the
Tambov province when he heard that we had been arrested, and at once set
off for Moscow, for fear that his mother should be alarmed by a visit of
the gendarmes, but he caught cold on the way and reached home in a high
fever. The police found him in bed, and it was impossible to move him to
the police station. He was placed under arrest at home, a soldier of the
police station was put on guard in the bedroom and the local police
superintendent was told off to act as brother-of-mercy by the patient’s
bedside, so that on recovering consciousness after delirium he met the
attentive glance of the one, or the battered countenance of the other.

At the beginning of the winter he was moved to the Lefortovsky Hospital;
it appeared there was not a single empty private room for a prisoner,
but such trifles were not deemed worth considering; a corner screened
off apart, with no stove, was found, the sick man was put in this
southern verandah and a sentry told off to watch him. What the
temperature in this hole was in winter may be judged from the fact that
the sentry was so benumbed with cold at night that he would go into the
corridor to warm himself at the stove, begging S—— not to tell of it.
The hospital authorities themselves saw that such tropical quarters were
impossible in a latitude so near the pole, and moved S—— to a room near
the one in which frost-bitten patients were rubbed.

Before we had time to describe and listen to half our adventures, the
adjutants began suddenly bustling about, the gendarmes’ officers drew
themselves up, and the police set themselves to rights: the door opened
solemnly and little Prince Sergey Mihailovitch Golitsyn walked in _en
grande tenue_ with a ribbon across his shoulder; Tsinsky was in a
uniform of the suite, even the auditor, Oransky, put on some sort of
pale-green civil-military uniform for the joyful occasion. The
commandant, of course, had not come.

Meanwhile the noise and laughter had risen to such a pitch that the
auditor came fiercely into the room and observed that loud conversation
and, above all, laughter seemed a flagrant disrespect to the will of the
Most High, which we were about to hear.

The doors were opened. Officers divided us into three groups: in the
first was Sokolovsky, the painter Utkin, and an officer called Ibaev; we
were in the second; in the third, _tutti frutti_.

The sentence regarding the first category was read aloud. It was
terrible; condemned for high treason, they were sent to the
Schlüsselburg for an indefinite period. When Oransky, drawling to give
himself dignity, read with emphasis that for ‘insulting the Majesty and
Most August Family, _et cetera_,’ Sokolovsky observed: ‘Well, I never
insulted the family.’

Among his papers besides this poem were found some resolutions written
in jest as though by the Grand Duke Michael Pavlovitch, with intentional
mistakes in spelling, and those orthographical errors helped to convict
him.

Tsinsky, to show that he could be free and easy and affable, said to
Sokolovsky after the sentence: ‘Hey, have you ever been in Schlüsselburg
before?’ ‘Last year,’ Sokolovsky answered promptly, ‘as though I knew
what was coming, I drank a bottle of Madeira there.’ Two years later
Utkin died in the fortress. Sokolovsky, half dead, was released and sent
to the Caucasus; he died at Pyatigorsk. Some remnant of shame and
conscience led the government after the death of two to transfer the
third to Perm. Ibaev only died in the spiritual sense: he became a
mystic.

Utkin, ‘a free artist confined in prison,’ as he described himself at
the examinations, was a man of forty; he had never taken part in any
kind of political affair, but, being of a generous and impulsive
temperament, he gave free rein to his tongue in the committee and was
abrupt and rude in his answers. For this he was done to death in a damp
cell, in which the water trickled down the walls.

Ibaev’s greater guilt lay in his epaulettes. Had he not been an officer,
he would never have been so punished. The man had happened to be present
at some supper party, had probably drunk too much and sung like all the
rest, but certainly neither more nor louder than the others.

Our turn came. Oransky wiped his spectacles, cleared his throat, and
began reverently announcing the will of the Most High. The Tsar, after
examining the report of the committee and taking into special
consideration the youth of the criminals, _commanded that we should not
be brought to trial_, and informed us that by law we ought, as men
guilty of high treason by singing seditious songs, to lose our lives or,
alternatively, to be sentenced to penal servitude for life. Instead of
this, the Tsar in his infinite mercy forgave the greater number of the
guilty, leaving them in their present abode under the supervision of the
police. The more guilty among them he commanded to be put under
reformatory treatment, which consisted in being sent to civilian duty
for an indefinite period to remote provinces, to live under the
superintendence of the local police authorities.

It appeared that there were six of the ‘more guilty’: Ogaryov, S——,
Lahtin, Obolensky, Sorokin, and I. I was to be sent to Perm. Among those
condemned was Lahtin, who had not been arrested at all. When he was
summoned to the committee to hear the sentence, he supposed that it was
as a warning, to be punished by hearing how others were punished. The
story was that some one of Prince Golitsyn’s circle, being angry with
Lahtin’s wife, had prepared this agreeable surprise for him. A man of
delicate health, he died three years later in exile.

When Oransky had finished reading, Colonel Shubensky stepped forward. In
choice language and in the style of Lomonossov he informed us that it
was due to the good offices of the noble gentleman who had presided at
the committee that the Tsar had been so merciful.

Shubensky waited for all of us to thank Prince Golitsyn, but this did
not come off.

Some of those who were pardoned nodded, stealing a stealthy glance at us
as they did so.

We stood with folded arms, making not the slightest sign that our hearts
were touched by the Imperial and princely mercy.

Then Shubensky thought of another dodge and, addressing Ogaryov, said:
‘You are going to Penza; do you imagine that that is by chance? Your
father is lying paralysed at Penza and the prince besought the Tsar to
fix that town, that your being near might to some extent alleviate the
blow of your exile for him. Do you not think you have reason to thank
the prince?’

There was no help for it, Ogaryov made a slight bow. This was what they
were trying to get.

The good-natured old man was pleased at this, and next, I don’t know
why, he summoned me. I stepped forward with the devout intention of not
thanking him whatever he or Shubensky might say; besides, I was being
sent farther away than any and to the nastiest town.

‘You are going to Perm,’ said Prince Golitsyn. I said nothing. He was
disconcerted and, to say something, added, ‘I have an estate there.’

‘Would you care to send some commission through me to your steward?’ I
asked with a smile.

‘I do not give commissions to people like you—Carbonari,’ added the
resourceful old man.

‘Then what do you wish of me?’

‘Nothing.’

‘I thought you called me.’

‘You can go,’ Shubensky interposed.

‘Allow me,’ I replied, ‘since I am here to remind you that you told me,
Colonel, last time I was before the committee, that no one accused me of
being connected with the supper-party affair. Yet in the sentence it is
stated that I was one of those guilty in connection with that affair.
There is some mistake here.’

‘Do you wish to protest against the decision of the Most High?’ observed
Shubensky. ‘You had better take care that Perm is not changed to
something worse. I shall order your words to be taken down.’

‘I meant to ask you to do so. In the sentence the words occur “on the
report of the committee.” I am protesting against your report and not
against the will of the Most High. I appeal to the prince: there was no
question in my case of a supper party or of songs, was there?’

‘As though you do not know,’ said Shubensky, beginning to turn pale with
wrath, ‘that you are ten times more guilty than those who were at the
supper party. He now’—he pointed to one of those who had been
pardoned—‘in a state of intoxication sang some filthy song, but
afterwards he begged forgiveness on his knees with tears. But you are
still far from a sign of penitence.’

The gentleman at whom the colonel pointed said nothing, but hung his
head and flushed crimson....

It was a good lesson, much good his meanness did him!...

‘Excuse me, it is not the point whether my guilt is greater or not,’ I
went on, ‘but, if I am a murderer, I don’t want to be considered a
thief. I don’t want it to be said of me, even in justification, that I
did something in a “state of intoxication,” as you expressed it just
now.’

‘If I had a son who showed such stubbornness I would myself beg the Tsar
to send him to Siberia.’

At this point the chief police-master interposed some incoherent
nonsense. It is a pity that Golitsyn junior was not present, it would
have been an opportunity for his eloquence.

It all ended, of course, in nothing.

Lahtin went up to Prince Golitsyn and begged that his departure might be
deferred. ‘My wife is with child,’ he said.

‘I am not responsible for that,’ answered Golitsyn.

A wild beast, a mad dog when it bites, looks grave and sticks up its
tail, but this crazy aristocrat, though he had the reputation of a
good-natured man, was not ashamed to make this vulgar joke.

We were left once more for a quarter of an hour in the room, and, in
spite of the zealous upbraidings of the gendarmes and police officers,
warmly embraced one another and took a long farewell. Except Obolensky I
saw none of them again until I came back from Vyatka.

Departure was before us.

Prison had been a continuation of our past; but our departure into the
wilds was a complete break with it.

Our youthful existence in our circle of friends was over.

Our exile would probably last several years. Where and how should we
meet, and should we ever meet?...

I regretted my old life, and I had to leave it so abruptly ... without
saying good-bye. I had no hope of seeing Ogaryov. Two of my friends had
succeeded in seeing me during the last few days, but that was not enough
for me.

If I could but once again see my youthful comforter and press her hand,
as I had pressed it in the graveyard.... I longed both to take leave of
my past and to greet my future in her person....

We did see each other for a few minutes on the 9th of April 1835, on the
day before I was sent off into exile.

For years I kept that day sacred in my memory; it was one of the
happiest moments in my life.

Why must the thought of that day and of all the bright days of my past
bring back so much that is terrible?... The grave, the wreath of
dark-red roses, two children holding my hand—torches, crowds of exiles,
the moon, the warm sea under the mountain-side, the words that I did not
understand and that wrung my heart....

All is over!




                               Chapter 13
               EXILE—THE MAYOR AT POKROVO—THE VOLGA—PERM


On the morning of the 10th of April an officer of gendarmes took me to
the house of the governor-general. There, in the private part of the
building, my relatives were allowed to come and say good-bye to me.

Of course it was all awkward and wrung the heart; the prying spies and
clerks, the reading of the instructions to the gendarme who was to take
me, the impossibility of saying anything without witnesses: in fact,
more distressing and painful surroundings could not be imagined.

I heaved a sigh of relief when at last the carriage rolled off along
Vladimirka.

                   ‘Per me si va nella città dolente,
                   Per me si va nel eterno dolore——’

At a station somewhere I wrote those two lines, which apply equally well
to the portals of Hell and the Siberian high-road.

Seven versts from Moscow there is a restaurant called ‘Perov’s’; there
one of my most intimate friends had promised to wait for me. I suggested
to the gendarme a drink of vodka. It was a long way from the town. We
went in, but my friend was not there. I tried every device to linger in
the tavern; at last the gendarme would stay no longer and the driver was
starting the horses—when suddenly a troika dashed up straight to the
restaurant. I flew to the door ... two strangers, merchants’ sons, out
for a spree, noisily dismounted from the chaise. I looked into the
distance—not one moving point, not one man could be seen on the road to
Moscow ... it was bitter to get in and drive off. I gave the driver
twenty kopecks, and we flew like an arrow from the bow.

We drove without stopping; the gendarme had been ordered to do not less
than two hundred versts in the twenty-four hours. This would have been
quite endurable at any time but the beginning of April. In places the
road was covered with ice, in places with mud and water; moreover, as we
drove towards Siberia it got worse and worse at every station.

The first incident of my journey was at Pokrovo.

We had lost several hours owing to the ice which was floating down the
river and cutting off all communication with the opposite bank. The
gendarme was in a nervous fidget; all at once the superintendent of the
posting-station at Pokrovo announced that there were no horses. The
gendarme pointed out that in the permit he was instructed to give them
couriers’ horses if there were no post horses. The superintendent
replied that those horses had been taken by the Deputy Minister of Home
Affairs. I need hardly say that the gendarme began to quarrel and made a
row. The superintendent ran to try and get private horses and the
gendarme went with him.

I got tired of waiting for them in the superintendent’s dirty room. I
went out at the gate and began walking in front of the house. It was my
first walk unescorted by a soldier after nine months’ imprisonment.

I had walked up and down for half an hour when suddenly I was met by a
man wearing a uniform with epaulettes and a blue _pour le mérite_ on his
neck. He looked at me with marked persistence, passed me, and at once
turning back asked me with a fierce air: ‘Is it you who are being taken
by a gendarme to Perm?’

‘Yes,’ I answered without stopping.

‘Excuse me, excuse me, but how dare he?...’

‘With whom have I the honour to speak?’

‘I am the mayor,’ answered the stranger in a voice which betrayed a
profound sense of the dignity of that public position. ‘Upon my soul! I
am expecting the Deputy Minister from hour to hour, and here there are
political prisoners walking about the streets. What an ass your gendarme
is!’

‘Will you please address yourself to the gendarme in person.’

‘It is not a matter of addressing myself, I’ll arrest him. I’ll order
him a hundred strokes and send you on with a policeman.’

I nodded without waiting for him to finish his speech and strode rapidly
back into the station.

From the window I could hear him fuming at the gendarme and threatening
all sorts of things. The gendarme apologised but did not seem much
frightened. Three minutes later they both came in. I was sitting turned
toward the window and did not look at them.

From the mayor’s questions to the gendarme, I saw that he was consumed
by the desire to find out for what offence, how and why, I was being
sent into exile. I remained obstinately silent. The mayor began
addressing me and the gendarme indiscriminately: ‘No one cares to enter
into our position. Do you suppose it is pleasant for me to have to swear
at a soldier and cause unpleasantness to a man whom I have never seen in
my life? It is the responsibility! The mayor is in charge of the town.
Whatever happens, I have to answer for it; if government funds are
stolen, it is my fault; if the church is burnt down, it is my fault; if
there are a great many men drunk in the street, it is my fault; if there
is not enough liquor drunk, it is my fault too’ (the last phrase pleased
him very much and he went on in a more cheerful tone). ‘It’s a good
thing you met me, but if you had met the Minister and you walking up and
down, he would have asked, how is this, a political prisoner out for a
walk? Put the mayor under arrest....’

At last I was weary of his eloquence and, turning to him, I said: ‘Do
what your duty requires, but I beg you to spare me your admonitions. I
see from what you say that you expect me to bow to you; it is not my
habit to bow to strangers.’

The mayor was confused.

‘It is always like that among us,’ A—— A—— used to say; ‘whichever is
first to begin scolding and shouting always gets the best of it. If you
allow an official to raise his voice, you are lost; hearing himself
yelling, he becomes a wild beast. If at his first rude word you begin
shouting, he is invariably scared and gives way, thinking you are a
determined person and that such persons had better not be irritated too
much.’

The mayor sent the gendarme to inquire about horses and, turning to me,
observed by way of apology: ‘I have acted like this for the sake of the
soldier; you don’t know what our soldiers are like—one must not allow
the slightest slackness, but, believe me, I can discriminate—allow me to
ask you what unlucky chance....’

‘At the conclusion of our trial we were forbidden to speak of it.’

‘In that case.... Of course.... I do not venture ...’ and the mayor’s
eyes expressed agonies of curiosity. He paused.

‘I had a distant relative, he was a year in the Peter-Paul fortress. You
see, I, too—excuse me, it worries me. I believe you are still angry? I
am a military man, stern, accustomed to the service; I went into the
regiment at seventeen. I have a hasty temper, but it is all over in a
minute. I won’t touch your gendarme, the devil take him entirely....’

The gendarme came in with the reply that the horses could not be driven
in from the grazing-ground in less than an hour.

The mayor informed him that he forgave him on my intercession. Then
turning to me he added:

‘And to show that you are not angry, you will not refuse my request. I
live only two doors away; allow me to ask you to take pot-luck at lunch
with me.’

This was so funny after our encounter that I went to the mayor’s and ate
his dried sturgeon and caviare and drank his vodka and Madeira.

He became so affable that he told me all his domestic affairs, even
describing his wife’s illness which had lasted seven years. After
luncheon he took with proud satisfaction a letter from a vase standing
on the table and gave me to read ‘a poem’ by his son, deemed worthy of
being read in public at the examination for the Cadet School. After
obliging me with such marks of complete confidence, he adroitly passed
to an indirect question about my case. This time I partly gratified his
curiosity.

This mayor reminded me of the secretary of the district court of whom
our friend Shtchepkin used to tell: ‘Nine police-captains came and went,
but the secretary remained unchanged, and went on managing the district
as before. “How is it you get on with all of them?” Shtchepkin asked
him. “Oh, it’s nothing; with God’s help we get round them somehow. Some
certainly were hot-tempered at first, would stamp with their forelegs
and their hindlegs, shout, swear for all they were worth, say they’d
kick me out, and they’d report me to the governor—well, as you see, I
know my place, one holds one’s tongue and thinks; give him time, he’ll
be broken in! This is just first being in harness! And, as a matter of
fact, they can be driven all right!”’

When we reached Kazan the Volga was in all the glory of the spring
floods. The whole distance from Uslon to Kazan we had to float on a
punt, the river had overflowed for fifteen versts or more. It was a
cloudy day. The ferry had broken down, a number of carts and conveyances
of all sorts were waiting on the bank. The gendarme went to the station
superintendent and asked for a punt. The man gave it reluctantly, saying
that it would be better to wait, that it was not safe to cross. The
gendarme was in a hurry because he was drunk and because he wanted to
show his power.

They put my carriage on a little punt and we floated off. The weather
seemed calmer. Half an hour later the Tatar put up a sail, when suddenly
the storm began to rage again. We were carried along with such violence
that, running upon a log, we crashed against it so that the wretched
punt was broken and the water poured over the deck. The position was
disagreeable; however, the Tatar succeeded in getting the punt on to a
sandbank. A merchant’s barge came into sight. We shouted to it and asked
them to send a boat; the bargemen heard us and floated by without doing
anything.

A peasant came up with his wife in a little canoe made out of a
tree-trunk, asked us what was the matter, and, remarking ‘Well, what of
it? Stop up the hole and go your way rejoicing. What’s there to mope
about? It’s because you are a Tatar, I suppose, you can’t do anything,’
climbed on to the punt.

The Tatar certainly was very much alarmed. First, when the water had
poured over the sleeping gendarme, the latter had leapt up and at once
began beating the Tatar. Secondly, the boat was government property, and
the Tatar kept repeating: ‘Here it will go to the bottom, what will
become of me! what will become of me!’

I comforted him by saying that if it went to the bottom he would go with
it.

‘It is all right, master, if I drown, but how if I don’t?’

The peasant and the others stopped up the hole with all sorts of things.
The peasant struck it with his axe and knocked in some little plank;
then, up to his waist in the water, helped to drag the punt off the
sandbank and we were soon floating off into the channel of the Volga.
The river rushed us along savagely. The wind and the sleet cut the face,
the cold penetrated to the bone, but soon the monument of Ivan the
Terrible began to stand out from the fog and the floods of water. It
seemed as though the danger were over, when suddenly the Tatar shouted
in a plaintive voice, ‘A leak, a leak!’ and the water began pouring
vigorously in at the hole that had been stuffed up. We were in the very
centre of the river, the punt moved more and more slowly, one could
foresee that it would soon sink altogether. The Tatar took off his cap
and prayed. My valet, overcome with terror, wept and said: ‘Farewell,
mother, I shall not see you again.’ The gendarme swore and vowed to
thrash them all as soon as they got to the bank.

At first I too was frightened; besides, the wind and the rain added
confusion and uproar. But the thought that it was absurd that I should
perish without having _done anything_, that youthful ‘_Quid timeas,
Caesarem vehis!_’ got the upper hand and I calmly awaited the end,
convinced that I could not perish between Uslon and Kazan. Later on,
life breaks us of this proud confidence and punishes us for it; that is
why youth is bold and full of heroism, while with the years a man grows
cautious and is rarely carried away.

A quarter of an hour later, we were ashore near the walls of the Kazan
Kremlin, drenched and shivering. I went into the nearest tavern, drank
off a glass of foaming wine, ate a fried egg, and set off to the
post-office.

In villages and little towns there is a room at the posting-station for
travellers, in big towns every one puts up at hotels and there is
nothing at the posting-stations for travellers. I was taken to the
posting-station. The superintendent of the station showed me his room;
there were women and children in it and a sick and bedridden old man;
there was absolutely not a corner where I could change my clothes. I
wrote a letter to the general of gendarmes and asked him to assign a
room to me somewhere that I might get warm and dry my clothes.

An hour later the gendarme returned and said that Count Apraxin had
ordered that a room should be given me. I waited a couple of hours; no
one came and I sent the gendarme off again. He came back with the answer
that Colonel Pol, to whom the General had given the order to find me a
room, was playing cards at the Nobles’ Club and that a room could not be
found me till next day.

This was barbarous; and I wrote a second letter to Count Apraxin asking
him to send me on immediately, saying that I might find shelter at the
next posting-station. The Count was graciously pleased to be in bed, and
the letter was left until the morning. There was nothing for it. I took
off my wet clothes and lay down on the table of the post-office wrapped
in the greatcoat of the ‘elder’; for a pillow I took a thick book and
laid some linen upon it.

In the morning I sent out for some breakfast. The post-office officials
were by now assembling. The clerk in charge submitted to me that it
really was not the right thing to have breakfast in a public office,
that it did not matter to him personally, but that the postmaster might
not like it.

I answered him jocosely that a man cannot be turned out who has no right
to go, and if he has no right to go he is obliged to eat and drink where
he is detained....

Next day Count Apraxin gave me permission to remain three days in Kazan
and to put up at the hotel.

I spent those three days wandering about the town with the gendarme. The
Tatar women with their covered faces, their broad-cheeked husbands,
mosques of the true faith side by side with orthodox churches, all was
suggestive of Asia and the East. In Vladimir, in Nizhni there is a
feeling of nearness to Moscow, here of remoteness from her.

In Perm I was taken straight to the governor. He was holding a great
reception; his daughter was being married that day to an officer. He
insisted on my going in, and I had to present myself to the whole
society of Perm in a dirty travelling coat, covered with mud and dust.
The governor, after talking all sorts of nonsense, forbade me to make
acquaintance with the Polish exiles and ordered me to come to him in a
few days, saying that then he would find me work in the office.

This governor was a Little Russian; he did not oppress the exiles, and
altogether was a harmless person. He was improving his position somehow
on the sly, like a mole working unseen underground; he was adding grain
to grain and laying by a little hourly for a rainy day.

From some inexplicable idea of discipline, he used to order all the
exiles who lived in Perm to appear before him at ten o’clock in the
morning on Saturdays. He would come out with his pipe and a list, verify
whether we were all present, and, if any one was not, send a policeman
to find out the reason and, after saying scarcely anything to any one,
would dismiss us. In this way in his reception-room I became acquainted
with all the Polish exiles, whose acquaintance he had warned me I must
not make.

The day after my arrival the gendarme went away, and for the first time
since my arrest I found myself in freedom.

In freedom ... in a little town on the Siberian frontier, with no
experience, with no conception of the surroundings in which I had to
live.

From the nursery I had passed into the lecture-room, from the
lecture-room to a circle of friends—it had all been theories, dreams, my
own people, no practical responsibilities. Then prison to let it all
settle. Practical contact with life was beginning here near the Ural
Mountains.

It began at once; the day after my arrival, I went with a porter from
the governor’s office to look for a lodging and he took me to a big
house of one storey. In spite of my protesting that I was looking for a
very little house or, still better, part of a house, he obstinately
insisted on my going in.

The landlady made me sit down on her sofa and, learning that I came from
Moscow, asked if I had seen Mr. Kabrit in Moscow. I told her that I had
never even heard the name.

‘How is that?’ observed the old woman; ‘I mean Kabrit,’ and she
mentioned his Christian name and his father’s name. ‘Upon my word, sir,
why, he was our vice-governor!’

‘But I have been nine months in prison, perhaps that is why I have not
heard of him,’ I said, smiling.

‘Maybe that is it. So you will take the house, my good sir?’

‘It is too big, much too big; I told the man so.’

‘You can’t have too much of a good thing,’ she said.

‘That is so, but you will want more rent for so much of a good thing.’

‘Ah, my good sir, but who has talked to you about my price? I have not
said a word about it yet.’

‘But I know that such a house cannot be cheap.’

‘How much will you give?’

To get rid of her, I said that I would not give more than three hundred
and fifty roubles.

‘Well, I would be thankful for that. Bid the man bring your bits of
trunks, darling, and take a little glass of Teneriffe.’

Her price seemed to me fabulously low. I took the house, and, just as I
was on the point of going, she stopped me. ‘I forgot to ask you, are you
going to keep your own cow?’

‘Good Heavens, no!’ I answered, almost appalled by her question.

‘Well, then, I will let you have cream.’

I went away thinking with horror where I was and what I was that I could
be considered capable of keeping my own cow. But before I had time to
look round, the governor informed me that I was transferred to Vyatka
because another exile who had been allotted to Vyatka had asked to be
transferred to Perm, where he had relations. The governor wanted me to
leave the next day. This was impossible; thinking to remain some time in
Perm, I had bought all sorts of things and I had to sell them even at
half-price. After various evasive answers, the governor gave me
permission to remain forty-eight hours, exacting a promise that I would
not seek an opportunity of seeing the other exiles.

I was preparing to sell my horse and all sorts of rubbish the next day
when suddenly the police-master appeared with an order to leave within
twenty-four hours. I explained to him that the governor had given me an
extension of time. The police-master showed me the instructions, in
which he certainly was directed to see me off within twenty-four hours.
The document had been signed that very day and, consequently, after the
conversation with me.

‘Ah,’ said the police-master, ‘_I_ understand, I understand; our fine
gentleman wants to throw the responsibility on me.’

‘Let us go and confront him with it.’

‘Let us!’

The governor said that he had forgotten the permission he had given me.
The police-master asked slyly whether he wished him to make a fresh copy
of the instructions.

‘Is it worth while?’ the governor remarked simply.

‘We have caught him,’ said the police-master, gleefully rubbing his
hands, ‘the scribbling soul!’

The Perm police-master belonged to a special type of military men turned
into officials. They are men who have had the luck in the army to come
in contact with a bayonet or to be hit by a bullet, and so to be given
such posts as that of local police-master or executive clerk.

In the regiment they have acquired certain airs of frankness, have
learnt by heart various phrases about the inviolability of honour and
the noble feelings, and also sarcastic jeers at the ‘scribbling gentry.’
The younger among them have read Marlinsky[130] and Zagoskin,[131] know
the beginning of the _Prisoner of the Caucasus_ and _Voynarovsky_, and
often repeat verses. Some, for instance, will say every time they see a
man smoking:

                  ‘The amber smoked between his lips.’

They are all without exception deeply and volubly conscious that their
position is far inferior to their merits, that only poverty keeps them
in this ‘world of ink,’ that if it were not for their wounds and lack of
means, they would be commanding army corps or have the rank of
adjutant-generals. Every one of them will quote a striking instance of
some old comrade and say: ‘Why, Kreits, or Ridiger, was made a cornet
with me. We lodged together. Called each other Petrusha and Alyosha—but
there, I’m not a German, you see, and I had no backing—so I can stay a
policeman. Do you imagine it’s easy for an honourable man with our ideas
to do police work?’

Their wives are even louder in their complaints, and with heavy hearts
go to Moscow every year to put money into the bank, on the pretext that
a mother or aunt is ill and wants to see them for the last time.

And so they live in comfort for fifteen years. The husband, railing
against his destiny, thrashes the police, beats the workpeople, cringes
to the governor, screens thieves, steals legal documents, and repeats
verses from the _Fountain of Bahtchisaray_.[132] The wife, complaining
of destiny and provincial life, grabs everything she can get, takes
tribute from petitioners and shops, and raves over moonlight nights.

I have made this digression because at first I was taken in by these
gentry and believed they really were rather better than the rest, which
is far from being the case....

I brought away from Perm one personal memory which is dear to me.

At one of the governor’s inspections of the exiles a Polish priest
invited me to go and see him. I found several Poles there. One of them
sat in silence pensively smoking a little pipe; misery, hopeless misery,
was apparent on every feature of his face. He was round-shouldered, even
crooked, his face was of the irregular Polish-Lithuanian type which at
first surprises and then attracts. The greatest of the Poles, Thaddeus
Kosciuszko, had just such features. The clothes of the Pole, whose name
was Tsihanovitch, gave evidence of terrible poverty.

A few days later I was walking along the deserted boulevard with which
Perm is bounded on one side; it was in the second half of May, the young
leaves were opening, the birches were in flower (I remember the whole
avenue was of birches), and there was no one anywhere. Our provincials
are not fond of _platonic_ walks. After strolling for some time, I saw
at last on the other side of the boulevard, that is, where the open
country began, a man botanising or perhaps simply gathering the scanty
and monotonous flowers of that region. When he raised his head I
recognised Tsihanovitch and went up to him.

Later on I saw a good deal of the victims of the Polish insurrection;
their record is particularly rich in martyrs—Tsihanovitch was the first.
When he told me how he had been persecuted by executioners in the
uniform of adjutant-generals—those tools with which the brutality of the
savage despot of the Winter Palace fights—then our discomforts, our
prison, and our trial seemed to me paltry.

At that time in Vilna the commanding officer _on the side of the
victorious enemy_ was the celebrated renegade Muravyov, who immortalised
himself by the historic declaration, ‘that he belonged to the Muravyovs
who hanged and not the Muravyovs who are hanged.’ For Nicholas’ narrow,
vindictive outlook, men of feverish ambition and coarse callousness were
always the best fitted or, at any rate, the most sympathetic.

The generals who sat in the torture chamber and tormented the
emissaries, their friends or the friends of their friends, behaved to
the prisoners like blackguards, with no breeding, no feeling of
delicacy, and at the same time were very well aware that all their
doings were covered by the military coat of Nicholas, soaked in the
blood of the Polish martyrs and the tears of Polish mothers.... This
Passion Week of a whole people still awaits its Luke or its Matthew....
But let them know: one torturer after another will be shamed at the bar
of history and leave his name there. That will be the portrait gallery
of the period of Nicholas by way of pendant to the gallery of the
generals of 1812.

Muravyov spoke to the prisoners as though they were of a lower class,
and swore at them in the language of the market. Once he was so carried
away by fury that he went up to Tsihanovitch and would have taken him by
the shoulder and perhaps have struck him, but met the fettered
prisoner’s eyes, was abashed, and went on in a different tone.

I guessed what those eyes must have looked like; when he told me the
story three years after the event, his eyes glowed, the veins stood out
on his forehead and on his bowed neck.

‘What could you have done in chains?’

‘I could have torn him to pieces with my teeth, I could have beaten him
to death with my skull, with my chains,’ he said, trembling.

Tsihanovitch was sent at first to Verhoturye, one of the remotest towns
of the province of Perm, lost in the Ural Mountains, buried in snow and
so far from every road that in winter there was scarcely any means of
communication. I need hardly say that living in Verhoturye was worse
than in Omsk or Krasnoyarsk. Being in complete solitude, Tsihanovitch
occupied himself with the study of natural science, collected the scanty
flora of the Ural Mountains, and at last received permission to move to
Perm; and this was a great amelioration of his lot. Again he heard the
sound of his own language and met with comrades in misfortune. His wife,
who had remained in Lithuania, wrote that she was setting off to _walk_
to him from the province of Vilna.

When I was transferred so unexpectedly to Vyatka, I went to say good-bye
to Tsihanovitch. The little room in which he lived was almost completely
empty. A small, old trunk stood beside the meagre bed, a wooden table
and a chair made up the rest of the furniture. It reminded me of my cell
in the Krutitsky Barracks.

The news of my departure grieved him, but he was so used to
disappointments that a minute later he said to me with a smile that was
almost bright: ‘That’s just what I love nature for; wherever a man may
be, she cannot be taken from him.’

I wanted to leave him something as a souvenir. I took a little stud out
of my shirt and asked him to accept it.

‘It won’t suit my shirt, but I shall keep your stud to the end of my
days and I will wear it at my funeral.’

Then he sank into thought and all at once began rapidly rummaging in his
trunk. He found a little bag, from it drew out an iron chain made in a
peculiar way, and, tearing several links off, gave them to me with the
words: ‘That chain is very precious to me, the most sacred memories of a
certain time are connected with it. I do not give you all, but take
these links. I never thought that I, an exile from Lithuania, would
present them to a Russian exile.’

I embraced him and said good-bye.

‘When are you going?’ he asked.

‘To-morrow morning, but I will not invite you; a gendarme is always
sitting in my lodging.’

‘And so a good journey to you; may you be happier than I.’

At nine o’clock next morning the police-master turned up at my lodgings
and began hurrying me off. The Perm gendarme, a far more manageable
person than the Krutitsky one, was busy getting the carriage ready, not
concealing his joy at the hope of being able to be drunk for three
hundred and fifty versts. Everything was ready. I glanced casually into
the street; Tsihanovitch was passing, I rushed to the window.

‘Well, thank God,’ he said, ‘this is the fourth time I have walked past
to say good-bye to you, if only from a distance, and still you did not
see me.’

With eyes full of tears I thanked him. This tender, womanly attention
deeply touched me; but for this meeting I should have had nothing to
regret in Perm!

On the day after we left Perm there was a heavy, unceasing downpour of
rain from dawn, such as is common in forest districts; at two o’clock we
reached a very poor village in the province of Vyatka. There was no
house at the posting-station. Votyaks[133] (who could not read or write)
performed the duties of overseer, looked through the permit for horses,
saw whether there were two seals or one, shouted ‘Aïda, aïda!’ and
harnessed the horses, I need hardly say, twice as quickly as it would
have been done had there been a superintendent. I wanted to get dry and
warm and to have something to eat. Before we reached the village, the
Perm gendarme agreed to my suggestion that we should rest for a couple
of hours. When I went into the stifling hut, without a chimney, and
found that it was absolutely impossible to get anything, that there was
not even a pot-house for five versts, I regretted our decision and was
on the point of asking for horses.

While I was thinking whether to go on or not to go on, a soldier came in
and reported that the officer at the étape had sent to invite me to a
cup of tea.

‘With the greatest pleasure. Where is your officer?’

‘In the hut near by, your honour,’ and the soldier made the familiar
left-about-turn. I followed him.

A short, elderly officer with a face that bore traces of many anxieties,
petty cares, and fear of his superiors, met me with all the genial
hospitality of deadly boredom. He was one of those unintelligent,
good-natured soldiers who work in the service for twenty-five years
without promotion and without reasoning about it, as old horses serve,
who probably suppose that it is their duty at dawn to put on their
harness and drag something.

‘Whom are you taking, and where?’

‘Oh, don’t ask, for it is heart-rending. Well, I suppose my superiors
know all about it; it is our duty to carry out orders and we are not
responsible, but, looking at it as a man, it is an ugly business.’

‘Why, what is it?’

‘You see, they have collected a crowd of cursed little Jew boys of eight
or nine years old. Whether they are taking them for the navy or what, I
can’t say. At first _the orders were to drive them to Perm, then there
was a change and we are driving them to Kazan_. I have taken them over a
hundred versts. The officer who handed them over said it was dreadful,
and that’s all about it; a third were left on the way’ (and the officer
pointed to the earth). ‘Not half will reach their destination,’ he
added.

‘Have there been epidemics, or what?’ I asked, deeply moved.

‘No, not epidemics, but they just die off like flies. A Jew boy, you
know, is such a frail, weakly creature, like a skinned cat; he is not
used to tramping in the mud for ten hours a day and eating dried
bread—then again, being among strangers, no father nor mother nor
petting; well, they cough and cough until they cough themselves into
their graves. And I ask you, what use is it to them? What can they do
with little boys?’

I made no answer.

‘When do you set off?’ I asked.

‘Well, we ought to have gone long ago, but it has been raining so
heavily.... Hey, you there! tell the small fry to form up.’

They brought the children and formed them into regular ranks: it was one
of the most awful sights I have ever seen, those poor, poor children!
Boys of twelve or thirteen might somehow have survived it, but little
fellows of eight and ten.... No painting could reproduce the horror of
that scene.

Pale, exhausted, with frightened faces, they stood in thick, clumsy,
soldiers’ overcoats, with stand-up collars, fixing helpless, pitiful
eyes on the garrison soldiers who were roughly getting them into ranks.
The white lips, the blue rings under their eyes looked like fever or
chill. And these sick children, without care or kindness, exposed to the
icy wind that blows straight from the Arctic Ocean, were going to their
graves.

And note that they were being taken by a kind-hearted officer who was
obviously sorry for the children. What if they had been taken by a
military political economist?

I took the officer’s hand and, saying ‘Take care of them,’ rushed to my
carriage. I wanted to sob and felt that I could not control myself.

What monstrous crimes are secretly buried in the archives of the
infamous reign of Nicholas! We are used to them, they are committed
every day, committed as though nothing were wrong, unnoticed, lost in
the terrible distance, noiselessly sunk in the silent bogs of
officialdom or shrouded by the censorship of the police.

Have we not seen with our own eyes seven hungry peasants from Pskov, who
were being forcibly removed to the province of Tobolsk and were pitched
without food or night’s lodging in the Tverskoy Square in Moscow until
Prince D. V. Golitsyn ordered them to be cared for at his own expense?




                               Chapter 14
   VYATKA—THE OFFICE AND DINING-ROOM OF HIS EXCELLENCY—K. Y. TYUFYAEV


The Governor of Vyatka did not receive me, but sent word that I was to
present myself next morning at ten.

I found in the room next morning the district police-captain, the
police-master, and two officials: they were all standing talking in
whispers and looking uneasily at the door. The door opened and there
walked in a short, broad-shouldered old man with a head set on his
shoulders like a bull-dog’s, and with big jaws, which completed his
resemblance to that animal and, moreover, wore a perpetual grin; the
elderly and at the same time satyr-like expression of his face, the
quick little grey eyes, and the sparse, stiff hair made an incredibly
disgusting impression.

To begin with, he gave the district police-captain a good dressing down
for the state of the roads on which he had driven the day before. The
district police-captain stood with his head somewhat bowed in token of
respect and submission, and replied to everything as servants used to do
in old days, ‘I obey, your Excellency.’

When he had done with the district police-captain, he turned to me. He
looked at me insolently and asked:

‘Did you finish your studies at the Moscow University?’

‘I took my degree.’

‘And then served?’

‘In the Kremlin department.’

‘Ha, ha, ha! a fine sort of service! Of course, you had plenty of time
there for supper parties and singing songs. Alenitsyn!’ he shouted.

A scrofulous-looking young man walked in.

‘Here, my boy, here is a graduate of the Moscow University. I expect he
knows everything except his duties in the service; it is His Majesty’s
pleasure that he should learn them with us. Take him into your office
and send me a special report on him. To-morrow you will come to the
office at nine o’clock, and now you can go. But stay, I forgot to ask
how you write.’

I did not understand for the moment.

‘Come, your handwriting.’

‘I have nothing with me.’

‘Bring paper and pen,’ and Alenitsyn handed me a pen.

‘What am I to write?’

‘What you like,’ observed the secretary. ‘Write, “On inquiry it
appears——”’

‘Well, you won’t be corresponding with the Tsar,’ the governor remarked,
laughing ironically.

Before I left Perm I had heard a great deal about Tyufyaev, but he far
surpassed all my expectations.

What does not Russian life produce!

Tyufyaev was born at Tobolsk. His father was possibly a convict and
belonged to the poorest class of artisan. At thirteen, young Tyufyaev
joined a troupe of travelling acrobats who wandered from fair to fair,
dancing on the tight-rope, turning somersaults, and so on. With these he
travelled from Tobolsk to the Polish provinces, entertaining the good
Russian people. There, I do not know why, he was arrested, and as he had
no passport he was treated as a vagrant, and sent on foot with a party
of convicts back to Tobolsk. His mother was by then a widow and was
living in great poverty. The son rebuilt the stove with his own hands
when it was broken: he had to find some calling; the boy had learned to
read and write, and he was engaged as a copying clerk in the local
court.

Being naturally of a free-and-easy character and having developed his
abilities by a many-sided education in the troupe of acrobats and the
party of convicts with whom he had passed from one end of Russia to the
other, he became an energetic and practical man.

At the beginning of the reign of Alexander some sort of inspector came
to Tobolsk. He needed capable clerks, and some one recommended Tyufyaev.
The inspector was so well pleased with him that he proposed taking him
along to Petersburg. Then Tyufyaev, whose ambition, to use his own
words, had never risen above the post of secretary in a district court,
formed a higher opinion of himself, and with iron will resolved to make
his career.

And he did make it. Ten years later we find him the indefatigable
secretary of Kankrin, who was at that time a general in the
commissariat. A year later he was superintending a department in
Araktcheyev’s secretariat which superintended all Russia. He was with
Araktcheyev in Paris at the time when it was occupied by the allied
troops. Tyufyaev spent the whole time sitting in the secretariat of the
expeditionary army and literally did not see one street in Paris. He sat
day and night collating and copying papers with his worthy colleague,
Kleinmihel.

Araktcheyev’s secretariat was like those copper mines into which men are
only sent to work for a few months, because if they remain longer they
die. Even Tyufyaev was tired at last in that factory of orders and
decrees, of regulations and commands, and began asking for a quieter
post. Araktcheyev could not fail to like a man like Tyufyaev, a man free
from higher pretensions, from all interests and opinions, formally
honest, devoured by ambition, and regarding obedience as the foremost
human virtue. Araktcheyev rewarded Tyufyaev with the post of deputy
governor. A few years later he made him governor of the Perm Province.
The province, through which Tyufyaev had once walked on a rope and once
tied to a rope, lay at his feet.

A governor’s power increases in direct ratio to his distance from
Petersburg, but it increases in geometrical progression in the provinces
where there are no nobility, as in Perm, Vyatka, and Siberia. Such a
region was just what Tyufyaev wanted.

He was an Oriental satrap, only an active, restless one, meddling in
everything and for ever busy. Tyufyaev would have been a ferocious
Commissaire of the Convention in 1794, a Carrier.[134]

Dissolute in his life, coarse in nature, intolerant of the slightest
contradiction, his influence was extremely pernicious. He did not take
bribes, though he did make his fortune, as it appeared after his death.
He was severe to his subordinates, he punished without mercy those who
were detected in wrongdoing, yet his officials were more dishonest than
anywhere. He carried the abuse of influence to an incredible point; for
instance, when he sent an official to an inquiry he would (that is, if
he were interested in the case) tell him that probably this or that
would be discovered, and woe to the official if something else were
discovered.

Perm was still full of the fame of Tyufyaev; there was a party of his
adherents there, hostile to the new governor, who, of course, had
surrounded himself with his own partisans.

On the other hand, there were people who hated him. One of them, a
rather original product of the warping influences of Russian life,
particularly warned me what Tyufyaev was like. I am speaking of a doctor
in one of the factories. This doctor, whose name was Tchebotarev, an
intelligent and very nervous man, had made an unfortunate marriage soon
after he had completed his studies, then he was transferred to
Ekaterinburg and without any experience plunged into the bog of
provincial life. Though placed in a fairly independent position in these
surroundings, he yet was mastered by them; all his resistance took the
form of sarcasms at the expense of the officials. He laughed at them to
their faces, he said the most insulting things with grimaces and
affectation. Since no one was spared, no one particularly resented the
doctor’s spiteful tongue. He made himself a social position by his
attacks and forced a flabby set of people to put up with the lash with
which he chastised them incessantly. I was warned that he was a good
doctor, but crazy and extremely impertinent.

His gossip and jokes were neither coarse nor pointless; quite the
contrary, they were full of humour and concentrated bitterness; it was
his poetry, his revenge, his outcry of anger and, to some extent,
perhaps, of despair. He had studied the circle of officials as an artist
and as a doctor, and, encouraged by their cowardice and lack of
resource, took any liberty he liked with them.

At every word he would add, ‘It won’t make a ha’p’orth of difference to
you.’

Once in joke I remarked upon his repeating this.

‘Why are you surprised?’ the doctor replied. ‘The object of everything
that is said is to convince. I am in haste to add the strongest argument
that exists. Convince a man that to kill his own father will not make a
ha’p’orth of difference and he will kill him.’

Tchebotarev never refused to lend small sums of a hundred or two hundred
roubles. When any one asked him for a loan, he would take out his
notebook and inquire the exact date when the borrower would return the
money.

‘Now,’ he would say, ‘allow me to make a bet of a silver rouble that you
won’t repay it then.’

‘Upon my soul,’ the other would object, ‘what do you take me for?’

‘It makes not a ha’p’orth of difference what I take you for,’ the doctor
would answer, ‘but the fact is I have been keeping a record for six
years, and not one person has paid me up to time yet, and hardly any one
has repaid me later either.’

The day fixed would pass and the doctor would very gravely ask for the
silver rouble he had won.

A spirit-tax contractor at Perm was selling a travelling coach. The
doctor presented himself before him and made the following speech: ‘You
have a coach to sell, I need it; you are a wealthy man, you are a
millionaire, every one respects you for it and I have therefore come to
pay you my respects also; as you are a wealthy man, it makes not a
ha’p’orth of difference to you whether you sell the coach or not, while
I need it very much and have very little money. You want to squeeze me,
to take advantage of my necessity and ask fifteen hundred for the coach.
I offer you seven hundred roubles. I shall be coming every day to
bargain with you and in a week you will let me have it for seven-fifty
or eight hundred; wouldn’t it be better to begin with that? I am ready
to give it.’

‘Much better,’ answered the astonished spirit-tax contractor, and he let
him have the coach.

Tchebotarev’s anecdotes and mischievous tricks were endless. I will add
two more.

‘Do you believe in magnetism?’ a rather intelligent and cultured lady
asked him in my presence.

‘What do you mean by magnetism?’

The lady talked some vague nonsense in reply.

‘It makes not a ha’p’orth of difference to you whether I believe in
magnetism or not, but if you like I will tell you what I have seen in
that way.’

‘Please do.’

‘Only listen attentively.’

After this he described in a very lively and interesting way the
experiments of a Harkov doctor, an acquaintance of his.

In the middle of the conversation, a servant brought some lunch in on a
tray. As he was going out, the lady said to him, ‘You have forgotten to
bring the mustard.’ Tchebotarev stopped. ‘Go on, go on,’ said the lady,
a little scared already, ‘I am listening.’

‘Has he brought the salt?’

‘So you are angry already,’ said the lady, turning crimson.

‘Not in the least. I assure you I know that you were listening
attentively. Besides, I know that, however intelligent a woman is and
whatever is being talked about, she can never rise above the kitchen—so
how could I dare to be angry with you personally?’

At Countess Polier’s factory he asked a lad, one of his patients there,
to enter his service. The boy was willing, but the foreman said that he
could not let him go without permission from the countess. Tchebotarev
wrote to the lady. She told the foreman to let the lad have his passport
on condition that the doctor paid five years’ _obrok_ in advance. The
doctor promptly wrote to the countess that he agreed to her terms, but
asked her as a preliminary to decide one point that troubled him, _i.e._
from whom could he recover the money if Encke’s Comet should,
intersecting the earth’s orbit, turn it out of its course—which might
occur a year and a half before the term fixed.

On the day of my departure for Vyatka the doctor appeared early in the
morning and began with the following foolishness: ‘Like Horace, once you
sang, and to this day you are translated.’[135] Then he took out his
notebook and asked if I would not like some money for the journey. I
thanked him and refused.

‘Why won’t you take any? It won’t make a ha’p’orth of difference to
you.’

‘I have money.’

‘That’s bad,’ he said; ‘the end of the world must be at hand.’ He opened
his notebook and wrote down: ‘After fifteen years of practice I have for
the first time met a man who won’t borrow, even though he is going
away.’

Having finished playing the fool, he sat down on my bed and said
gravely: ‘You are going to a terrible man. Be on your guard against him
and keep as far away from him as you can. If he likes you it will be a
poor recommendation; if he dislikes you, he will ruin you by slander, by
calumny, and I don’t know what, but he will ruin you, and it won’t make
a ha’p’orth of difference to him.’

With this he told me an incident the truth of which I had an opportunity
of verifying afterwards from documents in the secretariat of the
Minister of Home Affairs.

Tyufyaev carried on an open intrigue with the sister of a poor
government clerk. The brother was made a laughing-stock and he tried to
break off the liaison, threatened to report it to the authorities, tried
to write to Petersburg—in fact, made such a to-do that on one occasion
the police seized him and brought him before the provincial authorities
to be certified as a lunatic.

The provincial authorities, the president of the court, and the
inspector of the medical board, an old German who was very much liked by
the working people and whom I knew personally, all found that Petrovsky,
as the man was called, was mad.

Our doctor knew Petrovsky, who was a patient of his. He was asked as a
matter of form. He told the inspector that Petrovsky was not mad at all,
and that he proposed that they should make a fresh inquiry into the
case, otherwise he would have to pursue the matter further. The local
authorities were not at all opposed to this, but unluckily Petrovsky
died in the madhouse before the day fixed for the second inquiry,
although he was a sturdy young fellow.

The report of the case reached Petersburg. Petrovsky’s sister was
arrested (why not Tyufyaev?) and a secret investigation began. Tyufyaev
dictated the answers; he surpassed himself on this occasion. To hush it
up at once and to ward off the danger of a second involuntary journey to
Siberia, Tyufyaev instructed the girl to say that her brother had been
on bad terms with her ever since, carried away by youth and
inexperience, she had been seduced by the Emperor Alexander on his visit
to Perm, for which she had received five thousand roubles through
General Solomka.

Alexander’s habits were such that there was nothing incredible in the
story. To find out whether it was true was not easy, and in any case
would have created a great deal of scandal. To Count Benckendorf’s
inquiry, General Solomka answered that so much money had passed through
his hands that he could not remember the five thousand.

‘_La regina ne aveva molto!_’ says the Improvisatore in Pushkin’s
_Egyptian Nights_....

So this estimable pupil of Araktcheyev’s and worthy comrade of
Kleinmihel’s, acrobat, vagrant, copying clerk, secretary, and governor,
this tender heart, and disinterested man who put the sane into a
madhouse and did them to death there, the man who slandered the Emperor
Alexander to divert the attention of the Emperor Nicholas, was now
undertaking to train me in the service.

I was almost completely dependent upon him. He had only to write some
nonsense to the minister and I should have been sent off to some place
in Irkutsk. No need to write, indeed he had the right to send me to any
outlandish town, Kay or Tsarevo-Santchursk, without any discussion,
without any formalities. Tyufyaev dispatched a young Pole to Glazov
because the ladies preferred dancing the mazurka with him to dancing it
with his Excellency.

In this way Prince Dolgoruky was transferred from Perm to Verhoturye.
The latter place, lost in the mountains and the snows, is reckoned in
the province of Perm, though it is as bad as Beryozov for climate and
worse for desolation.

Prince Dolgoruky was one of the aristocratic scamps of the wrong sort
such as are rarely met with in our day. He played all sorts of pranks in
Petersburg, pranks in Moscow, and pranks in Paris.

His life was spent in this. He was an Izmailov on a small scale, a
Prince E. Gruzinsky without his band of runaways at Lyskovo, that is, a
spoilt, insolent, repulsive jester, a great gentleman and a great
buffoon at once. When his doings went beyond all bounds, he was ordered
to live in Perm.

He arrived in two carriages; in one he travelled with his dog, in the
other, his French cook with his parrots. The people of Perm were
delighted at the arrival of a wealthy visitor, and soon all the town was
crowding into his dining-room. Dolgoruky got up an affair with a young
lady at Perm; the latter, suspecting some infidelity, appeared
unexpectedly at the prince’s house one morning and found him with his
housemaid. This led to a scene which ended in the faithless lover taking
his riding-whip from the wall; the lady, seeing his intention, took to
flight, he followed her, scantily attired in a dressing-gown; overtaking
her in the little square in which the battalion were usually drilled, he
gave the jealous lady three or four lashes with the whip and calmly
returned home as though he had done his duty.

Such charming pranks brought down upon him the censure of his Perm
friends, and the authorities decided to send this mischievous urchin of
forty to Verhoturye. On the eve of departure he gave a splendid dinner,
and in spite of their differences the officials came to it. Dolgoruky
promised to give them some wonderful pie for dinner.

The pie certainly was excellent and vanished with incredible rapidity.
When nothing but scraps were left, Dolgoruky turned pathetically to his
guests and said: ‘Never let it be said that I grudged you anything at
parting. I ordered my Gardi to be killed yesterday for the pie.’

The officials looked at one another in horror, and looked round them for
the big Dane they knew so well; he was not to be seen. The prince saw
what they felt and bade the servant bring the rejected remnants of Gardi
and his skin; the rest of him was in the stomachs of the Perm officials.
Half the town was ill with horror.

Meanwhile Dolgoruky, pleased at having had a joke at the expense of his
friends, drove in triumph to Verhoturye. A third conveyance carried a
whole poultry yard, a poultry yard travelling with post horses! On the
way he carried off the ledgers from several posting-stations, mixed them
up, altered the entries and almost drove the posting superintendents out
of their minds, for even with their books they did not find it easy to
make their accounts balance.

The stifling emptiness and numbness of Russian life, strangely combined
with the liveliness and even turbulence of the Russian character,
develops every sort of eccentricity among us.

In Suvorov’s habit of crowing like a cock, just as in Prince Dolgoruky’s
dog-pie, in the savage deeds of Izmailov,[136] in the half-voluntary
madness of Mamonov,[137] in the violent crimes of Tolstoy ‘the
American,’ I detect a kindred note, familiar to us all, though weakened
in us by education, or directed to some other end.

I knew Tolstoy personally and just at the date when he lost his daughter
Sarra, an exceptional girl with marked poetic gifts. One glance at the
old man’s exterior, at his forehead covered with grey curls, at his
sparkling eyes and athletic frame revealed how much energy and vigour
nature had bestowed on him. He had developed only turbulent passions and
evil propensities, and that is not surprising; everything vicious is
allowed among us to develop for a long time without hindrance, while for
humane passions a man is sent to a garrison or Siberia at the first
step.... He rioted, gambled, fought, mutilated people and ruined
families for twenty years on end, till at last he was sent to Siberia,
from which he ‘returned an Aleutian’ as Griboyedov says, that is, he
made his way through Kamtchatka to America, and thence obtained
permission to return to Russia. Alexander pardoned him, and from the day
after his arrival he carried on the same life as before. Married to a
gypsy girl belonging to the Moscow camp and famous for her voice, he
turned his house into a gambling den, spent all his time in orgies, all
his nights at cards, and wild scenes of greed and drunkenness took place
beside the cradle of the little Sarra. The story goes that on one
occasion, to prove the nicety of his aim, he made his wife stand on the
table and shot through the heel of her shoe.

His last prank almost sent him to Siberia again. He had long been angry
with an artisan; he seized him in his house, bound him hand and foot,
and pulled out one of his teeth. Will it be believed that this incident
took place only ten or twelve years ago? The injured man lodged a
complaint. Tolstoy bribed the police and the judge, and the man was put
in prison for making a false accusation. At that time a well-known
Russian literary tan, N. F. Pavlov, was serving on the prison
commission. The artisan told him his story, the inexperienced official
took it up, Tolstoy was scared in earnest, the case was obviously going
to end in his condemnation; but great is the God of Russia. Count Orlov
wrote to Prince Shtcherbatov a secret report, in which he advised him to
hush up the case, so as not to allow the _open triumph of a man of
inferior rank over a member of the higher classes_. To Pavlov, Count
Orlov gave the advice to resign his post.... This is almost more
incredible than the extraction of the tooth. I was in Moscow at the time
and knew the imprudent official well. But let us return to Vyatka.

The government office was incomparably worse than prison. Not that the
actual work was great, but the stifling atmosphere, as of the Cave of
Dogs, of that scene of corruption, and the terrible, stupid waste of
time made the office insufferable. Alenitsyn did not worry me, he was,
indeed, more polite than I expected; he had been at the Kazan High
School and consequently had a respect for a graduate of the Moscow
University.

There were some twenty clerks in the office. For the most part they were
persons of no education and no moral conceptions; sons of clerks and
secretaries, accustomed from their cradle to regard the service as a
source of profit, and the peasants as soil that yielded revenue, they
sold their services, took twenty kopecks and quarter-roubles, cheated
for a glass of wine, demeaned themselves and did all sorts of shabby
things. My valet gave up going to the ‘billiard room,’ saying that the
officials cheated there worse than anybody, and one could not give them
a lesson because they were ‘officers.’ So with these people, whom my
servant did not beat only on account of their rank, I had to sit every
day from nine in the morning until two, and from five to eight in the
evening.

Besides Alenitsyn, who was the head of the office, there was a
head-clerk of the table at which I was put, who was also not a spiteful
creature, though drunken and illiterate. At the same table sat four
clerks. I had to talk to and become acquainted with these, and, indeed,
with all the others, too. Apart from the fact that these people would
have paid me out sooner or later for being ‘proud’ if I had not, it is
simply impossible to spend several hours of every day with the same
people without making their acquaintance. Moreover, it must not be
forgotten that provincials make up to any one from outside and
particularly to any one who comes from the capital, especially if there
is some interesting story connected with him.

After spending the whole day in this bondage, I would sometimes come
home with all my faculties in a state of stupefaction and fling myself
on the sofa, worn out, humiliated, and incapable of any work or
occupation. I heartily regretted my Krutitsky cell with its charcoal
fumes and black beetles, with a gendarme on guard and a lock on the
door. There I had freedom, I did what I liked and no one interfered with
me; instead of these vulgar sayings, dirty people, mean ideas and coarse
feelings, there had been the stillness of death and unbroken leisure.
And when I remembered that after dinner I had to go again, and again
to-morrow, I was at times overcome by fury and despair and tried to find
comfort in drinking wine and vodka.

And then, to make things worse, one of my fellow-clerks would look in
‘on his way’ and relieve his boredom by staying on talking until it was
time to go back to the office.

Within a few months, however, the position became somewhat easier.

Prolonged steady persecution is not in the Russian character unless a
personal or mercenary element comes in; and that is not because the
government does not want to stifle and crush a man, but is due to the
Russian carelessness, to our _laissez-aller_. Russians in authority are
as a rule ill-bred, coarse, and insolent; it is easy to provoke them to
rudeness, but persistent oppression is not in their line, they have not
enough patience for it, perhaps because it yields them no profit.

In the first heat to display, on the one hand, their zeal, on the other,
their power, they do all sorts of stupid and unnecessary things, then,
little by little, they leave a man in peace.

So it was with the office. The Ministry of Home Affairs had at that time
a craze for statistics: it had given orders for committees to be formed
everywhere, and had issued programmes which could hardly have been
carried out even in Belgium or Switzerland; at the same time, all sorts
of elaborate tables with maxima and minima, with averages and various
deductions from the totals for periods of ten years (made up on evidence
which had not been collected even a year beforehand!), with moral
remarks and meteorological observations. Not a farthing was assigned for
the expenses of the committees and the collection of evidence; all this
was to be done from love for statistics through the rural police and put
into proper shape in the government office. The clerks, overwhelmed with
work, and the rural police, who hate all peaceful and theoretical tasks,
looked upon a statistics committee as a useless luxury, as a caprice of
the ministry; however, the reports had to be sent in with tabulated
results and deductions.

This business seemed overwhelmingly difficult to the whole office; it
was simply impossible; but no one troubled about that, all they worried
about was that there should be no occasion for reprimands. I promised
Alenitsyn to prepare a preface and introduction, and to draw up
summaries of the tables with eloquent remarks introducing foreign words,
quotations, and striking deductions, if he would allow me to undertake
this very severe work not at the office but at home. Alenitsyn, after
parleying with Tyufyaev, agreed.

The introduction to my record of the work of the committee, in which I
discussed their hopes and their plans, for in reality nothing had been
done at all, touched Alenitsyn to the depths of his soul. Tyufyaev
himself thought it was written in masterly style. With that my labours
in the statistical line ended, but they put the committee under my
supervision. They no longer forced the hard labour of copying upon me,
and the drunken head-clerk who had been my chief became almost my
subordinate. Alenitsyn only insisted, from some consideration of
propriety, that I should go every day for a short time to the office.

To show the complete impossibility of real statistics, I will quote the
facts sent from the town of Kay. There, among various absurdities, were
for instance the entries: Drowned—2. Causes of drowning not known—2, and
in the column of totals these two figures were added together and the
figure 4 was entered. Under the heading of extraordinary incidents
occurred the following tragic anecdote: So-and-so, artisan, having
deranged his intelligence by stimulating beverages, hanged himself.
Under the heading of morality of the town’s inhabitants was the entry:
‘There are no Jews in the town of Kay.’ To the inquiry whether sums had
been allotted for the building of a church, a stock exchange, or an
almshouse, the answer ran thus: ‘For the building of a stock exchange
was assigned—nothing.’

The statistics that saved me from work at the office had the unfortunate
consequence of bringing me into personal relations with Tyufyaev.

There was a time when I hated that man; that time is long past and the
man himself is past. He died on his Kazan estates about 1845. Now I
think of him without anger, as of a peculiar wild beast met in a forest
which ought to have been tamed, but with which one could not be angry
for being a beast. At the time I could not help coming into conflict
with him; that was inevitable for any decent man. Chance helped me or he
would have done me great injury; to owe him a grudge for the harm he did
not do me would be absurd and paltry.

Tyufyaev lived alone. His wife was separated from him. The governor’s
favourite, the wife of a cook who for no fault but being married to her
had been sent away to the country, was, with an awkwardness which almost
seemed intentional, kept out of sight in the back rooms of his house.
She did not make her appearance officially, but officials who were
particularly devoted to the governor—that is, particularly afraid of not
being so—formed a sort of court about the cook’s wife ‘who was in
favour.’ Their wives and daughters paid her stealthy visits in the
evening and did not boast of doing so. This lady was possessed of the
same sort of tact as distinguished one of her brilliant
predecessors—Potyomkin; knowing the old man’s disposition and afraid of
being replaced, she herself sought out for him rivals that were not a
danger to her. The grateful old man repaid this indulgent love with his
devotion and they got on well together.

All the morning Tyufyaev worked and was in the office of the
secretariat. The poetry of life only began at three o’clock. Dinner was
for him no jesting matter. He liked a good dinner and he liked to eat it
in company. Preparations were always made in his kitchen for twelve at
table; if the guests were less than half that number he was mortified;
if there were no more than two visitors he was wretched; if there was no
one at all, he would go off on the verge of despair to dine in his
Dulcinea’s apartments. To procure people in order to feed them to
repletion is not a difficult task, but his official position and the
terror he inspired in his subordinates did not permit them freely to
enjoy his hospitality, nor him to turn his house into a tavern. He had
to confine himself to councillors, presidents (but with half of these he
was on bad terms), rich merchants, spirit-tax contractors, and the few
visitors to the town and ‘oddities,’ who were something in the style of
the _capacités_ whom Louis-Philippe wanted to introduce into elections.
Of course I was an oddity of the first magnitude in Vyatka.

Persons exiled ‘for their opinions’ to remote towns are somewhat feared,
but are never confounded with ordinary mortals. ‘Dangerous people’ have
for provincials the same attraction that notorious Lovelaces have for
women and courtesans for men. ‘Dangerous people’ are far more shunned by
Petersburg officials and wealthy Moscow people than by provincials and
especially by Siberians.

Those who were exiled in connection with the Fourteenth of December were
looked upon with immense respect. The first visit on New Year’s Day was
paid by officials to the widow of Yushnevsky. The senator Tolstoy when
taking a census of Siberia was guided by evidence received from the
exiled Decembrists in checking the facts furnished by the officials.

Minih[138] from his tower in Pelymo superintended the affairs of the
Tobolsk Province. Governors used to go to consult him about matters of
importance.

The working people are still less hostile to exiles: they are always on
the side of those who are punished. The word ‘convict’ disappears near
the Siberian frontier and is replaced by the word ‘unfortunate.’ In the
eyes of the Russian peasant legal sentence is no disgrace to a man. The
peasants of the Perm Province, living along the main road to Tobolsk,
often put out kvass, milk, and bread in a little window in case an
‘unfortunate’ should be secretly passing that way from Siberia.

By the way, speaking of exiles, Polish exiles begin to be met beyond
Nizhni and their number rapidly increases after Kazan. In Perm there
were forty, in Vyatka not less; there were besides several in every
district town.

They lived quite apart from the Russians and avoided all contact with
the inhabitants. There was great unity among them, and the rich shared
with the poor like brothers.

I never saw signs of either hatred or special goodwill towards them on
the part of the inhabitants. They looked upon them as outsiders—the more
so, as scarcely a single Pole knew Russian.

One tough old Sarmatian, who had been an officer in the Uhlans under
Poniatowski and had taken part in Napoleon’s campaigns, received
permission in 1837 to return to his Lithuanian domains. On the eve of
his departure he invited me and several Poles to dinner. After dinner my
cavalry officer came up to me, glass in hand, embraced me, and with a
warrior’s simplicity whispered in my ear, ‘Oh, why are you a Russian!’ I
did not answer a word, but this observation sank deeply into my heart. I
realised that _this_ generation could never set Poland free.

From the time of Konarski,[139] the Poles have come to look quite
differently upon the Russians.

As a rule Polish exiles are not oppressed, but the position is awful for
those who have no private means. The government gives those who have
nothing _fifteen roubles a month_; with that they must pay for lodging,
food, clothes, and fuel. In the bigger towns, in Kazan and Tobolsk, it
is possible to earn something by giving lessons or concerts, playing at
balls, drawing portraits and teaching dancing. In Perm and Vyatka they
had no such resources. And in spite of that they would ask nothing from
Russians.

Tyufyaev’s invitations to his rich Siberian dinners were a real
infliction to me. His dining-room was the same thing as the office only
in another form, less dirty but more vulgar, because it had the
appearance of free will and not of compulsion.

Tyufyaev knew his guests through and through, despised them, showed them
his claws at times, and altogether treated them as a master treats his
dogs, at one time with excessive familiarity, at another with a rudeness
which was beyond all bounds—and yet he invited them to his dinners and
they came to them in trembling and in joy, demeaning themselves, talking
scandal, listening, trying to please, smiling, bowing.

I blushed for them and felt ashamed.

Our friendship did not last long. Tyufyaev soon perceived that I was not
fit for ‘aristocratic’ Vyatka society.

A few months later he was displeased with me, a few months later still
he hated me, and I not only went no more to his dinners but even gave up
going to him at all. The visit of the Tsarevitch saved me from his
persecution, as we shall see later on.

I must note that I had done absolutely nothing to deserve first his
attentions and invitations, and afterwards his anger and disapproval. He
could not endure to see in me a man who behaved independently, though
not in the least insolently; I was always _en règle_ with him, and he
demanded obsequiousness. He loved his power jealously. He had earned it
and he exacted not only obedience but an appearance of absolute
subordination. In this, unhappily, he was typically national.

A landowner says to his servant, ‘Hold your tongue; I won’t put up with
your answering me!’

The head of a department observes, turning pale with anger, to a clerk
who has made some criticism, ‘You forget yourself; do you know to whom
you are speaking?’

The Tsar sends men to Siberia ‘for opinions,’ buries them in dungeons
for a poem—and all three of them are readier to forgive stealing and
bribe-taking, murder and robbery, than the impudence of human dignity
and the insolence of an independent word.

Tyufyaev was a true servant of the Tsar. He was thought highly of, but
not highly enough. Byzantine servility was in him wonderfully combined
with official discipline. Obliteration of self, renunciation of will and
thought before authority went hand in hand with savage oppression of
subordinates. He might have been a civilian Kleinmihel, his ‘zeal’ might
in the same way have conquered everything, and he might in the same way
have plastered the walls with the dead bodies of men, have dried the
palace with human lungs, and have thrashed the young men of the
engineering corps even more severely for not being informers.

Tyufyaev had an intense secret hatred for everything aristocratic; he
had gained it from bitter experience. The hard labour of Araktcheyev’s
secretariat had been his first refuge, his first deliverance. Till then
his superiors had never offered him a chair, but had employed him on
menial errands. When he served in the commissariat, the officers had
persecuted him in military fashion and one colonel had horsewhipped him
in the street in Vilna.... All this had entered into the copying clerk’s
soul and rankled there; now he was governor and it was his turn to
oppress, to keep men standing, to address them familiarly, to shout at
them, and sometimes to bring nobles of ancient lineage to trial.

From Perm, Tyufyaev had been transferred to Tver. The nobles of that
province could not, for all their submissiveness and servility, put up
with him. They petitioned the minister Bludov to remove him. Bludov
transferred him to Vyatka.

There he was quite at home again. Officials and contractors,
factory-owners and government clerks, a free hand with no one to
interfere.... Every one trembled before him, every one remained standing
in his presence, every one offered him drink and gave him dinners, every
one waited on his slightest wish; at weddings and name-day parties, the
first toast was ‘To the health of his Excellency!’




                               Chapter 15
   OFFICIALS—SIBERIAN GOVERNORS-GENERAL—A RAPACIOUS POLICE-MASTER—AN
ACCOMMODATING JUDGE—A ROASTED POLICE-CAPTAIN—A TATAR MISSIONARY—A BOY OF
                 THE FEMALE SEX—THE POTATO TERROR, ETC.


One of the most melancholy results of the revolutionising of Russia by
Peter the Great was the development of the official class. An
artificial, hungry, and uncultivated class, capable of doing nothing but
‘serving,’ knowing nothing but official forms, it constitutes a kind of
civilian clergy, officiating in the courts and the police forces, and
sucking the blood of the people with thousands of greedy and unclean
mouths.

Gogol lifted one corner of the curtain and showed us Russian officialdom
in all its ugliness; but Gogol cannot help conciliating by his laughter;
his immense comic talent gets the upper hand of his indignation.
Moreover, in the fetters of the Russian censorship, he could scarcely
touch upon the melancholy side of that foul underworld, in which the
destinies of the unhappy Russian people are forged.

There, somewhere in grimy offices, from which we make haste to get away,
shabby men write and write on grey paper, and copy on to stamped
paper—and persons, families, whole villages are outraged, terrified,
ruined. A father is sent into exile, a mother to prison, a son for a
soldier, and all this breaks like a thunderclap upon them, unexpected,
for the most part undeserved. And for the sake of what? For the sake of
money. A tribute must be paid ... or an inquiry will be held concerning
some dead drunkard, burnt up by spirits and frozen to death. And the
head-man collects and the village elder collects, the peasants bring
their last kopeck. The police-inspector must live; the police-captain
must live and keep his wife too; the councillor must live and educate
his children, the councillor is an exemplary father.

Officialdom reigns supreme in the north-east provinces of Russia and in
Siberia. There it flourishes unhindered, unsupervised ... it is so
terribly far off, every one shares in the profits, stealing becomes _res
publica_. Even the cannon-shots of the Imperial power cannot destroy
these foul, boggy trenches hidden under the snow. All the measures of
government are weakened, all its intentions are distorted; it is
deceived, fooled, betrayed, sold, and all under cover of loyal servility
and with the observance of all the official forms.

Speransky[140] tried to ameliorate the lot of the Siberian people. He
introduced everywhere the collegiate principle, as though it made any
difference whether the officials stole individually or in gangs. He
discharged the old rogues by hundreds and engaged new ones by hundreds.
At first he inspired such terror in the rural police that they actually
bribed the peasants not to make complaints against them. Three years
later the officials were making their fortunes by the new forms as well
as they had done by the old.

Another eccentric individual was General Velyaminov. For two years he
struggled at Tobolsk trying to check abuses, but, seeing the
hopelessness of it, threw it all up and quite gave up attending to
business.

Others, more judicious, did not make the attempt, but got rich
themselves and let others get rich.

‘I will abolish bribe-taking,’ said Senyavin, the Governor of Moscow, to
a grey-headed peasant who had lodged a complaint against some obvious
injustice. The old man smiled.

‘What are you laughing at?’ asked Senyavin.

‘Why, you must forgive me, sir,’ answered the peasant; ‘it put me in
mind of one fine young fellow who boasted he would lift a cannon, and he
really did try, but he did not lift it for all that.’

Senyavin, who told the story himself, belonged to that class of
unpractical men in the Russian service who imagine that rhetorical
sallies on the subject of honesty and despotic persecution of two or
three rogues can remedy so universal a disease as Russian bribe-taking,
which grows freely under the shadow of the censorship.

There are only two remedies for it, publicity, and an entirely different
organisation of the whole machinery, the introduction again of the
popular elements of the arbitration courts, verbal proceedings, sworn
witnesses, and all that the Petersburg administration detests.

Pestel, the Governor-General of Western Siberia, father of the
celebrated Pestel put to death by Nicholas, was a real Roman proconsul
and one of the most violent. He carried on an open system of plunder in
the whole region which was cut off by his spies from Russia. Not a
single letter crossed the border without the seal being broken, and woe
to the man who should dare to write anything about his rule. He kept
merchants of the first guild for a year at a time in prison in chains;
he tortured them. He sent officials to the borders of Eastern Siberia
and left them there for two or three years.

For a long time the people bore it; at last an artisan of Tobolsk made
up his mind to bring the position of affairs to the knowledge of the
Tsar. Afraid of the ordinary routes, he went to Kyahta and from there
made his way with a caravan of tea across the Siberian frontier. He
found an opportunity at Tsarskoe Syelo of giving Alexander his petition,
beseeching him to read it. Alexander was amazed and impressed by the
terrible things he read in it. He sent for the man, and after a long
talk with him was convinced of the melancholy truth of his report.
Mortified and somewhat embarrassed, he said to him: ‘You can go home
now, my friend; the thing shall be inquired into.’

‘Your Majesty,’ answered the man, ‘I will not go home now. Better
command me to be put in prison. My conversation with your Majesty will
not remain a secret and I shall be killed.’

Alexander shuddered and said, turning to Miloradovitch, who was at that
time Governor-General in Petersburg:

‘You will answer to me for him.’

‘In that case,’ observed Miloradovitch, ‘allow me to take him into my
own house.’ And the man actually remained there until the case was
ended.

Pestel almost always lived in Petersburg. You may remember that the
proconsuls as a rule lived in Rome. By means of his presence and
connections, and still more by the division of the spoils, he avoided
all sorts of unpleasant rumours and scandals.[141]

The Imperial Council took advantage of Alexander’s temporary absence at
Verona or Aachen to come to the intelligent and just decision that since
the matter related to Siberia the case should be handed to Pestel to
deal with, as he was on the spot. Miloradovitch, Mordvinov, and two
others were opposed to this decision, and the case was brought before
the Senate.

The Senate, with that outrageous injustice with which it continually
judges cases relating to the higher officials, exonerated Pestel but
exiled Treskin, the civilian governor of Tobolsk, and deprived him of
his grade and rank. Pestel was only relieved of his duty.

After Pestel, Kaptsevitch, a man of the school of Araktcheyev, was sent
to Tobolsk. Thin, bilious, a tyrant by nature and a tyrant because he
had spent his whole life in the army, a man of restless activity, he
brought external discipline and order into everything, fixed maximum
prices for goods, but left everyday affairs in the hands of robbers. In
1824 the Tsar wanted to visit Tobolsk. Through the Perm provinces runs
an excellent broad high-road, which has been in use for ages and is
probably good owing to the nature of the soil. Kaptsevitch made a
similar road to Tobolsk in a few months. In the spring, in the time of
alternate thaw and frost, he forced thousands of workmen to make the
road by levies from villages near and far; epidemics broke out among
them, half the workmen died, but ‘zeal can accomplish everything’—the
road was made.

Eastern Siberia is still more slackly governed. It is so far away that
news scarcely reaches Petersburg. Bronevsky, the Governor-General in
Irkutsk, was fond of firing cannon-balls into the town when ‘he was
merry.’ And another high official used when he was drunk to perform a
service in his house in full vestments and in the presence of the chief
priest. Anyway the noisiness of the one and the devoutness of the other
were not so pernicious as Pestel’s blockade and Kaptsevitch’s ceaseless
activity.

It is a pity that Siberia is so badly governed. The choice of its
governors-general has been particularly unfortunate. I do not know what
Muravyov is like; he is celebrated for his intelligence and ability; the
others were good for nothing. Siberia has a great future; it is looked
upon merely as a cellar, in which there are great stores of gold, of
fur, and other goods, but which is cold, buried in snow, poor in the
means of life, without roads or population. That is not true.

The dead hand of the Russian government, that does everything by
violence, everything with the stick, cannot give the living impetus
which would carry Siberia forward with American rapidity. We shall see
what will happen when the mouths of the Amur are opened for navigation
and America meets Siberia near China.

I said long ago that the _Pacific Ocean is the Mediterranean of the
future_.[142] In that future the part played by Siberia, the land that
lies between the ocean, Southern Asia, and Russia, will be extremely
important. Of course Siberia is bound to extend to the Chinese frontier.
People cannot freeze and shiver in Beryozov and Yakutsk when there are
Krasnoyarsk, Minusinsk, and other such places.

Even the Russian immigration into Siberia has elements in its nature
that suggest a different development. Generally speaking, the Siberian
race is healthy, well-grown, intelligent, and extremely practical. The
Siberian children of settlers know nothing of the landowners’ power.
There is no noble class in Siberia and at the same time there is no
aristocracy in the towns; the officials and the officers, who are the
representatives of authority, are more like a hostile garrison stationed
there by a victorious enemy than an aristocracy. The immense distances
save the peasants from frequent contact with them; money saves the
merchants, who in Siberia despise the officials and, though outwardly
giving way to them, take them for what they are—their clerks employed in
civil affairs.

The habit of using firearms, inevitable for a Siberian, is universal.
The dangers and emergencies of his daily life have made the Siberian
peasant more warlike, more resourceful, readier to offer resistance than
the Great Russian. The remoteness of churches leaves his mind freer from
superstition than in Russia, he is cold to religion and most often a
dissenter. There are remote villages which the priest visits only three
or four times a year and then christens, buries, marries, and hears
confessions wholesale.

On this side of the Ural Mountains things are done more discreetly, and
yet I could fill volumes with anecdotes of the abuse of power and the
roguery of the officials, heard in the course of my service in the
office and dining-room of the governor.

‘Well, he was a master at it, my predecessor,’ the police-master of
Vyatka said to me in a moment of confidential conversation. ‘Well, of
course, that’s the way to get on, only you have got to be born to it; he
was a regular Seslavin,[143] a Figner in his own way, I may say,’ and
the eyes of the lame major, promoted to be a police-master for his
wounds, sparkled at the memory of his glorious predecessor.

‘A gang of robbers turned up not far from the town, and once or twice
news reached the authorities of merchants’ goods being stolen, or money
being seized from a contractor’s steward. The governor was in a great
taking and wrote off one order after another. Well, you know the rural
police are cowards; they are equal to binding a wretched little thief
and bringing him to justice—but this was a gang and maybe with guns. The
rural police did nothing. The governor sends for the police-master and
says: “I know that it is not your duty, but your efficiency makes me
turn to you.”

‘The police-master had information about the business beforehand.
“General,” said he, “I will set off in an hour, the robbers must be at
this place and that place; I’ll take soldiers with me, I shall find them
at this place and that place, and within a few days I shall bring them
in chains to the prison.” Why, it was like Suvorov with the Austrian
Emperor! And indeed, no sooner said than done—he fairly pounced on them
with the soldiers, they had no time to hide their money, the
police-master took it all and brought the robbers to the town.

‘The police inquiry began. The police-master asked them: “Where is your
money?”

‘“Why, we gave it to you, sir, into your very hands,” answered two of
the robbers.

‘“Gave it to me?” says the police-master in amazement.

‘“Yes, to you, to you,” shout the robbers.

‘“What insolence!” says the police-master to the inspector, turning pale
with indignation. “Why, you scoundrels, you’ll be saying next, I
suppose, that I stole it with you. I’ll teach you to insult my uniform;
I’m a cornet of Uhlans and won’t allow a slur on my honour!”

‘He has them flogged, saying “Confess where you have hidden the money.”
At first they stick to their story, only when he gives the order for
them to have a second pipeful, the ringleader shouts: “We are guilty, we
spent the money.”

‘“You should have said so long ago,” said the police-master, “instead of
talking such nonsense; you won’t take me in, my man.”

‘“Well, to be sure, we ought to come to your honour for a lesson and not
you to us. We couldn’t teach you anything!” muttered the old robber,
looking with admiration at the police-master.

‘And do you know he got the Vladimir ribbon for that business.’

‘Excuse me,’ I asked, interrupting the praises of the great
police-master, ‘what is the meaning of “a second pipeful”?’

‘That’s just a saying among us. It’s a dreary business you know,
flogging, so as you order it to begin, you light your pipe and it is
usually over by the time you have smoked it—but in exceptional cases we
sometimes order our friends to be treated to two pipefuls. The police
are used to it, they know pretty well how much to give.’

Of the Figner above mentioned, there were regular legends current in
Vyatka. He performed miracles. Once, I do not remember the occasion,
some general-adjutant or minister arrived, and the police-master wanted
to show that he did not wear the Uhlan cross for nothing and that he
could spur his horse as smartly as any one. To this end he applied to
one of the Mashkovtsevs, rich merchants of that region, asking him to
give him his valuable grey saddle-horse. Mashkovtsev would not give it.

‘Very good,’ said Figner, ‘you won’t do such a trifle for me of your own
accord, so I’ll take the horse without your permission.’

‘Well, we shall see about that,’ said Gold.

‘Yes, we shall see,’ said Steel.[144]

Mashkovtsev locked up the horse and put two men on guard, and on that
occasion the police-master was unsuccessful.

But in the night, as though of design, an empty barn belonging to
spirit-tax contractors, and adjoining the Mihailovitch house, took fire.
The police-master and the police did their work admirably; to save
Mashkovtsev’s house, they even pulled down the wall of his stable and
carried off the horse in dispute without a hair of his tail or of his
mane singed. Two hours later, the police-master, parading on a white
stallion, went to receive the thanks of the highest authority for his
exemplary management of the fire. After this no one doubted that the
police-master could do anything.

The governor Ryhlevsky was driving from an assembly; at the moment when
his carriage was starting, the driver of a small sledge carelessly got
between the traces of the back pair and the front pair of horses; this
led to a minute’s confusion, which did not, however, prevent Ryhlevsky
from reaching home perfectly comfortably. Next day the governor asked
the police-master if he knew whose coachman it was who had driven into
his traces, and said that he ought to be reprimanded.

‘That coachman, your Excellency, will never drive into your traces
again; I gave him a good lesson,’ the police-master answered, smiling.

‘But whose man is he?’

‘Councillor Kulakov’s, your Excellency.’

At that moment the old councillor, whom I found and left councillor of
the provincial government, walked into the governor’s.

‘You must forgive us,’ said the governor to him, ‘for having given your
coachman a lesson.’

The astonished councillor looked at him inquiringly, unable to
understand.

‘You see he drove into my traces yesterday. You see if he is allowed
to....’

‘But, your Excellency, I was at home all day yesterday, and my wife too,
and the coachman was at home.’

‘What’s the meaning of this?’ asked the governor.

‘I am very sorry, your Excellency. I was so busy yesterday, my head was
in a whirl, I quite forgot about the coachman, and I confess I did not
dare to report that to your Excellency. I meant to see about him at
once.’

‘Well, you are a regular police-master, there is no doubt about it!’
observed Ryhlevsky.

Side by side with this rapacious official, I will describe another of
the opposite breed—a tame, soft, sympathetic official.

Among my acquaintances was one venerable old man, a police-captain
dismissed from his position by a Committee of Inquiry instituted by the
Senators’ revision. He spent his time drawing up petitions and getting
up cases, which was just what he was forbidden to do. This man, who had
been in the service immemorial ages, had stolen, doctored official
documents, and collected false evidence in three provinces, twice been
tried, and so on. This veteran of the rural police liked to tell amazing
anecdotes about himself and his colleagues, not concealing his contempt
for the degenerate officials of the younger generation.

‘They’re giddy-pates,’ he said; ‘of course they take what they can get,
there is no living without it, but it is no use looking for cleverness
or knowledge of the law in them. I’ll tell you, for instance, about one
friend of mine. He was a judge for twenty years and only died last year.
He was a man of brains! And the peasants don’t remember evil against
him, though he has left his family a bit of bread. He had quite a
special way of his own. If a peasant came along with a petition, the
judge would admit him at once and be as friendly and pleasant as you
please.

‘“What is your name, uncle, and what was your father’s?”

‘The peasant would bow and say, “Yermolay, sir, and my father was called
Grigory.”

‘“Well, good health to you, Yermolay Grigoryevitch, from what parts is
the Lord bringing you here?”

‘“We are from Dubilovo.”

‘“I know, I know. You have a mill, I fancy, on the right from the
track.”

‘“Yes sir, the mill of our commune.”

‘“A well-to-do village; the land is good, black soil.”

‘“We don’t complain against God, kind sir.”

‘“Well, that is as it should be. I’ll be bound you have a good-sized
family, Yermolay Grigoryevitch?”

‘“Three sons and two daughters, and I have married the elder to a young
fellow who has been with us five years.”

‘“I daresay you have grandchildren by now?”

‘“Yes, there are little ones, your honour.”

‘“And thank God for it! increase and multiply. Well, Yermolay
Grigoryevitch, it is a long way you have come, let us have a glass of
birch wine.”

‘The peasant makes a show of refusing. The judge fills a glass for him,
saying, “Nonsense, nonsense, my man, the holy Fathers have nothing
against wine and oil to-day.”

‘“It’s true there is nothing against it, but wine brings a man to every
trouble.” Then he crosses himself, bows, and drinks the birch wine.

‘“With such a family, Grigoryevitch, I’ll be bound life is hard? To feed
and clothe every one of them you can’t manage with one wretched nag or
cow; there would not be milk enough.”

‘“Upon my word, sir, what could I do with only one horse? I have three,
I did have a fourth, a roan, but it was bewitched about St. Peter’s
fast; the carpenter in our village, Dorofey, may God be his judge, hates
to see another man well off and has an evil eye.”

‘“It does happen, it does happen. And you have big grazing lands, of
course; I’ll be bound you keep sheep?”

‘“To be sure, we have sheep too.”

‘“Ah, I’ve been too long talking with you. It’s the Tsar’s service,
Yermolay Grigoryevitch, it is time I was in the Court. Had you come
about some little business or what?”

‘“Yes, your honour.”

‘“Well, what is it? some quarrel? Make haste and tell me, old man! it is
time I was going.”

‘“Well, kind sir, trouble has come upon me in my old age. Just at
Assumption, we were in the tavern and came to high words with a peasant
of a neighbouring village, such a mischievous man, he is always stealing
our wood. We had hardly said a word before he swung his fist and gave me
a punch in the chest. ‘Keep your blows for your own village,’ I said to
him, and just to make an example, I would have given him a push, but,
being drunk perhaps, or else it was the devil in it, hit him in the
eye—and, well, I spoilt his eye, and he is gone with the church elder
straight to the inspector—wants to have me up to be tried in the court.”

‘While he tells this story, the judge—our Petersburg actors are nothing
to him—grows graver and graver, makes his eyes look dreadful, and does
not say a word.

‘The peasant sees and turns pale, lays his hat at his feet and takes out
a towel to mop his face. The judge still sits silent and turns over the
leaves of a book.

‘“So I have come here to you, kind sir,” says the peasant in a changed
tone.

‘“What can I do in the matter? What a position! And what did you hit him
in the eye for?”

‘“That’s true indeed, sir, what for.... The evil one confounded me.”

‘“It’s a pity! a great pity! to think that a household must be ruined!
Why, what will become of the family without you, all young people and
little grandchildren, and I am sorry for your old woman, too.”

‘The peasant’s legs begin to tremble.

‘“Well, kind sir, what have I brought on myself?”

‘“Look here, Yermolay Grigoryevitch, read for yourself ... or perhaps
you are no great reader? Well, here is the article on maiming and
mutilation ... to be punished by flogging and exile to Siberia.”

‘“Don’t let a man be ruined! Don’t destroy a Christian! Cannot something
be done?...”

‘“What a fellow! Can we go against the law? Of course, it is all in
human hands. Well, instead of thirty strokes we might give five.”

‘“But about Siberia?...”

‘“That’s not in our power to decide, my good man.”

‘The peasant pulls out of his bosom a little bag, takes out of the bag a
bit of paper, out of the paper two and then three gold pieces, and with
a low bow lays them on the table.

‘“What’s this, Yermolay Grigoryevitch?”

‘“Save me, kind sir.”

‘“Nonsense, nonsense, what do you mean? Sinful man that I am, I do
sometimes accept a token of gratitude. My salary is small, so one is
forced to, but if one accepts it, it must be for something! How can I
help you? It would be a different thing if it were a rib or a tooth, but
a blow on the eye! Take your money back.”

‘The peasant is crushed.

‘“I’ll tell you what; shall I talk to my colleagues and write to the
governor’s office? Very likely the case will come into the courts of
justice, there I have friends, they can do anything, only they are a
different sort of people, you won’t get off for three gold pieces
there.”

‘The peasant begins to recover his faculties.

‘“You needn’t give me anything. I am sorry for your family, but it is no
use your offering them less than two grey notes.”

‘“But, kind sir, as God is above, I don’t know where I am to turn to get
such a mint of money—four hundred roubles—these are hard times.”’

‘“Yes, I expect it is difficult. We could diminish the punishment in
view of your penitence, and taking into consideration that you were not
sober ... and, there, you know people get on all right in Siberia. There
is no telling how far you may have to go.... Of course, if you were to
sell a couple of horses and one of the cows, and the sheep, you might
make it up. But it would take you a time to make up that money again! On
the other hand, if you do keep the horses, you’ll have to go off
yourself to the ends of the earth. Think it over, Grigoryevitch; there
is no hurry, we can wait till to-morrow, but it is time I was going,”
adds the judge, and puts the gold pieces he had refused into his pocket,
saying, “This is quite unnecessary. I only take it not to offend you.”’

‘Next morning you may be sure the old screw brings three hundred and
fifty roubles in all sorts of old-fashioned coins to the judge.

‘The judge promises to look after his interests: the peasant is tried
and tried and properly scared and then let off with some light
punishment, or with a warning to be careful in future, or with a note
that he is to be kept under police supervision, and he remembers the
judge in his prayers for the rest of his life.

‘That’s how they used to do in old days,’ the discharged
police-inspector told me; ‘they did things properly.’

The peasants of Vyatka are, generally speaking, not very long-suffering,
and for that reason the officials consider them fractious and
troublesome. The rural police find their real gold mine in the Votyaks,
the Mordvahs, and the Tchuvashes; they are pitiful, timid, dull-witted
people. Police inspectors pay double to the governor for appointments in
districts populated by these Finnish tribes.

The police and the officials do incredible things with these poor
creatures.

If a land-surveyor crosses a Votyak village on some commission, he
invariably halts in it, takes an astrolabe out of his cart, sticks a
post into the ground and stretches a chain. Within an hour the whole
village is in a turmoil. ‘The surveyors, the surveyors!’ the peasants
say with the horror with which in 1812 they used to say, ‘The French,
the French!’ The village elder comes with the commune to do homage. And
the surveyor measures everything and writes it down. The elder entreats
him not to measure, not to do them injury. The surveyor demands twenty
or thirty roubles. The Votyaks are greatly relieved, they collect the
money—and the surveyor goes on to the next Votyak village.

If a dead body comes into the hands of the police, they take it about
with them for a fortnight, if it is frosty weather, from one Votyak
village to another, and in each one declare that they have just picked
it up, and that an inquest and inquiry will be held in their village.
The Votyaks buy them off.

A few years before I came to the district, a police-inspector who had
acquired a taste for taking bribes brought a dead body into a big
Russian village and demanded, I remember, two hundred roubles. The
village elder called the commune together. The commune refused to give
more than a hundred. The police official would not give way. The
peasants lost their tempers and shut him with his two clerks in the hut
which serves as the parish office, and in their turn threatened to burn
them. The police-inspector did not believe in the threat. The peasants
surrounded the hut with straw and, as an ultimatum, passed a
hundred-rouble note in at the window on a stake. The heroic
police-inspector still insisted on another hundred. Then the peasants
set fire to the straw all round the hut and the three Mucius Scaevolas
of the rural police were burnt to death. This affair was afterwards
brought before the senate.

The Votyak villages are as a rule much poorer than the Russian ones.

‘You live poorly, brother,’ I said to a Votyak while I was waiting for
horses in a stuffy, smoky little hut all on the slant with its windows
looking into the back-yard.

‘Can’t be helped, master! We are poor, we save money for bad times.’

‘Well, it would be hard for times to be worse, old man,’ I said to him,
pouring out a glass of rum. ‘Drink, and forget your troubles.’

‘We do not drink,’ answered the Votyak, looking eagerly at the glass and
suspiciously at me.

‘Nonsense! come, take it.’

‘Drink yourself first.’

I drank and then the Votyak drank.

‘And what are you?’ he asked. ‘From the government on business?’

‘No,’ I answered, ‘on a journey; I am going to Vyatka.’

This considerably reassured him and, looking round carefully, he added
by way of explanation, ‘it is a black day when the police-inspector and
the priest come to us.’

I should like to add something concerning the latter. Our priests are
being more and more transformed into clerical police, as might indeed be
expected from the Byzantine meekness of our Church and the spiritual
supremacy of the Tsar.

The Finnish tribes were partly christened before the time of Peter the
Great and partly in the reign of Elizabeth, while a section of them have
remained heathen. The greater number of those christened in the reign of
Elizabeth secretly adhere to their savage, gloomy religion.[145]

Every two or three years the police-inspector or the rural police
superintendent go through the villages accompanied by a priest, to
discover which of the Votyaks have confessed and been absolved, and
which have not and why not. They are oppressed, thrown into prison,
flogged, and made to pay fines; and, above all, the priest and the
police-inspector search for any proof that they have not given up their
old rites. Then the spiritual spy and the police missionary raise a
storm, exact an immense bribe, give them a ‘black day,’ and so depart
leaving everything as before, to repeat their procession with cross and
rods a year or two later.

In 1835 the Most Holy Synod thought it fitting to do apostolic work in
the Vyatka Province and convert the Tcheremiss heathen to orthodoxy.

This conversion is a type of all the great reforms carried out by the
Russian government, a façade, scene-painting, _blague_, deception, a
magnificent report, while somebody steals and some one else is flogged.

The Metropolitan, Filaret, sent an energetic priest as a missionary. His
name was Kurbanovsky. Consumed by the Russian disease of ambition,
Kurbanovsky threw himself warmly into the work. He determined at all
costs to force the grace of God upon the Tcheremisses. At first he tried
preaching, but he soon got tired of that. And, indeed, does one make
much way by that old method?

The Tcheremisses, seeing the position of affairs, sent to him their
priests, wild, fanatical and adroit. After a prolonged parleying, they
said to Kurbanovsky: ‘In the forest are white birch-trees, tall pines
and firs, there is also the little juniper. God suffers them all and
bids not the juniper be a pine-tree. And so are we among ourselves, like
the forest. Be ye the white birch, we will remain the juniper; we will
not trouble you, _we will pray for the Tsar_, will pay the taxes and
send recruits, but we will not change our holy things.’[146]

Kurbanovsky saw that there was no making them hear reason, and that the
success of Cyril and Methodius[147] would not be vouchsafed him, and he
appealed to the local police-captain. The latter was highly delighted.
He had long been eager to display his devotion to the Church. He was an
unbaptized Tatar, _i.e._ a Mahommedan of the true faith, by name
Devlet-Kildeyev.

The police-captain took a band of soldiers and set off to attack the
Tcheremisses with the Word of God. Several villages were duly
christened. The apostle Kurbanovsky performed the thanksgiving service
and went meekly off to receive his reward. To the Tatar apostle the
government sent the Vladimir Cross for the propagation of Christianity!

Unfortunately, the Tatar missionary was not on good terms with the
mullah at Malmyzho. The mullah was not at all pleased that a son of the
true faith of the Koran should preach the Gospel so successfully. In
Ramadan, the police-captain, heedlessly affixing the cross to his
button, appeared at the mosque and of course took up his stand before
all the rest. The mullah had only just begun reading the Koran through
his nose, when all at once he stopped, and said that he dare not
continue in the presence of a Mussulman who had come into the mosque
wearing a Christian emblem.

The Tatars raised a murmur, the police-captain was overcome with
confusion and either withdrew or removed the cross.

I afterwards read in the _Journal of the Ministry of Home Affairs_ about
the brilliant conversion of the Tcheremisses. The article referred to
the zealous co-operation of Devlet-Kildeyev. Unluckily they forgot to
add that his zeal for the Church was the more disinterested as his faith
in Islam was so firm.

Before the end of my time at Vyatka, the Department of Crown Property
was stealing so impudently that a commission of inquiry was appointed,
which sent inspectors about the province. With that began the
introduction of new regulations concerning Crown peasants.

Governor Kornilov had the appointment of the officials for this
inspection in his hands. I was one of those appointed. What things it
was my lot to read! Melancholy, and amusing, and disgusting. The very
headings of the cases moved me to amazement.

‘Relating to the disappearance of the house of the Parish Council, no
one knows where, and of the gnawing of the plan of it by mice.’

‘Relating to the loss of twenty-two government quit-rent articles,
_i.e._ of fifteen versts of land.’

‘Relating to the re-enumeration of the peasant boy Vassily among the
feminine sex.’ This last was so strange that I at once read the case
from cover to cover.

The father of this supposed Vassily wrote in his petition to the
governor that fifteen years ago he had a daughter born, whom he had
wanted to call Vassilisa, but that the priest, being ‘in liquor,’
christened the girl Vassily and so entered it on the register. The
circumstance apparently troubled the peasant very little. But when he
realised that it would soon come to his family to furnish a recruit and
pay the poll tax, he reported on the matter to the mayor and the rural
police superintendent. The case seemed very suspicious to the police.
They had previously refused to listen to the peasant, saying that he had
let ten years pass. The peasant went to the governor, the latter
arranged a solemn examination of the boy of the feminine sex by a doctor
and a midwife.... At this point a correspondence suddenly sprang up with
the Consistory, and the priest, the successor of the one who, when ‘in
liquor,’ had failed to note this trifling difference, appeared on the
scene, and the case went on for years and the girl was left under
suspicion of being a man until the end.

Do not imagine that this is an absurd figment of my fancy; not at all,
it is quite in harmony with the spirit of the Russian autocracy.

In the reign of Paul some colonel of the Guards in his monthly report
entered an officer as dead who was dying in the hospital. Paul struck
him off the list as dead. Unluckily the officer did not die, but
recovered. The colonel persuaded him to withdraw to his country estate
for a year or two, hoping to find an opportunity to rectify the error.
The officer agreed, but unfortunately for the colonel the heirs who had
read of their kinsman’s death in the _Army Gazette_ refused on any
consideration to acknowledge that he was living, and, inconsolable at
their loss, insisted on bringing the matter before the authorities. When
the living corpse saw that he was likely to die a second time, not
merely on paper but from hunger, he went to Petersburg and sent in a
petition to Paul. The Tsar wrote with his own hand on the petition:
‘Forasmuch as a decree of the Most High has been promulgated concerning
this gentleman, the petition must be refused.’

This is even better than my Vassilisa-Vassily. Of what consequence was
the crude fact of life beside the decree of the Most High? Paul was the
poet and dialectician of autocracy!

Foul and loathsome as this morass of officialdom is, I must add a few
words more about it. To bring it into the light of day is the least poor
tribute one can pay to those who have suffered and perished, unknown and
uncomforted.

The government readily gives the higher officials waste lands by way of
reward. There is no great harm in that, though it would be more sensible
to keep these reserves to provide for the increase of population. The
regulations that govern the fixing of the boundaries of these lands are
fairly detailed; forests containing building timber, the banks of
navigable rivers, indeed the banks of any river, must not be given away,
nor under any circumstances may lands be so assigned that are being
cultivated by peasants, even though the peasants have no right to the
land except that of long usage.[148]

All these restrictions of course are only on paper. In reality the
assignment of land to private owners is a terrible source of plunder and
oppression of the peasants. Great noblemen in receipt of rents used
either to sell their rights to merchants, or try through the provincial
authorities to gain some special privilege contrary to the regulations.
Even Count Orlov himself was _by chance_ assigned a main road and the
pasture lands on which cattle droves are pastured in the Province of
Saratov.

It is therefore no wonder that one fine morning the peasants of the
Darovsky parish in Kotelnitchesky district had their lands cut off right
up to their barns and houses and given as private property to some
merchants who had bought the lease of them from a kinsman of Count
Kankrin. The merchants fixed a rent for the land. This led to a lawsuit.
The Court of Justice, bribed by the merchants and afraid of Kankrin’s
kinsman, confused the issues of the case. But the peasants were
determined to persist with it. They elected two hard-headed peasants
from amongst themselves and sent them to Petersburg. The case was
brought before the Senate. The land-surveying department perceived that
the peasants were in the right and consulted Kankrin. The latter simply
admitted that the land had been irregularly apportioned, but urged that
it would be difficult to restore it, because it _might_ have changed
hands since then, and that its present owners _might_ have made various
improvements. And therefore his Excellency proposed that, considering
the vast amount of Crown property available, the peasants should be
assigned a full equivalent in a different part. This satisfied every one
except the peasants. In the first place, it is no light matter to bring
fresh land under cultivation, and, in the second, the fresh land turned
out to be swampy and unsuitable. As the peasants were more interested in
growing corn than in shooting grouse and woodcock, they sent another
petition.

Then the Court of Justice and the Ministry of Finance made a new case
out of the old one, and finding a law which authorised them, if the land
that was assigned turned out to be unsuitable, to add as much as another
half of the amount to it, ordered the peasants to be given another half
swamp in addition to the swamp they already had.

The peasants sent another petition to the Senate, but, before their case
had come up for investigation, the land-surveying department sent them
plans of their new land, with the boundaries marked and coloured, with
stars for the points of the compass and appropriate explanations for the
lozenges, marked R.R.Z., and the lozenges marked Z.Z.R., and, what was
of more consequence, a demand for so much rent per acre. The peasants,
seeing that far from giving them land, they were trying to squeeze money
out of them for the bog, refused point-blank to pay. The police-captain
reported it to Tyufyaev, who sent a punitory expedition under the
command of the Vyatka police-master. The latter arrived, seized a few
persons, flogged them, restored order in the district, took the money,
handed over the _guilty parties_ to the Criminal Court, and was hoarse
for a week afterwards from shouting. Several men were punished with the
lash and sent into exile.

Two years later the Tsarevitch passed through the district, the peasants
handed him a petition; he ordered the case to be investigated. It was
upon this that I had to draw up a report. Whether any good came of this
re-investigation I do not know. I have heard that the exiles were
brought back, but whether the land was restored I cannot say.

In conclusion, I must mention the celebrated story of the potato mutiny
and how Nicholas tried to bring the blessings of Petersburg civilisation
to the nomad gypsies.

Like the peasantry of all Europe at one time, the Russian peasants were
not very ready to plant potatoes, as though an instinct told the people
that this was a poor kind of food which would give them neither health
nor strength. However, on the estates of decent landowners and in many
crown villages, ‘earth apples’ had been planted long before the Potato
Terror. But anything that is done of itself is distasteful to the
Russian Government. Everything must be done under terror of the stick
and the drill-sergeant, to the beating of drums.

The peasants of the Kazan and of part of the Vyatka province planted
potatoes in their fields. When the potatoes were lifted, the idea
occurred to the Ministry to set up a central potato-pit in each
_volost_. Potato-pits were ratified, potato-pits were prescribed,
potato-pits were dug; and at the beginning of winter the peasants, much
against their will, took the potatoes to the central pit. But when the
following spring the authorities tried to make them plant frozen
potatoes, they refused. There cannot, indeed, be a more flagrant insult
to labour than a command to do something obviously absurd. This refusal
was represented as a mutiny. The Minister Kisselyov sent an official
from Petersburg; he, being an intelligent and practical man, exacted a
rouble apiece from the peasants of the first _volost_ and allowed them
not to plant frozen potatoes.

He repeated this proceeding in the second _volost_ and the third, but in
the fourth, the elder told him point-blank that he would neither plant
the potatoes nor pay him anything. ‘You have let off these and those,’
he told the official; ‘it’s clear you must let us off too.’ The official
would have concluded the business with threats and thrashings, but the
peasants snatched up stakes and drove away the police; the military
governor sent Cossacks. The neighbouring _volosts_ took the peasants’
part.

It is enough to say that it came to using grape-shot and bullets. The
peasants left their homes and dispersed into the woods; the Cossacks
drove them out of the bushes like game; then they were caught, put into
irons, and sent to be court-martialled at Kosmodemiansk.

By a strange accident the old major in charge there was an honest,
good-natured man; in the simplicity of his heart, he said that the
official sent from Petersburg was solely to blame. Every one pounced
upon him, his voice was hushed up, he was suppressed; he was intimidated
and even put to shame for ‘trying to ruin an innocent man.’

And the inquiry followed the usual Russian routine: the peasants were
flogged during the examination, flogged as a punishment, flogged as an
example, flogged to extort money, and a whole crowd of them sent to
Siberia.

It is worth noting that Kisselyov passed through Kosmodemiansk during
the inquiry. He might, it may be thought, have looked in at the court
martial or have sent for the major.

He did not do so!

The famous Turgot, seeing the hatred of the peasants for the potatoes,
distributed seed-potatoes among contractors, purveyors, and other
persons under government control, sternly forbidding them to give them
to the peasants. At the same time he gave them secret orders not to
prevent the peasants from stealing them. In a few years a large part of
France was under potatoes.

_Tout bien pris_, is not that better than grape-shot, Pavel
Dmitrievitch?

In 1836 a gypsy camp came to Vyatka and settled in a field. These
gypsies had wandered as far as Tobolsk and Irbit and had invariably,
accompanied by their trained bear and entirely untrained children, led
their free nomadic existence from time immemorial, engaged in
horse-doctoring, fortune-telling, and petty pilfering. They peacefully
sang songs and robbed hen-roosts, but all at once the governor received
instructions from the Most High that if gypsies were found without
passports (not a single gypsy had ever had a passport, and that Nicholas
and his men knew perfectly well) they were to be given a fixed time
within which they were to inscribe themselves as citizens of the village
or town where they happened to be at the date of the decree.

At the expiration of the time limit, it was ordained that those fit for
military service should be taken for soldiers and the rest sent into
exile, all but the children of the male sex.

This senseless decree, which recalled biblical accounts of the
persecution and punishment of whole races and the slaughter of all the
males among them, disconcerted even Tyufyaev. He communicated the absurd
decree to the gypsies and wrote to Petersburg that it could not be
carried out. To inscribe themselves as citizens they would need both
money for the officials and the consent of the town or village, which
would also have been unwilling to accept the gypsies for nothing. It was
necessary, too, that the gypsies should themselves have been desirous of
settling on the spot. Taking all this into consideration, Tyufyaev—and
one must give him credit for it—asked the Ministry to grant
postponements and exemptions.

The Ministry answered by instructions that at the expiration of the time
limit this Nebuchadnezzar-like decree should be carried out. Most
unwillingly Tyufyaev sent a company of soldiers with orders to surround
the gypsy camp; as soon as this was done, the police arrived with the
garrison battalion, and what happened, I am told, was beyond all
imagination. Women with streaming hair ran about in a frenzy, screaming
and weeping, and falling at the feet of the police; grey-headed old
mothers clung to their sons. But order triumphed and the police-master
took the boys and took the recruits—while the rest were sent by étape
somewhere into exile.

But when the children had been taken, the question arose what was to be
done with them and at whose expense they were to be kept.

In old days there were foundling hospitals in connection with the
Department of Public Charity which cost the government nothing. But the
Prussian chastity of Nicholas abolished them as detrimental to morals.
Tyufyaev advanced money of his own and asked the Minister for
instructions. Ministers never stick at anything. They ordered that the
boys, until further instructions, were to be put into the charge of the
old men and women maintained in the almshouses.

Think of placing little children in charge of moribund old men and
women, making them breathe the atmosphere of death—forcing old people
who need peace and quiet to look after children for nothing!

What imagination!

While I am on the subject I must describe what happened some eighteen
months later to the elder of my father’s village in the province of
Vladimir. He was a peasant of intelligence and experience who carried on
the trade of a carrier, had several teams of three horses each, and had
been for twenty years the elder of a little village that paid _obrok_ to
my father.

Some time during the year I spent in Vladimir, the neighbouring peasants
asked him to deliver a recruit for them. Bringing the future defender of
his country on a rope, he arrived in the town with great self-confidence
as a man proficient in the business.

‘This,’ said he, combing with his fingers the fair, grizzled beard that
framed his face, ‘is all the work of men’s hands, sir. Last year we
pitched on our lad, such a wretched sickly fellow he was—the peasants
were much afraid he wouldn’t do. “And how much, good Christians, will
you go to? A wheel will not turn without being greased.” We talked it
over and the _mir_ decided to give twenty-five gold pieces. I went to
the town and after talking in the government office I went straight to
the president—he was a sensible man, sir, and had known me a long time.
He told them to take me into his study and he had something the matter
with his leg, so he was lying on the sofa. I put it all before him and
he answered me with a laugh, “that’s all right, that’s all right, you
tell me how many _of them_ you have brought—you are a skinflint, I know
you.” I put ten gold pieces on the table and made him a low bow—he took
the money in his hand and kept playing with it. “But I say,” he said, “I
am not the only one whom you will have to pay, what more have you
brought?” “Another ten,” I told him. “Well,” he said, “you can reckon
yourself what you must do with it. Two to the doctor, two to the army
receiver, then the clerk, and all sorts of other little tips won’t come
to more than three—so you had better leave the rest with me and I will
try to arrange it all.”’

‘Well, did you give it to him?’

‘To be sure I did—and they took the boy all right.’

Accustomed to such reckonings and calculations and also, perhaps, to the
five gold pieces of which he had given no account, the elder was
confident of success. But there may be many mishaps between the bribe
and the hand that takes it. Count Essen, one of the Imperial adjutants,
was sent to Vladimir for the levy of recruits. The elder approached him
with his gold pieces. Unfortunately the Count had, like the heroine of
Pushkin’s _Nulin_, been reared ‘not in the traditions of his fathers,’
but in the school of the Baltic aristocracy, which instils German
devotion to the Russian Tsar. Essen was angered, shouted at him and,
what was worse, rang the bell; the clerk ran in and gendarmes made their
appearance. The elder, who had never suspected the existence of men in
uniform who would not take bribes, lost his head so completely that he
did not deny the charge, did not vow and swear that he had never offered
money, did not protest, might God strike him blind and might another
drop never pass between his lips, if he had thought of such a thing! He
let himself be caught like a sheep and led off to the police station,
probably regretting that he had offered the general too little and so
offended him.

But Essen, not satisfied with the purity of his own conscience, nor the
terror of the luckless peasant, and probably wishing to eradicate
bribery _in Russland_, to punish vice and set a salutary example, wrote
to the police, wrote to the governor, wrote to the recruiting office of
the elder’s criminal attempt. The peasant was put in prison and
committed for trial. Thanks to the stupid and grotesque law which metes
out the same punishment to the honest man who gives a bribe to an
official and to the official himself who takes the bribe, things looked
black for him and the elder had to be saved at all costs.

I rushed to the governor; he refused to intervene in the matter; the
president and councillors of the Criminal Court shook their heads,
panic-stricken at the interference of the Imperial adjutant. The latter
himself, relenting, was the first to declare that he ‘wished the man no
harm, that he only wanted to give him a lesson, that he ought _to be
tried and then let off_.’ When I told this to the police-master, he
observed: ‘The fact is, none of these gentry know how things are done,
he should have simply sent him to me. I would have given the fool a good
drubbing—to teach him to mind what he is about—and would have sent him
about his business. Every one would have been satisfied, and now you are
in a nice mess with the Criminal Court.’

These two comments express the Russian conception of law so neatly and
strikingly that I cannot forget them.

Between these pillars of Hercules of the national jurisprudence, the
elder had fallen into the deepest gulf, that is, into the Criminal
Court. A few months later the verdict was prepared that the elder after
being punished with the lash should be exiled to Siberia. His son and
all his family came to me, imploring me to save their father, the head
of the family. I myself felt fearfully sorry for the peasant, ruined
though perfectly innocent. I went again to the president and the
councillors, pointing out to them that they were doing themselves harm
by punishing the elder so severely; that they knew themselves very well
that no business was ever done without bribes; that, in fact, they would
have nothing to eat if they did not, like true Christians, consider that
every gift is perfect and every giving is a blessing. Entreating,
bowing, and sending the elder’s son to bow still lower, I succeeded in
gaining half of my object. The elder was condemned to a few strokes of
the lash within prison walls, was allowed to remain in his home, but was
forbidden to act as an agent for the other peasants.

I sighed with relief when I saw that the governor and the prosecutor had
agreed to this, and went to the police to ask for some mitigation of the
severity of the flogging; the police, partly because they were flattered
at my coming myself to ask them a favour, partly through compassion for
a man who was suffering for something that concerned them all so
intimately, promised me to make it a pure formality.

A few days later the elder appeared, thinner and greyer than before. I
saw that for all his delight he was sad about something and weighed down
by some oppressive thought.

‘What are you worrying about?’ I asked him.

‘Well, I wish they’d settle it once for all.’

‘I don’t understand.’

‘I mean, when will they punish me?’

‘Why, haven’t they punished you?’

‘No.’

‘Then how is it they have let you go? You are going home, aren’t you?’

‘Home, yes; but I fancy the secretary read something about punishment.’

I could really make nothing of it, and at last asked him whether they
had given him any sort of paper. He gave it me. The whole verdict was
written in it, and at the end it was stated that, having received the
punishment of the lash within the prison walls in accordance with the
sentence of the Criminal Court, he was given his certificate and let out
of prison.

I laughed.

‘Well, you have been flogged already, then!’

‘No, sir, I haven’t.’

‘Well, if you are dissatisfied, go back and ask them to punish you;
perhaps the police will enter into your position.’

Seeing that I was laughing, the old man smiled too, shaking his head
dubiously and adding: ‘Well, well, strange doings!’

‘How irregular!’ many people will say; but they must remember that it is
only through such irregularity that life is possible in Russia.




                               Chapter 16
                    ALEXANDER LAVRENTYEVITCH VITBERG


Among the grotesque and dirty, petty and loathsome scenes and figures,
affairs and cases, in this setting of official routine and red-tape, I
recall the noble and melancholy features of an artist, who was crushed
by the government with cold and callous cruelty.

The leaden hand of the Tsar did not merely strangle a work of genius in
its infancy, did not merely destroy the very creation of the artist,
entangling him in judicial snares and police traps, but tried to snatch
from him his honourable name together with his last crust of bread and
to brand him as a taker of bribes and a pilferer of government funds.

After ruining and disgracing A. L. Vitberg, Nicholas exiled him to
Vyatka. It was there that we met.

For two years and a half I lived with the great artist and saw the
strong man, who had fallen a victim to the autocracy of red-tape
officialdom and barrack-discipline, which measures everything in the
world by the footrule of the recruiting officer and the copying clerk,
breaking down under the weight of persecution and misery.

It cannot be said that he succumbed easily; he struggled desperately for
full ten years. He came into exile still hoping to confound his enemies
and justify himself, he came in fact still ready for conflict, bringing
plans and projects. But he soon discerned that all was over.

Perhaps even this discovery would not have overwhelmed him, but he had
at his side a wife and children and ahead of him years of exile,
poverty, and privation; and Vitberg was turning grey, growing old,
growing old not by days but by hours. When I left him in Vyatka at the
end of two years he was quite ten years older.

Here is the story of this long martyrdom.

The Emperor Alexander did not believe in his victory over Napoleon, he
was oppressed by the fame of it and genuinely gave the glory to God.
Always disposed to mysticism and melancholy, in which many people saw
the fretting of conscience, he gave way to it particularly after the
series of victories over Napoleon.

When ‘the last soldier of the enemy had crossed the frontier,’ Alexander
issued a proclamation in which he vowed to raise in Moscow an immense
temple to the Saviour. Plans for such a temple were invited, and an
immense competition began.

Vitberg was at that time a young artist who had just completed his
studies and gained the gold medal for painting. A Swede by origin, he
was born in Russia and at first was educated in the Engineers’ Cadet
Corps. The artist was enthusiastic, eccentric, and given to mysticism:
he read the proclamation, read the appeal for plans, and flung aside all
other pursuits. For days and nights he wandered about the streets of
Petersburg, tortured by a persistent idea; it was too strong for him, he
locked himself up in his own room, took a pencil and set to work.

To no one in the world did the artist confide his design. After some
months of work, he went to Moscow to study the city and the surrounding
country and set to work again, shutting himself up for months together
and keeping his design a secret.

The date of the competition arrived. The plans were numerous, there were
designs from Italy and from Germany and our Academicians sent in theirs.
And the unknown youth sent in his among the rest. Weeks passed before
the Emperor examined the plans. These were the forty days in the
wilderness, days of temptation, doubt, and agonising suspense.

Vitberg’s colossal design, filled with religious poetry, impressed
Alexander. He came to a stop before it, and it was the first of which he
inquired the authorship. They broke open the sealed envelope and found
the unknown name of an Academy pupil.

Alexander wanted to see Vitberg. He had a long talk with the artist. His
bold and fervent language, his genuine inspiration and the mystic tinge
of his convictions impressed the Emperor. ‘You speak in stones,’ he
observed, examining Vitberg’s design again.

That very day his design was accepted and Vitberg was chosen to be the
architect and the director of the building committee. Alexander did not
know that with the laurel wreath he was putting a crown of thorns on the
artist’s head.

There is no art more akin to mysticism than architecture; abstract,
geometrical, mutely musical, passionless, it lives in symbol, in emblem,
in suggestion. Simple lines, their harmonious combination, rhythm,
numerical relations, make up something mysterious and at the same time
incomplete. The building, the temple, is not its own object, as is a
statue or a picture, a poem, or a symphony; a building requires an
inmate; it is a place mapped and cleared for habitation, an environment,
the shield of the tortoise, the shell of the mollusc; and the whole
point of it is that the receptacle should correspond with its spirit,
its object, its inmate, as the shell does with the tortoise. The walls
of the temple, its vaults and columns, its portal and façade, its
foundations and its cupola must bear the imprint of the divinity that
dwells within it, just as the convolutions of the brain are imprinted on
the bone of the skull.

The Egyptian temples were their holy books. The obelisks were sermons on
the high-road. Solomon’s temple was the Bible turned into architecture;
just as St. Peter’s at Rome is the architectural symbol of the escape
from Catholicism, of the beginning of the lay world, of the beginning of
the secularisation of mankind.

The very building of temples was so invariably accompanied by mystic
rites, symbolical utterances, mysterious consecrations that the mediæval
builders looked upon themselves as something apart, a kind of
priesthood, the heirs of the builders of Solomon’s temple, and made up
secret guilds of stonemasons, which afterwards passed into Freemasonry.

From the time of the Renaissance architecture loses its peculiar mystic
character. The Christian faith is struggling with philosophic doubt, the
Gothic arch with the Greek pediment, spiritual holiness with worldly
beauty. What gives St. Peter’s its lofty significance is that in its
colossal proportions Christianity struggles towards life, the church
becomes pagan and on the walls of the Sistine Chapel Michael Angelo
paints Jesus Christ as a broad-shouldered athlete, a Hercules in the
flower of his age and strength.

After St. Peter’s, church architecture deteriorated completely and was
reduced at last to simple repetition, on a larger or smaller scale, of
the ancient Greek peripteras and of St. Peter’s.

One Parthenon is called St. Madeleine’s in Paris; the other is the
Exchange in New York.

Without faith and without special circumstances, it was hard to create
anything living: there is something of artificiality, of hypocrisy, of
anachronism, about all new churches, such as the five-domed cruet-stands
with onions instead of corks in them in the Indo-Byzantine manner, which
Nicholas builds, with Ton for architect, or the angular Gothic churches
offensive to the aristocratic eye, with which the English decorate their
towns.

But the circumstances under which Vitberg created his design, his
personality, and the state of mind of the Emperor were all exceptional.

The war of 1812 had caused a violent upheaval in men’s minds in Russia;
it was long after the deliverance of Moscow before the ferment of
thought and nervous irritation could subside. Events outside Russia, the
taking of Paris, the story of the Hundred Days, the suspense, the
rumours, Waterloo, Napoleon sailing over the ocean, the mourning for
fallen kinsmen, the apprehension over the living, the returning troops,
the soldiers going home, all produced a great effect even on the
coarsest natures. Imagine a youthful artist, a mystic, gifted with
creative force and at the same time a fanatic, under the influence of
all that had happened, under the influence of the Tsar’s appeal and his
own genius.

Near Moscow, between the Mozhaisk and Kaluga roads, there is a slight
eminence which rises above the whole city. These are the Sparrow Hills
of which I have spoken in my first reminiscences of childhood. The city
lies stretched at their foot, and one of the most picturesque views of
Moscow is from their top. Here Ivan the Terrible, at that time a young
profligate, stood weeping and watching his capital burn; here the priest
Sylvester appeared before him and with stern words transformed that
monster of genius for twenty years.

Napoleon with his army skirted this hill, here his strength was broken,
it was at the foot of the Sparrow Hills that his retreat began.

Could a better spot be found for a temple to commemorate the year 1812
than the furthest point which the enemy reached?

But this was not enough, the hill itself was to be turned into the lower
part of the temple; the open ground down to the river was to be
encircled by a colonnade, and on this base, built on three sides by
nature itself, a second and a third temple were to be raised, making up
a marvellous whole.

Vitberg’s temple, like the chief dogma of Christianity, was threefold
and indivisible.

The lower temple carved out of the hill had the form of a parallelogram,
a coffin, a body, it was a heavy portico supported by almost Egyptian
columns, it merged into the hill, into rough, unhewn nature. This temple
was lighted up by lamps in tall Etrurian candelabra, and the daylight
filtered sparsely into it through the second temple, passing through a
transparent picture of the Nativity. In this crypt all the heroes who
had fallen in 1812 were to be laid at rest. An eternal requiem was to be
sung for those slain on the field of battle, the names of all of them
from the generals to the private soldiers were to be carved upon the
walls.

Upon this tomb, upon this graveyard, the second temple—the temple of
outstretched hands, of life, of suffering, of labour, was laid out in
the form of a Greek cross with the four ends equal. The colonnade
leading to it was decorated with statues from figures of the Old
Testament. At the entrance stood the prophets, they stood outside the
temple pointing the way which they were not destined to tread. The whole
story of the Gospels and of the Acts of the Apostles was depicted within
this temple.

Above it, crowning it and completing it, was a third temple in the form
of a dome. This temple, brightly lighted, was the temple of the spirit
of untroubled peace, of eternity, expressed in its circular plan. Here
there were neither pictures nor sculpture, only on the outside it was
encircled by a ring of archangels and was covered by a colossal cupola.

I am now giving from memory Vitberg’s leading idea. He had it worked out
to the minutest detail and everywhere perfectly in harmony with
Christian theology and architectural beauty.

The marvellous man spent his whole life over his design. During the ten
years that he was on his trial he was occupied with nothing else and,
though harassed by poverty and privation in exile, he devoted several
hours every day to his temple. He lived in it, he did not believe that
it would never be built; memories, consolations, glory, all were in the
artist’s portfolio.

Perhaps one day some other artist, after the martyr’s death, will shake
the dust off those sheets and with reverence publish that record of
martyrdom, in which was spent and wasted a life full of strength, for a
moment gladdened by the radiance of glory, then worn out and crushed
between a drill-sergeant Tsar, serf-senators, and pettifogging
ministers.

The design was a work of genius, terrifying, staggering; that was why
Alexander chose it, that was why it ought to have been carried out. It
was said that the hill could not have borne the weight of the temple. I
find that incredible in face of all the new resources of the American
and English engineers, the tunnels which a train takes eight minutes to
pass through, the hanging bridges, and so on.

Miloradovitch advised Vitberg to make the thick columns of the lower
temple of single blocks of granite. On this some one observed that it
would be very expensive to bring the granite blocks from Finland. ‘That
is just why we ought to get them,’ answered Miloradovitch, ‘if there
were a quarry in the river Moskva there would be nothing wonderful in
having them.’

Miloradovitch was a warrior poet and he understood poetry in general.
Grand things are done by grand means.

Only nature does great things for nothing.

Even those who have no doubt of Vitberg’s honesty find great fault with
him for having undertaken the duty of directing operations, though he
was an inexperienced young artist who knew nothing of official business.
He ought to have confined himself to the part of architect. That is
true.

But it is easy to make such criticisms sitting at home in one’s study.
He undertook it just because he was young, inexperienced, and an artist;
he undertook it because after his design had been accepted, everything
seemed easy to him; he undertook it because the Tsar himself had
proposed it to him, encouraged him, supported him. Is there any man
whose head would not have been turned?... Are there any so prudent, so
sober, so self-restrained? Well, if there are, they do not design
colossal temples nor do they make ‘stones speak’!

It need hardly be said that Vitberg was surrounded by a crowd of rogues,
men who look on Russia as a field for plunder, on the service as a
profitable line of business, on a public post as a lucky chance to make
a fortune. It was easy to understand that they would dig a pit under
Vitberg’s feet. But that, after falling into it, he should be unable to
get out again, was due also to the envy of some and the wounded vanity
of others.

Vitberg’s colleagues on the committee were the metropolitan Filaret, the
Governor-General of Moscow, and the Senator Kushnikov; they were all
offended to begin with by being associated with a young upstart,
especially as he gave his opinion boldly and objected if he did not
agree.

They helped to get him into trouble, they helped to slander him and with
cold-blooded indifference completed his ruin afterwards.

They were helped in this by the fall of the mystically-minded minister
Prince A. N. Golitsyn, and afterwards by the death of Alexander.
Together with the fall of Golitsyn came the collapse of Freemasonry, of
the Bible societies, of Lutheran pietism, which in the persons of
Magnitsky at Kazan and of Runitch in Petersburg ran to grotesque
extremes, to savage persecutions, to hysterical antics, to complete
dementia and goodness knows what strange doings.

Savage, coarse, ignorant orthodoxy was supreme. It was preached by Fotiy
the archimandrite of Novgorod, who lived on intimate (not physically, of
course) terms with Countess Orlov. The daughter of the celebrated Alexey
Grigoryevitch who strangled Peter III., she hoped to win the redemption
of her father’s soul by devoting herself to frenzied fanaticism, by
giving up to Fotiy and his monks the greater part of her enormous
estates, which had been forcibly snatched from the monasteries by
Catherine.

But the one thing in which the Petersburg government is persistent, the
one thing in which it does not change, however its principles and
religions may change, is its unjust oppression and persecution. The
violence of the Runitches and the Magnitskys was turned against the
Runitches and the Magnitskys. The Bible Society, only yesterday
patronised and approved—the prop of morality and religion, was to-day
closed and sealed, and its members put almost on the level with
counterfeit coiners; the _Messenger of Zion_, only yesterday recommended
to all fathers of families, was more severely prohibited than Voltaire
and Diderot, and its editor, Labzin, was exiled to Vologda.

Prince A. N. Golitsyn’s fall involved Vitberg; everyone fell upon him,
the committee complained of him, the metropolitan was offended and the
governor-general was displeased. His answers were ‘insolent’
(‘insolence’ is one of the principal charges in the indictment of him);
his subordinates were thieves—as though there were any one in the
government service who was not a thief. Though indeed it is likely that
there was more thieving among Vitberg’s subordinates than among others;
he had had no practice in superintending houses of correction and
official thieves.

Alexander commanded Araktcheyev to investigate the case. He was sorry
for Vitberg; he let him know through one of his attendants that he
believed in his rectitude.

But Alexander died and Araktcheyev fell. Under Nicholas, Vitberg’s case
at once took a turn for the worse. It was dragged on for ten years with
terrible absurdities. On the points on which he was found guilty by the
Criminal Court he was acquitted by the Senate. On those on which he was
acquitted by the Court he was found guilty by the Senate. The committee
of ministers found him guilty on all the charges. The Tsar, taking
advantage of the ‘most precious privilege of monarchs to show mercy and
remit punishment,’ added exile to Vyatka to his sentence.

And so Vitberg was sent into exile, dismissed from the service ‘for
abuse of the confidence of the Emperor Alexander and causing loss to the
treasury.’ He was fined, I believe, a million roubles, all his property
was seized and sold by public auction, and a rumour was circulated that
he had transferred countless millions to America.

I lived in the same house with Vitberg for two years and remained on
intimate terms with him up to the time I left Vyatka. He had not saved
the barest crust of bread; his family lived in the most awful poverty.

To give an idea of this case and of all similar ones in Russia, I will
quote two little details which have remained in my memory.

Vitberg bought for timber for the temple a copse from a merchant called
Lobanov; before the trees were felled Vitberg saw another wood, also
Lobanov’s, nearer to the river and asked him to exchange the one he had
sold for the second one. The merchant consented. The trees were felled
and the timber floated down the river. Later on more timber was needed,
and Vitberg bought the first wood again. This was the celebrated
accusation of having twice over bought the same copse. Poor Lobanov was
put in prison for it and died there.

The second instance came before my own eyes. Vitberg bought an estate
for the temple. His idea was that the peasants bought with the land for
the temple should be bound to furnish a certain number of workmen for
it, and by this means should obtain complete freedom for themselves and
their villages. It is amusing that our serf-owning senators found a
suggestion of slavery in this measure!

Among other things, Vitberg wanted to buy my father’s estate in the
Ruzsky district on the bank of the Moskva. Marble had been found on it,
and Vitberg asked permission to make a geological survey to discover
what amount of it there was. My father gave permission. Vitberg went off
to Petersburg.

Three months later my father learnt that quarrying was going forward on
an immense scale, that the peasants’ cornfields were heaped up with
marble. He protested; no notice was taken. A protracted lawsuit began.
At first they tried to throw all the blame on Vitberg, but unluckily it
appeared that he had given no orders, and that it all had been done by
the committee in his absence.

The case was taken before the Senate. To the general surprise the
Senate’s decision was not very far from common-sense. The marble
quarried was to remain the property of the landowner as compensation for
the ruined cornfields. The government money spent on quarrying and
labour, mounting to a hundred thousand roubles, was to be made good by
those who signed the contract for the work. Those who signed were Prince
Golitsyn, Filaret, and Kushnikov. There was of course a great clamour
and outcry. The case was taken before the Tsar. He had his system of
justice. He directed that the offenders should be excused payment
because—he wrote it with his own hand, as is printed in the minutes of
the Senate—‘The members of the committee did not know what they were
signing.’ Even if we admit that the metropolitan was professionally
bound to show a meek spirit, what are we to think of the other two grand
gentlemen who accepted the Imperial favour on grounds so courteously and
graciously explained?

But from whom was the hundred thousand to be taken? Government property,
they say, is not burnt in the fire nor drowned in the water. It is only
stolen, we might add. No need to hesitate, an adjutant-general was sent
off post-haste to Moscow to investigate the question.

Strekalov investigated everything, set everything straight, arranged and
settled it all in a few days: the marble was to be taken from the
landowner to make good the sum paid for the quarrying; if, however, the
landowner wished to retain the marble he was required to pay the hundred
thousand. The landowner needed no compensation, because the value of his
property was increased by the discovery of a new form of wealth upon it
(this was the _chef-d’œuvre_!), but for the damaged fields of the
peasants so many kopecks per dessyatin were to be allotted in accordance
with the law of flooded meadows and ruined hayfields passed by Peter I.

The person really punished in this case was my father. There is no need
to add that the quarrying of this marble was nevertheless brought up
against Vitberg in his indictment.

Two years after Vitberg’s exile the merchants of Vyatka formed a project
of building a new church.

Nicholas, desirous of killing all spirit of independence, of
individuality, of imagination, and of freedom, everywhere and in
everything, published a whole volume of designs for churches sanctioned
by the Most High. If any one wanted to build a church he was absolutely
obliged to select one of the approved plans. He is said to have
forbidden the writing of Russian operas, considering that even those
written by the adjutant Lvov, in the very office of the secret police,
were good for nothing. But that was not enough: he ought to have
published a collection of musical airs sanctioned by the Most High!

The Vyatka merchants after turning over the approved plans had the
boldness to differ from the Tsar’s taste. The design they sent in
astonished Nicholas; he sanctioned it and sent instructions to the
provincial authorities to see that the architect’s ideas were faithfully
carried out.

‘Who made this design?’ he asked the secretary.

‘Vitberg, your Majesty.’

‘What, the same Vitberg?’

‘The same, your Majesty.’

And behold, like a bolt from the blue, comes permission for Vitberg to
return to Moscow or Petersburg. The man had asked leave to clear his
character and it had been refused; he made a successful design, and the
Tsar bade him return—as though any one had ever doubted his artistic
ability....

In Petersburg, almost perishing of want, he made one last effort to
defend his honour. It was utterly unsuccessful. Vitberg asked the
assistance of A. N. Golitsyn, but the latter thought it impossible to
raise the case again, and advised Vitberg to write a very touching
letter to the Tsarevitch begging for financial assistance. He undertook
to do his best for him with the assistance of Zhukovsky,[149] and
promised to get him a thousand silver roubles.

Vitberg refused.

I was in Petersburg for the last time in the beginning of the winter of
1846 and there saw Vitberg. He was completely crushed. Even his old
wrath against his enemies which I had liked so much had begun to die
down; he had no more hope, he did nothing to escape from his position,
blank despair was bringing him to his end, his life was shattered, he
was waiting for death. If this was what Nicholas wanted he may be
satisfied.

Whether the victim is still living I do not know, but I doubt it.

‘If it were not for my family, my children,’ he said at parting, ‘I
would escape from Russia and go begging alms about the world. With the
Vladimir cross on my neck I would calmly hold out to passers-by the hand
pressed by the Emperor Alexander and tell them of my design and the fate
of an artist in Russia!’

‘They shall hear in Europe of your fate, poor martyr,’ I thought; ‘I
will answer for that.’

The society of Vitberg was a great solace to me in Vyatka. A grave
serenity and a sort of solemnity gave something priestly to his manner.
He was a man of very pure morals and in general more disposed to
asceticism than indulgence; but his severity did not detract from the
wealth and luxuriance of his artistic nature. He could give to his
mysticism so plastic a form and so artistic a colouring that criticism
died away on one’s lips; one was sorry to analyse, to dissect the
shining images and misty pictures of his imagination.

Vitberg’s mysticism was partly due to his Scandinavian blood, it was the
same coldly-thought-out dreaminess which we see in Swedenborg, and which
is like the fiery reflection of sunbeams in the icy mountains and snows
of Norway.

Vitberg’s influence made me waver, but my realistic temperament
nevertheless gained the upper hand. I was not destined to rise into the
third heaven, I was born a quite earthly creature. No tables turn at the
touch of my hands nor do rings shake at my glance. The daylight of
thought is more akin to me than the moonlight of phantasy. But I was
more disposed to mysticism at the period when I was living with Vitberg
than at any other time. Separation, exile, the religious exaltation of
the letters I received, the love which was filling my soul more and more
intensely, and at the same time the oppressive feeling of remorse, all
reinforced Vitberg’s influence.

And for two years afterwards I was under the influence of ideas of a
mystical socialist tinge, drawn from the Gospel and Jean-Jacques, after
the style of French thinkers like Pierre Leroux.[150]

Ogaryov plunged into the sea of mysticism even before I did. In 1833 he
was beginning to write the words for Gebel’s[151] oratorio, _The Lost
Paradise_. In the idea of a “Lost Paradise,” Ogaryov wrote to me, ‘there
is the whole history of humanity’; so at that time, he too mistook the
paradise of the ideal that we are seeking for a paradise we have lost.

In 1838 I wrote historical scenes in the religious socialist spirit, and
at the time took them for dramas. In some I pictured the conflict of the
pagan world with Christianity. In them Paul going to Rome raised a dead
youth to new life. In others I described the conflict of the official
Church with the Quakers and the departure of William Penn to America to
the new world.[152]

The mysticism of the gospel was soon replaced in me by the mysticism of
science; fortunately I rid myself of the second also.

But to return to our modest little town of Hlynov, the name of which
was, I don’t know why, perhaps from Finnish patriotism, changed by
Catherine II. to Vyatka.

In the desolation of my Vyatka exile, in the filthy atmosphere of
government clerks, in that gloomy remote place, separated from all who
were dear to me and put defenceless in the power of the governor, I
spent many exquisite sacred moments, and met many warm hearts and
friendly hands.

Where are you? What has happened to you, my friends of that snowy
region? It is twenty years since we met. I dare say you have grown old
as I have, you are marrying your daughters, you don’t now drink
champagne by the bottle and liqueur by the little glass. Which of you
has grown rich, which of you has come to ruin, who is high up in the
service, who is paralysed? Above all, is the memory of our old talks
still living in you, are those chords which vibrated so eagerly with
love and indignation still vibrating within you?

I have remained the same, that you know; I dare say news of me reaches
you even from the banks of the Thames. Sometimes I think of you, always
with love; I have some letters of that time, some of them are
exceedingly dear to me and I like reading them over.

‘I am not ashamed to own to you that I am passing through a very bitter
time,’ a young man wrote to me on the 26th of January 1838. ‘Help me for
the sake of that life to which you called me, help me with your advice.
I want to study, tell me of books, tell me anything you like, I will do
all I can, give me a chance; it will be too bad of you if you don’t help
me.’

‘I bless you,’ another wrote to me after I had gone away, ‘as the
husbandman blesses the rain that has made fruitful his arid soil.’

It is not from vanity that I have quoted these lines, but because they
are very precious to me. For the sake of those youthful appeals and
youthful love, for the sake of the yearnings aroused in those hearts,
one could well resign oneself to nine months’ imprisonment and three
years’ exile to Vyatka.

And then twice a week the post from Moscow came in; with what excitement
I waited by the post-office while the letters were sorted, with what a
tremor I broke the seal and looked in the letter from home for a tiny
note on thin paper written in a wonderfully fine and elegant hand.

I never read it in the post-office, but walked quietly home, deferring
the minute of reading it, happy in the mere thought that there was a
letter.

Those letters were all kept. I left them in Moscow. I long to read them
over again and dread to touch them....

Letters are more than memories, the very essence of events still lives
in them; they are the very past just as it was, preserved and unfaded.

... Should one know it, see it all again? Should one touch with wrinkled
hands one’s wedding garment?




                               Chapter 17
   THE TSAREVITCH AT VYATKA—THE FALL OF TYUFYAEV—I AM TRANSFERRED TO
           VLADIMIR—THE POLICE-CAPTAIN AT THE POSTING-STATION


The Tsarevitch will visit Vyatka! The Tsarevitch is travelling about
Russia to show himself and look at the country! This news interested
all, but the governor, of course, more than any one. He was worried and
did a number of incredibly stupid things: ordered the peasants along the
high-road to be dressed in holiday attire, ordered the fences to be
painted and the sidewalks to be repaired in the towns. At Orlov a poor
widow who owned a small house told the mayor that she had no money to
repair the sidewalk and he reported this to the governor. The latter
ordered that the planks should be taken from her floors (the sidewalks
there are made of wood), and that, should they not be sufficient, the
repairs should be made at the government expense and the money recovered
from her afterwards, even if it were necessary to sell her house by
public auction. The sale did not take place, but the widow’s floors were
broken up.

Fifty versts from Vyatka there was the spot in which the wonder-working
ikon of St. Nicholas of Hlynov appeared to the people of Novgorod. When
emigrants from Novgorod settled at Hlynov (now Vyatka) they brought the
ikon, but it disappeared and turned up again on the Great river fifty
versts from Vyatka. They fetched it back again, and at the same time
took a vow that if the ikon would stay they would carry it every year in
a solemn procession to the Great river. This was the chief summer
holiday in the Vyatka province; I believe it was on the 23rd of May. For
twenty-four hours the ikon was travelling down the river in a
magnificent boat with the bishop and all the clergy in full vestments
accompanying it. Hundreds of boats and craft of all sorts filled with
peasants, men and women, Votyaks, and artisans, made up a
bright-coloured procession following the sailing image, and foremost of
all was the governor’s decked boat covered with red cloth. This barbaric
ceremony was a very fine show. Tens of thousands of people from
districts near and far were awaiting the image on the banks of the Great
river. They were all camping in noisy crowds about a small village, and
what was most strange, crowds of heathen Votyaks, Tcheremisses, and even
Tatars came to pray to the image, and, indeed, the festival is a
thoroughly pagan ceremony. Outside the monastery-wall Votyaks and
Russians bring sheep and calves to be sacrificed; they are killed on the
spot, a monk reads a service over them, blesses and consecrates the
meat, which is sold at a special window within the precincts. The meat
is distributed in pieces to the people; in old days it used to be given
for nothing, now the monks charge a few kopecks for every piece. So that
a peasant who has presented a whole calf has to pay something for a
piece for his own consumption. In the monastery-yard sit whole crowds of
beggars, the halt, the blind, and the lame, who raise a lamentation in
chorus. Lads—priests’ sons or boys from the town—sit on the tombstones
near the church with inkpots and cry: ‘Who wants to be prayed for?’
Peasant girls and women surround them, mentioning names, and the lads,
saucily scratching with their pens, repeat: ‘Marya, Marya, Akulina
Stepanida, Father Ioann, Matryona.... Well, Auntie, you have got a lot;
you’ve shelled out two kopecks, we can’t take less than five; such a
family—Ioann, Vassilisa, Iona, Marya, Yevpraxyea, Baby Katerina....’

In the church there is a great crush and strange preferences are shown;
one peasant woman will hand her neighbour a candle with exact
instructions to put it up ‘for our visitor,’ another for ‘our host.’ The
Vyatka monks and deacons are continually drunk during the whole time of
this procession. They stop at the bigger villages on the way, and the
peasants regale them enough to kill them.

So this popular holiday, to which the peasants had been accustomed for
ages, the governor proposed to change to an earlier date, wishing to
entertain the Tsarevitch who was to arrive on the 19th of May; he
thought there would be no harm in St. Nicholas going on his visit three
days earlier. The consent of the bishop was of course necessary;
fortunately the bishop was an amenable person, and found nothing to
protest against in the governor’s intention of changing the festival of
the 23rd of May to the 19th.

The governor sent a list of his ingenious plans for the reception of the
Tsarevitch to the Tsar—as though to say, see how we fête your son. On
reading this document the Tsar flew into a rage, and said to the
Minister of Home Affairs: ‘The governor and the bishop are fools, leave
the holiday as it was.’ The Minister gave the governor a good scolding,
the Synod did the same to the bishop, and St. Nicholas went on his visit
according to his old habits.

Among various instructions from Petersburg, orders came that in every
provincial town an exhibition should be held of the various natural
products and handicrafts of the district, and that the things exhibited
should be arranged according to the three natural kingdoms. This
division into animal, vegetable, and mineral greatly worried the
officials, and Tyufyaev himself to some extent. That he might not make a
mistake he made up his mind in spite of his dislike to summon me to give
advice. ‘Now, for instance, honey,’ he said, ‘where would you put honey?
or a gilt frame—how are you to decide where it is to go?’ Seeing from my
answers that I had wonderfully precise information concerning the three
natural kingdoms, he offered me the task of arranging the exhibition.

While I was busy placing wooden vessels and Votyak dresses, honey and
iron sieves, and Tyufyaev went on taking the most ferocious measures for
the entertainment of his Imperial Highness at Vyatka, the Highness in
question was graciously pleased to stay at Orlov, and the news of the
arrest of the Orlov mayor burst like a clap of thunder on the town.
Tyufyaev turned yellow, and there was an uncertainty apparent in his
gait.

Five days before the Tsarevitch arrived in Orlov, the mayor wrote to
Tyufyaev that the widow whose floor had been broken up to make the
sidewalk was making a fuss, and that So-and-so, a wealthy merchant and a
prominent person in the town, was boasting that he would tell the
Tsarevitch everything. Tyufyaev disposed of the latter very adroitly; he
told the mayor to have doubts of his sanity (the precedent of Petrovsky
pleased him), and to send him to Vyatka to be examined by the doctors;
this business could be delayed till the Tsarevitch had left the province
of Vyatka, and that would be the end of it. The mayor did as he was bid,
the merchant was put in the hospital at Vyatka.

At last the Tsarevitch arrived. He gave Tyufyaev a frigid bow, did not
invite him to visit him, but at once sent for the doctor, Dr. Enohin, to
inquire concerning the arrested merchant. He knew all about it. The
Orlov widow had given him her petition, the other merchants and artisans
told him all that was going on. Tyufyaev’s face was more awry than ever.
Things looked black for him. The mayor said straight out that he had
written instructions from the governor for everything.

Dr. Enohin declared that the merchant was perfectly sane. Tyufyaev was
lost.

Between seven and eight in the evening the Tsarevitch visited the
exhibition with his suite. Tyufyaev conducted him, explaining things
incoherently, getting into a muddle and speaking of the ancient Siberian
prince Tohtamysh as though he were a tsar. Zhukovsky and Arsenyev,
seeing that things were not going well, asked me to show them the
exhibition. I led them round.

The Tsarevitch’s expression had none of that narrow severity, that cold
merciless cruelty which was characteristic of his father; his features
were more suggestive of good nature and listlessness. He was about
twenty, but was already beginning to grow stout.

The few words he said to me were friendly and very different from the
hoarse, abrupt tones of his uncle Constantine and the menacing
intonations of his father, which made the listener almost faint with
terror.

When he had gone away, Zhukovsky and Arsenyev began asking me how I had
come to Vyatka. They were surprised to hear a Vyatka official speak like
a gentleman. They at once offered to speak of my position to the
Tsarevitch, and did in fact do all that they could for me. The
Tsarevitch approached the Tsar for permission for me to return to
Petersburg. The Tsar replied that that would be unfair to the other
exiles, but, in consideration of the Tsarevitch’s representations, he
ordered me to be transferred to Vladimir, which was geographically an
improvement, being seven hundred versts nearer home. But of that later.

In the evening there was a ball. The musicians who had been sent for
expressly from one of the factories arrived dead drunk; the governor
arranged that they should be locked up for twenty-four hours before the
ball, escorted straight from the police station to their seats in the
orchestra and not allowed to leave them till the ball was over.

The ball was a stupid, awkward, extremely poor and extremely gaudy
affair, as balls always are in little towns on exceptional occasions.
Police officers fussed about, government clerks in uniform huddled
against the walls, ladies flocked round the Tsarevitch as savages do
round travellers.... Apropos of the ladies, in one little town a
_goûter_ was arranged after the exhibition. The Tsarevitch took nothing
but one peach, the stone of which he threw on the window-sill. All at
once a tall figure saturated with spirits stepped out from the crowd of
officials; it was the district assessor, notoriously a desperate
character, who with measured steps approached the window, picked up the
stone and put it in his pocket.

After the ball or the _goûter_, he approached one of the ladies of most
consequence and offered her the stone gnawed by royalty; the lady
accepted it with enthusiasm. Then he approached a second, then a third,
all were in ecstasies.

The assessor had bought five peaches, cut out the stones, and made six
ladies happy. Which had the real one? Each was suspicious of the
genuineness of her own stone....

After the departure of the Tsarevitch, Tyufyaev with a weight on his
heart prepared to exchange his autocratic power for the chair of a
senator; but worse than that happened.

Three weeks later the post brought from Petersburg papers addressed to
the governor of the province. Everything was turned upside down in the
secretariat; the registrar ran to say that they had received a decree;
the office manager rushed to Tyufyaev, the latter gave out that he was
ill and would not go to the office. Within an hour we learned that he
had been dismissed _sans phrase_.

The whole town was delighted at the fall of the governor; there was
something stifling, unclean, about his rule, a fetid odour of red tape,
but for all that it was disgusting to look at the rejoicings of the
officials.

Yes, every ass gave a parting kick to this wounded boar. The meanness of
men was just as apparent as at the fall of Napoleon, though the
catastrophe was on a different scale. Of late I had been on terms of
open hostility with him, and he would have certainly sent me off to some
obscure little town, if he had not been sent away himself. I had held
aloof from him, and I had no reason to change my behaviour in regard to
him. But the others, who only the day before had been cap in hand at the
sight of his carriage, eagerly anticipating his wishes, fawning on his
dog and offering snuff to his valet, now barely greeted him and made an
outcry all over the town against the irregularities, the guilt of which
they shared with him. This is nothing new, it has been repeated so
continually in every age and every place that we must accept this
meanness as a common trait of humanity and at any rate feel no surprise
at it.

The new governor, Kornilov, arrived. He was a man of quite a different
type: a tall, stout, lymphatic man about fifty with a pleasantly smiling
face and cultured manner. He expressed himself with extraordinary
grammatical correctness at great length with a precision and clarity
calculated by its very excess to obscure the simplest subject. He had
been at the Lyceum of Tsarskoe Syelo, had been a schoolfellow of
Pushkin’s, had served in the Guards, bought the new French books, liked
talking of important subjects, and gave me De Tocqueville’s book on
_Democracy in America_ on the day after his arrival.

The change was very great. The same rooms, the same furniture, but
instead of a Tatar _baskak_, with the exterior of a Tunguz and the
habits of a Siberian—a _doctrinaire_, rather a pedant, but at the same
time quite a decent man. The new governor was intelligent, but his
intelligence seemed somehow to shed light without giving warmth, like a
bright, winter day which is pleasant though one does not look for fruits
from it. Moreover, he was a terrible formalist—not in a pettifogging
way, but ... how shall I express it?... it was formalism of a higher
sort, but just as tiresome as any other.

As the new governor was really married, the house lost its
ultra-bachelor and polygamous character. Of course this brought all the
councillors back to their lawful spouses; bald old men no longer boasted
of their conquests among the fair, but, on the contrary, alluded
tenderly to their faded, angularly-bony, or monstrously fat wives.

Kornilov had some years before coming to Vyatka been promoted to be
civil governor somewhere, straight from being a colonel in the
Semyonovsky or Izmailovsky regiment. He went to his province knowing
nothing of his duties. To begin with, like all novices he set to work to
read everything. One day a document came to him from another province
which he could make nothing of, though he read it two or three times. He
called the secretary and gave it him to read. The secretary could not
explain the business clearly either.

‘What will you do with that document,’ Kornilov asked him, ‘if I pass it
on to the office?’

‘I shall hand it in to the third table, it’s in their section.’

‘Then the head-clerk of the third table knows what to do?’

‘To be sure he does, your Excellency, he has been in charge of that
table for seven years.’

‘Send him to me.’

The head-clerk came in. Kornilov handing him the paper asked what was to
be done. The head-clerk glanced through the document and informed him
that they ought to make an inquiry in the palace of justice and send a
notification to the police-captain.

‘But notify what?’

The head-clerk was nonplussed, and at last admitted that it was
difficult to express it in words, but that it was easy to write it.

‘Here is a chair, I beg you to write your answer.’

The head-clerk took up the pen and without hesitation briskly scribbled
off two documents.

The governor took them, read them once, read them twice, but could make
nothing of it. ‘I saw,’ he told me, smiling, ‘that it really was an
answer to the document, and crossing myself I signed it. Nothing more
was heard of the business—the answer was completely satisfactory.’

The news of my transfer to Vladimir came just before Christmas; I was
soon ready and set off.

My parting with Vyatka society was very warm. In that remote town I had
made two or three friends among the young merchants. Every one wanted to
show sympathy and kindness to the exile. Several sledges accompanied me
as far as the first posting-station, and in spite of all my efforts to
prevent it my sledge was filled up with a perfect load of all sorts of
provisions and wine. Next day I reached Yaransk.

From Yaransk the road goes through endless pine forests. It was
moonlight and very frosty at night. The little sledge flew along the
narrow road. I have never seen such forests since, they go on in that
way unbroken as far as Archangel, and sometimes reindeer come through
them to the Vyatka province. The forest was for the most part of large
trees; the pines, of remarkable straightness, ran past the sledge like
soldiers, tall and covered with snow from under which their black
needles stuck out like bristles; one would drop asleep and wake up again
and still the regiments of pines would be marching rapidly by, sometimes
shaking off the snow. The horses were changed at little clearings; there
was a tiny house lost among the trees, the horses were tied up to a
trunk, the bells would begin tinkling, two or three Tcheremiss boys in
embroidered shirts would run out, looking sleepy. The Votyak driver
would swear at his companion in a husky alto, shout ‘Aïda,’ begin
singing a song on two notes, and again pines and snow, snow and pines.

Just as I drove out of the Vyatka province it was my lot to take my last
farewell of the official world, and it showed itself in all its glory
_pour la clôture_.

We stopped at a posting-station, the driver began unharnessing the
horses, when a tall peasant appeared in the porch and asked:

‘Who has arrived?’

What’s that to do with you?’

‘Why, the police-captain told me to inquire, and I am the messenger of
the rural court.’

‘Well then, go into the station hut, my travelling permit is there.’

The peasant went away and came back a minute later, saying to the
driver, ‘He is not to have horses.’

This was too much. I jumped out of the sledge and went into the hut. A
half-tipsy police-captain was sitting on a bench, dictating to a
half-tipsy clerk. A man with fetters on his hands and feet was sitting
or rather lying on another bench in the corner. Several bottles,
glasses, tobacco ash, and bundles of papers were scattered about.

‘Where is the police-captain?’ I asked in a loud voice as I went in.

‘The police-captain’s here,’ answered the half-tipsy man whom I
recognised as Lazarev, a man I had seen in Vyatka. As he spoke he fixed
a rude and impudent stare upon me, and all at once rushed at me with
open arms.

I must explain that after Tyufyaev’s downfall the officials, seeing that
I was on rather good terms with the governor, had began making up to me.

I stopped him with my hand and asked him very gravely, ‘How could you
give orders that I shouldn’t have horses. What nonsense is this,
stopping travellers on the high-road?’

‘Why, I was joking; upon my soul, aren’t you ashamed to be angry! Here,
horses, order the horses! Why are you standing there, you rascal?’ he
shouted to the messenger. ‘Please have a cup of tea with rum.’

‘Thank you.’

‘But haven’t we any champagne....’ He hurried to the bottles, they were
all empty.

‘What are you doing here?’

‘An inquiry, this fine fellow here has killed his father and sister with
an axe, in a quarrel, through jealousy.’

‘So that’s why you are drinking together?’

The police-captain was disconcerted. I glanced at the Tcheremiss; he was
a young fellow of twenty, with nothing ferocious about his face, which
was typically oriental, with shining, narrow eyes and black hair.

It was all so disgusting that I went out into the yard again. The
police-captain ran out after me with a glass in one hand and a bottle of
rum in the other, and pressed me to have a drink.

To get rid of him I drank some; he caught hold of my hand and said: ‘I
am sorry, there, I am sorry! there it is, but I hope you won’t speak of
it to his Excellency, don’t ruin an honourable man!’ With that the
police-captain _seized my hand and kissed it_, repeating a dozen times
over: ‘For God’s sake don’t ruin an honourable man.’ I pulled away my
hand in disgust and said to him:

‘Oh get away, as though I were likely to tell him.’

‘But how can I be of service to you?’

‘See they make haste and harness the horses.’

‘Look alive,’ he shouted, ‘Aïda, aïda!’ and he himself began dragging at
the straps and harness.

This incident is vividly imprinted on my memory. In 1841, when I was for
the last time in Petersburg, I had to go to the secretariat of the
Minister of Home Affairs to try and get a passport. While I was talking
to the head-clerk of the table, a gentleman passed ... shaking hands
familiarly with the magnates of the secretariat and bowing
condescendingly to the head-clerks of the tables. ‘Bah, hang it all,’ I
thought, ‘surely that is he! Who is that?’ I asked.

‘Lazarev, a clerk of special commissions and a great authority in the
ministry.’

‘Was he once a police-captain in the Vyatka province?’

‘Yes.’

‘Well, I congratulate you, gentlemen, nine years ago he kissed my hand.’

Perovsky was a master in the choice of men.




                               Chapter 18
                  THE BEGINNING OF MY LIFE AT VLADIMIR


When I went to get into my sledge at Kosmodemiansk it was harnessed in
the Russian style, three horses abreast, and the shaft horse with the
yoke over its head was gaily jingling the bells.

In Perm and Vyatka the horses are put in tandem, one before the other or
two side by side and the third in front. So my heart throbbed with
delight when I saw the familiar troika.

‘Come now, show us your mettle,’ I said to the young lad who sat smartly
on the box in an unlined sheepskin and stiff gauntlets which barely
allowed his fingers to close enough to take fifteen kopecks from my
hand.

‘We’ll do our best, sir, we’ll do our best. Hey, darlings! Now, sir,’ he
said, turning suddenly to me, ‘you only hold on, there is a hill yonder,
so I will let them go.’

It was a steep descent to the Volga which was used as a road in the
winter.

He certainly did let the horses go. The sledge bounded from right to
left, from left to right, as the horses flew downhill; the driver was
tremendously pleased, and indeed, sinful man that I am, so was I—it is
the Russian temperament.

So I raced with posting horses into 1838—into the best, the brightest
year of my life. I will describe how we saw the New Year in.

Eighty versts from Nizhni, we, _i.e._ Matvey, my valet, and I, went into
the station superintendent’s to warm ourselves. There was a very sharp
frost, and it was windy too. The superintendent, a thin, sickly,
pitiful-looking man, made the inscription in my travelling permit,
dictating every letter to himself and yet making mistakes. I took off my
fur-lined coat and walked up and down the room in immense fur boots,
Matvey was warming himself at the red-hot stove, the superintendent
muttered, while a wooden clock ticked on a faint, cracked note.

‘I say,’ Matvey said to me, ‘it will soon be twelve o’clock, it’s the
New Year, you know. I will bring something,’ he added, looking at me
half-inquiringly, ‘from the stores they gave us at Vyatka.’ And without
waiting for an answer he ran to fetch bottles and a parcel of food.

Matvey, of whom I shall have more to say later, was more than a servant,
he was a friend, a younger brother to me. A Moscow artisan, apprenticed
to Sonnenberg to learn the art of bookbinding, in which Sonnenberg,
however, was not very proficient, he passed into my hands.

I knew that if I refused it would disappoint Matvey, besides I had
nothing against celebrating the day at the posting-station.... The New
Year is a station of a sort.

Matvey brought ham and champagne. The champagne turned out to be frozen
solid; the ham could have been chopped with an axe, it was all
glistening with ice; but _à la guerre comme à la guerre_. ‘May the New
Year bring new happiness.’ Yes indeed, new happiness. Was I not on my
homeward way? Every hour was bringing me nearer to Moscow—my heart was
full of hope.

The frozen champagne did not exactly please the superintendent. I added
half a glass of rum to his wine. This new ‘_half-and-half_’ had a great
success.

The driver, whom I also invited to join us, was still more extreme in
his views; he sprinkled pepper into the glass of foaming wine, stirred
it with a spoon, drank it off at one gulp, uttered a painful sigh and
almost with a moan added: ‘It did scorch fine!’

The superintendent himself tucked me into the sledge, and was so zealous
in his attentions that he dropped the lighted candle into the hay and
could not find it afterwards. He was in great spirits and kept
repeating: ‘You’ve given me a New Year’s Eve, too!’

The scorched driver whipped up the horses.

At eight o’clock on the following evening I reached Vladimir and put up
at the hotel, which is extremely accurately described in the _Tarantass_
with its fowls in rice, its dough-like pastry, and vinegar by way of
Bordeaux.

‘A man was asking for you this morning, he’s waiting at the beer-shop,’
the waiter, who wore the rakish parting and killing lovelocks, which in
old days were only affected by Russian waiters, but are now worn by
Louis Napoleon also, told me after reading my name on my travel permit.

I could not conceive who this could be. ‘But here he is,’ added the
waiter, moving aside.

What I saw first, however, was not a man but a tray of terrific size, on
which were piles of all sorts of good things, a cake and cracknels,
oranges and apples, eggs, almonds, raisins ... and behind the tray
appeared the grey head and blue eyes of the village elder, from my
father’s Vladimir estate.

‘Gavril Semyonitch,’ I cried, and rushed to hug him. This was the first
of our own people, the first figure out of my former life whom I met
after imprisonment and exile. I could not take my eyes off the
intelligent old man, and felt as though I would never say all I had to
say to him. He was the living proof of my nearness to Moscow, to my
home, to my friends; only three days before, he had seen them all, he
brought me greetings from all of them.... So it was not so far away
after all!

The governor, who was a clever Greek called Kuruta, had a thorough
knowledge of human nature, and had long ceased to have a strong
preference for good or evil. He grasped my position at once and did not
make the slightest attempt to worry me. Office work was not even
referred to; he commissioned me and a master at the high school to edit
the _Vladimir Provincial News_—that was my only duty.

The work was familiar to me; I had in Vyatka successfully edited the
unofficial part of the _Provincial News_, and had published in it an
article which almost got my successor into trouble. Describing the
festival on the Great river, I said that the mutton sacrificed to St.
Nicholas at Hlynov used in old days to be distributed to the poor, but
now was sold. The bishop was incensed and the governor had difficulty in
persuading him to let the matter drop.

These provincial newspapers were introduced in 1837. The very original
idea of training the inhabitants of the land of silence and dumbness to
express themselves in print occurred to Bludov the Minister of Home
Affairs. The latter, famous for being chosen to continue Karamzin’s
_History_, though he never actually added a line to it, and for being
the author of the report of the committee of investigation into the
affair of the 14th of December, which it would have been better not to
write at all, belonged to the group of political doctrinaires who
appeared on the scene at the end of the reign of Alexander. They were
intelligent, cultured, old ‘Arzamass geese’[154] who had risen in the
service. They could write Russian, were patriots, and were so zealously
engaged in the history of their native land that they had no time to
give serious attention to its present condition. They all cherished the
never-to-be-forgotten memory of N. M. Karamzin, loved Zhukovsky, knew
Krylov by heart, and used to go to Moscow to converse with I. I.
Dmitriev in his house in Sadovy Street, where I too visited him as a
student, armed with romantic prejudices, a personal acquaintance with N.
Polevoy, and a concealed disapproval of the fact that Dmitriev, who was
a poet, should be Minister of Justice. Great things were hoped of them,
and like most doctrinaires of all countries they did nothing. Perhaps
they might have succeeded in leaving more permanent traces under
Alexander, but Alexander died and left them with nothing but their
desire to do something worth doing.

At Monaco there is an inscription on the tombstone of one of the
hereditary princes: ‘Here lies the body of Florestan So-and-so—he
desired to do good to his subjects.’[155] Our doctrinaires also desired
to do good, not to their own subjects but to the subjects of Nicholas,
but they reckoned without their host. I do not know who hindered
Florestan, but they were hindered by our Florestan. They were drawn into
taking part in all the measures detrimental to Russia and had to
restrict themselves to useless innovations, mere alterations of name and
form. Every head of a department among us thinks it his duty to produce
at intervals a project, an innovation, usually for the worse but
sometimes simply neutral. They thought it necessary for instance to call
the secretary in the governor’s office by a name of purely Russian
origin, while they left the secretary of the provincial office
untranslated into Russian. I remember that the Minister of Justice
brought forward a plan for necessary changes in the uniforms of civil
servants. This scheme opened in a majestic and solemn style: ‘taking
into special consideration the lack of unity, of standard, in the make
and pattern of certain uniforms in the civil department and adopting as
a fundamental principle,’ and so on.

Possessed by the same mania for reform the Minister of Home Affairs
replaced the rural assessors by police inspectors. The assessors lived
in the towns and used to visit the villages. The police inspectors
sometimes met together in the town but lived permanently in the country.
In this way all the peasants were put under the supervision of the
police and this was done with full knowledge of the predatory,
rapacious, corrupt character of our police officials. Bludov initiated
the policeman into the secrets of the peasants’ industry and wealth,
into their family life, into the affairs of the commune, and in this way
attacked the last stronghold of peasant life. Fortunately our villages
are very many and there are only two police inspectors in a district.

Almost at the same time the same Bludov had the notion of establishing
provincial newspapers. In Russia, although the government has no regard
for popular education, it has literary pretensions, and while in
England, for instance, there are no official organs, every one of our
departments has its own magazine, and so have the universities and the
academy. We have journals relating to mining, to dry-salting, to marine
affairs, and to means of communication, some in Russian, others in
French or German. All these are published at the government expense;
contracts for literary articles are made with the department exactly as
contracts for fuel and candles, but without competition; there are
plenty of statistics, invented figures and fantastic inferences from
them. After monopolising everything else, the government has now taken
the monopoly of talk and, imposing silence on every one else, has begun
chattering unceasingly. Continuing this system, Bludov commanded every
provincial government to publish its own newspaper, which was to have an
unofficial part for articles on historical, literary, and other
subjects.

No sooner said than done, and the officials in fifty provinces were
tearing their hair over this unofficial part. Priests of seminary
education, doctors of medicine, high-school teachers, all who could be
suspected of a tinge of culture and ability to spell correctly were
requisitioned. After much reflection and reading over of the _Library of
Good Reading_ and the _Notes of the Fatherland_, with inward tremors and
misgivings, they at last set to work to write articles.

The desire to see one’s name in print is one of the strongest artificial
passions of this bookish age. Nevertheless it needs favourable
circumstances to induce people to expose their efforts to public
criticism. People who would never have dared to dream of sending their
essays to the _Moscow News_ or to a Petersburg magazine, were ready to
publish them at home. And, meanwhile, the fatal habit of the newspaper
took root. And, indeed, it may not be amiss to have an instrument ready.
The printing press, too, is an unruly member.

My colleague in the editorship was also a Moscow graduate and of the
same faculty. I have not the heart to speak of him with a smile because
of his sad death, and yet he was an absurd figure up to the end. Though
far from being stupid, he was extraordinarily clumsy and awkward. It
would be hard to find an ugliness not merely so complete but so great,
that is, on so large a scale. His face was half as large again as
ordinary and somehow rugged-looking; a huge fish-like mouth reached to
his ears, white eyelashes did not shade but rather emphasised his pale
grey eyes, his skull was scantily covered with bristling hair, and at
the same time he was a head taller than I was, round-shouldered, and
very untidy in his appearance.

Even his name was such that a sentry at Vladimir locked him up on
account of it. Late one evening he was walking past the governor’s
house, wrapped up in his overcoat, carrying a pocket telescope; he stood
still and took aim with it at some planet. This perturbed the sentry who
probably regarded stars as public property. ‘Who goes there?’ he shouted
to the motionless stargazer. ‘Nebaba,’[156] answered my friend in a deep
voice, without budging.

‘Don’t play the fool,’ answered the sentry, offended, ‘I am on duty.’

‘But I tell you I am Nebaba.’

This was too much for the sentry and he rang his bell; a sergeant
appeared and the sentry handed over the astronomer to be taken to the
guardroom. ‘There they’ll find out whether you are a woman or not.’ He
would certainly have spent the night in custody had not the officer on
duty recognised him.

One morning Nebaba came to tell me that he was going to Moscow for a few
days; he gave a sly, rather appealing smile as he told me this. ‘I shall
not return alone,’ he said hesitatingly.

‘What, you mean...?’

‘Yes, I am actually getting married,’ he said shyly. I marvelled at the
heroic courage of the woman who could bring herself to marry this
good-hearted but monstrously ugly man. But when two or three weeks later
I saw in his house a girl of eighteen, who was not exactly good-looking
but rather prepossessing and with a lively expression in her eyes, I
began to look upon him as a hero.

Six weeks later I began to notice that things were not going well with
my Quasimodo. He was plunged in dejection, corrected his proofs badly,
did not finish his article on migratory birds, and was gloomily
preoccupied. It did not last long. One day as I was returning home
through the Golden Gate I saw shopmen and boys running to the
churchyard; policemen bustled about. I went with them.

Nebaba’s dead body was lying by the church wall and beside him a gun. He
had shot himself just opposite the window of his house; the string with
which he had pulled the trigger was still on his foot. The inspector of
the medical board, in well-rounded sentences, assured the bystanders
that the dead man had felt no pain; the police were preparing to take
the body to the police station.

How savage nature is to some people! What were the feelings in the heart
of the victim before he brought himself to stop with his bit of string
the pendulum that measured for him nothing but humiliations and
misfortunes? And why? Because his father was scrofulous and his mother
lymphatic? That may all be so. But what right have we to expect justice,
to call to account, to ask for reasons from—what? The whirling vortex of
life?...

At that very time a new chapter in my life was opening, a chapter full
of purity, serenity, youth, earnestness, secluded and bathed in love....

It belongs to another volume.

-----

Footnote 1:

  Golohvastov, the husband of my father’s younger sister.

Footnote 2:

  Governor of Moscow in 1812. Believed to have set fire to the city when
  the French entered. See Tolstoy’s _War and Peace_.—(_Translator’s
  Note._)

Footnote 3:

  Mortier, duc de Trévise, general under the Revolution and Napoleon.
  Killed, 1835, by the infernal machine of Fieschi.—(_Translator’s
  Note._)

Footnote 4:

  Fain, François, Baron (1778–1837), French historian and secretary of
  Napoleon.

Footnote 5:

  Commander-in-chief of the Russian army in 1812. See Tolstoy’s _War and
  Peace_.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 6:

  Minister of War and the most powerful and influential man of the reign
  of Alexander I., whose intimate friend he was, hated and dreaded for
  his cruelty.

Footnote 7:

  Secretary of State under Alexander I.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 8:

  One of the generals of the campaign of 1812. Military governor-general
  of Petersburg at the accession of Nicholas in 1825, and killed in the
  rising of December 14th. See Merezhkovsky’s novel, _December the
  Fourteenth_.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 9:

  Gmelin, Johann Georg (1709–1755), a learned German who travelled in
  the East.

Footnote 10:

  Pallas, Peter Simon (1741–1811), German traveller and naturalist who
  explored the Urals, Kirghiz Steppes, Altai mountains, and parts of
  Siberia.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 11:

  My father had, besides me, another son ten years older. I was always
  fond of him, but he could not be a companion to me. From his twelfth
  to his thirtieth year he was always in the hands of the surgeons.
  After a series of tortures, endured with extreme fortitude and
  rendering his whole existence one intermittent operation, the doctors
  declared his disease incurable. His health was shattered;
  circumstances and character contributed to the complete ruin of his
  life. The pages in which I speak of his lonely and melancholy
  existence have been omitted. I do not care to print them without his
  consent.

Footnote 12:

  There were originally four brothers: Pyotr, the grandfather of ‘the
  cousin from Kortcheva’ mentioned in Chapter 3; Alexander, the elder
  brother here described, who is believed to have been the model from
  whom Dostoevsky drew the character of Fyodor Pavlovitch in _The
  Brothers Karamazov_; Lyov, always referred to as ‘the Senator,’ and
  Ivan, Herzen’s father. Of the sisters one was Elizaveta Alexeyevna
  Golohvastov and one was Marya Alexeyevna Hovansky. The family of the
  Yakovlyevs was one of the oldest and most aristocratic in
  Russia.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 13:

  British Foreign Secretary in 1791, and Prime Minister, 1806 and 1807,
  when the Act for the abolition of the slave trade was passed.

Footnote 14:

  _I.e._, of Jerome Bonaparte, king of Westphalia from 1807 to 1813. ‘At
  the court of King Jeremiah’ is a popular phrase equivalent to ‘in the
  days of Methuselah.’—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 15:

  Kleinmihel, Minister of Means of Communication under Nicholas I.

Footnote 16:

  Benckendorf, Chief of Gendarmes, and favourite of Nicholas. See
  Merezhkovsky’s _December the Fourteenth_ for character-study.

Footnote 17:

  Perekusihin, Darya Savishna, favourite of Catherine II.—(_Translator’s
  Notes._)

Footnote 18:

  Father Matthew (1790–1856), Irish priest, who had remarkable success
  in a great temperance campaign based on the religious
  appeal.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 19:

  Senkovsky, Joseph Ivanovitch (1800–1878), of Polish origin, was a
  whimsical critic on the reactionary side who placed a miserable
  poetaster, Timofeyev, above Pushkin and preferred Le Sage to Fielding.
  Under the pseudonym Baron Brambàeus, he wrote sensational and
  bombastic novels. He edited a serial publication the _Library of Good
  Reading_, employing poor young men of talent to write for
  it.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 20:

  Payment in money or kind by a serf in lieu of labour for his
  master.—(_Translater’s Note._)

Footnote 21:

  _I.e._, clubs or guilds for messing or working
  together.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 22:

  _Le Mariage de Figaro_, a satirical comedy by Beaumarchais (_né_
  Caron, 1732–1799), a watchmaker’s son, who rose to wealth and
  influence, and by his writings helped to bring about the Revolution.
  This play and an earlier one, _Le Barbier de Séville_, became popular
  all over Europe, but are now chiefly remembered through their
  adaptation to operas by Mozart and Rossini.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 23:

  The famous passage in Racine’s _Phèdre_.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 24:

  Mlle. George (1787–1867), French actress famous for her performances
  in classical tragedy.

Footnote 25:

  Mlle. Mars (1779–1847), French actress famous for her acting in
  comedies of Molière.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 26:

  The organist and music-teacher, I. I. Eck, spoken of in the _Memoirs
  of a Young Man_, did nothing but give music-lessons and had no other
  influence.

Footnote 27:

  The English speak French worse than the Germans, but they only distort
  the language, while the Germans degrade it.

Footnote 28:

  The story is told that on one occasion in his own household, in the
  presence, that is, of two or three heads of the secret police, two or
  three maids of honour and generals in waiting, he tried his Medusa
  glance on his daughter Marya Nikolayevna. She is like her father, and
  her eyes really do recall the terrible look in his. The daughter
  boldly confronted her father’s stare. The Tsar turned pale, his cheeks
  twitched, and his eyes grew still more ferocious; his daughter met him
  with the same look in hers. Every one turned pale and trembled; the
  maids of honour and the generals in waiting dared not breathe, so
  panic-stricken were they at this cannibalistic imperial duel with the
  eyes, in the style of that described by Byron in ‘Don Juan.’ Nicholas
  got up, he felt that he had met his match.

Footnote 29:

  The President of the Academy proposed Araktcheyev as an honorary
  member. Labzin asked in what the Count’s services to the arts
  consisted. The President was at a loss and answered that Araktcheyev
  was the man who stood nearest to the Tsar. ‘If that is a sufficient
  reason, then I propose his coachman, Ilya Baykov,’ observed the
  secretary, ‘he not only stands near the Tsar, but sits in front of
  him.’ Labzin was a mystic and the editor of the _Messenger of Zion_;
  Alexander himself was a mystic of the same sort, but with the fall of
  Golitsyn’s ministry he handed over his former ‘brethren of Christ and
  of the inner man’ to Araktcheyev to do with as he pleased. Labzin was
  banished to Simbirsk.

Footnote 30:

  Victor Joseph Étienne de Jouy, a popular French writer
  (1764–1846).—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 31:

  The officer, if I am not mistaken, Count Samoylov, had left the army
  and was living quietly in Moscow. Nicholas recognised him at the
  theatre; fancied that he was dressed with rather elaborate
  originality, and expressed the royal desire that such costumes should
  be ridiculed on the stage. The theatre director and patriot, Zagoskin,
  commissioned one of his actors to represent Samoylov in some
  vaudeville. The rumour of this was soon all over the town. When the
  performance was over, the real Samoylov went into the director’s box
  and asked permission to say a few words to his double. The director
  was frightened, but, afraid of a scene, summoned the actor. ‘You have
  acted me very well,’ the Count said to him, ‘and the only thing
  wanting to complete the likeness is this diamond which I always wear;
  allow me to hand it over to you; you will wear it next time you are
  ordered to represent me.’ After this Samoylov calmly returned to his
  seat. The stupid jest at his expense fell as flat as the proclamation
  that Tchaadayev was mad and other august freaks.

Footnote 32:

  Wife of Camille Desmoulins, who at his execution appealed to the
  crowd, was arrested and also executed in 1794.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 33:

  Alibaud attempted to assassinate Louis-Philippe in
  1836.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 34:

  Line from Pushkin’s poem, ‘The Tsar Nikita.’—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 35:

  People, who knew the Ivashevs well, have since told me that they doubt
  this story of the robber, and that, in speaking of the return of the
  children and of the brother’s sympathy, I must not omit to mention the
  noble conduct of Ivashev’s sisters. I heard the details from one of
  them, Mme. Yazykov, who visited her brother in Siberia. But whether
  she told me about the robber, I don’t remember. Has not Mme. Ivashev
  been mixed up with Princess Trubetskoy, who sent letters and money to
  Prince Obolensky through an unknown sectary? Have Ivashev’s letters
  been preserved? It seems to us that we ought to have access to them.

Footnote 36:

  _I.e._, the secret police.

Footnote 37:

  ‘Cantonists’ were soldiers’ sons educated at the government expense
  and afterwards sent into the army.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 38:

  Pestel, leader of the officers in the Southern Army who supported the
  attempt to overthrow the autocracy and establish constitutional
  government. The other four who were hanged were Ryleyev, Kahovsky,
  Bestuzhev-Ryumin, and Muravyov-Apóstol. See Merezhkovsky’s novel,
  _December the Fourteenth_, which adheres very closely to the
  historical facts.

Footnote 39:

  Mirovitch in 1762 tried to rescue from the Schlüsselburg the
  legitimate heir to the Russian throne, known as Ivan VI., who perished
  in the attempt. It is said that Catherine had given orders that he was
  to be murdered if any attempt were made to release him. Mirovitch was
  beheaded.

Footnote 40:

  Pugatchov, the Cossack leader of the great rising of the serfs in
  1775.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 41:

  Nicholas’s victory over the Five was celebrated by a religious service
  in Moscow. In the midst of the Kremlin the Metropolitan Filaret
  thanked God for the murders. The whole of the Royal Family took part
  in the service, near them the Senate and the ministers, and in the
  immense space around packed masses of the Guards knelt bareheaded, and
  also took part in the prayers; cannon thundered from the heights of
  the Kremlin. Never have the gallows been celebrated with such pomp;
  Nicholas knew the importance of the victory!

  I was present at that service, a boy of fourteen lost in the crowd,
  and on the spot, before that altar defiled by bloody rites. I swore to
  avenge the murdered men, and dedicated myself to the struggle with
  that throne, with that altar, with those cannons. I have not avenged
  them, the Guards and the throne, the altar and the cannon all remain,
  but for thirty years I have stood under that flag and have never once
  deserted it.—(_Polar Star_, 1855.)

Footnote 42:

  Paul’s mistress, the daughter of Lopuhin, the chief of the Moscow
  Police, better known under her married name as Princess
  Gagarin.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 43:

  The date when the Polish rebellion broke out.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 44:

  Tatyana Kutchin, known in Russian literature under her married name,
  Passek. She wrote _Memoirs_, which throw interesting sidelights on
  Herzen’s narrative.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 45:

  Originally a convent, this was a famous girls’ school founded by
  Catherine II.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 46:

  Heinrich Zschokke (1771–1848), wrote in German _Tales of Swiss Life_,
  in five vols., and also dramas—as well as a religious work _Stunden
  der Andacht_, in eight vols., which was widely read up to the middle
  of the nineteenth century and attacked for ascribing more importance
  to religious feeling than to orthodox belief.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 47:

  Translated by Juliet Soskice.

Footnote 48:

  One of the leaders of the Decembrists.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 49:

  Biron, favourite of the Empress Anna Ivanovna, was by her made
  practically ruler of Russia during her reign and designated as
  successor by her.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 50:

  Joseph II. of Austria paid a famous visit to Catherine II. of Russia
  in 1780.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 51:

  Karamzin (1766–1826), author of a great _History of the Russian
  State_, and also of novels in the sentimental romantic style of his
  period.

Footnote 52:

  In the _Philosophische Briefe_.

Footnote 53:

  See the _Tagebuch_ of Bettina von Arnim for the account of her famous
  first interview with Goethe.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 54:

  Schiller’s poetry has not lost its influence on me. A few months ago I
  read _Wallenstein_, that titanic work, aloud to my son. The man who
  has lost his taste for Schiller has grown old or pedantic, has grown
  hard or forgotten himself. What is one to say of these precocious
  _altkluge Burschen_ who know his defects so well at seventeen?

Footnote 55:

  Written in 1853.

Footnote 56:

  Translated by Juliet Soskice.

Footnote 57:

  The hero of _La Vie du Chevalier de Faublas_ (1787), by Louvet de
  Couvray, is the type of the effeminate rake and fashionable exquisite
  of the period.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 58:

  Beaumarchais, author of _Le Barbier de Séville_ and _Le Mariage de
  Figaro_.

Footnote 59:

  Casti (1721–1803), an Italian poet, ‘attached by habit and taste to
  the polished and frivolous society of the _ancien regime_, his
  sympathies were nevertheless liberal,’ satirised Catherine II. and,
  when exiled on that account from Vienna, had the spirit to resign his
  Austrian pension. The _Talking Animals_, a satire on the predominance
  of the foreigner in political life, is his best work. The influence of
  his poems on Byron is apparent in ‘Don Juan.’—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 60:

  Gonzaga was a Venetian painter who came to Petersburg in 1792 to paint
  scenery for the Court Theatre. He planned the celebrated park at
  Pavlovsk.

Footnote 61:

  Derzhavin, Gavril Romanovitch (1743–1816), was poet-laureate to
  Catherine II., and wrote numerous patriotic and a few other odes.

Footnote 62:

  Krylov, Ivan Andreyevitch (1768–1844), was a very popular writer of
  fables in verse.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 63:

  Marmontel (1723–1799), author of the _Contes Moraux_ and other
  stories.

Footnote 64:

  Marivaux (1688–1763), author of numerous plays and a novel called
  _Marianne_—all distinguished by an excessive refinement of sentiment
  and language.

Footnote 65:

  Shalikov and V. Panaev were insignificant writers of the early part of
  the eighteenth century.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 66:

  Arapov (1796–1861) wrote some twenty plays, but is chiefly remembered
  for the _Chronicle of the Russian Theatre_ (published after his
  death), a chronological record of everything performed on the Russian
  stage up to 1825.

Footnote 67:

  I. I. Dmitriev (1760–1837) wrote a number of fables and songs, of
  which ‘The Little Dove’ is the best known. He was a great patron of
  young literary men, and in 1810 was made Minister of Justice.

Footnote 68:

  Vassily Lvovitch Pushkin, a minor poet, uncle of the famous
  Pushkin.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 69:

  The uniform of the secret police of which Benckendorf was head was
  light blue with a white strap.

Footnote 70:

  See later, Appendix to Chapter 7 for a full account of this.

Footnote 71:

  The Kritsky brothers were said to have broken a bust of the Tsar at a
  drinking party.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 72:

  By the way, here is another of the fatherly measures of the ‘never to
  be forgotten’ Nicholas. Foundling hospitals and the regulations for
  their public inspection are among the best monuments of the reign of
  Catherine. The very idea of maintaining hospitals, almshouses, and
  orphan asylums on part of the percentage made by the loan banks from
  the investment of their capital is remarkably intelligent.

  These institutions were accepted, the banks and the regulations
  enriched them, the foundling hospitals and almshouses flourished so
  far as the universal thievishness of officials permitted them. Of the
  children brought into the Foundling Hospital some remained in it,
  while others were put out to be brought up by peasant-women in the
  country; the latter remained peasants, while the former were brought
  up in the institution itself. The more gifted among them were picked
  out to continue the high-school course, while the less promising were
  taught trades or sent to the Institute of Technology. It was the same
  with the girls. Some were trained in handicrafts, others as children’s
  nurses, while the cleverest became schoolmistresses and governesses.
  But Nicholas dealt a terrible blow to this institution, too. It is
  said that the Empress on one occasion, meeting in the house of one of
  her friends the children’s governess, entered into conversation with
  her and, being very much pleased with her, inquired where she had been
  brought up, to which the young woman answered, the Foundling Hospital.
  Any one would suppose that the Empress would be grateful to the
  government for it. No—it gave her occasion to reflect on the
  _impropriety_ of giving such an education to abandoned children.

  A few months later Nicholas transferred the higher classes of the
  Foundling Hospital to the Officers’ Institute, _i.e._ commanded that
  the foundlings should no longer be put in these classes, but replaced
  them with the children of officers. He even thought of a more radical
  measure, he forbade the provincial institutions in their regulations
  to accept new-born infants. The best commentary on this intelligent
  measure is to be found in the records of the Minister of Justice under
  the heading ‘Infanticide.’

Footnote 73:

  Immense progress has been made in this respect. All that I have heard
  of late of the theological Academies, and even of the Seminaries
  confirms it. I need hardly say that it is not the ecclesiastical
  authorities but the spirit of the pupils that is responsible for this
  improvement.

Footnote 74:

  Griboyedov’s famous comedy, which appeared and had a large circulation
  in manuscript copies in 1824, its performance and publication being
  prevented by the Censorship. When performed later it was in a very
  mutilated form. It was a lively satire on Moscow society and full of
  references to well-known persons, such as Izmailov and Tolstoy ‘the
  American.’ Griboyedov was imprisoned in 1825 in connection with the
  Fourteenth of December.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 75:

  Stanislav Leszcynski, king of Poland from 1702 to 1709. His daughter
  Maria was married to Louis XV. of France.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 76:

  Lalande (1732–1807), a French astronomer connected with the theory of
  the planets of Mercury.

Footnote 77:

  Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire (1772–1844), French naturalist and author of
  many books on zoology and biology—in which, in opposition to Cuvier,
  he advanced the theory of the variation of species under the influence
  of environment.

Footnote 78:

  Oken, German naturalist, who aimed at deducing a system of natural
  philosophy from _à priori_ propositions, and incidentally threw off
  some valuable and suggestive ideas.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 79:

  At that time there were none of the inspectors and subinspectors who
  played the part of my Pyotr Fyodorovitch in the lecture-room.

Footnote 80:

  A pun on the name—the phrase meaning also ‘Nine all but a
  little.’—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 81:

  Merzlyakov, a critic and translator of some merit.—(_Translator’s
  Note._)

Footnote 82:

  Abencerrages, a Moorish family, on the legend of whose tragic fate in
  Granada, Chateaubriand founded his romance _Les Aventures du Dernier
  des Abencérages_.

Footnote 83:

  Tredyakovsky (1703–1769), son of a priest at Astrakhan, is said, like
  Lomonossov, to have walked to Moscow in pursuit of learning. He was
  the author of inferior poems, but did great service to Russian culture
  by his numerous translations. He was the first to write in Russian as
  spoken.

Footnote 84:

  Kostrov (1750–1796), a peasant’s son and a seminarist, wrote in
  imitation of Derzhavin, but is better known for his translations of
  the Iliad, Apuleius and Ossian.

Footnote 85:

  Heraskov (1733–1807), author of an immense number of poems in
  pseudo-classic style. Wiener says ‘they now appal us with their inane
  voluminousness.’ But readers of Turgenev will remember how greatly
  they were admired by Punin. The best known of his epics is the
  Rossiad, dealing with Ivan the Terrible.

Footnote 86:

  Knyazhnin (1742–1791) wrote numerous tragedies and comedies, chiefly
  adaptations from the French or Italian, and of no literary
  merit.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 87:

  Byelinsky, Vissarion Grigoryevitch (1810–1848), was the greatest of
  Russian critics. See later, Chapter 25, Vol. II., for an account of
  him.

Footnote 88:

  Kavelin (1818–1855), a writer of brilliant articles on political and
  economical questions. Friend of Turgenev.

Footnote 89:

  Pirogov (1810–1881), the great surgeon and medical authority, was
  the first in Russia to investigate disease by experiments on
  animals, and to use anæsthetics for operations. He took an active
  part in education and the reforms of the early years of Alexander
  II.’s reign, and published many treatises on medical subjects. To
  his genius and influence as Professor of Medicine in Petersburg
  University is largely due the very high standard of medical training
  in Russia.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 90:

  Glinka, author of patriotic verses of no merit. Referred to as ‘the
  officer’ by Pushkin in a poem.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 91:

  How diversely Humboldt’s travels were understood in Russia may be
  gathered from the account of an Ural Cossack who served in the office
  of the Governor of Perm; he liked to describe how he had escorted the
  mad Prussian Prince, Gumplot. What did he do? ‘Just the same silly
  things, collecting grasses, looking at the sand; at Solontchaki he
  said to me, through the interpreter, ‘Go into the water and get what’s
  at the bottom’; well, I got just what is usually at the bottom, and he
  asks, ‘Is the water very cold at the bottom?’ ‘No, my lad,’ I thought,
  ‘you won’t catch me.’ So I drew myself up at attention, and answered,
  ‘When it’s our duty, your Highness, it’s of no consequence, we are
  glad to do our best.’

Footnote 92:

  Homyakov. See later, Chapter 30, for Herzen’s account of this leader
  of the Slavophil movement.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 93:

  Pic-de-la-Mirandole (1463–1494), a learned Italian who was the most
  famous of all infant prodigies, a mediæval ‘Admirable
  Crichton.’—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 94:

  Ledru-Rollin (1808–1874), member of the French Provisional Government
  of 1848, and one of the earliest advocates of universal adult
  suffrage.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 95:

  Catherine II., born a German princess, rose to be Empress of Russia
  through the murder—by her orders or with her connivance—of her
  husband, Peter III., to the great advantage of the country.

Footnote 96:

  Mrs. Radcliffe (1764–1823) wrote many stories, _The Mysteries of
  Udolpho_ and _The Italians_ being the best known. All largely turn on
  mysterious haunted castles, and had great vogue in their
  day.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 97:

  Manuel (J. A.), a man of great independence and honesty, was expelled
  from the Chambre des Députés for his opposition to the war with Spain
  in 1823.

Footnote 98:

  Dupont de l’Eure (J. C.), a leader in the revolution of 1830, was
  afterwards president of the Provisional Government in 1848.

Footnote 99:

  Armand Carrel (1800–1836), as editor of _Le National_, offered
  spirited opposition to Charles X., as well as to aggressive acts of
  the government of Louis-Philippe.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 100:

  Here is what Denis Davydov[101] tells in his Memoirs:

  ‘The Tsar said one day to A. P. Yermolov: “I was once in a very
  terrible position during the Polish War. My wife was expecting her
  confinement, the mutiny had broken out in Novgorod, I had only two
  squadrons of Horse Guards left me; the news from the army only reached
  me through Königsberg. I was forced to surround myself with soldiers
  discharged from hospital.”’

  The Memoirs of this general of partisans leave no room for doubt that
  Nicholas, like Araktcheyev, like all cold-hearted, cruel and
  revengeful people, was a coward. Here is what General Tchetchensky
  told Davydov: ‘You know that I can appreciate manliness and so you
  will believe my words. I was near the Tsar on the 14th December, and I
  watched him all the time. I can assure you on my honour that the Tsar,
  who was very pale all the time, had his heart in his boots.’

  And again Davydov himself tells us: ‘During the riot in the Haymarket,
  the Tsar only visited the capital on the second day when order was
  restored. The Tsar was at Peterhof, and himself observed casually, “I
  was standing all day with Volkonsky on a mound in the garden,
  listening for the sound of cannon-shot from the direction of
  Petersburg.” Instead of anxiously listening in the garden, and
  continually sending couriers to Petersburg,’ added Davydov, ‘he ought
  to have hastened there himself; any one of the least manliness would
  have done so. On the following day (when everything was quiet) the
  Tsar rode in his carriage into the crowd, which filled the square, and
  shouted to it, “On your knees!” and the crowd hurriedly obeyed the
  order. The Tsar, seeing several people dressed in parti-coloured
  clothes (among those following the carriage), imagined that they were
  suspicious characters, and ordered the poor wretches to be taken to
  the lock-up and, turning to the people, began shouting: “They are all
  wretched Poles, they have egged you on.” Such an ill-timed sally
  completely ruined the effect in my opinion.’

  A strange sort of bird was this Nicholas!

Footnote 101:

  Davydov (see Tolstoy’s _War and Peace_) and Yermolov were both leaders
  of the partisan or guerilla warfare against the French in
  1812.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 102:

  And where are the Kritskys? What had they done? Who tried them? For
  what were they condemned?

Footnote 103:

  _I.e._, Tatyana Kutchin, the ‘cousin from Kortcheva,’ mentioned in
  Chapter 3.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 104:

  Venevitinov, a young poet whose few poems showed the greatest promise.
  He died at the age of seventeen.

Footnote 105:

  The members of the Petrashevsky group, of whom Dostoevsky was one,
  were condemned to death, and led out to the scaffold. At the last
  moment their sentence was transmuted to penal servitude in
  Siberia.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 106:

  _I.e._, of supervision by the secret police, whose light-blue uniform
  was worn with a white strap.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 107:

  The dynasty of kings of Poland from 1386 to 1572.

Footnote 108:

  Karl Sand, a student of Jena University, who in 1819 assassinated the
  German dramatist Kotzebue, because he threw ridicule on the
  Burschenschaft movement.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 109:

  In 1844, I met Perevoshtchikov at Shtchepkin’s and sat beside him at
  dinner. Towards the end he could not resist saying: ‘It is a pity, a
  very great pity, that circumstances prevented you from taking up work,
  you had excellent abilities.’

  ‘But you know it’s not for every one to follow you up to heaven. We
  are busy here on earth at work of some sort.’

  ‘Upon my word, to be sure that may be work of a sort. Hegelian
  philosophy perhaps. I have read your articles, there is no
  understanding them; bird’s language, that’s queer sort of work. No,
  indeed!’

  For a long while I was amused at this verdict, that is, for a long
  while I could not understand that our language really was poor; if it
  were a bird’s, it must have been the bird that was Minerva’s
  favourite.

Footnote 110:

  Among the papers sent me from Moscow, I found a note in which I
  informed my cousin who was in the country that I had taken my degree.
  ‘The examination is over, and I am a graduate! You cannot imagine the
  sweet feeling of freedom after four years of work. Did you think of me
  on Thursday? It was a stifling day, and the torture lasted from nine
  in the morning till nine in the evening.’ (26th June 1833.) I fancy I
  added two hours for effect or to round off the sentence. But for all
  my pleasure, my vanity was stung by another student’s winning the gold
  medal. In a second letter of the 6th July, I find: ‘To-day was the
  prizegiving, but I was not there. I did not care to be second at the
  giving of the medals.’

Footnote 111:

  St. Just was a member of the Convention and the Committee of Public
  Safety, a follower of Robespierre and beheaded with him at the age of
  twenty-seven.

Footnote 112:

  Hoche and Marceau were generals of the French Revolutionary Army. Both
  were engaged in the pacification of La Vendée. Both perished before
  reaching the age of thirty.

Footnote 113:

  Desmoulins was one of the early leaders of the French Revolution, and
  headed the attack on the Bastille; afterwards accused of being a
  Moderate and beheaded together with Danton at the age of thirty-four.

Footnote 114:

  Escousse (b. 1813) and Lebras (b. 1816) were poets who wrote in
  collaboration a successful play, _Farruck le Maure_, followed by
  an unsuccessful one called _Raymond_. On the failure of the latter
  they committed suicide in 1832. Béranger wrote a poem on
  them.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 115:

  _I.e._, Nikolay Pavlovitch Golohvastov, the younger of the two sons of
  a sister of Herzen’s father. These two sons are fully described in
  Vol. II. Chapter 31.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 116:

  This is the earliest record of Russian history. It begins with the
  Deluge and continues in leisurely fashion up to the year 1110. Nestor,
  of whom nothing is really known, is assumed to have been a monk of the
  twelfth century.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 117:

  Enfantin, a French engineer, was one of the founders of
  Saint-Simonism.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 118:

  Familiar to all English school-girls of the last generation in the
  French as _La Jeune Sibérienne_ by Xavier de Maistre. I cannot
  discover whether the Russian version is the original and the French
  the translation or vice versa.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 119:

  Translated by Juliet Soskice.

Footnote 120:

  J. S. Bailly (1736–1793), one of the early leaders of the French
  revolution, and an astronomer and literary man of some distinction,
  was Mayor of Paris after the taking of the Bastille, and executed in
  1793.

Footnote 121:

  Fieschi, the celebrated conspirator, executed in 1836 for
  the attempt with an ‘infernal machine’ on the life of
  Louis-Philippe.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 122:

  The League of Public Welfare was formed in the reign of Alexander I.
  to support philanthropic undertakings and education, to improve the
  administration of justice, and to promote the economical welfare of
  the country. The best men in Russia belonged to it. At first approved
  by Alexander, it was afterwards repressed, and it split into the
  ‘Union of the North,’ which aimed at establishing constitutional
  government, and the ‘Union of the South’ led by Pestel, which aimed at
  republicanism. The two Unions combined in the attempt of December the
  Fourteenth.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 123:

  See Gogol’s _Dead Souls_.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 124:

  A character in Gogol’s _Dead Souls_.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 125:

  Philip Wouverman (1619–1668), a Dutch master who excelled in drinking
  and hunting scenes.

Footnote 126:

  Jacques Callot (1592–1635), a French painter and
  engraver.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 127:

  The epithet in the last line is left to the imagination in Russian
  also.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 128:

  Among those who have distinguished themselves in this line of late
  years is the notorious Liprandi, who drew up a scheme for founding an
  Academy of Espionage (1858).

Footnote 129:

  I need not say that this was a barefaced lie, a shameful police trap.

Footnote 130:

  Marlinsky (pseudonym for Bestuzhev) (1795–1837), author of numerous
  tales, extremely romantic in style and subject. Readers of Turgenev
  will remember that he was the favourite author of the hero of _Knock,
  Knock, Knock_.

Footnote 131:

  Zagoskin (1789–1852), author of popular historical novels, sentimental
  and patriotic.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 132:

  The _Prisoner of the Caucasus_, _Voynarovsky_, and the _Fountain of
  Bahtchisaray_ are poems of Pushkin’s. The line quoted is from the last
  of the three.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 133:

  The Votyaks are a Mongolian tribe, found in Siberia and Eastern
  Russia.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 134:

  Jean-Baptiste Carrier (1756–1794) was responsible for the _noyades_
  and massacre of 1600 people at Nantes, while suppressing the
  counter-revolutionary rising of La Vendée.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 135:

  Pun on the Russian word for ‘translate,’ which also means ‘transfer
  from place to place.’—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 136:

  In 1802, Alexander I. ordered a report to be sent him concerning the
  management by Major-General Izmailov of the latter’s estates in Tula,
  where serfs were tortured and imprisoned by their owner on the
  slightest provocation. By the connivance of the local authorities,
  Izmailov was able to retain control and persist in his brutal
  practices till 1830. Even then he was only punished by being deprived
  of the management of his estates and interned in a small town. Both
  Izmailov and Tolstoy ‘the American’ are referred to in Griboyedov’s
  famous play, _Woe from Wit_.

Footnote 137:

  Mamonov was one of the lovers of Catherine II., declared insane for
  having married against her wishes.—(_Translator’s Notes._)

Footnote 138:

  Minih was a minister and general prominent under Peter the Great and
  Anna. On the latter’s death he brought about the downfall of Biron,
  was exiled by Elizabeth, and finally brought back from Siberia by
  Catherine.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 139:

  Simon Konarski, a Polish revolutionary, also active in the ‘Young
  Europe’ (afterwards ‘Young Italy’) movement, lived in disguise and
  with a false passport in Poland, founding a printing press and
  carrying on active propaganda till he was caught and shot at Vilna in
  1839. His admirers cut the post to which he was tied into bits which
  they preserved as relics of a saint.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 140:

  Speransky, a leading statesman of the early period of the reign of
  Alexander I., banished in 1812 on a trumped-up charge of treason,
  recalled by Nicholas. He was responsible for the codification of
  Russian laws. See Tolstoy’s _War and Peace_ for sketch of
  him.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 141:

  This gave Count Rastoptchin occasion for a biting jest at Pestel’s
  expense. They were both dining with the Tsar. The Tsar, who was
  standing at the window, asked: ‘What’s that on the church, the black
  thing on the cross?’ ‘I can’t distinguish,’ observed Count
  Rastoptchin. ‘You must ask Boris Ivanovitch, he has wonderful eyes, he
  sees from here what is being done in Siberia.’

Footnote 142:

  I see with great pleasure that the New York papers have several times
  repeated this.

Footnote 143:

  Seslavin was a famous leader of the guerilla warfare against Napoleon
  in 1812.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 144:

  An epigram of Pushkin’s contains the two lines:—

           ‘“I’ll buy all,” said Gold.
           “I’ll take all,” said Steel.’—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 145:

  All their prayers may be reduced to a petition for the continuance of
  their race, for their crops, and the preservation of their herds.

  ‘May Yumala grant that from one sheep may be born two, from one grain
  may come five, that my children may have children.’

  There is something miserable and gloomy, the survival from ancient
  times of oppression, in this lack of confidence in life on earth, and
  daily bread. The devil (Shaitan) is regarded as equal to God. I saw a
  terrible fire in a village, in which the inhabitants were mixed
  Russian and Votyak. The Russians were hard at work shouting and
  dragging out their things, the tavern-keeper was particularly
  conspicuous among them. It was impossible to check the fire, but it
  was easy at first to save things. The Votyaks were huddled together on
  a little hill, weeping copiously and doing nothing.

Footnote 146:

  A similar reply (if Kurbanovsky did not invent this one) was made by
  peasants in Germany when refusing to be converted to Catholicism.

Footnote 147:

  Cyril and Methodius were brothers who in the ninth century evangelised
  in Thrace, Moesia and Moravia, invented the Slav alphabet, and made a
  Slav translation of the Bible. They are saints of both the Greek and
  the Catholic Churches.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 148:

  In the Province of Vyatka the peasants are particularly fond of
  forming new settlements. Very often three or four clearings are
  suddenly discovered in the forest. The immense waste lands and forests
  (now half cut down) tempt the peasants to take this _res nullius_
  which is left unused. The Minister of Finance has several times been
  obliged to confirm these squatters in possession of the land.

Footnote 149:

  Zhukovsky (1786–1852), the well-known poet, was tutor to the
  Tsarevitch, afterwards Alexander II. He was a man of fine and
  generous character. His original work is not of the first order,
  but as a translator from the European and classical languages he
  was of invaluable service in the development of Russian
  culture.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 150:

  Leroux, a follower of Saint Simon, of the first half of the nineteenth
  century.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 151:

  Gebel, a well-known musical composer of the period.

Footnote 152:

  I thought fit, I don’t understand why, to write these scenes in verse.
  Probably I thought that anybody could write unrhymed five-foot
  iambics, since even Pogodin[153] wrote them. In 1839 or 1840, I gave
  both the manuscripts to Byelinsky to read and calmly awaited his
  eulogies. But next day Byelinsky sent them back to me with a note in
  which he said: ‘Do please have them copied to run on without being
  divided into lines, then I will read them with pleasure, as it is I am
  bothered all the time by the idea of their being in verse.’

  Byelinsky killed both my dramatic efforts. It is always pleasant to
  pay one’s debts. In 1841, Byelinsky published a long dialogue upon
  literature in the _Notes of the Fatherland_. ‘How do you like my last
  article?’ he asked me, as we were dining together _en petit comité_ at
  Dusseau’s. ‘Very much,’ I answered, ‘all that you say is excellent,
  but tell me, please, how could you go on struggling for two hours to
  talk to that man without seeing at the first word that he was a fool?’
  ‘That’s perfectly true,’ said Byelinsky, bursting into laughter.
  ‘Well, my boy, that is crushing! Why, he is a perfect fool!’

Footnote 153:

  Pogodin, chiefly known as an historian of a peculiar Slavophil tinge,
  was co-editor with Shevyryov of the _Moskvityanin_, a reactionary
  journal, and wrote historical novels of little merit.—(_Translator’s
  Note._)

Footnote 154:

  The reference is to the ‘Arzamass,’ a literary club of which Karamzin,
  Batyushkov, Uvarov, this Bludov and some others were members. The town
  Arzamass is noted for its geese.—(_Translator’s Note._)

Footnote 155:

  _Il a voulu le bien de ses sujets._

Footnote 156:

  The name means ‘not a woman.’—(_Translator’s Note._)

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 Page           Changed from                      Changed to

  160 they used to keep them for going they used to keep them for going
      walks, that strangers            on walks, that strangers

 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Used numbers for footnotes, placing them all at the end of the last
     chapter.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 76599 ***
