*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 62687 ***

[Transcriber's Notes

This text is based on what is called the Grub Street edition of the
One Thousand and One Nights, that first appeared in London in 1706.
It was translated indirectly by anonymous translator(s) from the
French translation of Antoine Galland titled Les mille et une nuits.

The table of contents was moved from the end of the book to the
beginning to better suit the ebook format.

Footnotes appearing throughout the text were numbered sequentially
and collected at the end of the ebook under _Footnotes_.]




FRONTISPIECE


“The lady happening at the same time to look up to the tree, saw
the two princes, and made a sign to them with her hand to come down
without making any noise. Their fear was extreme when they found
themselves discovered, and they prayed the lady, by other signs, to
excuse them; but she, after having laid the monster’s head softly
down on the ground, rose up, and spoke to them, with a low, but
eager voice, to come down to her; she would take no denial. They
made signs to her that they were afraid of the genie, and would fain
have been excused. Upon which she ordered them to come down, and if
they did not make haste, threatened to awake the genie, and bid him
kill them.”




THE
ARABIAN NIGHTS’
ENTERTAINMENTS.

EMBELLISHED WITH

NEARLY ONE HUNDRED ENGRAVINGS.

A NEW EDITION,

CAREFULLY REVISED AND CORRECTED.

COMPLETE IN ONE VOLUME.

STEREOTYPED BY JAMES CONNER.

PHILADELPHIA:

PUBLISHED BY THOMAS WARDLE,

NO. 13 MINOR STREET.

1835.




CONTENTS


The Story of the Genie, and the Lady shut up in a Glass Box

The Fable of the Ass, the Ox, and the Labourer

The Fable of the Dog and the Cock

The Story of the Merchant and the Genie

The History of the first Old Man and the Hind

The Story of the second Old Man and the two Black Dogs

The Story of the Fisherman

The Story of the Grecian King and the Physician Douban

The Story of the Husband and the Parrot

The Story of the Vizier that was punished

The History of the young King of the Black Isles

The History of the three Calenders, Sons of Kings; and of the five
ladies of Bagdad

The History of the first Calender, a King’s Son

The Story of the second Calender, a King’s Son

The Story of the Envious Man, and of him that he envied

The History of the third Calender, a King’s Son

The Story of Zobeide

The Story of Amine

The Story of Sinbad, the Sailor

His first Voyage

His second Voyage

His third Voyage

His fourth Voyage

His fifth Voyage

His sixth Voyage

His seventh and last Voyage

The Story of the Three Apples

The Story of the Lady that was murdered, and of the Young Man, her
husband

The Story of Noureddin Ali and Bedreddin Hassan

The Story of the little Hunch-back

The Story told by the Christian Merchant

The Story told by the Sultan of Casgar’s Purveyor

The Story told by the Jewish Physician

The Story told by the Tailor

The Story of the Barber

The Story of the Barber’s eldest Brother

The Story of the Barber’s second Brother

The Story of the Barber’s third Brother

The Story of the Barber’s fourth Brother

The Story of the Barber’s fifth Brother

The Story of the Barber’s sixth Brother

The History of Aboulhassen Ali Ebn Becar, and Schemselnihar,
favourite of Caliph Haroun Alraschid

The Story of the Amours of Camaralzaman, Prince of the Isles of the
Children of Khaledan, and of Badoura, Princess of China

The History of the Princess of China

The Story of Marzavan, with the sequel of that of the Prince
Camaralzaman

The Story of the Princess Badoura, after her separation from Prince
Camaralzaman

The Story of the Princes Amgiad and Assad

The Story of Prince Amgiad and a Lady of the City of the Magicians

The sequel of the Story of Prince Assad

The Story of Noureddin and the Fair Persian

The Story of Beder, Prince of Persia, and Giahaure, Princess of
Samandal

The History of Ganem, Son of Abou Ayoub, and known by the surname of
Love’s Slave

The History of Prince Zeyn Alasnam, and the King of the Genii

The History of Codadad and his Brothers

The History of the Princess of Deryabar

The Story of the Sleeper awakened

The Story of Aladdin, or the Wonderful Lamp

The Adventures of the Caliph Haroun Alraschid

The Story of the Blind Man, Baba Abdalla

The Story of Sidi Nonman

The Story of Cogia Hassan Alhabbal

The Story of Ali Baba, and the Forty Robbers destroyed by a Slave

The Story of Ali Cogia, a Merchant of Bagdad

The Story of the Enchanted Horse

The Story of Prince Ahmed, and the Fairy Pari Banou

The Story of the Sisters who envied their youngest Sister




PREFACE.


Numerous as are the editions of the Arabian Nights’
Entertainments, and frequently as they have received the
embellishments of the artist, yet an Edition was still wanting, more
easily accessible to the general reader, and which, while it
combined economy, should not be deficient in elegance or
illustration. To supply this chasm in the Literature of Romance, is
the object of the Edition now offered to the public; and it can
scarcely be necessary to observe, that although the Engravings are
more numerous than in any preceding Edition, the vigour and spirit
with which they are executed, will recommend them even to the
admirers of the arts. These Engravings, the whole of which are from
original designs, made expressly for this work, are nearly one
hundred in number. The subjects have been very happily selected, and
it will be seen with how much skill the Artist has embodied the
humour and spirit of the Author. Under these circumstances, the
Publisher has no doubt but that he will enjoy the double
gratification of giving to the public the cheapest Edition of the
Thousand and One Tales of the inimitable Oriental Story Teller, and
of supplying a work, which, in point of embellishment, may be found
worthy of a place in the best libraries.

Of the merits of the Arabian Nights’ Entertainments, their
popularity would be sufficient evidence alone, had not the language
of praise both in poetry and prose, long been exhausted on them.
They are still the admiration of every person who can appreciate
curious and useful information conveyed through the medium of
fiction. “They are,” says Colonel Capper, in his Observations on
the Passage to India, “by many people erroneously supposed to be a
spurious production, and are therefore slighted in a manner they do
not deserve. They were written by an Arabian, and are universally
read and admired throughout Asia by all ranks of men, both old and
young: considered, therefore, as an original work, descriptive as
they are of the manners and customs of the East in general, and also
of the Arabians in particular, they surely must be thought to merit
the attention of the curious; nor are they, in my opinion, destitute
of merit in other respects: for, although the extravagance of some
of the stories is carried too far, yet, on the whole, one cannot
help admiring the fancy and invention of the author, in striking out
such a variety of pleasing incidents; pleasing I will call them,
because they have frequently afforded me much amusement; nor do I
envy any man his feelings, who is above being pleased with them. But
before any person decides upon the merit of these books, he should
be eye-witness of the effect they produce on those who best
understand them. I have more than once seen the Arabians in the
desert sitting round a fire listening to these stories with such
attention and pleasure, as totally to forget the fatigue and
hardship with which an instant before they were entirely overcome.
In short, not to dwell any longer on this subject, they are in the
same estimation all over Asia, that the adventures of Don Quixote
are in Spain; and it is presumed, no man of genius or taste would
think of making the tour of that country without previously reading
the work of Cervantes.”

Nor is the picture of Oriental manners and customs, as exhibited in
the Arabian Nights’ Entertainments, that of a remote age; on the
contrary, Mr. Dallaway, one of the recent travellers in the East, in
his “Constantinople Ancient and Modern,” says, “Much of the
romantic air which pervades the domestic habits of the persons
described in the Arabian Nights’ Entertainments, particularly in
inferior life, will be observed in passing through the streets of
that city. And we receive with additional pleasure a remembrance of
the delight with which we at first perused them, in finding them
authentic portraits of every Oriental nation.”

Mr. Hole, in his remarks on these Tales, considers the Sindbad as
the Arabian Odyssey, and as descriptive of real places and manners;
and he takes no small pains to ascertain the precise local
situations of the islands which Sindbad is supposed to visit; but
the beauties of the Arabian Nights’ Entertainments have never been
better described than in the following Sonnet to the Author, by Mr.
Thomas Russell, Fellow of New College, Oxford:

    “Blessed child of Genius, whose fantastic sprite
    Rides on the vivid lightning’s flash, or roves
    Through flowery valleys and elysian groves;
    Or, borne on vent’rous pinions, takes its flight
    To those dread realms, where, hid from mortal sight,
    Fierce Genii roam, or where in bright alcoves
    Mild Fairies reign, and woo their secret loves:
    Whate’er thy theme, whether the magic might
    Of the stern kings that dwell ’mid Ocean’s roar,
    Or Sindbad’s perils, or the cruel wiles
    Of Afric’s curst enchanters, charm us more,
    Or aught more wond’rous still our ear beguiles;
    Well pleased we listen to thy fabling lore,
    And Truth itself with less attraction smiles.”

The present translation is from the _Contes Arabes_ of M. Galland,
who appears to have imbibed no inconsiderable portion of the spirit
of the Oriental writer; and the utmost care has been taken to render
it as correct as possible, consistent with the simplicity of the
narration, and the luxuriance of its descriptions.

Although it cannot now be necessary to enter into a critical
examination of a work which is equally admired by the learned and
the unlearned, the young and the old, yet as the Genii and Fairies
form so considerable a part of the machinery of these Tales, it may
not be improper to say something respecting them.

The _Genn_ or _Ginn_ of the Arabians, is the same with the _Div_ or
_Ganman_ of the Persians, the _Deuta_ of the Indians, and the
Turks’ _Ginler_, and signifies a genie or demon, who has a body
formed of a more subtle matter than those of men, and like
elementary fire. They are supposed to have been created and to have
governed the world before Adam, and are divided into good and evil
angels, and even giants, who, in the early times, made war against
men, but have since been confined to one region, denominated from
them _Gimristan_, the fairy land of our old romances. _Gian ben
Gian_ was the sovereign of these creatures, or of the _Peris_ or
fairies, who governed the world two thousand years; after which
Eblis was sent by God to drive them into a distant part of the
world, and there confine them, because of their rebellion. The
shield of this prince is as famous as that of Achilles among the
Greeks, and, like it, seven-fold and destructive of all
enchantments, and was possessed by three successive Solomons, who
performed with it marvellous but fabulous exploits, and fell at last
into the hands of a hero named Tahmurath, surnamed _Divbend_, or the
Conqueror of Giants.

Solomon, the son of David, is said by the eastern historians to have
had not only men, but good and evil spirits, the birds and the
winds, subjected to him by God; and to have been possessed of a ring
of wonderful virtues, which seems to be nothing more than the
extraordinary wisdom with which he was divinely endowed. All that we
find in these writers about the marvellous actions and unrivalled
empire of Solomon over men and devils, is drawn from the Scripture
account of the extraordinary wisdom, and virtues, and throne of this
monarch.

_Peri_ are those beautiful creatures, which are neither men, angels,
nor devils. Some have supposed them the female genies, but the
_Peris_ are of both sexes, and are good beings; on whom the _Div_ or
genies frequently make war, and shut up their prisoners in cages
suspended on the highest trees, where their companions come and feed
them with the finest odours, which are their common food, and defend
them from the _Div_, who feel a sudden change to melancholy as soon
as they approach them.

_Benon_, or _Beni al Giam_, is another name for these good spirits,
who separated from the rebellious ones headed by Eblis or Lucifer.
--D’Herbelot, voc. _Genn, Gian, Peri. Solomon_.




ARABIAN NIGHTS’
ENTERTAINMENTS.


The chronicles of the Sussanians, the ancient kings of Persia, who
extended their empire into the Indies, over all the islands
thereunto belonging, a great way beyond the Ganges, and as far as
China, acquaint us, that there was formerly a king of that potent
family, the most excellent prince of his time: he was as much
beloved by his subjects for his wisdom and prudence, as he was
dreaded by his neighbours, because of his valour, and his warlike
and well disciplined troops. He had two sons; the eldest, Schahriar,
the worthy heir of his father, and endowed with all his virtues. The
youngest, Schahzenan, was likewise a prince of incomparable merit.

After a long and glorious reign, this king died, and Schahriar
mounted his throne. Schahzenan, being excluded from all share of the
government by the laws of the empire, and obliged to live a private
life, was so far from envying the happiness of his brother, that he
made it his whole business to please him, and effected it without
much difficulty. Schahriar, who had naturally a great affection for
that prince, was so charmed with his complaisance, that out of an
excess of friendship, he would needs divide his dominions with him,
and gave him the kingdom of Great Tartary. Schahzenan went
immediately, and took possession of it, and fixed the seat of his
government at Samarcande, the metropolis of the country.

After they had been separated ten years, Schahriar, having a
passionate desire to see his brother, resolved to send an ambassador
to invite him to his court. He made choice of his prime vizier for
the embassy, sent him to Tartary with a retinue answerable to his
dignity, and he made all possible haste to Samarcande. When he came
near the city, Schahzenan had notice of it, and went to meet him
with the principal lords of his court, who, to put the more honour
on the sultan’s minister, appeared in magnificent apparel. The
king of Tartary received the ambassador with the greatest
demonstrations of Joy; and immediately asked him concerning the
welfare of the sultan his brother. The vizier having acquainted him
that he was in health, gave him an account of his embassy.
Schahzenan was so much affected with it, that he answered thus:--
Sage vizier, the sultan, my brother, does me too much honour; he
could propose nothing in the world so acceptable; I long as
passionately to see him, as he does to see me. Time has been no more
able to diminish my friendship than his. My kingdom is in peace, and
I desire no more than ten days to get myself ready to go with you;
so that there is no necessity for your entering the city for so
short a time; I pray you to pitch your tents here, and I will order
provisions in abundance for yourself and your company.

The vizier did accordingly, and as soon as the king returned, he
sent him a prodigious quantity of provisions of all sorts, with
presents of great value.

In the meanwhile, Schahzenan made ready for his journey, took orders
about his meet important affairs, appointed a council to govern in
his absence, and named a minister, of whose wisdom he had sufficient
experience, and in whom he had an entire confidence, to be their
president. At the end of ten days, his equipage being ready, he took
his leave of the queen his wife, and went out of town in the evening
with his retinue, pitched his royal pavilion near the vizier’s
tent, and discoursed with that ambassador till midnight. But willing
once more to embrace the queen, whom he loved entirely, he returned
alone to his palace, and went straight to her majesty’s apartment,
who, not expecting his return, had taken one of the meanest officers
of her household to her bed, where they lay both fast to sleep,
having been in bed a considerable while.

The king entered without any noise, and pleased himself to think how
he should surprise his wife, who, he thought, loved him as entirely
as he did her: but how great was his surprise, when by the light of
the flambeaux, which burn all night in the apartments of those
eastern princes, he saw a man in her arms! He stood immoveable for a
time, not knowing how to believe his own eyes; but, finding that it
was not to be doubted, How! says he to himself, I am scarce out of
my palace, and but just under the walls of Samarcande, and dare they
put such an outrage upon me! Ah! perfidious wretches! your crime
shall not go unpunished. As king, I am to punish wickedness
committed in my dominions; and as an enraged husband, I must
sacrifice you to my just resentment. In a word, this unfortunate
prince, giving way to his rage, drew his scimitar, and, approaching
the bed, killed them both with one blow, turning their sleep into
death; and afterwards taking them up, threw them out of a window,
into the ditch that surrounded the palace.

Having avenged himself thus, he went out of town privately, as he
came into it; and, returning to his pavilion, without saying one
word of what had happened, he ordered the tents to be struck, and to
make ready for his journey. This was speedily done; and before day
he began his march, with kettle-drums and other instruments of
music, that filled every one with joy, except the king, who was so
much troubled at the disloyalty of his wife, that he was seized with
extreme melancholy, which preyed upon him during his whole journey.

When he drew near the capital of the Indies, the sultan Schahriar
and all his court came out to meet him; and the princes were
overjoyed to see one another, and alighting, after mutual embraces,
and other marks of affection and respect, they mounted again, and
entered the city, with the acclamations of vast multitudes of
people. The sultan conducted his brother to the palace he had
provided for him, which had a communication with his own, by means
of a garden; and was so much the more magnificent, that it was set
apart as a banqueting-house for public entertainments, and other
diversions of the court, and the splendour of it had been lately
augmented by new furniture.

Schahriar immediately left the king of Tartary, that he might give
him time to bathe himself, and to change his apparel; and as soon as
he had done, he came to him again, and they sat down together upon a
sofa or alcove. The courtiers kept at a distance, out of respect,
and those two princes entertained one another suitably to their
friendship, their nearness of blood, and the long separation that
had passed betwixt them. The time of supper being come, they ate
together, after which they renewed their conversation, which
continued till Schahriar, perceiving that it was very late, left his
brother to rest.

The unfortunate Schahzenan went to bed; and though the conversation
of his brother had suspended his grief for some time, it returned
upon him with more violence; so that, instead of taking his
necessary rest, he tormented himself with cruel reflections. All the
circumstances of his wife’s disloyalty presented themselves afresh
to his imagination, in so lively a manner, that he was like one
beside himself. In a word, not being able to sleep, he got up, and
giving himself over to afflicting thoughts, they made such an
impression upon his countenance, that the sultan could not but take
notice of it, and said thus to himself: What can be the matter with
the king of Tartary, that he is so melancholy? Has he any cause to
complain of his reception? No, surely; I have received him as a
brother whom I love, so that I can charge myself with no omission in
that respect. Perhaps it grieves him to be at such a distance from
his dominions, or from the queen his wife. Alas! if that be the
matter, I must forthwith give him the presents I designed for him,
that he may return to Samarcande when he pleases. Accordingly, next
day Schahriar sent him part of those presents, being the greatest
rarities and the richest things that the Indies could afford. At the
same time he endeavoured to divert his brother every day, by new
objects of pleasure, and the finest treats; which, instead of giving
the king of Tartary any ease, only increased his sorrow.

One day, Schahriar, having appointed a great hunting match, about
two days’ journey from his capital, in a place that abounded with
deer, Schahzenan prayed him to excuse him, for his health would not
allow him to bear him company. The sultan, unwilling to put any
constraint upon him, left him at his liberty, and went a hunting
with his nobles. The king of Tartary being thus left alone, shut
himself up in his apartment, and sat down at a window that looked
into the garden. That delicious place, and the sweet harmony of an
infinite number of birds which chose it for a place of retreat, must
certainly have diverted him, had he been capable of taking pleasure
in any thing; but being perpetually tormented with the fatal
remembrance of his queen’s infamous conduct, his eyes were not so
often fixed upon the garden, as lifted up to heaven to bewail his
misfortunes.

While he was thus swallowed up with grief, an object presented
itself to his view, which quickly turned all his thoughts another
way. A secret gate of the sultan’s palace opened all of a sudden,
and there came out of it twenty women, in the midst of whom walked
the sultaness, who was easily distinguished from the rest by her
majestic air. The princess, thinking that the king of Tartary was
gone a hunting with his brother the sultan, came up with her retinue
near the windows of his apartment; for the prince had placed himself
so that he could see all that passed in the garden, without being
perceived himself. He observed, that the persons who accompanied the
sultaness threw off their veils and long robes, that they might be
at more freedom; but was wonderfully surprised when he saw ten of
them to be blacks, and that each of them took his mistress. The
sultaness, on her part, was not long without her gallant. She
clapped her hands, and called Masoud, Masoud; and immediately a
black came down from a tree, and ran to her in all haste.

Modesty will not allow, nor is it necessary, to relate what passed
between the blacks and the ladies. It is sufficient to say, that
Schahzenan saw enough to convince him that his brother was as much
to be pitied as himself. This amorous company continued together
till midnight, and having bathed all together, in a great piece of
water which was one of the chief ornaments of the garden, they
dressed themselves, and re-entered the palace by the secret door,
all except Masoud, who climbed up his tree, and got over the garden
wall the same way as he came in.

All this having passed in the king of Tartary’s sight, occasioned
him to make a multitude of reflections. How little reason had I,
says he, to think that no one was so unfortunate as myself! It is
certainly the unavoidable fate of all husbands, since the sultan, my
brother, who is sovereign of so many dominions, and the greatest
prince of the earth, could not escape it. The case being so, what a
fool am I to kill myself with grief! I am resolved that the
remembrance of a misfortune so common shall never more disturb my
quiet.

From that moment he forbore afflicting himself. Being unwilling to
sup till he saw the whole scene that was acted under his window, he
called then for his supper, eat with a better appetite than he had
done at any time since his coming from Samarcande, and listened with
some degree of pleasure to the agreeable concert of vocal and
instrumental music, that was appointed to entertain him while at
table.

He continued after this in very good humour; and when he knew that
the sultan was returning, he went to meet him, and paid him his
compliments with great gayety. Schahriar at first took no notice of
this alteration; but politely expostulated with him, why he would
not bear him company at hunting the stag; and without giving him
time to reply, entertained him with a relation of the great number
of deer and other game they had killed, and what pleasure he had in
the sport. Schahzenan heard him with attention, gave answer to every
thing, and being free from that melancholy which formerly
overclouded his wit, he said a thousand agreeable and pleasant
things to the sultan.

Schahriar, who expected to have found him in the same state as he
left him, was overjoyed to see him so cheerful, and spoke to him
thus: Dear brother, I return thanks to Heaven for the happy change
it has made in you during my absence; I am extremely rejoiced at it;
but I have a request to make to you, and conjure you not to deny me.
--I can refuse you nothing, replied the king of Tartary; you may
command Schahzenan as you please; speak, I am impatient till I know
what you desire of me. --Ever since you came to my court, replied
Schahriar, I found you swallowed up by a deep melancholy, and I in
vain attempted to remove it by all sorts of diversion. I imagined it
might be occasioned by reason of your distance from your dominions,
or that love might have a great share in it, and that the queen of
Samarcande, who, no doubt, is an accomplished beauty, might be the
cause of it. I do not know if I be mistaken; but I must own, that it
was for this very reason I would not importune you upon the subject,
for fear of making you uneasy. But without my having contributed any
thing towards it, I find now, upon my return, that you are in the
best humour that can be, and that your mind is entirely delivered
from that black vapour which disturbed it. Pray do me the favour to
tell me why you were so melancholy, and why you are no longer so.

Upon this, the king of Tartary continued for some time, as if he had
been meditating, and contriving what he should answer; but at last
replied as follows: You are my sultan and master; but excuse me, I
beseech you, from answering your question. --No, dear brother, said
the sultan, you must answer me; I will take no denial. Schahzenan,
not being able to withstand these pressing instances, answered,
Well, then, brother, I will satisfy you, since you command me; and
having told him the story of the queen of Samarcande’s treachery,
This, says he, was the cause of my grief; judge whether I had not
reason enough to give myself up to it.

Oh! my brother, says the sultan, (in a tone which showed what an
interest he took in the king of Tartary’s story,) what a horrible
story do you tell me! How impatient was I till I heard it out! I
commend you for punishing the traitors who offered you such an
outrage. Nobody can blame you for that action: it was just; and, for
my part, had the case been mine, I should scarce have been so
moderate as you. I would not have satisfied myself with the life of
one woman; I verily think I should have sacrificed a thousand to my
fury. I cease now to wonder at your melancholy. The cause of it was
too sensible and too mortifying, not to make you yield to it. O
heaven! what a strange adventure! Nor do I believe the like ever
befel any man but yourself. But, in short, I must bless God, who has
comforted you; and since I doubt not but your consolation is well
grounded, be so good as to let me know what it is, and conceal
nothing from me. Schahzenan was not so easily prevailed upon in this
point, as he had been in the other, because of his brother’s
concern it; but being obliged to yield to his pressing instances,
answered, I must obey you, then, since your command is absolute; yet
I am afraid that my obedience will occasion your trouble to be
greater than ever mine was. But you must blame yourself for it,
since you force me to reveal a thing which I should otherwise have
buried in eternal oblivion. What you say, answers Schahriar, serves
only to increase my curiosity. Make haste to discover the secret,
whatever it be. The king of Tartary being no longer able to refuse,
gave him the particulars of all that he had seen of the blacks in
disguise; of the ungoverned passion of the sultaness and her ladies;
and he did not forget Masoud. After having been witness to those
infamous actions, says he, I believed all women to be naturally
inclined thereto, and that they could not resist their inclination.
Being of this opinion, it seemed to me to be an unaccountable
weakness in men to place any confidence in their fidelity. This
reflection brought on many others; and, in short, I thought the best
thing I could do was to make myself easy. It cost me some pains,
indeed, but at last I effected it; and if you will take my advice,
you will follow my example.




THE LADY OF THE GLASS CASE.


Though the advice was good, the sultan could not relish it, but fell
into a rage. What! says he, is the sultaness of the Indies capable
of prostituting herself in so base a manner? No, brother, I cannot
believe what you say, except I saw it with my own eyes; your’s
must needs have deceived you: the matter is so important, that I
must be satisfied of it myself. Dear brother, answers Schahzenan,
that you may without much difficulty. Appoint another hunting match;
and when we are out of town with your court and mine, we will stop
under our tents, and at night let you and I return alone to my
apartments; I am certain the next day you will see what I saw. The
sultan, approving the stratagem, immediately appointed a new
hunting-match; and that same day the tents were set up at the place
appointed.

Next day the two princes set out with all their retinue; they
arrived at the place of encampment, and staid there till night. Then
Schahriar called his grand vizier, and without acquainting him with
his design, commanded him to stay in his place during his absence,
and suffer no person to go out of the camp upon any account
whatever. As soon as he had given this order, the king of Grand
Tartary and he took horse, passed through the camp incognito,
returned to the city, and went to Schahzenan’s apartment. They had
scarce placed themselves in the same window where the king of
Tartary had beheld the scene of the disguised blacks, but the secret
gate opened, the sultaness and her ladies entered the garden with
the blacks, and she, having called upon Masoud, the sultan saw more
than enough to convince him fully of his dishonour and misfortune.

O heavens! cried he, what an indignity! what horror! Can the wife of
a sovereign such as I am, be capable of such an infamous action?
After this, let no prince boast of his being perfectly happy. Alas!
my brother, continued he, (embracing the king of Tartary,) let us
both renounce the world; honour is banished out of it; if it
flatters us one day, it betrays us the next! Let us abandon our
dominions and grandeur; let us go into foreign countries, where we
may lead an obscure life, and conceal our misfortunes. Schahzenan
did not at all approve of this resolution, but did not think fit to
contradict Schahriar in the heat of his passion. Dear brother, says
he, your will shall be mine; I am ready to follow you whither you
please: but promise me that you will return if we can meet with any
one that is more unhappy than ourselves. I agree to it, says the
sultan, but doubt much whether we shall. I am not of your mind in
this, replies the king of Tartary; I fancy our journey will be but
short. Having said thus, they went secretly out of the palace by a
different way from that by which they came. They travelled as long
as it was day, and lay the first night under trees; and getting up
about break of day, they went on till they came to a fine meadow
upon the bank of the sea, that was besprinkled with great trees.
They sat down under one of those trees to rest and refresh
themselves, and the chief subject of their conversation was the
infidelity of their wives.

They had not sat long, before they heard a frightful noise from the
sea, and a terrible cry, which filled them with fear; then, the sea
opening, there arose up something like a great black column, which
reached almost to the clouds. This redoubled their fear, made them
rise speedily, and climb up into a tree to hide themselves. They had
scarce got up, till looking to the place from whence the noise came,
and where the sea opened, they observed that the black column
advanced, winding about towards the shore, cleaving the water before
it. They could not at first think what it should be; but in a little
time they found that it was one of those malignant genii that are
mortal enemies to mankind, and are always doing them mischief. He
was black, frightful, had the shape of a giant, of a prodigious
stature, and carried on his head a great glass box, shut with four
locks of fine steel. He entered the meadow with his burden, which he
laid down just at the foot of the tree where the two princes were,
who looked upon themselves to be dead men. Meanwhile the genie sat
down by his box, and opening it with four keys that he had at his
girdle, there came out a lady magnificently apparelled, of a
majestic stature, and a complete beauty. The monster made her sit
down by him, and eying her with an amorous look, Lady, says he, nay,
most accomplished of all ladies who are admired for their beauty, my
charming mistress, whom I carried off on your wedding-day, and have
loved so constantly ever since, let me sleep a few moments by you;
for I found myself so very sleepy, that I came to this place to take
a little rest. Having spoken thus, he laid down his huge head upon
the lady’s knees, and stretching out his legs, which reached as
far as the sea, he fell asleep presently, and snored so that he made
the banks echo again.

The lady happening at the same time to look up to the tree, saw the
two princes, and made a sign to them with her hand to come down
without making any noise. Their fear was extreme when they found
themselves discovered, and they prayed the lady, by other signs, to
excuse them; but she, after having laid the monster’s head softly
down on the ground, rose up and spoke to them with a low, but eager
voice, to come down to her; she would take no denial. They made
signs to her that they were afraid of the genie, and would fain have
been excused. Upon which she ordered them to come down, and if they
did not make haste, threatened to awake the genie, and bid him kill
them.

These words did so much intimidate the princes, that they began to
come down with all possible precaution, lest they should awake the
genie. When they came down, the lady took them by the hand, and
going a little farther with them under the trees, made a very urgent
proposal to them. At first they rejected it, but she obliged them to
accept it by her threats. Having obtained what she desired, she
perceived that each of them had a ring on his finger, which she
demanded of them. As soon as she received them, she went and took a
box out of the bundle, where her toilet was, pulled out a string of
other rings of all sorts, which she showed them, and asked them if
they knew what those jewels meant. No, said they, we hope you will
be pleased to tell us. These are, replied she, the rings of all the
men to whom I have granted my favours. There are full fourscore and
eighteen of them, which I keep as tokens to remember them; and asked
your’s for the same reason, to make up the hundred. So that,
continued she, I have a hundred gallants already, notwithstanding
the vigilance of this wicked genie, who never leaves me. He may lock
me up in this glass box, and hide me in the bottom of the sea; I
find a way to cheat his care. You may see by this, that when a woman
has formed a project, there is no husband or lover that can hinder
her putting it into execution. Men had better not put their wives
under such restraint, as it only serves to teach them cunning.
Having spoken thus to them, she put their rings upon the same string
with the rest, and sitting down by the monster, as before, laid his
head again upon her lap, and made a sign for the princes to be gone.

They returned immediately by the same way they came, and when they
were out of sight of the lady and genie, Schahriar says to
Schahzenan, Well, brother, what do you think of this adventure? Has
not the genie a very faithful mistress? And do not you agree that
there is no wickedness equal to that of woman? Yes, brother, answers
the king of Tartary; and you must also agree that the monster is
more unfortunate, and more to be pitied than we. Therefore, since we
have found what we sought for, let us return to our dominions, and
let not this hinder us from marrying. For my part, I know a method
by which to keep inviolable the fidelity that my wife owes me. I
will say no more of it at present, but you will hear of it in a
little time, and I am sure you will follow my example. The sultan
agreed with his brother; and continuing their journey, they arrived
in the camp the third night after they left it.

The news of the sultan’s return being spread, the courtiers came
betimes in the morning before his pavilion, to wait on him. He
ordered them to enter, received them with a more pleasant air than
formerly, and gave each of them a present: after which he told them
he would go no farther, ordered them to take horse, and returned
speedily to his palace.

As soon as he arrived, he ran to the sultaness’s apartment,
commanded her to be bound before him, and delivered her to his grand
vizier, with an order to strangle her, which was accordingly
executed by that minister without inquiring into her crime. The
enraged prince did not stop here, but cut off the heads of all the
sultaness’s ladies with his own hand. After this rigorous
punishment, being persuaded that no woman was chaste, he resolved,
in order to prevent the disloyalty of such as he should afterwards
marry, to wed one every night, and have her strangled next morning.
Having imposed this cruel law upon himself, he swore that he would
observe it immediately after the departure of the king of Tartary,
who speedily took leave of him, and being laden with magnificent
presents, set forward on his journey.

Schahzenan being gone, Schahriar ordered his grand vizier to bring
him the daughter of one of his generals. The vizier obeyed; the
sultan lay with her, and putting her next morning into his hands
again, in order to be strangled, commanded him to get him another
next night. Whatever reluctance the vizier had to put such orders in
execution, as he owed blind obedience to the sultan his master, he
was forced to submit. He brought him then the daughter of a
subaltern, whom he also cut off next day. After her he brought a
citizen’s daughter; and, in a word, there was every day a maid
married, and a wife murdered.

The rumour of this unparalleled barbarity, occasioned a general
consternation in the city, where there was nothing but crying and
lamentation. Here, a father in tears, and inconsolable for the loss
of his daughter! and there, tender mothers, dreading lest their
daughters should have the same fate, making the air to resound
beforehand with their groans: so that, instead of the commendations
and blessings which the sultan had hitherto received from his
subjects, their mouths were now filled with imprecations against him.

The grand vizier, who, as has been already said, was the executioner
of this horrid injustice, against his will, had two daughters, the
eldest called Scheherazade, and the youngest Dinarzade. The latter
was a lady of very great merit; but the elder had courage, wit, and
penetration infinitely above her sex. She read much, and had such a
prodigious memory, that she never forgot any thing she had read. She
had successfully applied herself to philosophy, physic, history, and
the liberal arts; and for verse exceeded the best poets of her time.
Besides this, she was a perfect beauty, and all her fine
qualifications were crowned by solid virtue.

The vizier passionately loved a daughter so worthy of his tender
affection; and one day, as they were discoursing together, she says
to him, Father, I have one favour to beg of you, and most humbly
pray you to grant it me. I will not refuse it, answers he, provided
it be just and reasonable. For the justice of it, says she, there
can be no question, and you may judge of it by the motive which
obliges me to demand it of you. I wish to stop the course of that
barbarity which the sultan exercises upon the families of this city.
I would dispel those unjust fears which so many mothers have of
losing their daughters in such a fatal manner. Your design,
daughter, replies the vizier, is very commendable; but the evil you
would remedy to me seems incurable; how do you pretend to effect it?
--Father, says Scheherazade, since by your means the sultan makes
every day a new marriage, I conjure you by the tender affection you
bear to me, to procure me the honour of his bed. The vizier could
not hear this without horror. O heavens! replied he, in a passion,
have you lost your senses, daughter, that you make such a dangerous
request to me? You know the sultan has sworn by his soul that he
will never lie above one night with the same woman, and to order her
to be killed next morning: and would you have me propose you to him?
Consider well to what your indiscreet zeal will expose you. --Yes,
dear father, replies the virtuous daughter, I know the risk I run;
but that does not frighten me. If I perish, my death will be
glorious; and if I succeed, I shall do my country an important piece
of service. No, no, says the vizier, whatever you can represent to
engage me to let you throw yourself into that horrible danger, do
not think that ever I will agree to it. When the sultan shall order
me to strike my poinard into your heart, alas! I must obey him; and
what an employment is that for a father! Ah! if you do not fear
death, yet at least be afraid of occasioning me the mortal grief of
seeing my hand stained with your blood. Once more, father, says
Scheherazade, grant me the favour I beg. Your stubbornness, replies
the vizier, will make me angry; why will you run headlong to your
ruin? They that do not foresee the end of a dangerous enterprise,
can never bring it to a happy issue. I am afraid the same thing will
happen to you that happened to the ass, which was well, and could
not keep himself so. What misfortune befell the ass? replies
Scheherazade. I will tell you, says the vizier, if you will hear me.




FABLE.
The Ass, the Ox, and the Labourer.


A very wealthy merchant possessed several country-houses, where he
kept a large number of cattle of every kind. He retired with his
wife and family to one of these estates, in order to improve it
under his own direction. He had the gift of understanding the
language of beasts, but with this condition, that he should not, on
pain of death, interpret it to any one else. And this hindered him
from communicating to others what he learned by means of this
faculty.

He kept in the same stall an ox and an ass. One day as he sat near
them, and was amusing himself in looking at his children who were
playing about him, he heard the ox say to the ass, Sprightly, O! how
happy do I think you, when I consider the ease you enjoy, and the
little labour that is required of you. You are carefully rubbed down
and washed, you have well-dressed corn, and fresh clean water. Your
greatest business is to carry the merchant, our master, when he has
any little journey to make, and were it not for that you would be
perfectly idle. I am treated in a very different manner, and my
condition is as deplorable as yours is fortunate. Daylight no sooner
appears than I am fastened to a plough, and made to work till night,
which so fatigues me, that sometimes my strength entirely fails.
Besides, the labourer, who is always behind me, beats me
continually. By drawing the plough, my tail is all fleaed; and in
short, after having laboured from morning to night, when I am
brought in they give me nothing to eat but sorry dry beans, not so
much as cleansed from dirt, or other food equally bad; and to
heighten my misery, when I have filled my belly with such ordinary
stuff, I am forced to lie all night in my own dung; so that you see
I have reason to envy your lot.

The ass did not interrupt the ox; but when he had concluded,
answered, They that called you a foolish beast did not lie. You are
too simple; you suffer them to conduct you whither they please, and
show no manner of resolution. In the mean time, what advantage do
you reap from all the indignities you suffer? You kill yourself for
the ease, pleasure, and profit of those who give you no thanks for
your service. But they would not treat you so, if you had as much
courage as strength. When they come to fasten you to the stall, why
do you not resist? why do you not gore them with your horns, and
show that you are angry, by striking your foot against the ground?
And, in short, why do you not frighten them by bellowing aloud?
Nature has furnished you with means to command respect; but you do
not use them. They bring you sorry beans and bad straw; eat none of
them; only smell and then leave them. If you follow my advice, you
will soon experience a change, for which you will thank me.

The ox took the ass’s advice in very good part, and owned he was
much obliged to him. Dear Sprightly, added he, I will not fail to do
as you direct, and you shall see how I will acquit myself. Here
ended their conversation, of which the merchant lost not a word.

Early the next morning the labourer went for the ox. He fastened him
to the plough, and conducted him to his usual work. The ox, who had
not forgotten the ass’s counsel, was very troublesome and
untowardly all that day, and in the evening, when the labourer
brought him back to the stall, and began to fasten him, the
malicious beast, instead of presenting his head willingly as he used
to do, was restive, and drew back bellowing; and then made at the
labourer, as if he would have gored him with his horns. In a word,
he did all the ass had advised him. The day following, the labourer
came as usual, to take the ox to his labour; but finding the stall
full of beans, the straw that he had put in the night before not
touched, and the ox lying on the ground with his legs stretched out
and panting in a strange manner, he believed him to be unwell and
pitied him, and thinking that it was not proper to take him to work,
went immediately and acquainted his master with his condition. The
merchant perceiving that the ox had followed all the mischievous
advice of the ass, determined to punish the latter, and accordingly
ordered the labourer to go and put him in the ox’s place, and to
be sure to work him hard. The labourer did as he was desired. The
ass was forced to draw the plough all that day, which fatigued him
so much the more, as he was not accustomed to that kind of labour;
besides, he had been so soundly beaten, that he could scarcely stand
when he came back.

Meanwhile, the ox was mightily pleased; he ate up all that was in
the stall, and rested himself the whole day. He rejoiced that he had
followed the ass’s advice, blessed him a thousand times for the
kindness he had done him, and did not fail to express his obligation
when the ass had returned. The ass made no reply, so vexed was he at
the ill-treatment he had received; but he said within himself, It is
by my own imprudence I have brought this misfortune upon myself. I
lived happily, every thing smiled upon me; I had all that I could
wish; it is my own fault that I am brought to this miserable
condition; and if I cannot contrive some way to get out of it, I am
certainly undone. As he spoke, his strength was so much exhausted
that he fell down in his stall, as if he had been half dead.

Here the grand vizier addressed himself to Scheherazade, and said,
Daughter, you act just like this ass; you will expose yourself to
destruction by your erroneous policy. Take my advice, remain quiet,
and do not seek to hasten your death. Father, replied Scheherazade,
the example you have set before me will not induce me to change my
resolution. I will never cease importuning you until you present me
to the sultan as his bride. The vizier, perceiving that she
persisted in her demand, replied, Alas! then, since you will
continue obstinate, I shall be obliged to treat you in the same
manner as the merchant whom I before referred to, treated his wife a
short time after.

The merchant understanding that the ass was in a lamentable
condition, was desirous of knowing what passed between him and the
ox, therefore, after supper he went out by moonlight, and sat down
by them, his wife bearing him company. After his arrival, he heard
the ass say to the ox, Comrade, tell me, I pray you, what you intend
to do to-morrow, when the labourer brings you meat? What will I do!
replied the ox, I will continue to act as you taught me. I will draw
back from him and threaten him with my horns, as I did yesterday: I
will feign myself ill, and at the point of death. Beware of that,
replied the ass, it will ruin you; for as I came home this evening,
I heard the merchant, our master, say something that makes me
tremble for you. Alas! what did you hear? demanded the ox; as you
love me, withhold nothing from me, my dear Sprightly. Our master,
replied the ass, addressed himself thus to the labourer: Since the
ox does not eat and is not able to work, I would have him killed
to-morrow, and we will give his flesh as an alms to the poor for
God’s sake; as for the skin that will be of use to us, and I would
have you give it the currier to dress; therefore be sure to send for
the butcher. This is what I had to tell you, said the ass. The
interest I feel in your preservation, and my friendship for you,
obliged me to make it known to you, and to give you new advice. As
soon as they bring you your bran and straw, rise up, and eat
heartily. Our master will by this think that you are recovered, and
no doubt will recall his orders for killing you; but, if you act
otherwise, you will certainly he slaughtered.

This discourse had the effect which the ass designed. The ox was
greatly alarmed, and bellowed for fear. The merchant, who heard the
conversation very attentively, fell into a loud fit of laughter. His
wife was greatly surprised, and asked, Pray, husband, tell me what
you laugh at so heartily, that I may laugh with you. Wife, replied
he, you must content yourself with hearing me laugh. No, returned
she, I will know the reason. I cannot afford you that satisfaction,
answered he, and can only inform you that I laugh at what our ass
just now said to the ox. The rest is a secret, which I am not
allowed to reveal. What, demanded she, hinders you from revealing
the secret? If I tell it you, replied he, I shall forfeit my life.
You only jeer me, cried his wife; what you would have me believe
cannot be true. If you do not directly satisfy me as to what you
laugh at, and tell me what the ox and the ass said to one another, I
swear by heaven that you and I shall never bed together again.

Having spoken thus, she went into the house, and seating herself in
a corner, cried there all night. Her husband lay alone, and finding
next morning that she continued in the same humour, told her, she
was very foolish to afflict herself in that manner; that the thing
was not worth so much; that it concerned her very little to know,
while it was of the utmost consequence to him to keep the secret:
therefore, continued he, I conjure you to think no more of it. I
shall still think so much of it, replied she, as never to forbear
weeping till you have satisfied my curiosity. But I tell you very
seriously, answered he, that it will cost me my life if I yield to
your indiscreet solicitations. Let what will happen, said she, I do
insist upon it. I perceive, resumed the merchant, that it is
impossible to bring you to reason, and since I foresee that you will
occasion your own death by your obstinacy, I will call in your
children, that they may see you before you die. Accordingly he
called for them, and sent for her father and mother, and other
relations. When they were come, and heard the reason of their being
summoned, they did all they could to convince her that she was in
the wrong, but to no purpose: she told them that she would rather
die than yield that point to her husband. Her father and mother
spoke to her, and told her that what she desired to know was of no
importance to her; but they could produce no effect upon her, either
by their authority or entreaties. When her children saw that nothing
would prevail to draw her out of that sullen temper, they wept
bitterly. The merchant himself was half frantic, and almost ready to
risk his own life to save that of his wife, whom he sincerely loved.

Now, my daughter, continued the vizier to Scheherazade, this
merchant had fifty hens, and one cock, with a dog, that gave good
heed to all that passed. While the merchant was, as I said,
considering what he had best do, he saw his dog run towards the cock
as he was treading a hen, and heard him say to him: Cock, I am sure
heaven will not let you live long; are you not ashamed to act thus
to-day? The cock standing up on tiptoe, answered fiercely: and why
not to-day as well as other days? If you do not know, replied the
dog, then I will tell you, that this day our master is in great
perplexity. His wife would have him reveal a secret which is of such
a nature, that the disclosure would cost him his life. Things are
come to that pass, that it is to be feared he will scarcely have
resolution enough to resist his wife’s obstinacy; for he loves
her, and is affected by the tears she continually sheds. We are all
alarmed at his situation, while you only insult our melancholy, and
have the impudence to divert yourself with your hens.

The cock answered the dog’s reproof thus: What, has our master so
little sense? he has but one wife, and cannot govern her, and though
I have fifty I make them all do what I please. Let him use his
reason, he will soon find a way to get rid of his trouble. How?
demanded the dog; what would you have him to do? Let him go into the
room where his wife is, resumed the cock, lock the door, and take a
stick and thrash her well; and I will answer for it, that will bring
her to her senses, and make her forbear to importune him to discover
what he ought not to reveal. The merchant had no sooner heard what
the cock said, than he took up a stick, went to his wife whom he
found still crying, and shutting the door, belaboured her so
soundly, that she cried out “Enough, husband, enough, forbear, and
I will never ask the question more.” Upon this, perceiving that
she repented of her impertinent curiosity, he desisted; and opening
the door her friends came in, were glad to find her cured of her
obstinacy, and complimented her husband upon this happy expedient to
bring his wife to reason. Daughter, added the grand vizier, you
deserve to be treated as the merchant treated his wife.

Father, replied Scheherazade, I beg you would not take it ill that I
persist in my opinion. I am nothing moved by the story of this
woman. I could relate many, to persuade you that you ought not to
oppose my design. Besides, pardon me for declaring, that your
opposition is vain, for if your paternal affection should hinder you
from granting my request, I will go and offer myself to the sultan.
In short, the father, being overcome by the resolution of his
daughter, yielded to her importunity, and though he was much grieved
that he could not divert her from so fatal a resolution, he went
instantly to acquaint the sultan, that next night he would bring him
Scheherazade.

The sultan was much surprised at the sacrifice which the grand
vizier proposed to make. How could you, says he, resolve to bring me
your own daughter? Sir, answered the vizier, it is her own offer.
The sad destiny that awaits her could not intimidate her; she
prefers the honour of being your majesty’s wife for one night, to
her life. But do not act under a mistake, vizier, said the sultan;
to-morrow when I place Scheherazade in your hands, I expect you will
put her to death; and if you fail, I swear that your own life shall
answer. Sir, rejoined the vizier, my heart without doubt will be
full of grief to execute your commands; but it is to no purpose for
nature to murmur. Though I am her father, I will answer for the
fidelity of my hand to obey your order. Schahriar accepted his
minister’s offer, and told him he might bring his daughter when he
pleased.

The grand vizier went with the intelligence to Scheherazade, who
received it with as much joy as if it had been the most agreeable
information she could have received. She thanked her father for
having so greatly obliged her; and perceiving that he was
overwhelmed with grief, told him, for his consolation, that she
hoped he would never repent of having married her to the sultan; and
that, on the contrary, he should have reason to rejoice at his
compliance all his days.

Her business now was to adorn herself to appear before the sultan;
but before she went, she took her sister Dinarzade apart, and said
to her, My dear sister, I have need of your assistance in a matter
of great importance, and must pray you not to deny it me. My father
is going to conduct me to the sultan: do not let this alarm you, but
hear me with patience. As soon as I am in his presence, I will pray
him to allow you to lie in the bride-chamber, that I may enjoy your
company this one night more. If I obtain that favour, as I hope to
do, remember to awake me to-morrow an hour before day, and to
address me in these or some such words, “My sister, if you be not
asleep. I pray you that till day-break, which will be very shortly,
you will relate to me one of the entertaining stories of which you
have read so many.” I will immediately tell you one; and I hope by
this means to deliver the city from the consternation it is under at
present. Dinarzade answered that she would with pleasure act as she
required her.

The grand vizier conducted Scheherazade to the palace, and retired,
after having introduced her into the sultan’s apartment. As soon
as the sultan was left alone with her, he ordered her to uncover her
face; he found her so beautiful, that he was perfectly charmed; but
perceiving her to be in tears, demanded the reason. Sir, answered
Scheherazade. I have a sister who loves me tenderly, and I could
wish that she might be allowed to pass the night in this chamber,
that I might see her, and once more bid her adieu. Will you be
pleased to allow me the consolation of giving her this last
testimony of my affection? Schahriar having consented, Dinarzade was
sent for, who came with all possible expedition.

An hour before day, Dinarzade failed not to do as her sister had
ordered. My dear sister, cried she, if you be not asleep, I pray
that until day-break, which will be very shortly, you will tell me
one of those pleasant stories you have read. Alas! this may perhaps
be the last time that I shall enjoy that pleasure.

Scheherazade, instead of answering her sister, addressed herself to
the sultan; Sir, will your majesty be pleased to allow me to afford
my sister this satisfaction? With all my heart, replied the sultan.
Scheherazade then bade her sister attend, and afterwards addressing
herself to Schahriar, proceeded as follows.




FIRST NIGHT.

The Merchant and the Genii.


Sir, --There was formerly a merchant, who had a great estate in
lands, goods, and money. He had abundance of deputies, factors, and
slaves. He was obliged from time to time to take journeys, and talk
with his correspondents: and one day, being under a necessity of
going a long journey, about an affair of importance, he took horse,
and put a portmanteau behind him, with some biscuits and dates,
because he had a great desert to pass over, where he could have no
manner of provisions. He arrived, without any accident, at the end
of his journey; and having dispatched his affairs, took horse again,
in order to return home.

The fourth day of his journey, he was so much incommoded by the heat
of the sun, and the reflection of that heat from the earth, that he
turned out of the road, to refresh himself under some trees, that he
saw in the country. There he found, at the foot of a great walnut
tree, a fountain of very clear running water; and alighting, tied
his horse to a branch of a tree, and sitting down by the fountain,
took some biscuits and dates out of his portmanteau; and as he ate
his dates, threw the shells about on both sides of him. When he had
done eating, being a good Mussulman, he washed his hands, his face,
and his feet, and said his prayers. He had not made an end, but was
still on his knees, when he saw a genie appear, all white with age,
and of a monstrous bulk; who, advancing towards him with a scimitar
in his hand, spoke to him in a terrible voice thus: Rise up, that I
may kill thee with this scimitar, as you have killed my son; and
accompanied those words with a frightful cry. The merchant, being as
much frightened at the hideous shape of the monster as at those
threatening words, answered him, trembling, Alas, my good lord, of
what crime can I be guilty towards you, that you should take away my
life? I will, replies the genie, kill thee, as thou hast killed my
son. O, heaven! says the merchant, how should I kill your son? I did
not know him, nor ever saw him. Did not you sit down when you came
hither? replies the genie. Did not you take dates out of your
portmanteau, and, as you ate them, did not you throw the shells
about on both sides? I did all that you say, answers the merchant; I
cannot deny it. If it be so, replied the genie, I tell thee that
thou hast killed my son; and the way was thus: when you threw the
nutshells about, my son was passing by, and you threw one of them
into his eye, which killed him, and therefore I must kill thee. Ah!
my lord, pardon me, cried the merchant. No pardon, answers the
genie, no mercy: is it not just to kill him that has killed another?
I agree to it, says the merchant, but certainly I never killed your
son; and if I have, it was unknown to me, and I did it innocently;
therefore I beg you to pardon me, and suffer me to live. No, no,
says the genie, persisting in his resolution; I must kill thee,
since thou hast killed my son; and then, taking the merchant by the
arm, threw him with his face upon the ground, and lifted up his
scimitar to cut off his head.

The merchant, all in tears, protested he was innocent, bewailed his
wife and children, and spoke to the genie in the most moving
expressions that could be uttered. The genie, with his scimitar
still lifted up, had so much patience as to hear the wretch make an
end of his lamentations, but would not relent. All this whining,
says the monster, is to no purpose; though you should shed tears of
blood, that shall not hinder me from killing thee, as thou hast
killed my son. Why, replied the merchant, can nothing prevail with
you? Will you absolutely take away the life of a poor innocent? Yes,
replied the genie, I am resolved upon it. As she had spoken these
words, perceiving it was day, and knowing that the sultan rose
betimes in the morning to say his prayers, and hold his council,
Scheherazade held her peace. Lord! sister, says Dinarzade, what a
wonderful story is this! The remainder of it, says Scheherazade, is
more surprising; and you will be of my mind, if the sultan will let
me live this day, and permit me to tell it you the next night.
Schahriar, who had listened to Scheherazade with pleasure, says to
himself, I will stay till to-morrow, for I can at any time put her
to death, when she has made an end of her story. So, having resolved
not to take away Scheherazade’s life that day, he rose, and went
to his prayers, and then called his council.

[Illustration: THE MERCHANT AND GENIUS.]

All this while the grand vizier was terribly uneasy. Instead of
sleeping, he spent the night in sighs and groans, bewailing the loss
of his daughter, of whom he believed that he himself should be the
executioner. And as, in this melancholy prospect, he was afraid of
seeing the sultan, he was agreeably surprised when he saw the prince
enter the council chamber, without giving him the fatal orders he
expected.

The sultan, according to his custom, spent the day in regulating his
affairs; and when night came, he went to bed with Scheherazade. Next
morning, before day, Dinarzade failed not to address herself to her
sister thus: My dear sister, if you be not asleep, I pray you, till
day-break, which must be in a very little time, to go on with the
story you began last night. The sultan, without staying till
Scheherazade asked him leave, bid her make an end of the story of
the genie and the merchant, for I long to hear the issue of it. Upon
which Scheherazade spoke, and continued the story, as follows:




SECOND NIGHT.


When the merchant saw that the genie was going to cut off his head,
he cried out aloud, and said to him, For heaven’s sake, hold your
hand! Allow me one word: be so good as to grant me some respite;
allow me but time to bid my wife and children adieu, and to divide
my estate among them by will, that they may not go to law with one
another, after my death; and when I have done so, I will come back
to the same place, and submit to whatever you shall please to order
concerning me. But, says the genie, if I grant you the time you
demand, I doubt you will never return. If you will believe my oath,
answers the merchant, I swear by all that is sacred that I will come
and meet you here without fail. What time do you demand then?
replies the genie. I ask a year, says the merchant; I cannot have
less to order my affairs, and to prepare myself to die without
regret. But I promise you, that this day twelvemonths I will return
under those trees, to put myself into your hands. Do you take heaven
to be witness to this promise? says the genie. I do, answers the
merchant, and repeat it, and you may rely upon my oath. Upon this,
the genie left him near the fountain, and disappeared.

The merchant, being recovered from his fright, mounted his horse,
and set forward on his journey; and as he was glad, on the one hand,
that he had escaped so great a danger, so he was mortally sorry, on
the other, when he thought on his fatal oath. When he came home, his
wife and children received him with all the demonstrations of
perfect joy; but he, instead of making them suitable returns, fell
to weeping bitterly; from whence they readily conjectured that
something extraordinary had befallen him. His wife asked the reason
of his excessive grief and tears: We are all overjoyed, says she, at
your return, but you frighten us to see you in this condition; pray
tell us the cause of your sorrow. Alas! replies the husband, the
cause of it is, that I have but a year to live; and then he told
what had passed between him and the genie, and that he had given him
his oath to return at the end of the year, to receive death from his
hands.

When they had heard this sad news, they all began to lament
heartily. His wife made a pitiful outcry, beat her face, and tore
her hair. The children, all in tears, made the house resound with
their groans: and the father, not being able to overcome nature,
mingled his tears with theirs; so that, in a word, it was the most
affecting spectacle that any man could behold.

Next morning, the merchant applied himself to put his affairs in
order, and, first of all, to pay his debts. He made presents to his
friends; gave great alms to the poor; set his slaves of both sexes
at liberty; divided his estate among his children; appointed
guardians for such of them as were not come of age; and, restoring
to his wife all that was due to her by contract of marriage, he gave
her, over and above, all that he could do by law.

At last the year expired, and go he must. He put his burial clothes
in his portmanteau; but never was there such grief seen as when he
came to bid his wife and children adieu. They could not think of
parting, but resolved to go and die with him; but finding that he
must be forced to part with those dear objects, he spoke to them
thus: My dear wife and children, says he, I obey the order of Heaven
in quitting you; follow my example, submit courageously to this
necessity, and consider that it is the destiny of man to die. Having
said these words, he went out of the hearing of the cries of his
family; and taking his journey, arrived at the place where he
promised to meet the genie on the day appointed. He alighted, and
setting himself down by the fountain, waited the coming of the genie
with all the sorrow imaginable. Whilst he languished in this cruel
expectation, a good old man, leading a hind, appeared, and drew near
him. They saluted one another; after which the old man says to him,
Brother, may I ask you why you are come into this desert place,
where there is nothing but evil spirits, and by consequence you
cannot be safe? To look upon these fine trees, indeed, one would
think the place inhabited; but it is a true wilderness, where it is
not safe to stay long.

The merchant satisfied his curiosity, and told him the adventure
which obliged him to be there. The old man listened to him with
astonishment, and when he had done, cried out, This is the most
surprising thing in the world; and you are bound with the most
inviolable oath; however, I will be witness of your interview with
the genie. And sitting down by the merchant, they talked together.
But I see day, says Scheherazade, and must leave off; yet the best
of the story is to come. The sultan, resolving to hear the end of
it, suffered her to live that day also.




THIRD NIGHT.


Next morning, Dinarzade made the same request to her sister as
formerly: My dear sister, says she, if you be not asleep, tell me
one of those pleasant stories that you have read. But the sultan,
willing to understand what followed between the merchant and the
genie, bid her go on with that, which she did, as follows:

Sir, while the merchant, and the old man who led the hind, were
talking, they saw another old man coming to them, followed by two
black dogs. After they had saluted one another, he asked them what
they did in that place. The old man with the hind, told him the
adventure of the merchant and genie, with all that had passed
between them, particularly the merchant’s oath. He added, that it
was the day agreed on, and that he was resolved to stay and see the
issue.

The second old man, thinking it also worth his curiosity, resolved
to do the like: he likewise sat down by them; and they had scarce
began to talk together, but there came a third old man, who
addressing himself to the two former, asked why the merchant that
sat with them looked so melancholy. They told him the reason of it,
which appeared so extraordinary to him, that he also resolved to be
witness to the result; and for that end sat down with them.

In a little time, they perceived in the field a thick vapour, like a
cloud of dust raised by a whirlwind, advancing towards them, which
vanished all of a sudden, and then the genie appeared; who, without
saluting them, came up to the merchant with a drawn scimitar, and
taking him by the arm, says, Get thee up, that I may kill thee, as
thou didst my son. The merchant and the three old men, being
frightened, began to lament, and to fill the air with their cries.
Here Scheherazade, perceiving day, left off her story; which did so
much whet the sultan’s curiosity, that he was absolutely resolved
to hear the end of it, and put off the sultaness’s execution till
the next day.

Nobody can express the grand vizier’s joy when he perceived that
the sultan did not order him to kill Scheherazade: his family, the
court, and all the people in general, were astonished at it.




FOURTH NIGHT.


Towards the end of the following night, Dinarzade failed not to
awake the sultaness. My dear sister, says she, if you be not asleep,
pray tell me one of your fine stories. Then Scheherazade, with the
sultan’s permission, spoke as follows:

Sir, when the old man who led the hind saw the genie lay hold of the
merchant, and about to kill him without mercy, he threw himself at
the feet of the monster, and, kissing them, says to him, Prince of
genies, I most humbly request you to suspend your anger, and do me
the favour to hear me. I will tell you the history of my life, and
of the hind you see; and if you think it more wonderful and
surprising than the adventure of the merchant you are going to kill,
I hope you will pardon the poor unfortunate man the third of his
crime. The genie took some time to consult upon it, out answered at
last, Well, then, I agree to it.

The History of the first Old Man, and the Hind.

I shall begin, then, says the old man; listen to me, I pray you,
with attention. This hind you see is my cousin; nay, what is more,
my wife: she was only twelve years or age when I married her, so
that I may justly say, she ought as much to regard me as her father,
as her kinsman and husband.

We lived together twenty years without any children; yet her
barrenness did not hinder my having a great deal of complaisance and
friendship for her. The desire of having children only made me buy a
slave, by whom I had a son, who was extremely promising. My wife
being jealous, conceived a hatred for both mother and child, but
concealed it so well, that I did not know it till it was too late.

Mean time my son grew up, and was ten years old, when I was obliged
to undertake a journey. Before I went, I recommended to my wife, of
whom I had no mistrust, the slave and her son, and prayed her to
take care of them during my absence, which was for a whole year. She
made use of that time to satisfy her hatred; she applied herself to
magic, and when she knew enough of that diabolical art to execute
her horrible contrivance, the wretch carried my son to a desolate
place, where by her enchantments, she changed my son into a calf,
and gave him to my farmer to fatten, pretending she had bought him.
Her fury did not stop at this abominable action, but she likewise
changed the slave into a cow, and gave her also to my farmer.

At my return, I asked for the mother and child: Your slave, says
she, is dead; and as for your son, I know not what has become of
him. I have not seen him these two months. I was troubled at the
death of the slave, but my son having only disappeared, as she told
me, I was in hopes he would return in a little time. However, eight
months passed, and I heard nothing of him. When the festival of the
great Bairam happened, to celebrate the same, I sent to my farmer
for one of the fattest cows, to sacrifice, and he sent me one
accordingly. The cow which he brought me was my slave, the
unfortunate mother of my son. I tied her, but as I was going to
sacrifice her, she bellowed pitifully, and I could perceive streams
of tears run from her eyes. This seemed to me very extraordinary;
and finding myself, in spite of all I could do, inspired with pity,
I could not find in my heart to give her a blow, but ordered my
farmer to get me another.

My wife, who was present, was enraged at my compassion, and,
opposing herself to an order which disappointed her malice, she
cries out, What are you doing, husband? Sacrifice that cow: your
farmer has not a finer, nor one fitter for that use. Out of
complaisance to my wife, I came again to the cow, and, combating my
compassion, which suspended the sacrifice, was going to give her the
fatal blow, when the victim, redoubling her tears and bellowing,
disarmed me a second time. Then I put the mallet into the farmer’s
hands, and bid him take and sacrifice her himself, for her tears and
bellowing pierced my heart.

The farmer, less compassionate than I, sacrificed her; and when he
flayed her, found her to be nothing but bones, though to us she
seemed very fat. Take her to yourself, says I to the farmer, I quit
her to you; give her in alms, or which way you will; and if you have
a very fat calf, bring it me in her stead. I did not inform myself
what he did with the cow; but, soon after he took her away, he came
with a very fat calf. Though I knew not the calf was my son, yet I
could not forbear being moved at the sight of him. On his part, as
soon as he saw me, he made so great an effort to come to me, that he
broke his cord, threw himself at my feet, with his head against the
ground, as if he meant to excite my compassion, conjuring me not to
be so cruel as to take his life; and did as much as was possible for
him to do, to signify that he was my son.

I was more surprised and affected with this action, than with the
tears of the cow; I felt a tender pity, which made me interest
myself for him, or, rather, nature did its duty. Go, says I to the
farmer, carry home that calf, take great care of him, and bring me
another in his place immediately.

As soon as my wife heard me say so, she immediately cried out, What
do you do, husband? Take my advice, sacrifice no other calf but
that. Wife, says I, I will not sacrifice him; I will spare him, and
pray do not you oppose it. The wicked woman had no regard to my
desire; she hated my son too much to consent that I should save him.
I tied the poor creature, and taking up the fatal knife --Here
Scheherazade stopped, because she perceived daylight.

Then Dinarzade said, Sister, I am enchanted with this story, which
so agreeably calls for my attention. If the sultan will suffer me to
live to-day, answers Scheherazade, what I have to tell to-morrow
will divert you abundantly more. Schahriar, curious to know what
would become of the old man’s son that led the hind, told the
sultaness he would be very glad to hear the end of that story next
night.




FIFTH NIGHT.


When day began to draw near, Dinarzade put her sister’s orders in
execution very exactly, who, being awaked, prayed the sultan to
allow her to give Dinarzade that satisfaction; which the prince, who
took so much pleasure in the story himself, willingly agreed to.

Sir, then, says Scheherazade, the first old man who lead the hind,
continuing his story to the genie, to the other two old men, and the
merchant, proceeded thus: I took the knife, says he, and was going
to strike it into my son’s throat; when turning his eyes bathed
with tears, in a languishing manner towards me, he affected me so
that I had no strength to sacrifice him, but let the knife fall, and
told my wife positively that I would have another calf to sacrifice,
and not that. She used all endeavours to make me change my
resolution; but I continued firm, and pacified her a little, by
promising that I would sacrifice him against the Bairam next year.

Next morning my farmer desired to speak with me alone, and told me,
I come, says he, to tell you a piece of news, for which I hope you
will return me thanks. I have a daughter that has some skill in
magic. Yesterday, as I carried back the calf which you would not
sacrifice, I perceived she laughed when she saw him, and in a moment
after fell a weeping. I asked her why she acted two such contrary
parts at one and the same time. Father, replied she, the calf you
bring back is our landlord’s son: I laughed for joy to see him
still alive, and I wept at the remembrance of the sacrifice that was
made the other day of his mother, who was changed into a cow. These
two metamorphoses were made by the enchantments of our master’s
wife, who hated both the mother and son. This is what my daughter
told me, said the farmer, and I come to acquaint you with it.

At these words, the old man adds, I leave you to think, my lord
genie, how much I was surprised: I went immediately to my farmer, to
speak with his daughter myself. As soon as I came, I went forthwith
to the stall where my son was: he could not answer my embraces, but
received them in such a manner as fully satisfied me he was my son.

The former’s daughter came: My good maid, says I, can you restore
my son to his former shape? Yes, says she, I can. Ah! says I, if you
can, I will make you mistress of all my fortune. She replied to me,
smiling, You are our master, and I know very well what I owe to you;
but I cannot restore your son into his former shape but on two
conditions: the first is, that you give him me for my husband; and
the second is, that you allow me to punish the person who changed
him into a calf. For the first, says I, I agree to it with all my
heart; nay, I promise you more --a considerable estate for yourself,
independent of what I design for my son: in a word, you shall see
how I will reward the great service I expect from you. As to what
relates to my wife, I also agree to it; a person who has been
capable of committing such a criminal action deserves very well to
be punished: I leave her to you, only I must pray you not to take
her life. I am just going then, answers she, to treat her as she has
treated your son. I agree to it, says I, provided you restore my son
to me beforehand.

Then the damsel took a vessel full of water, pronounced over it
words that I did not understand, and, addressing herself to the
calf, O, calf, says she, if thou wast created by the almighty and
sovereign Master of the World such as you appear at this time,
continue in that form; but, if thou be a man, and art changed into a
calf by enchantment, return to thy natural shape, by the permission
of the sovereign Creator. As she spoke these words, she threw water
upon him, and in an instant, he recovered his first shape.

My son, my dear son, cried I, immediately embracing him, with such a
transport of joy that I knew not what I was doing: it is Heaven that
has sent us this young maid, to take off the horrible charm by which
you were enchanted, and to avenge the injury done to you and your
mother. I doubt not but, in acknowledgment, you will take your
deliverer to wife, as I have promised. He consented to it with joy:
but, before they married, she changed my wife into a hind; and this
is she whom you see here. I desired she should have this shape,
rather than another less agreeable, that we might see her in the
family without horror.

Since that time, my son is become a widower, and gone to travel;
and, it being several years since I heard of him, I am come abroad
to inquire after him; and not being willing to trust any body with
my wife till I should come home, I thought fit to carry her every
where with me. This is the history of myself and this hind: is it
not one of the most wonderful and surprising that can be? --I agree
to it, says the genie, and upon that account I forgive the merchant
the third of his crime.

When the first old man, sir, continued the sultaness, had finished
his story, the second, who led the two black dogs, addressed himself
to the genie, and says to him: I am going to tell you what happened
to me and those two black dogs you see by me, and I am certain you
will say that my story is yet more surprising than that which you
have just now heard; but, when I have told it you, I hope you will
be pleased to pardon the merchant the second third of his crime.
Yes, replies the genie, provided your story surpass that of the
hind. Then the second old man began in this manner. But, as
Scheherazade pronounced these words, she saw it was day, and left
off speaking.

O, heaven! sister, says Dinarzade, these adventures are very
singular. Sister, replies the sultaness, they are not comparable to
those which I have to tell you next night, if the sultan, my lord
and master, be so good as to let me live. Schahriar answered nothing
to that; but rose up, said his prayers, and went to council, without
giving any order against the life of the charming Scheherazade.




SIXTH NIGHT.


The sixth night being come, the sultan and his lady went to bed.
Dinarzade awaked at the usual hour, and, calling to the sultaness,
says, Dear sister, if you be not asleep, I pray you, until it be
day, to satisfy my curiosity: I am impatient to hear the story of
the old man and the two black dogs. The sultan consented to it with
pleasure, being no less desirous to know the story than Dinarzade;
and Scheherazade continued it as follows:




The Story of the second Old Man and the two Black Dogs.


Great prince of genii, says the old man, you must know that we are
three brothers, I and the two black dogs you see. Our father, when
he died, left each of us one thousand sequins. With that sum we all
entered into the same way of living, and became merchants. A little
time after we had opened shop, my eldest brother, one of these two
dogs, resolved to travel, and trade in foreign countries. With this
view, he sold his estate, and bought goods proper for the trade he
intended.

He went away, and was absent a whole year; at the end of which, a
poor man, who I thought had come to ask alms, presented himself
before me in my shop. I said to him, God help you. God help you
also, answered he: is it possible you do not know me? Upon this I
looked at him narrowly, and knew him. Ah, brother, cried I,
embracing him, how could I know you in this condition? I made him
come into my house, and asked him concerning his health and the
success of his travels. Do not ask me that question, says he: when
you see me, you see all: it would only renew my grief to tell you
all the particulars of the misfortunes that have befallen me, and
reduced me to this condition, since I left you.

I immediately shut up my shop, and carrying him to a bath, gave him
the best clothes I had by me; and, examining my books, and finding
that I had doubled my stock, that is to say, that I was worth two
thousand sequins, I gave him one half: With that, says I, brother,
you may make up your loss. He joyfully accepted the proffer,
recovered himself, and we lived together as before.

Some time after, my second brother, who is the other of these two
dogs, would also sell his estate. I, and his other brother, did all
we could to divert him from it, but without effect. He sold it, and
with the money bought such goods as were suitable to the trade he
designed. He joined a caravan, and took a journey. He returned, at
the end of the year, in the same condition as my other brother; and
I, having gained another thousand sequins, gave him them, with which
he furnished his shop, and continued to follow his trade.

Some time after, one of my brothers came to me to propose a trading
voyage with them. I immediately rejected their proposal. You have
travelled, says I, and what have you gained by it? Who can assure me
that I shall be more successful than you have been. They represented
to me, in vain, all that they thought fit, to prevail upon me to
engage in that design with them, for I constantly refused: but they
importuned me so much, that after having resisted their
solicitations five whole years, they overcame me at last. But, when
we were to make preparations for our voyage, and to buy goods
necessary to the undertaking, I found they had spent all, and that
they had not one farthing left of the thousand sequins I had given
each of them. I did not, however, upbraid them in the least. On the
contrary, my stock being six thousand sequins, I shared the half of
it with them, telling them, My brothers, we must venture these three
thousand sequins, and hide the rest in some sure place; that, in
case our voyage be no more successful than your’s was formerly, we
may have wherewith to assist us, and to follow our ancient way of
living. I gave each of them a thousand sequins, and, keeping as much
for myself, I buried the other three thousand in a corner of my
house. We bought our goods, and, after having embarked them on board
of a vessel, which we freighted betwixt us three, we put to sea,
with a favourable wind. After a month’s sail --But I see day, says
Scheherazade; I must stop here.

Sister, says Dinarzade, this story promises a great deal; I fancy
the rest of it must be very extraordinary. You are not mistaken,
says the sultaness; and, if the sultan will allow me to tell it you,
I am persuaded, it will very much divert you. Schahriar got up, as
he did the day before, without explaining his mind, but gave no
order to the grand vizier to kill his daughter.




SEVENTH NIGHT.


When the seventh night drew near a close, Dinarzade awaked the
sultaness, and prayed her to continue the story of the second old
man. I will, answered Scheherazade, provided the sultan, my lord and
master, does not oppose it. Not at all, says Schahriar; I am so far
from opposing it, that I desire you earnestly to go on with it.

To resume the thread of the story, says Scheherazade, you must know,
that the old man who led the two dogs, continued his story to the
genie, the other two old men, and the merchant, thus: In short, says
he, after two months’ sail, we arrived happily at port, where we
landed and had a very great vent for our goods. I, especially, sold
mine so well, that I gamed ten to one, and we bought commodities of
that country, to transport and sell in our own.

When we were ready to embark, in order to return, I met upon the
bank of the sea a lady, handsome enough, but poorly clad. She came
up to me presently, kissed my hand, prayed me, with the greatest
earnestness imaginable, to marry her, and take her along with me. I
made some difficulty to agree to it; but she said so many things to
persuade me that I ought to make no objection to her poverty, and
that I should have all the reason in the world to be satisfied with
her conduct, that I yielded. I ordered proper apparel to be made for
her; and after having married her, according to form, I took her on
board, and we set sail. During the navigation, I found the wife I
had taken had so many good qualities, that I loved her every day
more and more. In the mean time, my two brothers, who had not
managed their affairs so well as I did mine, envied my prosperity;
and their fury carried them so far as to conspire against my life;
so that, one night, when my wife and I were asleep, they threw us
both into the sea.

My wife was a fairy, and, by consequence, a genie, you know well she
could not be drowned; but for me, it is certain I had been lost
without her help. I had scarce fallen into the water when she took
me up, and carried me to an island. When it was day, the fairy said
to me, You see, husband, that, by saving your life, I have not
rewarded you ill for your kindness to me. You must know, that I am a
fairy, and that, being upon the bank of the sea when you were going
to embark, I found I had a strong inclination for you: I had a mind
to try your goodness, and presented myself before you in that
disguise wherein you saw me. You have dealt very generously with me,
and I am very glad to have found an opportunity of testifying my
acknowledgment to you. But I am incensed against your brothers, and
nothing will satisfy me but their lives.

I listened to this discourse of the fairy with admiration; I thanked
her, as well as I could, for the great kindness she had done me:
but, madam, says I, as for my brothers, I beg you to pardon them;
whatever cause they have given me, I am not cruel enough to desire
their death. I told her the particulars of what I had done for them,
which increased her indignation so that she cried out, I must
immediately pursue those ungrateful traitors, and take speedy
vengeance on them: I will drown their vessel, and throw them into
the bottom of the sea. No, my good lady, replied I, for Heaven’s
sake, do not so; moderate your anger; consider that they are my
brothers, and that we must do good for evil.

I pacified the fairy by those words; and, as soon as I had spoken
them, she transported me, in a moment, from the island where we were
to the roof of my own house, which was terrassed, and disappeared in
a moment. I went down, opened the doors, and dug up the three
thousand sequins I had hid. I went afterwards to the place where my
shop was, which I also opened; and was complimented by the
merchants, my neighbours, upon my return. When I went to my house, I
perceived two black dogs, which came to me in a very submissive
manner: I knew not what it meant, but was much astonished at it. But
the fairy, who appeared immediately, says to me, husband, be not
surprised to see these two black dogs by you; they are your two
brothers. I was troubled at these words, and asked her by what power
they were so transformed. It was I who did it, says she; at least, I
gave commission to one of my sisters to do it, who at the same time
sunk their ship. You have lost the goods you had on board, but I
will make it up to you another way. As to your two brothers, I have
condemned them to remain five years in that shape: their
perfidiousness too well deserves such a penance. And, in short,
after having told me where I might hear of her, she disappeared.

Now, the five years being out, I am travelling in quest of her; and,
as I passed this way, I met this merchant and the good old man that
led the hind, and sat down by them. This is my history, O prince of
genii! do not you think it very extraordinary? I own it, says the
genie; and, upon that account, I remit the merchant the second third
of the crime which he committed against me.

As soon as the second old man had finished his story, the third
began, and made the like request of the genie with the two first;
that is to say, to pardon the merchant the other third of his crime,
provided the story he had to tell him exceeded the two he had
already heard for singular events. The genie made him the same
promise as he had done the other two. Hearken, then, says the old
man to him --but day appears, says Scheherazade; I must stop here.

I cannot enough admire, sister, says Dinarzade, the adventures you
have told me. I know abundance more, says the sultaness, that are
still more wonderful. Schahriar, willing to know if the story of the
third old man would be as agreeable as that of the second, put off
the execution of Scheherazade till the next day.




EIGHTH NIGHT.


As soon as Dinarzade perceived it was time to call the sultaness,
she says, sister, I have been awake a long time, and had a great
mind to awake you, I am so impatient to hear the story of the third
old man. The sultan answered, I can hardly think that the third
story will surpass the two former ones.

Sir, replies the sultaness, the third old man told his story to the
genie: I cannot tell it to you, because it is not come to my
knowledge; but I know that it did so much exceed the two former
stories, in the variety of wonderful adventures, that the genie was
astonished at it, and no sooner heard the end of it, but he said to
the third old man, I remit the other third part of the merchant’s
crime upon the account of your story. He is very much obliged to all
three of you for having delivered him out of this danger, by your
stories, without which he had not now been in the world. And, having
spoke thus, he disappeared to the great contentment of the company.

The merchant failed not to give his three deliverers the thanks he
owed them. They rejoiced to see him out of danger; after which they
bade him adieu, and each of them went on his way. The merchant
returned to his wife and children, and passed the rest of his days
with them in peace. But, sir, added Scheherazade, now pleasant
soever these stories may be, that I have told your majesty hitherto,
they do not come near that of the fisherman. Dinarzade, perceiving
that the sultaness demurred, says to her, sister, since there is
still some time remaining, pray tell us the story of the fisherman,
if the sultan is willing. Schahriar agreed to it; and Scheherazade,
resuming her discourse, pursued it in this manner:




The Story of the Fisherman.


Sir --There was a very ancient fisherman, so poor, that he could
scarce earn enough to maintain himself, his wife, and three
children. He went every day to fish betimes in a morning; and
imposed it as a law upon himself, not to cast his nets above four
times a day. He went one morning by moonlight, and coming to the
sea-side, undressed himself, and cast in his nets. As he drew them
towards the shore, he found them very heavy, and thought he had a
good draught of fish, at which he rejoiced within himself; but in a
moment after perceiving, that, instead of fish, there was nothing in
his nets but the carcass of an ass, he was much vexed. Scheherazade
stopped here, because she saw it was day.

Sister, says Dinarzade, I must confess, that the beginning of the
story charms me, and I foresee that the result of it will be very
agreeable. There is nothing more surprising than the story of this
fisherman, replied the sultaness; and you will be convinced of it
next night, if the sultan will be so gracious as to let me live.
--Schahriar being curious to hear the success of such an
extraordinary fishing, would not order Scheherazade to be put to
death that day.




NINTH NIGHT.


My dear sister, cried Dinarzade, next morning, at the usual hour, if
you be not asleep, I pray you go on with the story of the fisherman;
I am ready to die till I hear it. I am willing to give you that
satisfaction, says the sultaness: but, at the same time she demanded
leave of the sultan, and having obtained it, began the story again
as follows:

Sir, when the fisherman, vexed to have made such a sorry draught,
had mended his nets, which the carcass of the ass had broken in
several places, he threw them in a second time; and when he drew
them, found a great deal of resistance, which made him think he had
taken abundance of fish; but he found nothing except a basket full
of gravel and slime, which grieved him extremely. O, fortune! cries
he, with a lamentable tone, be not angry with me, nor persecute a
wretch who prays thee to spare him. I came hither from my house to
seek for my livelihood, and thou pronouncest death against me. I
have no other trade but this to subsist by; and, notwithstanding all
the pains I take, I can scarcely provide what is absolutely
necessary for my family. But I am to blame to complain of thee; thou
takest pleasure to persecute honest people, and to leave great men
in obscurity, while thou showest favour to the wicked, and advancest
those who have no virtue to recommend them.

Having finished this complaint, he threw away the basket in a fret,
and washing his nets from the slime, cast them the third time; but
brought up nothing, except stone, shells, and mud. Nobody can
express his disorder; he was almost beside himself. However, when
day began to appear, he did not forget to say his prayers, like a
good Mussulman, and afterwards added this petition: “Lord, thou
knowest that I cast my nets only four times a day; I have already
drawn them three times, without the least reward for my labour: I am
only to cast them once more; I pray thee to render the sea
favourable to me, as thou didst to Moses.”

The fisherman having finished this prayer, cast his nets the fourth
time; and when he thought it was time, he drew them as formerly,
with great difficulty; but instead of fish, found nothing in them
but a vessel of yellow copper, which, by its weight, seemed to be
full of something; and he observed that it was shut up and sealed
with lead, having the impression of a seal upon it. This rejoiced
him: I will sell it, says he, to the founder, and with the money
arising from the produce, buy a measure of corn. He examined the
vessel on all sides, and shook it, to see if what was within made
any noise, but heard nothing. This circumstance, with the impression
of the seal upon the leaden cover, made him think there was
something precious in it. To try this he took a knife, and opened it
with very little labour. He presently turned the mouth downward, but
nothing came out; which surprised him extremely. He set it before
him, and while he looked upon it attentively, there came out a very
thick smoke, which obliged him to retire two or three paces from it.

The smoke ascended to the clouds, and extending itself along the sea
and upon the shore, formed a great mist, which, we may well imagine,
did mightily astonish the fisherman. When the smoke was all out of
the vessel, it re-united itself, and became a solid body, of which
there was formed a genie twice as high as the greatest of giants. At
the sight of a monster of such an unsizeable bulk, the fisherman
would fain have fled, but was so frightened that he could not go one
step.

Solomon, cried the genie immediately, Solomon, the great prophet,
pardon, pardon; I will never more oppose your will, I will obey all
your commands.--

Scheherazade, perceiving day, broke off her story.

Upon which Dinarzade said, Dear sister, nobody can keep their
promise better than you have done yours. This story is certainly
more surprising than all the former. Sister, replies the sultaness,
there are more wonderful things yet to come, if my lord the sultan
will allow me to tell them to you. Schahriar had too great a desire
to hear out the story of the fisherman, to deprive himself of that
pleasure; and therefore put off the sultaness’s death another day.




TENTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade called her sister next night, when she thought it was
time, and prayed her to continue the story of the fisherman; and the
sultan being also impatient to know what concern the genie had with
Solomon, Scheherazade continued her story thus:

Sir, the fisherman, when he heard these words of the genie,
recovered his courage, and said to him, Proud spirit, what is it
that you say? It is above eighteen hundred years since the prophet
Solomon died, and we are now at the end of time. Tell me your
history, and how you came to be shut up in this vessel.

The genie, turning to the fisherman, with a fierce look, says, you
must speak to me with more civility; thou art very bold to call me a
proud spirit. Very well, replies the fisherman, shall I speak to you
with more civility, and call you the owl of good luck? I say,
answers the genie, speak to me more civilly before I kill thee. Ah!
replies the fisherman, why would you kill me? Did not I just now set
you at liberty, and have you already forgotten it? Yes, I remember
it, says the genie, but that shall not hinder me from killing thee:
I have only one favour to grant thee. And what is that? says the
fisherman. It is, answers the genie, to give thee thy choice, in
what manner thou wouldst have me take thy life. But wherein have I
offended you? replies the fisherman. Is that your reward for the
good services I have done you? I cannot treat you otherwise, says
the genie; and that you may be convinced of it, hearken to my story.

I am one of those rebellious spirits that opposed the will of
Heaven; all the other genii owned Solomon, the great prophet, and
submitted to him. Sacar and I were the only genii that would never
be guilty of a mean thing: and, to avenge himself, that great
monarch sent Asaph, the son of Barakhia, his chief minister, to
apprehend me. That was accordingly done. Asaph seized my person, and
brought me by force before his master’s throne.

Solomon, the son of David, commanded me to quit my way of living, to
acknowledge his power, and to submit myself to his command; I
bravely refused to obey, and told him, I would rather expose myself
to his resentment, than swear fealty, and submit to him, as he
required. To punish me, he shut me up in this copper vessel; and to
make sure of me, that I should not break prison, he himself stamped
upon this leaden cover his seal, with the great name of God engraved
upon it. Then he gave the vessel to one of the genii who submitted
to him, with orders to throw me into the sea, which was executed to
my sorrow.

During the first hundred years imprisonment, I swore that if any one
would deliver me before the hundred years expired, I would make him
rich, even after his death: but that century ran out, and nobody did
me that good office. During the second, I made an oath, that I would
open all the treasures of the earth to any one that should set me at
liberty; but with no better success. In the third, I promised to
make my deliverer a potent monarch, to be always near him in spirit,
and to grant him every day three requests, of what nature soever
they might be: but this century ran out as well as the two former,
and I continued in prison. At last, being angry, or rather mad, to
find myself a prisoner so long, I swore, that if afterwards any one
should deliver me, I would kill him without mercy, and grant him no
other favour but to choose what kind of death he would die; and,
therefore, since you have delivered me to-day, I give you that
choice.

This discourse afflicted the poor fisherman extremely; I am very
unfortunate, cries he, to come hither to do such a piece of good
service to one that is so ungrateful. I beg you to consider your
injustice, and revoke such an unreasonable oath: pardon me, and
heaven will pardon you; if you grant me my life, heaven will protect
you from all attempts against yours. No, thy death is resolved on,
says the genie, only choose how you will die. The fisherman,
perceiving the genie to be resolute, was extremely grieved, not so
much for himself, as for his three children; and bewailed the misery
they must be reduced to by his death. He endeavoured still to
appease the genie, and says, Alas! be pleased to take pity on me, in
consideration of the good service I have done you. I have told thee
already, replies the genie, it is for that very reason I must kill
thee. That is very strange, says the fisherman, are you resolved to
reward good with evil? The proverb says, “That he who does good to
one who deserves it not, is always ill rewarded.” I must confess,
I thought it was false; for in effect there can be nothing more
contrary to reason, or the laws of society. Nevertheless, I find now
by cruel experience, that it is but too true. Do not lose time,
replies the genie; all thy reasoning shall not divert me from my
purpose: make haste and tell me which way you choose to die.

Necessity is the mother of invention. The fisherman bethought
himself of a stratagem. Since I must die, then, says he to the
genie, I submit to the will of heaven; but before I choose the
manner of death, I conjure you by the great name which was engraven
upon the seal of the prophet Solomon, the son of David, to answer me
truly the question I am going to ask you.

The genie finding himself obliged to a positive answer by this
abjuration, trembled; and replied to the fisherman, Ask what thou
wilt, but make haste. Day appearing, Scheherazade held her peace.

Sister, says Dinarzade, it must be owned that the more you speak,
the more you surprise and satisfy. I hope our lord, the sultan, will
not order you to be put to death, till he hears out the fine story
of the fisherman. The sultan is absolute, replies Scheherazade, we
must submit to his will in every thing. But Schahriar being as
willing as Dinarzade to hear an end of the story, did again put off
the execution of the sultaness.




ELEVENTH NIGHT.


Schahriar, and the princess his spouse, passed this night in the
same manner as they had done the former; and before break of day,
Dinarzade awaked them with these words, addressed to the sultaness:
I pray you, sister, to resume the story of the fisherman. With all
my heart, said Scheherazade, I am willing to satisfy you, with the
sultan’s permission.

The genie, continued she, having promised to speak the truth, the
fisherman says to him, --I would know if you were actually in this
vessel: dare you swear it by the name of the great God? Yes, replied
the genie, I do swear by that great name that I was, and it is a
certain truth. In good faith, answered the fisherman, I cannot
believe you; the vessel is not capable of holding one of your feet,
and how should it be possible that your whole body could lie in it?
I swear to thee, notwithstanding, replied the genie, that I was
there just as you see me here: Is it possible, that thou dost not
believe me after this great oath that I have taken? Truly, not I,
said the fisherman; nor will I believe you, unless you show it me.

Upon which the body of the genic was dissolved, and changed itself
into smoke, extending itself as formerly upon the sea and shore: and
then at last being gathered together, it began to re-enter the
vessel, which it continued to do successively by a slow and equal
motion, after a smooth and exact way, till nothing was left out; and
immediately, a voice came forth, which said to the fisherman, Well,
now, incredulous fellow, I am all in the vessel, do not you believe
me now.

The fisherman, instead of answering the genie, took the cover of
lead, and having speedily shut the vessel, Genie, cries he, now it
is your turn to beg my favour, and to choose which way I shall put
you to death; but not so, it is better that I should throw you into
the sea, whence I took you: and then I will build a house upon the
bank, where I will dwell, to give notice to all fishermen who come
to throw in their nets, to beware of such a wicked genie as thou
art, who hast made an oath to kill him that shall set thee at
liberty.

The genie, enraged at those expressions, did all he could to get out
of the vessel again; but it was not possible for him to do it; for
the impression of Solomon’s seal prevented him. So perceiving that
the fisherman had got the advantage of him, he thought fit to
dissemble his anger; Fisherman, said he, in a pleasant tone, take
heed you do not do what you say, for what I spoke to you before was
only by way of jest, and you are to take it no otherwise. O, genie!
replies the fisherman, thou who wast but a moment ago the greatest
of all genie, and now art the least of them, thy crafty discourse
will signify nothing to thee, but to the sea thou shalt return. If
thou hast staid there already so long as thou hast told me, thou
mayst very well stay there till the day of judgment. I begged of
thee in God’s name, not to take away my life, and thou didst
reject my prayers; I am obliged to treat thee in the same manner.

The genie omitted nothing that could prevail upon the fisherman;
Open the vessel, says he, give me my liberty, I pray thee, and I
promise to satisfy thee to thy own content. Thou art a mere traitor,
replies the fisherman; I should deserve to lose my life, if I were
such a fool as to trust thee; thou wilt not fail to treat me in the
same manner as a certain Grecian king treated the physician Douban.
It is a story I have a mind to tell thee, therefore listen to it.

The Story of the Grecian King and the Physician Douban.

There was in the country of Zouman, in Persia, a king, whose
subjects were originally Greeks. This king was all over leprous, and
his physicians in vain endeavoured his cure; and when they were at
their wits end what to prescribe to him, a very able physician,
called Douban, arrived at his court.

This physician had learned his science in Greek, Persian, Turkish,
Arabian, Latin, Syriac, and Hebrew books; and besides that, he was
an expert philosopher, and fully understood the good and bad
qualities of all sorts of plants and drugs. As soon as he was
informed of the king’s distemper, and understood that his
physicians had given him over, he clad himself in the best habits he
could procure, and found means to present himself to the king. Sir,
says he, I know that all your majesty’s physicians have not been
able to cure you the leprosy; but if you will do me the honour to
accept my service, I will engage myself to cure you without potions,
or external applications.

The king listened to what he said, and answered, If you be able to
perform what you do promise, I will enrich you and your posterity;
and besides the presents I shall make you, you shall be my chief
favourite. Do you assure me, then, that you will cure me of my
leprosy, without making me take any potion, or applying any external
medicine? Yes, sir, replies the physician; I promise myself success,
through God’s assistance, and to-morrow I will make trial of it.

The physician returned to his quarters, and made a mallet, hollow
within, and at the handle he put in his drugs: he made also a ball
in such a manner as suited his purpose, with which, next morning, he
went to present himself before the king, and falling down at his
feet, kissed the ground. Here Scheherazade, perceiving day,
acquainted the sultan with it, and held her peace.

I wonder, sister, says Dinarzade, where you learn so many fine
things. You shall hear a great many others to-morrow, replies
Scheherazade, if the sultan, my master, will be pleased to prolong
my life farther. Schahriar, who longed as much as Dinarzade, to hear
the sequel of the story of Douban, the physician, did not order the
sultaness to be put to death that day.




TWELFTH NIGHT.


The twelfth night was far advanced, when Dinarzade called, and says,
sister, you owe us the continuation of the agreeable history of the
Grecian king and the physician Douban. I am very willing to pay my
debt, replied Scheherazade, and resumed the story as follows:

Sir, the fisherman, speaking always to the genie, whom he kept shut
up in the vessel, went on thus. The physician Douban rose up, and
after a profound reverence, says to the king, he judged it meet that
his majesty should take horse, and go to the place where he used to
play at mall. [1] The king did so, and when he arrived there, the
physician came to him with the mall, and says to him, Sir, exercise
yourself with this mall, and strike the ball with it until you find
your hands and your body in a sweat. When the medicine I have put up
in the handle of the mall, is heated with your hand, it will
penetrate your whole body; and as soon as you shall sweat, you may
leave off the exercise, for then the medicine will have had its
effect. As soon as you are returned to your palace, go into the
bath, and cause yourself to be well washed and rubbed; then go to
bed, and when you rise to-morrow you will find yourself cured.

The king took the mall, and struck the ball, which was returned by
his officers that played with him; he struck it again, and played so
long, that his hand and his whole body were in a sweat, and then the
medicine shut up in the handle of the mall had its operation, as the
physician said. Upon this the king left off play, returned to his
palace, entered the bath, and observed very exactly what his
physician had prescribed him.

He was very well after it, and next morning, when he arose, he
perceived, with equal wonder and joy, that his leprosy was cured,
and his body as clean as if he had never been attacked with that
distemper. As soon as he was dressed, he came into the hall of
audience, where he ascended his throne, and showed himself to his
courtiers, who, eager to know the success of the new medicine, came
thither betimes; and, when they saw the king perfectly cured, did
all express great joy. The physician Douban entered the hall, and
bowed himself before the throne, with his face to the ground. The
king, perceiving him, called him, made him sit down by his side,
showed him to the assembly, and gave him all the commendation he
deserved. His majesty did not stop here; but, as he treated all his
court that day, he made him eat at his table alone with him. At
these words, Scheherazade, perceiving day, broke off her story.
Sister, says Dinarzade, I know not what the conclusion of this story
will be, but I find the beginning admirable. That which is to come
is yet better, answered the sultaness; and I am certain you will not
deny it, if the sultan gives me leave to make an end of it to-morrow
night. Schahriar consented, and rose very well satisfied with what
he had heard.




THIRTEENTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade, willing to keep the sultan in ignorance of her design,
cried out as if she had started out of her sleep: O, dear sister, I
have had a troublesome dream, and nothing will sooner make me forget
it than the remainder of the story of the Grecian king and doctor
Douban. I conjure you by the love you always bore me, not to defer
it a moment longer. I shall not fail, good sister, to ease your
mind; and if my sovereign will permit me, I will go on. Schahriar,
being charmed with the agreeable manner of Scheherazade’s telling
her stories, says to her, You will oblige me no less than Dinarzade,
therefore continue. [2]

The Grecian king, says the fisherman to the genie, was not satisfied
with having admitted the physician Douban to his table, but towards
night, when he was about dismissing the company, he caused him to be
clad in a long rich robe, like those which his favourites usually
wore in his presence; and besides that he ordered him two thousand
sequins. The next day and the day following, he continued his favour
to him; in short, the prince, thinking that he could never enough
acknowledge the obligations he lay under to that able physician,
bestowed every day new favours upon him. But this king had a grand
vizier, who was avaricious, envious, and naturally capable of all
sort of mischief. He could not see, without envy, the presents that
were given to the physician, whose other merits had already began to
make him jealous, and therefore he resolved to lessen him in the
king’s esteem. To effect this, he went to the king, and told him
in private, that he had some advice to give him, which was of the
greatest concern. The king having asked what it was, Sir, said he,
it is very dangerous for a monarch to put confidence in a man whose
fidelity he never tried. Though you heap favours upon the physician
Douban, and show him all the familiarity that may be, your majesty
does not know but he may be a traitor, and come on purpose to this
court to kill you. From whom have you this, answered the king, that
you dare to tell it me? Consider to whom you speak, and that you
advance a thing which I shall not easily believe. Sir, replied the
vizier, I am very well informed of what I have had the honour to
represent to your majesty; therefore do not let your dangerous
confidence grow to a farther height: if your majesty be asleep, be
pleased to awake; for I once more repeat it, that the physician
Douban did not leave the heart of Greece, his native country, nor
come here to settle himself at your court, but to execute that
horrible design which I have just now hinted to you.

No, no, vizier, replies the king; I am certain that this man, whom
you treat as a villain, and a traitor, is one of the best and most
virtuous men in the world, and there is no man I love so much. You
know by what medicine, or rather by what miracle, he cured me of my
leprosy; if he had a design upon my life, why did he save me? He
needed only have left me to my disease; I could not have escaped it;
my life was already half gone. Forbear, then, to fill me with unjust
suspicions: instead of listening to you, I tell you, that from this
day forward I will give that great man a pension of a thousand
sequins per month for his life; nay, though I were to share with him
all my riches and dominions, I should never pay him enough for what
he has done for me: I perceive it to be his virtue which raises your
envy; but do not think that I will be unjustly possessed with
prejudice against him. I remember too well what a vizier said to
king Sinbad, his master, to prevent his putting to death the prince,
his son. But, sir, says Scheherazade, day light appears, which
forbids me to go any further.

I am very well pleased that the Grecian king, says Dinarzade, had so
much firmness of spirit, to reject the false accusation of the
vizier. If you commend the firmness of that prince to-day, says
Scheherazade, you will as much condemn his weakness to-morrow, if
the sultan be pleased to allow me time to finish this story. The
sultan, being curious to hear wherein the Grecian king discovered
his weakness, did further delay the death of the sultaness.




FOURTEENTH NIGHT.


An hour before day, Dinarzade awaked her sister, and says to her,
You will certainly be as good as your word, madam, and finish the
story of the fisherman; to assist your memory, I will tell you where
you left off: it was where the Grecian king maintained the innocence
of his physician Douban against his vizier. I remember it, says
Scheherazade, and am ready to give you satisfaction.

Sir, continues she, addressing herself to Schahriar, what the
Grecian king said about king Sinbad raised the vizier’s curiosity,
who says to him, sir, I pray your majesty to pardon me, if I have
the boldness to ask what the vizier of king Sinbad said to his
master to divert him from cutting off the prince, his son. The
Grecian king had the complaisance to satisfy him: That vizier, says
he, after having represented to king Sinbad, that he ought to
beware, lest on the accusation of a mother-in-law, he should commit
an action which he might afterwards repent of, told him this story.




The Story of the Husband and the Parrot.


A certain man had a beautiful wife, whom he loved so dearly, that he
could scarce allow her to be out of his sight. One day being obliged
to go abroad, about urgent affairs, he came to a place where all
sorts of birds were sold, and there bought a parrot which not only
spoke very well, but could also give an account of every thing that
was done before it. He brought it in a cage to his house, desired
his wife to put it in his chamber, and to take care of it during a
journey he was obliged to undertake; and then went out.

At his return, he took care to ask the parrot concerning what had
passed in his absence, and the bird told him things that gave him
occasion to upbraid his wife. She thought some of her slaves had
betrayed her, but all of them swore they had been faithful to her;
and they all agreed that it must have been the parrot that had told
tales.

Upon this, the wife bethought herself of a way how she might remove
her husband’s jealousy, and at the same time revenge herself on
the parrot, which she effected thus: her husband being gone another
journey, she commanded a slave in the night-time to turn a hand-mill
under the parrot’s cage; she ordered another to throw water, in
form of rain, over the cage; and a third to take a looking-glass,
and turn it to the right and to the left before the parrot by
candle-light. The slaves spent great part of the night in doing what
their mistress commanded them, and acquitted themselves very
dexterously.

Next night the husband returned, and examined the parrot again about
what had passed during his absence. The bird answered, Good master,
the lightning, thunder, and rain, did so much disturb me all night,
that I cannot tell how much I suffered by it. The husband, who knew
that there had been neither thunder, lightning, nor rain, that
night, fancied that the parrot, not having told him the truth in
this, might also have lied to him in the other; upon which he took
it out of the cage, and threw it with so much force to the ground
that he killed it. Yet, afterwards, he understood by his neighbours,
that the poor parrot had not lied to him, when it gave him an
account of his wife’s base conduct, which made him repent he had
killed it. Scheherazade stopped here, because she saw it was day.

All that you tell us, sister, says Dinarzade, is so curious, that
nothing can be more agreeable. I shall be willing to divert you,
answers Scheherazade, if the sultan, my master, will allow me time
to do it. Schahriar, who took as much pleasure to hear the
sultaness, as Dinarzade, rose and went about his affairs, without
ordering the vizier to cut her off.




FIFTEENTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade was punctual this night, as she had been the former, to
awaken her sister, and begged of her, as usual, to tell her a story.
I am going to do it, sister, says Scheherazade: but the sultan
interrupted her, for fear she should begin a new story, and bid her
finish the discourse between the Grecian king and his vizier about
his physician Douban. Sir, says Scheherazade, I will obey you; and
went on with the story, as follows:

When the Grecian king, says the fisherman to the genie, had finished
the story of the parrot; and you, vizier, adds he, because of the
hatred you bear to the physician Douban, who never did you any hurt,
you would have me cut him off; but I will take care of that, for
fear I should repent it, as the husband did the killing of his
parrot.

The mischievous vizier was too much concerned to effect the ruin of
the physician Douban to stop here. Sir, says he, the death of the
parrot was but a trifle, and, I believe, his master did not mourn
for him long; but why should your fear of wronging an innocent man,
hinder your putting this physician to death? Is it not enough to
authorize you to take away his life, that he is accused of a design
against your life? When the business in question is to secure the
life of a king, bare suspicion ought to pass for certainty; and it
is better to sacrifice the innocent than to spare the guilty. But,
sir, this is not an uncertainty; the physician Douban has certainly
a mind to assassinate you. It is not envy which makes me his enemy;
it is only my zeal, and the concern I have for preserving your
majesty’s life, that makes me give you my advice in a matter of
this importance. If it be false, I deserve to be punished in the
same manner as a vizier was formerly punished. What had the vizier
done, says the Grecian king, to deserve punishment? I will inform
your majesty of that, says the vizier, if you will be pleased to
hear me.




The Story of the Vizier that was punished.


There was a king, says the vizier, who had a son that loved hunting.
He allowed him to divert himself that way very often; but gave
orders to his grand vizier to attend him constantly, and never to
lose sight of him.

One hunting-day, the huntsman having roused a deer, the prince, who
thought the vizier followed him, pursued the game so far, and with
so much earnestness, that he was left quite alone. He stopped, and
finding he had lost his way, endeavoured to return the same way he
came, to find out the vizier, who had not been careful enough to
follow him, and so wandered farther.

Whilst he rode up and down, without keeping any road, he met by the
way-side a handsome lady, who wept bitterly. He stopped his horse,
asked who she was, how she came to be alone in that place, and what
she wanted. I am, says she, daughter to an Indian king. As I was
taking the air on horseback, in the country, I grew sleepy, fell
from my horse, who is run away, and I know not what is become of
him. The young prince taking compassion on her, asked her to get up
behind him, which she willingly accepted.

As they passed by the ruins of a house, the lady signified a desire
to alight on some occasion. The prince, stopped, and suffered her to
alight; then he alighted himself, and went near the ruins with his
horse in his hand. But you may judge how much he was surprised, when
he heard the lady within say these words: “Be glad, my children, I
bring you a handsome young man, and very fat;” and other voices,
which answered immediately, “Mamma, where is he, that we may eat
him presently, for we are very hungry!”

The prince heard enough to convince him of his danger, and then he
perceived that the lady who called herself daughter to an Indian
king, was an Ogress, wife to one of those savage demons, called
Ogres, who live in remote places, and make use of a thousand wiles
to surprise and devour passengers; so that the prince being
frightened, mounted his horse as soon as he could.

The pretended princess appeared that very moment, and perceiving she
had missed her prey, she cries, Fear nothing, prince: who are you?
whom do you seek? I have lost my way, replies he, and am seeking it.
If you have lost your way, says she, recommend yourself to God, he
will deliver you out of your perplexity. Then the prince lifted up
his eyes towards heaven. But, sir, says Scheherazade, I am obliged
to break off, for day appears.

I long, says Dinarzade, to know what became of that young prince: I
tremble for him. I will deliver you from your uneasiness to-morrow,
answers the sultaness, if the sultan will allow me to live till
then. Schahriar, willing to hear an end of this adventure, prolonged
Scheherazade’s life for another day.




SIXTEENTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade had such a desire to hear out the story of the young
prince, that she awaked that night sooner than ordinary, and said,
Sister, pray go on with the story you began yesterday: I am much
concerned for the young prince, and ready to die for fear that he
was eaten up by the Ogress and her children. Schahriar having
signified that he had the same fear, the sultaness replies, Well,
sir, I will satisfy you immediately.

After the counterfeit Indian princess had bid the young prince
recommend himself to God, he could not believe she spoke sincerely,
but thought she was sure of him: and therefore, lifting up his hands
to heaven, said, “Almighty Lord, cast thine eyes upon me, and
deliver me from this enemy.” After this prayer, the Ogress entered
the ruins again, and the prince rode off with all possible haste. He
happily found his way again, and arrived safe and sound at his
father’s court, to whom he gave a particular account of the danger
he had been in through the vizier’s neglect: upon which the king,
being incensed against the minister, ordered him to be immediately
strangled.

Sir, continued the Grecian king’s vizier, to return to the
physician Douban, if you do not take care, the confidence you put in
him will be fatal to you: I am very well assured, that he is a spy
sent by your enemies to attempt your majesty’s life. He has cured
you, he will say: but alas! who can assure you of that? He has,
perhaps, cured you only in appearance, and not radically; who knows
but the medicine he has given you may, in time, have pernicious
effects?

The Grecian king, who had naturally very little sense, was not able
to discover the wicked design of his vizier, nor had he firmness
enough to persist in his first opinion. This discourse staggered
him. Vizier, says he, thou art in the right; he may be come on
purpose to take away my life, which he may easily do by the very
smell of some of his drugs. We must consider what is fit for us to
do in this case.

When the vizier found the king in such a temper as he wished, Sir,
said he, the surest and speediest method you can take to secure your
life, is to send immediately for the physician Douban, and order his
head to be cut off as soon as he comes. In truth, says the king, I
believe that is the way we must take to prevent his design. When he
had spoken thus, he called for one of his officers, and ordered him
to go for the physician; who, knowing nothing of the king’s
design, came to the palace in haste.

Know ye, says the king, when he saw him, why I sent for you; No,
sir, answers he; I wait till your majesty be pleased to inform me. I
sent for you, replied the king, to rid myself of you by taking your
life.

No man can express the surprise of the physician, when he heard the
sentence of death pronounced against him. Sir, said he, why would
your majesty take my life? What crime have I committed? I am
informed by good hands, replies the king, that you come to my court
only to attempt my life; but to prevent you, I will be sure of
yours. Give the blow, says he to the executioner, who was present,
and deliver me from a perfidious wretch, who came hither on purpose
to assassinate me.

When the physician heard this cruel order, he readily judged that
the honours and presents he had received from the king had procured
him enemies, and that the weak prince was imposed on. He repented
that he had cured him of his leprosy; but it was now too late. Is it
thus, replied the physician, that you reward me for curing you? The
king would not hearken to him, but a second time ordered the
executioner to strike the fatal blow. The physician then had
recourse to his prayers: Alas! sir, cries he, prolong my days, and
God will prolong yours; do not put me to death lest God treat you in
the same manner. The fisherman broke off his discourse here, to
apply it to the genie. Well, genie, says he, you see what passed
then betwixt the Grecian king and his physician Douban, is acted
just now betwixt us.

The Grecian king, continues he, instead of having regard to the
prayers of the physician, who begged him for God’s sake to spare
him, cruelly replied to him, No, no; I must of necessity cut you
off, otherwise you may take my life away with as much art as you
cured me. The physician melted into tears, and bewailing himself for
being so ill rewarded by the king, prepared for death. The
executioner bound up his eyes, tied his hands, and was going to draw
his scimitar.

Then the courtiers, who were present, being moved with compassion,
begged the king to pardon him, assuring his majesty that he was not
guilty of the crime laid to his charge, and that they would answer
for his innocence: but the king was inflexible, and answered them so
as they dared not to say any more of the matter.

The physician, being on his knees, his eyes tied up, and ready to
receive the fatal blow, addressed himself once more to the king:
Sir, says he, since your majesty will not revoke the sentence of
death, I beg at least, that you would give me leave to return to my
house, to give order about my burial, to bid farewell to my family,
to give alms, and to bequeath my books to those who are capable of
making good use of them. I have one particularly I would present to
your majesty: it is a very precious book, and worthy to be laid up
very carefully in your treasury. Well, replies the king, why is that
book so precious as you talk of? --Sir, says the physician, because
it contains an infinite number of curious things; of which the chief
is, that when you have cut off my head, if your majesty will give
yourself the trouble to open the book at the sixth leaf, and read
the third line of the left page, my head will answer all the
questions you ask it. The king being curious to see such a wonderful
thing, deferred his death till next day, and sent him home under a
strong guard.

The physician, during that time, put his affairs in order: and the
report being spread that an unheard-of prodigy was to happen after
his death, the viziers, emirs, officers of the guard, and, in a
word, the whole court, repaired next day to the hall of audience,
that they might be witnesses of it.

The physician Douban was soon brought in, and advanced to the foot
of the throne, with a great book in his hand: there he called for a
basin, upon which he laid the cover that the book was wrapped in,
and presented the book to the king. Sir, says he, take that book, if
you please, and as soon as my head is cut off, order that it be put
into the basin upon the cover of the book; as soon as it is put
there, the blood will stop: then open the book, and my head will
answer your questions. But, sir, says he, permit me once more to
implore your majesty’s clemency; for God’s sake grant my
request; I protest to you that I am innocent. Your prayers, answers
the king, are in vain; and, were it for nothing but to hear your
head speak after your death, it is my will you should die. As he
said this, he took the book out of the physician’s hand, and
ordered the executioner to do his duty.

The head was so dexterously cut off, that it fell into the basin,
and was no sooner laid upon the cover of the book, but the blood
stopped; then, to the great surprise of the king, and all the
spectators, it opened its eyes, and said, Sir, will your majesty be
pleased to open the book? The king opened it, and finding that one
leaf was as it were glued to another, that he might turn it with the
more ease, he put his finger to his mouth, and wet it with spittle.
He did so till he came to the 6th leaf, and finding no writing on
the place where he was bid to look for it, Physician, says he to the
head, there is nothing written. Turn over some more leaves, replies
the head. The king continued to turn over, putting always his finger
to his mouth, until the poison, with which each leaf was imbued,
coming to have its effect, the prince finding himself all of a
sudden taken with an extraordinary fit, his eye-sight failed, and he
fell down at the foot of the throne, in violent convulsions. At
these words, Scheherazade, perceiving day, gave the sultan notice of
it, and forbore speaking. Ah, dear sister, says Dinarzade, how
grieved am I that you have not time to finish the story: I should be
inconsolable if you lose your life to-day. Sister, replies the
sultaness, that must be as the sultan pleases; but I hope he will be
so good as to suspend my death till to-morrow. And accordingly,
Schahriar, far from ordering her death that day, expected the next
night with much impatience; so earnest was he to hear out the story
of the Grecian king, and the sequel of the fisherman and the genie.




SEVENTEENTH NIGHT.


Though Dinarzade was very curious to hear the rest of the story of
the Grecian king, she did not awake that night so soon as usual, so
that it was almost day before she called upon the sultaness; and
then she said, I pray you, sister, to continue the wonderful story
of the Grecian king; but make haste, I beseech you, for it will
speedily be day.

Scheherazade resumed the story where she left off the day before:
Sir, said she to the sultan, when the physician Douban, or rather
his head, saw that the poison had taken effect, and that the king
had but a few moments to live; Tyrant, it cried, now you see how
princes are treated, who, abusing their authority, cut off innocent
men: God punishes soon or late their injustice and cruelty. Scarcely
had the head spoken these words, when the king fell down dead, and
the head itself lost what life it had.

Sir, continued Scheherazade, such was the end of the Grecian king
and of the physician Douban. I must return now to the story of the
fisherman and the genie; but it is day. The sultan, who always
observed his hours regularly, got up; and wishing to hear the sequel
of the story of the genie and the fisherman, bid the sultaness
prepare to relate it to him the next night.




EIGHTEENTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade made amends for the last night’s neglect; she awoke long
before day, and calling upon Scheherazade, sister, said she, if you
be not asleep, pray give us the rest of the story of the fisherman
and the genie; you know the sultan desires to hear it as well as I.

I shall soon satisfy his curiosity and yours, answered the
sultaness, and then addressing herself to Schahriar, Sir, continued
she, as soon as the fisherman had concluded the history of the Greek
king and his physician Douban, he made the application to the genie,
whom he still kept shut up in the vessel. If the Grecian king, said
he, had suffered the physician to live, God would have continued his
life also: but he rejected his most humble prayers, and the case is
the same with thee, O, genie! Could I have prevailed with thee to
grant me the favour I supplicated, I should now take pity on thee;
but since, notwithstanding the extreme obligation thou wast under to
me, for having set thee at liberty, thou didst persist in thy design
to kill me, I am obliged, in my turn, to be equally hard-hearted to
thee.

My good friend fisherman, replied the genie, I conjure thee once
more, not to be guilty of such cruelty; consider, that it is not
good to avenge one’s self, and that on the other hand, it is
commendable to do good for evil; do not treat me as Imama formerly
treated Ateca. And what did Imama to Ateca? inquired the fisherman.
Ho! says the genie, if you have a mind to be informed, open the
vessel: do you think that I can be in a humour to relate stories in
so strait a prison? I will tell you as many as you please, when you
have let me out. No, said the fisherman, I will not let thee out; it
is in vain to talk of it: I am just going to throw thee into the
bottom of the sea. Hear me one word more, cried the genie: I promise
to do thee no hurt; nay, far from that, I will shew thee a way to
become exceedingly rich.

The hope of delivering himself from poverty, prevailed with the
fisherman. I could listen to thee, said he, were there any credit to
be given to thy word; swear to me by the great name of God, that you
will faithfully perform what you promise, and I will open the
vessel; I do not believe you will dare to break such an oath.

The genie swore to him, upon which the fisherman immediately took
off the covering of the vessel. At that instant, the smoke ascended,
and the genie having resumed his form, the first thing he did was to
kick the vessel into the sea. This action alarmed the fisherman.
Genie, said he, will not you keep the oath you just now made? And
must I say to you, as the physician Douban said to the Grecian king,
suffer me to live, and God will prolong your days.

The genie laughed at the fisherman’s fear, and answered, No,
fisherman, be not afraid, I only did it to divert myself, and to see
if thou wouldst be alarmed at it: but to convince thee that I am in
earnest, take thy nets and follow me. As he spoke these words, he
walked before the fisherman, who having taken up his nets, followed
him, but with some distrust. They passed by the town, and came to
the top of a mountain, from whence they descended into a vast plain,
which brought them to a lake, that lay betwixt four hills.

When they reached the side of the lake, the genie said to the
fisherman, Cast in thy nets, and catch fish; the fisherman did not
doubt of taking some, because he saw a great number in the water;
but he was extremely surprised, when he found they were of four
colours, that is to say, white, red, blue, and yellow. He threw in
his nets, and brought out one of each colour. Having never seen the
like before, he could not but admire them, and judging that he might
get a considerable sum for them, he was very joyful. Carry those
fish, said the genie to him, and present them to thy sultan; he will
give thee more money for them. Thou mayest come every day to fish in
this lake; but I give thee warning not to throw in thy nets above
once a day, otherwise thou wilt repent. Having spoken thus, he
struck his foot upon the ground, which opened, and after it had
swallowed him up, closed again.

The fisherman being resolved to follow the genie’s advice, forbore
casting in his nets a second time; and returned to the town very
well satisfied; and making a thousand reflections upon his
adventure. He went immediately to the sultan’s palace, to offer
his fish. But, sir, said Scheherazade, I perceive day, and must stop
here.

Dear sister, said Dinarzade, how surprising are the last events you
have told us? I can hardly believe that any thing you have to say
can be more surprising. Sister, replied the sultaness, if the
sultan, my master, will let me live till tomorrow, I am persuaded
you will find the sequel of the history of the fisherman more
wonderful than the beginning of it, and incomparably more diverting.
Schahriar, being curious to know if the remainder of this story
would be such as the sultaness said, put off once more the execution
of his cruel sentence.




NINETEENTH NIGHT.


Towards morning, Dinarzade called the sultaness, and said, Dear
sister, it will be day speedily, therefore pray continue the history
of the fisherman; I am extremely impatient to know what the issue of
it was. Scheherazade having demanded permission, resumed her
discourse as follows: I leave it to your majesty to think how much
the sultan was surprised, when he saw the four fish which the
fisherman presented. He took them up one after another, and viewed
them with attention; and after having admired them a long time, Take
those fish, said he to his vizier, and carry them to the cook, whom
the emperor of the Greeks has sent me. I cannot imagine but that
they must be as good as they are beautiful.

The vizier carried them as he was directed, and delivering them to
the cook, said, Here are four fish just brought to the sultan; he
orders you to dress them: he then returned to the sultan his master,
who ordered him to give the fisherman four hundred pieces of gold of
the coin of that country, which he did accordingly.

The fisherman, who had never seen so much money, could scarcely
believe his good fortune, but thought the whole must be a dream,
until he found it otherwise, by being able to provide necessaries
for his family with the produce of his fish.

But, sir, said Scheherazade, having told you what happened to the
fisherman, I must acquaint you next with what befel the sultan’s
cook, whom we shall find in great perplexity. As soon as she had
gutted the fish, she put them upon the fire in a frying pan, with
oil, and when she thought them fried enough on one side, she turned
them upon the other; but, O, monstrous prodigy! scarcely were they
turned, when the wall of the kitchen divided, and a young lady of
wonderful beauty entered from the opening. She was clad in flowered
satin, after the Egyptian manner, with pendants in her ears, a
necklace of large pearls, and bracelets of gold set with rubies,
with a rod in her hand. She moved towards the frying-pan, to the
great amazement of the cook, who continued fixed by the sight, and
striking one of the fish with the end of the rod, said, “Fish,
fish, are you in duty?” The fish having answered nothing, she
repeated these words, and then the four fish lifted up their heads,
and replied, “Yes, yes: if you reckon, we reckon; if you pay your
debts, we pay ours; if you fly, we overcome, and are content.” As
soon as they had finished these words, the lady overturned the
frying-pan, and entered again into the open part of the wall, which
shut immediately, and became as it was before.

The cook maid was mightily frightened at this, and coming a little
to herself, went to take up the fishes that had fallen on the
hearth, but found them blacker than coal, and not fit to be carried
to the sultan. This grievously troubled her, and she fell to weeping
most bitterly. Alas! said she, what will become of me! If I tell the
sultan what I have seen, I am sure he will not believe me, but will
be enraged against me.

While she was thus bewailing herself, the grand vizier entered, and
asked her if the fish were ready? She told him all that had
occurred, which we may easily imagine astonished him; but without
speaking a word of it to the sultan, he invented an excuse that
satisfied him, and sending immediately for the fisherman, bid him
bring four more such fish, for a misfortune had befallen the others,
so that they are not fit to be carried to the sultan. The fisherman,
without saying any thing of what the genie had told him, in order to
excuse himself from bringing them that day, told the vizier he had a
great way to go for them, but would certainly bring them on the
morrow.

Accordingly the fisherman went away by night, and coming to the
pond, threw in his nets betimes next morning, took four fish like
the former, and brought them to the vizier at the hour appointed.
The minister took them himself, carried them to the kitchen, and
shutting himself up with the cook, she gutted them, and put them on
the fire, as she had done the four others the day before. When they
were fried on one side, and she had turned them upon the other, the
kitchen wall again opened, and the same lady came in, with the rod
in her hand, struck one of the fish, spoke to it as before, and all
four gave her the same answer. But, sir, said Scheherazade, day
appears, which obliges me to leave off. What I have told you, is
indeed very singular; but if I be alive to-morrow, I will tell you
other things, which are yet better worth your hearing. Schahriar,
conceiving that the sequel must be very curious, resolved to hear
her next night.




TWENTIETH NIGHT.


Next morning, the sultan prevented Dinarzade, and said to
Scheherazade, madam, I pray you finish the story of the fisherman, I
am impatient to hear it; upon which the sultaness continued thus:

After the four fish had answered the young lady, she overturned the
frying-pan with her rod, and retired into the same place of the wall
from whence she came out. The grand vizier being witness of what had
passed; This is too wonderful and extraordinary, said he, to be
concealed from the sultan: I will inform him of this prodigy; which
he did accordingly, and gave him a very faithful account of all that
had happened.

The sultan, being much surprised, was impatient to see this himself,
he sent immediately for the fisherman, and said to him, Friend,
cannot you bring me four more such fish? The fisherman replied, If
your majesty will be pleased to allow me three days’ time, I will
do it. Having obtained his time, he went to the pond immediately,
and at the first throwing in of his net, he caught four such fish,
and brought them presently to the sultan: who was so much the more
rejoiced, as he did not expect them so soon, and ordered him other
four hundred pieces of gold. As soon as the sultan had the fish, he
ordered them to be carried into the closet, with all that was
necessary for frying them; and having shut himself up there with the
vizier, the minister gutted them, put them into the pan, and when
they were fried on one side, turned them upon the other; then the
wall of the closet opened, but instead of the young lady, there came
out a black, in the habit of a slave, of a gigantic stature, with a
great green baton in his hand. He advanced towards the pan, and
touching one of the fish with his baton, said with a terrible voice,
“Fish, are you in your duty?” At these words, the fish raised up
their heads, and answered, “Yes, yes; we are: if you reckon, we
reckon; if you pay your debts, we pay ours; if you fly, we overcome,
and are content.”

The fish had no sooner finished these words, than the black threw
the pan into the middle of the closet, and reduced the fish to a
coal. Having done this, he retired fiercely, and entered again into
the aperture, it closed, and the wall appeared just as it did before.

After what I have seen, said the sultan to the vizier, it will be
impossible for me to be easy in my mind; these fish, without doubt,
signify something extraordinary, in which I have a mind to be
satisfied. He sent for the fisherman, and when he came, said to him,
Fisherman, the fish you have brought us, make me very uneasy; where
did you catch them? Sir, answered he, I fish for them in a pond
situated betwixt four hills, beyond the mountain that we see from
hence. Know’st not thou that pond? said the sultan to the vizier.
No, sir, replied the vizier, I never so much as heard of it,
although I have for sixty years hunted beyond that mountain. The
sultan asked the fisherman, how far the pond might be from the
palace? The fisherman answered, it was not above three hours
journey; upon this assurance, and there being day enough beforehand,
the sultan commanded all his court to take horse, and the fisherman
served them for a guide. They all ascended the mountain, and at the
foot of it, they saw, to their great surprise, a vast plain, that
nobody had observed till then, and at last they came to the pond,
which they found actually to be situated betwixt four hills, as the
fisherman had described. The water was so transparent, that they
observed all the fish were like those which the fisherman had
brought to the palace.

The sultan stood upon the bank of the pond, and after beholding the
fish with admiration, he demanded of his emirs and all his
courtiers, if it were possible they had never seen this pond, which
was within so short a distance of the town. They all answered, that
they had never so much as heard of it.

Since you all agree, said he, that you never heard of it, and as I
am no less astonished than you are, at this novelty, I am resolved
not to return to my palace till I know how this pond came here, and
why all the fish in it are of four colours. Having spoke thus, he
ordered his court to encamp; and immediately his pavilion, and the
tents of his household, were planted upon the banks of the pond.

When night came, the sultan retired under his pavilion, and spoke to
the grand vizier, by himself, thus: Vizier, my mind is very uneasy:
this pond transported hither, the black that appeared to us in my
closet, and the fishes that we heard speak, all this does so much
excite my curiosity, that I cannot resist the impatient desire which
I have to be satisfied in it. To this end, I am resolved to withdraw
alone from the camp, and I order you to keep my absence secret; stay
in my pavilion, and tomorrow morning, when the emirs and courtiers
come to attend my levee, send them away, and tell them that I am
somewhat indisposed, and have a mind to be alone; and the following
day tell them the same thing, till I return.

The grand vizier said several things to divert the sultan from this
design: he represented to him the danger to which he might be
exposed, and that all his labour might perhaps be in vain; but it
was to no purpose, the sultan was resolved on it, and would go. He
put on a suit fit for walking, and took his scimitar; and as soon as
he saw that all was quiet in the camp, he went out alone, and went
over one of the hills without much difficulty. He found the descent
still more easy, and when he came to the plain, walked on till the
sun arose, and then he saw before him, at a considerable distance, a
great building. He rejoiced at the sight, in hopes to be informed
there of what he wanted to know. When he came near, he found it was
a magnificent palace, or rather a very strong castle, of fine black
polished marble, and covered with fine steel, as smooth as a
looking-glass. Being highly pleased that he had so speedily met with
something worthy his curiosity, he stopped before the front of the
castle, and considered it with attention.

He afterwards came up to the gate, which had two leaves, one of them
open; though he might have entered when he would, yet he thought it
best to knock. He knocked, at first softly, and waited for some
time; seeing nobody, and supposing they had not heard him, he
knocked harder the second time, but neither seeing nor hearing any
body, he knocked again and again, but nobody appearing, it surprised
him extremely; for he could not think that a castle in so good
repair was without inhabitants. If there be nobody in it, says he to
himself, I have nothing to fear; and if there be, I have wherewith
to defend myself.

At last he entered, and when he came within the porch, he cried, Is
there nobody here to receive a stranger, who comes in for some
refreshment as he passes by? He repeated the same two or three
times; but though he spoke very high, nobody answered. The silence
increased his astonishment: he came into a very spacious court, and
looking on every side, to see if he could perceive any body, he saw
no living thing. But, sir, says Scheherazade, day appears, and I
must stop.

Ah! sister, says Dinarzade, you break off at the very best of the
story. It is true, answered the sultaness; but, sister, you see I am
forced to do so. If my lord, the sultan, pleases, you may hear the
rest tomorrow. Schahriar agreed to this, not so much to please
Dinarzade, as to satisfy his own curiosity, being impatient to know
what adventure the prince met with in the castle.




TWENTY-FIRST NIGHT.


Dinarzade, to make amends for her neglect the night before, never
closed her eyes, and when she thought it was time, awaked the
sultaness, saying to her, My dear sister, pray give us an account of
what happened in the fine castle where you left us yesterday.

Scheherazade forthwith resumed her story, and addressing herself to
Schahriar, said, sir, the sultan perceiving nobody in the court,
entered the great halls, which were hung with silk tapestry, the
alcoves and sofas were covered with stuffs of Mecca, and the porches
with the richest stuffs of India, mixed with gold and silver. He
came afterwards into an admirable saloon, in the middle of which
there was a great fountain, with a lion of massy gold at each
corner: water issued from the mouths of the four lions, and this
water, as it fell, formed diamonds and pearls, that very well
answered a jet of water, which, springing from the middle of the
fountain, rose as high almost as the bottom of a cupola painted
after the Arabian manner.

The castle, on three sides, was encompassed by a garden, with
flower-pots, water-works, groves, and a thousand other fine things
concurring to embellish it; and to complete the beauty of the place,
an infinite number of birds filled the air with their harmonious
notes, and always stayed there, nets being spread over the trees,
and fastened to the palace to keep them in. The sultan walked a long
time from apartment to apartment, where he found every thing very
grand and magnificent. Being tired with walking, he set down in an
open closet, which had a view over the garden, and there reflecting
upon what he had already seen, and then saw, all of a sudden he
heard the voice of one complaining accompanied with lamentable
cries. He listened with attention, and heard distinctly these sad
words: “O, fortune! thou who wouldest not suffer me longer to
enjoy a happy lot, and hast made me the most unfortunate man in the
world, forbear to persecute me, and by a speedy death put an end to
my sorrows. Alas! is it possible that I am still alive, after so
many torments as I have suffered.”

The sultan, being affected with these pitiful complaints, rose up,
and made toward the place where he heard the voice; and when he came
to the gate of a great hall, he opened it, and saw a handsome young
man, richly habited, set upon a throne raised a little above the
ground. Melancholy was painted on his looks. The sultan drew near
and saluted him; the young man returned him his salute, by a low bow
with his head; but not being able to rise up, he said to the sultan,
My lord, I am very well satisfied that you deserve I should rise up
to receive you, and do you all possible honour; but I am hindered
from doing so, by a very sad reason, and therefore hope you will not
take it ill. My lord, replies the sultan, I am very much obliged to
you for having so good an opinion of me; as to the reason of your
not rising, whatever your apology be, I heartily accept it. Being
drawn hither by your complaints, and afflicted by your grief, I come
to offer you my help; would to God that it lay in my power to ease
you of your trouble; I would do my utmost to effect it. I flatter
myself that you would willingly tell me the history of your
misfortunes; but pray tell me first the meaning of the pond near the
palace, where the fishes are of four colours? what this castle is?
how you came to be here? and why you are alone?

Instead of answering these questions, the young man began to weep
bitterly. How inconstant is fortune! cried he: she takes pleasure to
pull down those she had raised up. Where are they who enjoy quietly
the happiness which they hold of her, and whose day is always clear
and serene?

The sultan, moved with compassion to see him in that condition,
prayed him forthwith to tell him the cause of his excessive grief.
Alas! my lord, replies the young man, how is it possible but I
should grieve, and my eyes be inexhaustible fountains of tears? At
these words, lifting up his gown, he shewed the sultan that he was a
man only from the head to the girdle, and that the other half of his
body was black marble. Here Scheherazade broke off and told the
sultan that day appeared.

Schahriar was so much charmed with the story, and became so much in
love with Scheherazade, that he resolved to let her live a month. He
rose, however, as usual, without acquainting her with his resolution.




TWENTY-SECOND NIGHT.


Dinarzade was so impatient to hear out the story, that she called
her sister next morning sooner than usual, and said to her, sister,
pray continue the wonderful story you began, but could not make an
end of yesterday morning. I agree to it, replies the sultaness;
hearken, then:

You may easily imagine, continued she, that the sultan was strangely
surprised, when he saw the deplorable condition of the young man.
That which you show me, says he, while it fills me with horror,
excites my curiosity, so that I am impatient to hear your history,
which, no doubt, is very extraordinary, and I am persuaded that the
pond and the fishes make some part of it; therefore I conjure you to
tell it me; you will find some comfort in it, since it is certain,
that unfortunate people will find some sort of ease in telling their
misfortunes. I will not refuse you this satisfaction, replies the
young man, though I cannot do it without renewing my grief. But I
give you notice beforehand, to prepare your ears, your mind, and
even your eyes, for things which surpass all that the most
extraordinary imagination can conceive.




The History of the young King of the Black Isles.


You must know, my lord, continued he, that my father, who was called
Mahmoud, was king of this country. This is the kingdom of the Black
Isles, which takes its name from the four little neighbouring
mountains; for those mountains were formerly isles: the capital,
where the king my father had his residence, was where that pond you
now see is. The sequel of my history will inform you of all those
changes.

The king my father died when he was seventy years of age; I had no
sooner succeeded him, but I married, and the lady I chose to share
the royal dignity with me, was my cousin. I had all the reason
imaginable to be satisfied in her love to me; and, for my part, I
had so much tenderness for her, that nothing was comparable to the
good understanding betwixt us, which lasted five years, at the end
of which time I perceived the queen, my cousin, had no more delight
in me.

One day, while she was at the bath, I found myself inclined to sleep
after dinner, and lay down upon a sofa. Two of her ladies, who were
then in my chamber, came and sat down, one at my head, and the other
at my feet, with fans in their hands, to moderate the heat, and to
hinder the flies from troubling me in my sleep. They thought I was
fast, and spoke very low; but I only shut my eyes, and heard every
word they said.

One of them says to the other, Is not the queen much in the wrong,
not to love such an amiable prince as this? Certainly, replies the
other; for my part, I do not understand it; and I know not why she
goes out every night, and leaves him alone! Is it possible that he
does not perceive it! Alas! says the first, how would you have him
perceive it? She mixes every evening in his drink, the juice of a
certain herb, which makes him sleep so sound all night, that she has
time to go where she pleases; and as day begins to appear, she comes
and lies down by him again, and wakes him by the smell of something
she puts under his nose.

You may guess, my lord, how much I was surprised at this
conversation, and with what sentiments it inspired me; yet, whatever
emotions it excited in me, I had command enough over myself to
dissemble, and feigned to awake without having heard one word of it.

The queen returned from the bath, we supped together, and before we
went to bed, she, with her own hand, presented me with a cup full of
such water as I was accustomed to drink: but instead of putting it
into my mouth, I went to a window that was open, and threw out the
water so quickly, that she did not perceive it, and I put the cup
again into her hands, to persuade her that I had drank it.

We went to bed together, and soon after, believing that I was
asleep, though I was not, she got up with so little precaution, that
she said so loud that I could hear it distinctly, Sleep, and may you
never wake again! She dressed herself speedily, and went out of the
chamber. As Scheherazade spoke these words, she saw day appear, and
stopped.

Dinarzade had heard her sister with a great deal of pleasure, and
Schahriar thought the history of the king of the Black Isles so
worthy of his curiosity, that he rose up full of impatience for the
rest of it.




TWENTY-THIRD NIGHT.


An hour before day, Dinarzade being awake, failed not to call upon
the sultaness, and said, Pray, dear sister, go on with the history
of the young king of the four Black Islands; Scheherazade, calling
to mind where she had left off, resumed the story thus:

As soon as the queen my wife went out, continued the king of the
Black Islands, I got up, dressed me in haste, took my scimitar, and
followed her so quick, that I soon heard the sound of her feet
before me, and then walked softly after her, for fear of being
heard. She passed through several gates, which opened upon her
pronouncing some magical words; and the last she opened was that of
the garden, which she entered. I stopped at that gate, that she
might not perceive me as she crossed a plat, and looking after her
as far as the darkness of the night permitted, I perceived that she
entered a little wood, whose walks were guarded by thick pallisades.
I went thither by another way, and slipping behind the pallisades of
a long walk, I saw her walking there with a man.

I was very attentive to their discourse, and heard her say thus to
her gallant: I do not deserve to be upbraided by you for want of
diligence; you know very well what hinders me; but if all the tokens
of love that I have already given you, be not enough, I am ready to
give you greater: you need but command me, you know my power. I
will, if you desire it, before sun-rising, change this great city,
and this fine palace, into frightful ruins, which shall be inhabited
by nothing but wolves, owls, and ravens. If you wish me to transport
all the stones of those walls so solidly built, beyond mount
Caucasus, and out of the bounds of the habitable world, speak but
the word, and all those places shall undergo a change.

As the queen finished these words, her gallant and she came to the
end of the walk, turned to enter another, and passed before me. I
had already drawn my scimitar, and her gallant being next me, I
struck him in the neck, and made him fall to the ground. I thought I
had killed him, and therefore retired speedily, without making
myself known to the queen, whom I chose to spare because she was my
kinswoman.

The blow I had given her gallant was mortal; but she preserved his
life by the force of her enchantments; in such a manner, however,
that he could not be said to be either dead or alive. As I crossed
the garden, to return to the palace, I heard the queen cry out
lamentably; and judging by that now much she was grieved, I was
pleased that I had spared her life.

When I returned to her apartment, I went to bed, and being satisfied
with having punished the villain that did me the injury, I went to
sleep; and when I awaked next morning, found the queen lying by me.
Scheherazade was obliged to stop here because she saw day.

O, heaven! sister, says Dinarzade, how it troubles me that you can
say no more. Sister, replies the sultaness, you ought to have awaked
me more early, it is your fault. I will make amends next night,
replies Dinarzade, for I doubt not out the sultan will be as willing
to hear out the story as I am; and I hope he will be so good as to
let you live one day more.




TWENTY-FOURTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade was actually as good as her word. She called the sultaness
very early, saying, Dear sister, if you be not asleep, pray finish
the agreeable history of the king of the Black Isles; I am ready to
die with impatience to know how he came to be changed into marble.
You shall hear it, replies Scheherazade, if the sultan will give me
leave.

I found the queen lying by me, says the king of the Black Islands: I
cannot tell you whether she slept or not; but I got up without
making any noise, and went to my closet, where I made an end of
dressing myself. I afterwards went and held my council, and at my
return, the queen, clad in mourning, her hair hanging about her
eyes, and part of it torn off, presented herself before me, and
said: Sir, I come to beg your majesty not to be surprised to see me
in this condition; three afflicting pieces of news, I have just now
received all at once, are the cause of my heavy grief, of which the
tokens you see are but very faint expressions. Alas! what is that
news, madam, said I. The death of the queen, my dear mother,
answered she; that of the king, my father, killed in battle; and
that of one of my brothers, who is also fallen down a precipice.

I was not ill pleased that she made use of this pretext to hide the
true cause of her grief, and I thought she had not suspected me of
having killed her gallant. Madam, says I, I am so far from blaming
your grief, that I assure you, I take my share in it. I should very
much wonder if you were insensible of so great a loss: mourn on;
your tears are so many proofs of your good nature; I hope, however,
that time and reason will moderate your grief.

She retired into her apartment, where giving herself wholly up to
sorrow, she spent a whole year in mourning, and afflicting herself.
At the end of that time, she begged leave of me to build a burying
place for herself, within the bounds of the palace, where she would
continue, she told me, to the end of her days; I agreed to it, and
she built a stately palace, with a cupola, that may be seen from
hence, and she called it the Palace of Tears. When it was finished,
she caused her gallant to be brought thither, from the place whither
she had caused him to be carried the same night that I wounded him;
she had hindered his dying, by a drink she gave him, and carried to
him herself every day after he came to the Palace of Tears.

Yet, with all her enchantments, she could not cure the wretch; he
was not only unable to walk and to help himself, but had also lost
the use of his speech, and gave no sign of life, but by his looks.
Though the queen had no other consolation but to see him, and to say
to him all that her foolish passion could inspire, yet every day she
made him two long visits. I was very well informed of all this, but
pretended to know nothing of it.

One day I went out of curiosity to the Palace of Tears, to see how
the princess employed herself; and going to a place where she could
not see me, I heard her speak thus to her gallant: I am afflicted to
the highest degree to see you in this condition; I am as sensible as
yourself of the tormenting pain you endure; but, dear soul, I always
speak to you, and you do not answer me; How long will you be silent.
Speak only one word: Alas! the sweetest moments of my life are these
I spend here in partaking of your grief. I cannot live at a distance
from you, and would prefer the pleasure of always seeing you, to the
empire of the universe.

At these words, which were several times interrupted by her sighs
and sobs, I lost all patience; and discovering myself, came up to
her and said, Madam, you have mourned enough, it is time to give
over this sorrow, which dishonours us both; you have too much
forgotten what you owe to me and to yourself. Sir, said she, if you
have any kindness or complaisance left for me, I beseech you to put
no restraint upon me; allow me to give myself up to mortal grief,
which it is impossible for time to lessen.

When I saw that my discourse, instead of bringing her to her duty,
served only to increase her rage, I gave over and retired. She
continued every day to visit her gallant, and for two whole years
gave herself up to excessive grief.

I went a second time to the Palace of Tears, while she was there. I
hid myself again, and heard her speak thus to her gallant: It is now
three years since you spoke one word to me; you return no answer to
the expressions of love I give you by my discourse and groans. Is it
from insensibility, or contempt? O, tomb! hast thou abated that
excessive love he had for me? Hast thou shut those eyes that showed
me so much love, and were all my joy? No, no, I believe nothing of
it. Tell me rather, by what miracle thou becamest the depository of
the rarest treasure that ever was in the world.

I must confess, my lord, I was enraged at these words; for, in
short, this gallant so much doted upon, this adored mortal, was not
such a one as you would imagine him to have been. He was a black
Indian, a native of that country. I say, I was so enraged at that
discourse, that I discovered myself all of a sudden, and addressing
the tomb in my turn: O, tomb! cried I, why dost not thou swallow up
that monster in nature, or rather, why dost not thou swallow up the
gallant and his mistress?

I had scarce finished these words, when the queen, who sat by the
black, rose up like a fury. Cruel man! said she, thou art the cause
of my grief; do not you think that I know it? I have dissembled it
but too long; it is thy barbarous hand which hath brought the object
of my love into this lamentable condition; and you are so
hard-hearted as to come and insult a despairing lover. Yes, said I,
in a rage, it was I who chastised that monster, according to his
desert; I ought to have treated thee in the same manner; I repent
now that I did not do it; thou hast abused my goodness too long. As
I spoke these words, I drew out my scimitar, and lifted up my hand
to punish her; but she, steadfastly beholding me, said, with a
jeering smile, Moderate thy anger. At the same time, she pronounced
words I did not understand; and afterwards added, By virtue of my
enchantments, I command thee immediately to become half marble and
half man. Immediately, my lord, I became such as you see me already,
a dead man among the living, and a living man among the dead. Here
Scheherazade, perceiving day, broke off her story.

Upon which Dinarzade says, Dear sister, I am extremely obliged to
the sultan: it is to his goodness I owe the extraordinary pleasure I
have in your stories. My sister, replies the sultaness, if the
sultan will be so good as to suffer me to live till to-morrow, I
shall tell you a thing that will afford as much satisfaction as any
thing you have yet heard. Though Schahriar had not resolved to defer
the death of Scheherazade a month longer, he could not have ordered
her to be put to death that day.




TWENTY-FIFTH NIGHT.


Towards the end of the night, Dinarzade cried, Sister, if I do not
trespass too much upon your complaisance, I would pray you to finish
the history of the king of the Black Islands. Scheherazade having
awaked upon her sister’s call, prepared to give her the
satisfaction she required, and began thus:

The king, half marble and half man, continued his history to the
sultan thus: After this cruel magician, unworthy of the name of a
queen, had metamorphosed me thus, and brought me into this hall, by
another enchantment she destroyed my capital, which was very
flourishing, and full of people; she abolished the houses, the
public places and markets, and reduced it to the pond and desert
field, which you may have seen: the fishes of four colours in the
pond are the four sorts of people, of different religions, who
inhabited the place. The white are the Mussulmen; the red, the
Persians, who worshipped the fire; the blue, the Christians; and the
yellow, the Jews. The four little hills were the four islands that
gave name to this kingdom. I learned all this from the magician,
who, to add to my affliction, told me with her own mouth those
effects of her rage. But this is not all: her revenge was not
satisfied with the destruction of my dominions, and the
metamorphosis of my person; she comes every day, and gives me over
my naked shoulders a hundred blows with an ox-pizzle, which makes me
all over blood: and when she has done, covers me with a coarse stuff
of goat’s hair, and throws over it this robe of brocade that you
see, not to do me honour, but to mock me.

After this part of the discourse, the young king could not withhold
his tears; and the sultan’s heart was so pierced with the
relation, that he could not speak one word to comfort him. A little
time after, the young king, lifting up his eyes to heaven, cried
out, “Mighty Creator of all things, I submit myself to thy
judgments, and to the decrees of thy providence: I endure my
calamities with patience, since it is thy will it should be so; but
I hope thy infinite goodness will reward me for it.”

The sultan being much moved by the recital of so strange a story,
and animated to avenge this unfortunate prince, says to him, Tell me
whither this perfidious magician retires, and where may be her
unworthy gallant, who is buried before his death. My lord, replies
the prince, her gallant, as I have already told you, is in the
Palace of Tears, in a handsome tomb in form of a dome, and that
palace joins to this castle on the side of the gate. As to the
magician, I cannot precisely tell whither she retires, but every day
at sun-rising she goes to see her gallant, after having executed her
bloody vengeance upon me, as I have told you; and you see I am not
in a condition to defend myself against so great a cruelty. She
carries him the drink with which she has hitherto prevented his
dying, and always complains of his never speaking to her since he
was wounded.

Unfortunate prince, says the sultan, you can never enough be
lamented! Nobody can be more sensibly touched with your condition
than I am; never did such an extraordinary misfortune befal any man,
and those who write your history will have the advantage to relate
something that surpasses all that has ever yet been written. There
wants but the vengeance which is due to you, and I will omit nothing
that can be done to procure it.

While the sultan discoursed upon the subject with the young prince,
he told him who he was, and for what end he entered the castle, and
thought on a way to avenge him, which he communicated to him. They
agreed upon the measures they were to take for effecting their
design, but deferred the execution of it till the next day. In the
mean time, the night being far spent, the sultan took some rest; but
the poor young prince passed the night without sleep, as usual,
having never slept since he was enchanted; but conceived some hopes
of being speedily delivered from his misery.

Next morning the sultan got up before day, and, in order to execute
his design, he hid in a corner his upper garment, which would have
encumbered him, and went to the Palace of Tears. He found it
enlightened with an infinite number of flambeaux of white wax, and a
delicious scent issued from several boxes of fine gold of admirable
workmanship, all ranged in excellent order. As soon as he saw the
bed where the black lay, he drew his scimitar, killed the wretch
without resistance, dragged his corpse into the court of the castle,
and threw it into a well. After this he went and lay down in the
black’s bed, took his scimitar with him under the counterpane, and
waited there to execute his design.

The magician arrived in a little time. She first went into the
chamber where her husband, the king of the Black Islands, was,
stripped him, and beat him with the ox-pizzle in the most barbarous
manner. The poor prince filled the palace with his lamentations to
no purpose, and conjured her in the most affecting manner to take
pity on him; but the cruel woman would not give over till she had
given him a hundred blows. You had no compassion on my lover, said
she, and you are to expect none from me. Scheherazade, perceiving
day, stopped, and could go no further.

O, heavens! says Dinarzade, sister, this was a barbarous enchantress
indeed! but must we stop here? Will you not tell us whether she
received the chastisement she deserved? My dear sister, says the
sultaness, I desire nothing more than to acquaint you with it
to-morrow; but you know that depends on the sultan’s pleasure.
After what Schahriar had heard, he was far from any design to put
Scheherazade to death; on the contrary, he said to himself, I will
not take away her life until she has finished the surprising story,
though it should last for two months. It will always be in my power
to keep the oath I have made.




TWENTY-SIXTH NIGHT.


As soon as Dinarzade thought it time to call the sultaness, she said
to her, How much should I be obliged to you, dear sister, if you
would tell us what passed in the Palace of Tears. Schahriar having
signified that he was as curious to know it as Dinarzade, the
sultaness resumed the story of the young enchanted prince as follows:

Sir, after the enchantress had given the king, her husband, a
hundred blows with the ox-pizzle, she put on again his covering of
goat’s hair, and his brocade gown over all. She went afterwards to
the Palace of Tears, and as she entered the same, she renewed her
tears and lamentations; then approaching the bed where she thought
her gallant was, What cruelty, cries she, was it to disturb the
satisfaction of so tender and passionate a lover as I am? O, thou
who reproachest me that I am too inhuman, when I make thee feel the
effects of my resentment! Cruel prince! Does not thy barbarity
surpass my vengeance? Ah, traitor! in attempting the life of the
object which I adore, hast thou not robbed me of mine? Alas! says
she, addressing herself to the sultan, while she thought she spoke
to the black, my sun, my life! will you always be silent? Are you
resolved to let me die, without giving me the comfort of telling me
that you love me? My soul, speak one word to me, at least, I conjure
you.

The sultan, making as if he had awaked out of a deep sleep, and
counterfeiting the language or the blacks, answered the queen with a
grave tone, “There is no strength or power but in God alone, who
is almighty.” At these words the enchantress, who did not expect
them, gave a great shout, to signify her excessive joy. My dear
lord, cried she, do not I deceive myself? Is it certain that I hear
you, and that you speak to me? Unhappy wretch! said the sultan, art
thou worthy that I should answer thy discourse? Alas! replies the
queen, why do you reproach me thus? The cries, replied he, the
groans and tears of thy husband, whom thou treatest every day with
so much indignity and barbarity, hinder me from sleeping night and
day. I should have been cured long ago, and have recovered the use
of my speech, hadst thou disenchanted him. That is the cause of my
silence, which you complain of. Very well, says the enchantress; to
pacify you, I am ready to do what you will command me: would you
have me restore him as he was? Yes, replies the sultan; make haste
to set him at liberty, that I be no more disturbed with his cries.

The enchantress went immediately out of the Palace of Tears: she
took a cup of water, and pronounced words over it, which caused it
to boil, as if it had been on the fire. She went afterwards to the
hall to the young king, her husband, and threw the water upon him,
saying, “If the Creator of all things did form thee so as thou art
at present, or if he be angry with thee, do not change: but if thou
art in that condition merely by virtue of my enchantments, resume
thy natural shape, and become what thou wast before.” She had
scarce spoken these words, when the prince, finding himself restored
to his former condition, rose up freely, with all imaginable joy,
and returned thanks to God. The enchantress then said to him, Get
thee gone from this castle, and never return here on pain of death!
The young king, yielding to necessity, went away from the
enchantress, without replying a word, and retired to a remote place,
where he patiently awaited the success of the design which the
sultan had so happily begun. Meanwhile the enchantress returned to
the Palace of Tears; and, supposing that she still spoke to the
black, says, Dear lover, I have done what you ordered; let nothing
now hinder you from giving me that satisfaction of which I have been
deprived so long.

The sultan continued to counterfeit the language of the blacks: That
which you have just now done, said he, is not sufficient to my cure.
You have only eased me of part of my disease; you must cut it up by
the roots. My lovely black, replies she, what do you mean by the
roots? Unfortunate woman, replies the sultan, do not you understand
that I mean the town, and its inhabitants, and the four islands,
which thou hast destroyed by thy enchantments? The fishes every
night at midnight raise their heads out of the pond, and cry for
vengeance against thee and me. This is the true cause of the delay
of my cure. Go speedily, restore things as they were, and at thy
return I will give thee my hand, and thou shalt help me to rise.

The enchantress, filled with hopes from these words, cried out in a
transport of joy, My heart! my soul! you shall soon be restored to
your health, for I will immediately do what you command me.
Accordingly she went that moment; and when she came to the brink of
the pond, she took a little water in her hand, and sprinkling it
--Here Scheherazade saw day, and stopped.

Dinarzade says to the sultaness, Sister, I am much rejoiced to hear
that the young king of the four Black Islands was disenchanted, and
I already consider the town and the inhabitants as restored to their
former state; but I long to know what will become of the
enchantress. Have a little patience, replies the sultaness; you
shall have the satisfaction you desire tomorrow, if the sultan, my
lord, will consent to it. Schahriar, having resolved on this
already, as was said before, rose up, and went about his business.




TWENTY-SEVENTH NIGHT.


At the usual hour, Dinarzade called upon the sultaness thus: Dear
sister, pray tell us what was the fate of the magician queen, as you
promised us. Upon which Scheherazade went on thus: The enchantress
had no sooner sprinkled the water, and pronounced some words over
the fishes and the pond, but the city was immediately restored. The
fishes became men, women, and children: Mahometans, Christians,
Persians, or Jews; freemen or slaves, as they were before; every one
having recovered their natural form. The houses and shops were
immediately filled with their inhabitants, who found all things as
they were before the enchantment. The sultan’s numerous retinue,
who found themselves encamped in the largest square, were astonished
to see themselves in an instant in the middle of a large, handsome,
well-peopled city.

To return to the enchantress: as soon as she had effected this
wonderful change, she returned with all diligence to the Palace of
Tears, that she might reap the fruits of it. My dear lord, cried
she, as she entered, I come to rejoice with you for the return of
your health. I have done all that you required of me; then pray
rise, and give me your hand. Come near, said the sultan, still
counterfeiting the language of the blacks. She did so. You are not
near enough, replied he; come nearer. She obeyed. Then he rose up,
and seized her by the arm so suddenly, that she had not time to
discover who it was, and with a blow of his scimitar cut her in two,
so that one half fell one way and the other another. This done, he
left the carcass upon the place; and going out of the Palace of
Tears, he went to seek the young king of the Black Isles, who waited
for him with great impatience; and when he found him, Prince, said
he, embracing him, rejoice; you have nothing to fear now, your cruel
enemy is dead.

The young prince returned thanks to the sultan in such a manner as
shewed that he was thoroughly sensible of the kindness that he had
done him, and in return, wished him a long life and all happiness.
You may henceforward, said the sultan, dwell peaceably in your
capital, except you will go to mine, which is so near, where you
shall be very welcome, and have as much honour and respect shewn you
as if you were at home. Potent monarch, to whom I am so much
indebted, replied the king, you think, then, that you are very near
your capital? Yes, said the sultan, I know it; it is not above four
or five hours’ journey. It will take you a whole year’s journey,
said the prince. I do believe, indeed, that you came hither from
your capital in the time you spoke of, because mine was enchanted;
but since the enchantment is taken off, things are changed: however,
this shall not prevent my following you, were it to the utmost
corners of the earth. You are my deliverer; and that I may give you
proofs of my acknowledging this during my whole life, I am willing
to accompany you, and to leave my kingdom without regret.

The sultan was extremely surprised to understand that he was so far
from his dominions, and could not imagine how it could be. But the
young king of the Black Isles convinced him beyond the possibility
of doubt. Then the sultan replied, It is no matter, the trouble of
returning to my own country is sufficiently recompensed by the
satisfaction of having obliged you, and by acquiring you for a son:
for since you will do me the honour to accompany me, as I have no
child, I look upon you as such; and from this moment I appoint you
my heir and successor.

This discourse between the sultan and the king of the Black Islands
concluded with the most affectionate embraces; after which the young
prince was totally taken up in making preparations for his journey,
which were finished in three weeks’ time, to the great regret of
his court and subjects, who agreed to receive at his hands one of
his nearest kindred for their king.

At last the sultan and the young prince began their journey, with a
hundred camels laden with inestimable riches from the treasury of
the young king, followed by fifty handsome gentlemen on horseback,
perfectly well mounted and dressed. They had a very happy journey;
and when the sultan, who had sent couriers to give advice of his
delay, and of the adventure which had occasioned it, came near his
capital, the principal officers he had left there came to receive
him, and to assure him that his long absence had occasioned no
alteration in his empire. The inhabitants came out also in great
crowds, receiving him with acclamations, and made public rejoicings
for several days.

Next day after his arrival, the sultan gave all his courtiers a very
ample account of the events which, contrary to his expectation, had
detained him so long. He acquainted them with his having adopted the
king of the four Black Islands, who was willing to leave a great
kingdom, to accompany and live with him; and, in short, in reward of
their loyalty, he made each of them presents according to their rank.

As for the fisherman, as he was the first cause of the deliverance
of the young prince, the sultan gave him a plentiful fortune, which
made him and his family happy the rest of their days.

Here Scheherazade made an end of the story of the Fisherman and the
Genie. Dinarzade signified that she had taken a great deal of
pleasure in it; and Schahriar having said the same thing, the
sultaness told them, that she knew another which was much finer, and
if the sultan would give her leave, she would tell it them next
morning, for day began to appear. Schahriar, bethinking himself that
he had granted the sultaness a month’s reprieve, and being curious
moreover to know if this new story would be as agreeable as she
promised, got up, with a desire to hear it next night.




TWENTY-EIGHTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade, according to custom, did not forget to call the sultaness
when it was time. Madam, said she, I know not what is the matter
with me, but I know very well, that one of the stories which you
tell so agreeably would be a great relief against that melancholy
which eats me up. Scheherazade, without answering her, began
immediately, and told the sultan the following story:




The Story of the Three Calendars, [3] sons of Kings, and of the Five
Ladies of Bagdad.


Sir, said she, in the reign of Caliph Haroun Alraschid, there was at
Bagdad, the place of his residence, a porter, who, notwithstanding
his mean and laborious business, was a fellow of wit and good
humour. One morning, as he was at the place where he usually plied,
with a great basket, waiting for employment, a handsome young lady,
covered with a great muslin veil, accosted him, and said, with a
pleasant air, Hark ye, porter, take your basket, and follow me. The
porter, charmed with those few words, pronounced in so agreeable a
manner, took his basket immediately, set it on his head, and
followed the lady, saying, O, happy day! O, day of good luck!

The lady stopped presently before a gate that was shut, and knocked:
a Christian, with a venerable long white beard, opened the gate, and
she put money into his hand, without speaking one word: but the
Christian, who knew what she wanted, went in, and in a little time
after brought a large jug of excellent wine. Take this jug, said the
lady to the porter, and put it in your basket. This being done, she
commanded him to follow her; and as she went on, the porter said
still, O, happy day! this is a day of agreeable surprise and joy!

The lady stopped at a fruit shop, where she bought several sorts of
apples, apricots, peaches, quinces, lemons, citrons, oranges,
myrtles, sweet basil, lilies, jessamin, and some other sorts of
flowers and fragrant plants; she bade the porter put all into his
basket, and follow her. As she went by a butcher’s stall, she made
him weigh her twenty-five pounds of his best meat, which she ordered
the porter to put also into his basket. At another shop she took
capers, tarragon, cucumbers, sasafras, and other herbs, to be
preserved in vinegar; at another shop she bought pistachios,
walnuts, filberts, almonds, kernels of pine apples, and such other
fruits; and at another she bought all sorts of confectionary. When
the porter had put all those things into his basket, and perceived
that it grew full, My good lady, said he, you ought to have given me
notice that you had so much provision to carry, and then I would
have got a horse, or rather a camel, to have carried them; for if
you buy ever so little more, I shall not be able to carry it. The
lady laughed at the fellow’s pleasant humour, and ordered him
still to follow her.

Then she went to a druggist, where she furnished herself with all
manner of sweet-scented waters, cloves, musk, pepper, ginger, and a
great piece of ambergris, and several other Indian spices. This
quite filled the porter’s basket, and she ordered him to follow
her. They walked till they came to a magnificent house, whose front
was adorned with fine columns, and which had a gate of ivory. There
they stopped, and the lady knocked softly. Here Scheherazade,
perceiving day, broke off.

I must own, sister, says Dinarzade, the beginning of this story has
a great deal of curiosity; I fancy the sultan will not deprive
himself of the pleasure of hearing the rest of it. And, indeed,
Schahriar was so far from ordering the sultaness to be put to death,
that he longed impatiently for next night, to know what passed in
the fine house.




TWENTY-NINTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade being awake before day, addressed the sultaness thus:
Sister, if you be awake, I would pray you to continue the history
you began yesterday; and Scheherazade went on with it thus:

While the young lady and the porter staid for the opening of the
gate, the porter had a thousand thoughts: he wondered that such a
fine lady should come abroad to buy provisions: he concluded she
could not be a slave, her air was too noble; and therefore he
thought she must needs be a woman of quality. Just as he was about
to ask her some questions upon that head, another lady came to open
the gate, and appeared to him so beautiful, that he was perfectly
surprised, or rather so much struck with her charms, that he had
like to have let his basket fall, for he had never seen any beauty
that equalled her.

The lady who brought the porter with her, perceiving his disorder,
and what occasioned it, diverted herself with it, and took so much
pleasure to examine his looks, that she forgot the gate was opened.
Upon this the beautiful lady said to her, Pray, sister, come in;
what do you stay for? Do you not see this poor man so heavily laden,
that he is scarcely able to stand under it?

When she entered with the porter, the lady who opened the gate shut
it, and all three, after having gone through a very fine porch, came
into a spacious court, encompassed with an open gallery, which had a
communication with several apartments on a floor, and
extraordinarily magnificent. There was at the farther end of the
court a sofa richly adorned, with a throne of amber in the middle of
it, supported by four columns of ebony, enriched with diamonds and
pearls of an extraordinary size, and covered with red satin
embroidered with Indian gold of admirable workmanship. In the middle
of the court there was a great fountain, faced with white marble,
and full of clear water, which fell into it abundantly out of the
mouth of a lion of brass.

The porter, though heavy laden, could not but admire the
magnificence of this house, and the excellent order that every thing
was placed in; but that which particularly captivated his attention
was a third lady, who seemed to be a greater beauty than the second,
and was seated upon the throne just now mentioned. She came down
from it, as soon as she saw the two former ladies, and advanced
towards them; he judged by the respect which the others showed her,
that she was the chief, in which he was not mistaken. This lady was
called Zobeide, she who opened the gate was called Safie, and Amine
was the name of her who went out to buy the provisions.

Zobeide said to the two ladies, when she came to them, Sisters, do
not you see that this honest man is ready to sink under his burden?
Why do not you ease him of it? Then Amine and Safie took the basket,
the one before and the other behind, and Zobeide also lent her hand,
and all three together set it on the ground; then emptied it; and
when they had done, the beautiful Amine took out money, and paid the
porter liberally. Day-light appearing, Scheherazade was obliged to
keep silence; but Schahriar, having a great desire to hear the rest
of the story, ordered the sultaness to go on with it next night.




THIRTIETH NIGHT.


Next morning Dinarzade being awaked by her impatience to hear the
rest of the story, said to the sultaness: For the sake of heaven,
sister, if you be not asleep, give us an account of what the ladies
did with the provisions brought by Amine. You shall quickly hear it,
said Scheherazade, if you listen to my story, which she resumed as
follows:

The porter, very well satisfied with the money he had received, was
to have taken up his basket, and be gone; but he could not tell how
to think on it. Do what he could, he found himself stopped by the
pleasure of seeing three such beauties, who appeared to him equally
charming; for Amine having now laid aside her veil, was as handsome
as either of them. What surprised him most was, that he saw no man
about the house, yet most of the provisions he brought in, as the
dry fruits, and the several sorts of cakes and confections, were fit
chiefly for those who could drink and make merry.

Zobeide thought at first, that the porter staid only to take breath;
but perceiving that he staid too long, What do you wait for? said
she: are you not well enough paid? And turning to Amine, said,
Sister, give him something more, that he may depart satisfied.
Madam, replied the porter, it is not that which keeps me, I am over
and above paid; I am sensible that I am unmannerly to stay longer
than I ought, but I hope you will be so good as to pardon me, if I
tell you, that I am astonished to see that there is no man with
three ladies of such extraordinary beauty; and you know that a
company of women without men is as melancholy a thing as a company
of men without women. To this he added several other pleasant
things, to prove what he said, and did not forget the Bagdad
proverb, That the table is not completely furnished, except there be
four in company: and so concluded that since they were but three,
they wanted a fourth.

The ladies fell a laughing at the porter’s discourse; after which,
Zobeide said to him very gravely, Friend, you are a little too bold;
and though you do not deserve that I should enter into particulars
with you, yet I am willing to tell you, that we are three sisters,
who do our business so secretly, that no body knows any thing of it.
We have too great reason to be cautious of acquainting indiscreet
persons with it; and a good author that we have read, says, “Keep
your secret and do not reveal it to any body. He that reveals it is
no longer master of it. If your own breast cannot keep your secret,
how do you think that another person will keep it?”

My ladies, replied the porter, by your very air, I judged at first
that you were persons of extraordinary merit, and I conceive that I
am not mistaken; though fortune has not given me wealth enough to
raise me above my mean profession, yet I have not failed to
cultivate my mind as much as I could, by reading books of science
and history: and allow me, if you please, to tell you, that I have
also read in another author a maxim which I have always happily
practised: “We do not conceal our secrets,” says he, “but from
such persons as are known to all the world to want discretion, and
would abuse the confidence we put in them; but we make no scruple to
discover them to prudent persons, because we know they can keep
them.” A secret with me is as sure as if it were in a closet,
whose key is lost, and the door sealed up.

Zobeide perceiving that the porter did not want sense, but
conceiving he had a mind to share in their treat, she replied to
him, smiling, You know that we are about to have a treat, and you
know also that we have been at a considerable expense, and it is not
just that you should have a share of it, without contributing
towards it. The beautiful Safie seconded her sister, and said to the
porter, Friend, have you never heard that which is commonly said,
“If you bring any thing with you, you shall be welcome; but if you
bring nothing, you must get you gone with nothing?”

The porter, notwithstanding his rhetoric, must in all probability
have retired in confusion, if Amine had not taken his part, and said
to Zobeide and Safie, My dearest sisters, I conjure you to let him
stay with us; I need not tell you that he will divert us, you see
well enough that he is capable of that; I must needs tell you, that
unless he had been very willing, as well as nimble, and hardy enough
to follow me, I could not have done so much business in so little
time: besides, should I repeat to you all the obliging expressions
he used to me by the way, you would not be surprised at my
protecting him.

At these words of Amine, the porter was so much transported with
joy, that he fell on his knees, kissed the ground at the feet of
that charming person, and raising himself up, said, Most beautiful
lady, you began my good fortune to-day, and now you complete it by
this generous action; I cannot enough testify my acknowledgment for
it. As to what remains, my ladies, said he, addressing himself to
all three sisters, since you do me so great honour, do not think
that I will abuse it, or look upon myself as a person that deserves
it. No, I shall always look upon myself as one of your most humble
slaves. When he had spoken these words, he would have returned the
money he had received, but the grave Zobeide ordered him to keep it.
That which we have once given, said she, to reward those who have
served us, we never take again. --Here day began to dawn, which put
Scheherazade to silence.

Dinarzade, who listened with a great deal of attention, was much
troubled at it, but had this comfort, however, that the sultan, who
was as curious as she to know what passed betwixt the three
beautiful ladies and the porter, ordered the sultaness to go on with
the rest of the story next night, and rose up to go about his
business.




THIRTY-FIRST NIGHT.


The next morning, Dinarzade did not fail to awaken the sultaness at
the ordinary time, and said, Dear sister, if you are not asleep, I
would pray you, (until break of day, which is near at hand,) to go
on with that agreeable story you began. Upon which Scheherazade
addressed the sultan thus: Sir, with your leave, I am willing to
satisfy my sister’s curiosity; and at the same time, went on with
the story of the Three Calenders.

Zobeide would not take back the money from the porter, but said, My
friend, in consenting that you stay with us, I must forewarn you,
that it is not only on condition that you keep secret what we have
required you, but also that you observe exactly the rules of good
manners and civility. In the mean time the charming Amine put off
the apparel she went abroad with, put on her night-gown that she
might be more easy, and covered the table, which she furnished with
several sorts of meat, and upon a side-board she set bottles of wine
and cups of gold. Soon after the ladies took their places, and made
the porter sit down by them, who was overjoyed to see himself at
table with three such admirable beauties. After they had eaten a
little, Amine, who sat next the sideboard, took up a bottle and a
cup, filled out wine, and drank first herself, according to the
custom of the Arabians; then she filled the cup to her sisters, who
drank in course as they sat; and at last she filled it the fourth
time to the porter, who, as he received it, kissed Amine’s hand;
and before he drank, sung a song to this purpose: That as the wind
brings along with it the sweet scents of the perfumed places through
which it passes, so the wine he was going to drink, coming from her
fair hands, received a more exquisite taste than what it had of its
own nature. This song pleased the ladies so much, that each of them
sung another in their turn. In short, they were very merry all
dinner-time, which lasted a long while, and nothing was wanting that
could make it agreeable. The day being almost spent, Safie spoke in
the name of the three ladies, and said to the porter, Arise, and be
gone; it is time for you to depart. But the porter, not willing to
leave so good company, cried, Alas! ladies, whither do you command
me to go in the condition I am in? I am quite beside myself, by what
I have seen since I came hither, and having also drank above my
usual quantity, I shall never find the way home: allow me this night
to repose in any place where you please, for no less time is
necessary for me to recover myself; but go when I will, I shall
leave the best part of myself behind me.

Amine pleaded the second time for the porter, saying, Sisters, he is
in the right; I am pleased with the request, he having already
diverted us so well; and, if you will take my advice, or if you love
me as much as I think you do, let us keep him, to pass away the
remaining part of the night. Sister, answered Zobeide, we can refuse
you nothing; and then turning to the porter, said, We are willing
once more to grant your request, but upon this new condition, that
whatever we do in your presence relating to ourselves or any thing
else, take heed you do not once open your mouth to ask the reason of
it; for if you ask questions about that which does not belong to
you, you may chance to know that which will be no way pleasing to
you; beware, therefore, and do not be too curious to dive into the
motives of our actions.

Madam, replied the porter, I promise to observe this condition with
such exactness, that you shall have no cause to reproach me with
breaking it, and far less to punish my indiscretion: my tongue shall
be immoveable on this occasion, and my eye like a looking-glass,
which retains nothing of the object that is set before it. And to
show you, said Zobeide with a serious countenance, that what we
demand of you is not a new thing among us, rise up, and read what is
written over our gate on the inside.

The porter went thither, and read these words, written in large
characters of gold: “He who speaks of things that do not concern
him, shall hear of things that will not please him.” Returning
again to the three sisters, Ladies, said he, I give you my oath,
that you shall never hear me speak any thing which does not concern
me, or wherein you may have any concern.

This agreement being made, Amine brought in supper, and after the
room was set round with tapers, that were mixed with aloes and
ambergris, which gave a most agreeable scent, as well as a delicate
light, she sat down at table with her sisters and the porter. They
began again to eat and drink, sing, and repeat verses. The ladies
took pleasure to fuddle the porter, under pretext of causing him to
drink their healths, and abundance of witty sentences passed on both
sides. In short, as they were all in the best humour in the world,
they heard a knocking at the gate.

Scheherazade was obliged to stop here, because she observed
day-light appearing.

The sultan, not doubting the sequel of this history deserved to be
heard, put it off till the day following, and so arose.




THIRTY-SECOND NIGHT.


The next night being almost at an end, Dinarzade called to the
sultaness; for heaven’s sake, sister, if you are awake, let me
pray you to continue the story of the three fair ladies: I am very
impatient till I know who it was that knocked at their gate. You
shall hear it immediately, said she; I am sure that what I am now
going to relate is worthy of my lord the sultan’s attention.

When the ladies, said she, heard the knocking, they all three got up
to open the gate; but Safie, to whom this office particularly
belonged, was the nimblest; which her other two sisters perceiving,
sat down till she came back, to acquaint them who it could be that
had any business with them so late. Safie returning, said, Sisters,
we have here a very fine opportunity to pass a good part of the
night with much satisfaction, and if you be of the same mind with
me, we shall not let it slip. There are three calenders at our gate,
at least they appear to be such by their habit; but that which you
will most admire is, they are all three blind of the right eye, and
have their heads, beards, and eye-brows shaved, and, as they say,
are but just come to Bagdad, where they never were before; and it
being night, and not knowing where to find any lodging, they
happened by chance to knock at this gate, and pray us, for the love
of heaven, to have compassion on them, and receive them into the
house; they care not what place we put them in, provided they may be
under shelter; they would be satisfied with a stable; they are young
and handsome enough, and seem also to be men of good sense; but I
cannot without laughing think of their pleasant and uniform figure.
Here Safie fell a laughing so heartily, that it put the two sisters
and the porter into the same mood. My dear sisters, said she, are
you content that they come in? it is impossible but with such
persons as I have already described them to be, we shall finish the
day better than we began it; they will afford us diversion enough,
and put us to no charge, because they desire shelter only for this
night, and resolve to leave us as soon as day appears.

Zobeide and Amine made some difficulty to grant Safie’s request,
for reasons they well knew; but she having so great a desire to
obtain this favour, they could not refuse her. Go then, said
Zobeide, and bring them in; but do not forget to acquaint them that
they must not speak of any thing which does not concern them, and
cause them to read what is written over the gate. Safie ran out with
a great deal of joy, and in a little time after returned with the
three calenders in her company.

At their entrance they made a profound bow to the ladies, who rose
up to receive them, told them most obligingly that they were very
welcome, that they were glad to have met with an opportunity to
oblige them, and to contribute towards relieving them from the
fatigue of their journey, and at last invited them to sit down with
them.

The magnificence of the place, and the civility they received in it,
made the calenders conceive a great idea of these handsome ladies;
but, before they sat down, having by chance cast their eyes upon the
porter, whom they saw clad almost like one of those other calenders
with whom they are in controversy about several points of
discipline, because they never shave their beards nor eyebrows; one
of them said, Look here, I believe we have got one of our revolted
Arabian brethren.

The porter being half asleep, and having his head warm with wine,
was affronted at these words, and with a fierce look, without
stirring from his place, answered, Sit you down, and do not meddle
with what does not concern you. Have you not read the inscription
over the gate? Do not pretend to make people live after your
fashion, but follow ours.

Honest man, said the calender, do not put yourself in a passion; we
should be very sorry to give you the least occasion; on the
contrary, we are ready to receive your commands. Upon which, to put
an end to the dispute, the ladies interposed, and pacified them.
When the calenders sat down at table, the ladies served them with
meat; and Safie, being most pleased with them, did not let them want
for drink.

Scheherazade stopped her discourse, because she saw day appear, and
the sultan got up to follow his affairs, and promised to hear the
rest of the story next day; for he had a great desire to know why
those three calenders were blind, and all three of the same eye.




THIRTY-THIRD NIGHT.


An hour before day, Dinarzade being awake, said to the sultaness,
Dear sister, pray let me know what passed between the ladies and the
calenders. With all my heart, replied Scheherazade, and continued
her story in the manner following:

After the calenders had eaten and drank liberally, they signified to
the ladies, that they had a great desire to entertain them with a
concert of music, if they had any instruments in the house, and
would cause them to be brought: they willingly accepted the proffer,
and fair Safie going to fetch them, returned again in a moment, and
presented them with a flute of her own country fashion, another of
the Persian sort, and a tabor. Each man took the instrument he
liked, and all three together began to play a tune. The ladies, who
knew the words of a merry song that suited the air, joined the
concert with their voices; but the words of the song made them now
and then stop, and fall into excessive laughter.

In the height of this diversion, and when the company were in the
midst of their jollity, somebody knocked at the gate. Safie left off
singing, and went to see who it was. But, sir, said Scheherazade to
the sultan, it is fit your majesty should know why this knocking
happened so late at the ladies’ house. Now the reason was this:
The Caliph Haroun Alraschid was accustomed to walk abroad in
disguise very often by night, that he might see with his own eyes if
every thing was quiet in the city, and that no disorders were
committed in it.

This night the caliph went out pretty early on his rambles,
accompanied by Giafar his grand vizier, and Mesrour the chief of the
eunuchs of his palace, all disguised in merchant’s habits; and
passing through the street where the three ladies dwelt, he heard
the sound of the music and great fits of laughter; upon which he
commanded the vizier to knock, because he would go in, to know the
reason of that jollity. The vizier told him in vain, that it was
some women merry making; that without question their heads were warm
with wine, and that it would not be proper he should expose himself
to be affronted by them; besides, it was not yet an unlawful hour,
and therefore he ought not to disturb them in their mirth. --No
matter, said the caliph, I command you to knock. So it was the grand
vizier Giafar that knocked at the ladies’ gate by the caliph’s
order, because he himself would not be known. Safie opened the gate,
and the vizier perceiving, by the light that she held in her hand,
that she was an incomparable beauty, he acted his part very well,
and with a very low bow and respectful behaviour, told her, Madam,
we are three merchants of Mossoul, who arrived about ten days ago
with rich merchandize, which we have in a warehouse at a khan, or
inn, where we have also our lodging. We happened this day to be with
a merchant of this city, who invited us to a treat at his house,
where we had a splendid entertainment; and the wine having put us in
humour, he sent for a company of dancers. Night being come on, and
the music and dancers making a great noise, the watch came by in the
mean time, caused the gate to be opened, and some of the company to
be taken up; but we had the good fortune to escape by getting over a
wall. Now, said the vizier, being strangers, and somewhat overcome
with wine, we are afraid of meeting another, and perhaps the same
watch, before we get home to our khan, which lies a good way from
hence. Besides, when we come there, the gates will be shut, and not
opened till morning: wherefore, madam, hearing, as we passed by this
way, the sound of music, we supposed you were not yet going to rest,
and made bold to knock at your gate, to beg the favour of lodging
ourselves in the house till morning; and if you think us worthy of
your good company, we will endeavour to contribute to your diversion
to the best of our power, to make some amends for the interruption
we have given you; if not, we only beg the favour of staying this
night under your porch.

Whilst Giafar held this discourse, fair Safie had time to observe
the vizier and his two companions, who were said to be merchants
like himself, and told them that she was not mistress of the house;
but if they would have a minute’s patience, she would return with
an answer.

Safie acquainted her sisters with the matter, who considered for
some time what to conclude upon: but being naturally of a good
disposition, and having granted the same favour to the three
calenders, they at last consented to let them in. Scheherazade
intending to continue her story, saw daylight appear, which made her
break off: but the quality of these new actors which the sultaness
had brought upon the stage excited the curiosity of Schahriar, who
looking for some singular event, expected the next night with
impatience.




THIRTY-FOURTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade, being as curious as the sultan to know what the arrival
of the caliph at the house of those three ladies might produce, did
not forget to awaken the sultaness very early next morning, and
prayed her earnestly to resume the story of the calenders, whilst
Scheherazade, with leave of the sultan, pursued in the following
manner:

The caliph, his grand vizier, and the chief of the eunuchs, being
introduced by the fair Safie, very courteously saluted the ladies
and the calenders. The ladies returned them the like civilities,
supposing them to be merchants. Zobeide, as the chief, said to them
with a grave and serious countenance, which was natural to her, You
are welcome. But before I proceed farther, I hope you will not take
it ill if we desire one favour of you. --Alas! said the vizier, what
favour? We can refuse nothing to such fair ladies. --Zobeide
replied, It is, that you would only have eyes, but no tongues; that
you put no question to us about the reason of any thing you may
happen to see, and speak not of any thing that does not concern you,
lest you come to hear of things that will by no means please you.

Madam, replied the vizier, you shall be obeyed. We are not
censorious, nor impertinently curious; it is enough for us to take
notice of that which concerns us, without meddling with that which
does not belong to us. Upon this they all sat down, and the company
being united, they drank to the health of the new comers.

While the vizier Giafar entertained the ladies in discourse, the
caliph could not forbear admiring their extraordinary beauty,
graceful behaviour, pleasant humour, and ready wit; on the other
hand, nothing was more surprising to him than the calenders being
all three blind of the right eye. He would gladly have been informed
of this singularity; but the conditions so lately imposed upon
himself and his companions would not allow him to speak. This, with
the richness of the furniture, the exact order of every thing, and
the neatness of the house, made him think it was some enchanted
place.

Their conversation happening to turn upon diversions and different
ways of making merry, the calenders arose, and danced after their
fashion, which augmented the good opinion the ladies had conceived
of them, and procured them the esteem of the caliph and his
companions.

When the three calenders had made an end of their dance, Zobeide
arose, and taking Amine by the hand, said, Pray, sister, rise up,
for the company will not take it ill if we use our freedom, and
their presence need not hinder our performance of what we are wont
to do. Amine, understanding her sister’s meaning, rose from her
seat, carried away the dishes, the table, the flasks and cups,
together with the instruments which the calenders had played upon.

Safie was not idle, but swept the room, put every thing again in its
place, snuffed the candles, and put fresh aloes and ambergris to
them, and then prayed the three calenders to sit down upon the sofa
on one side, and the caliph with his companions on the other. As to
the porter, she said to him, Get up and prepare yourself to serve in
what we are going about; a man like you, who is one of the family,
ought not to be idle. The porter, being somewhat recovered from his
wine, got up immediately, and having tied the sleeve of his gown to
his belt, answered, Here am I, ready to obey your commands in any
thing. Very well, replied Safie, stay till you are spoken to; you
shall not be idle very long. A little time after, Amine came in with
a chair, which she placed in the middle of the room; and then went
to a closet, which having opened, she beckoned to the porter, and
said to him, Come hither and help me; which he obeying, entered the
closet, and returned immediately, leading two black bitches, with
each of them a collar and chain; they looked as if they had been
severely whipped with rods, and he brought them into the middle of
the room.

Then Zobeide rising from her seat between the calenders and the
caliph, marched very gravely towards the porter:-- Come on, said
she, with a great sigh; let us perform our duty; then tucking up her
sleeves above her elbows, and receiving a rod from Safie, Porter,
said she, deliver one of the bitches to my sister Amine, and come to
me with the other.

The porter did as he was commanded; the bitch that he held in his
hand began to cry, and turning towards Zobeide, held her head up in
a begging posture; but Zobeide, having no regard to the sad
countenance of the bitch, which would have moved pity, nor her
cries, that resounded through the house, whipped her with the rod
till she was out of breath; and having spent her strength, that she
could strike no more, she threw down the rod, and taking the chain
from the porter, lifted up the bitch by her paws, and looking upon
her with a sad and pitiful countenance, they both wept; after which,
Zobeide, with her handkerchief, wiped the tears from the bitch’s
eye, kissed her, returned the chain to the porter, bade him carry
her to the place whence he took her, and bring her the other. The
porter led back the whipped bitch to the closet, and receiving the
other from Amine, presented her to Zobeide, who bade the porter hold
her as he did the first, took up the rod, and treated her after the
same manner; and when she had wept over her, dried her eyes, and
kissed her, and returned her to the porter: but lovely Amine spared
him the trouble of leading her back into the closet, and did it
herself. The three calenders and the caliph, with his companions,
were extremely surprised at this execution, and could not comprehend
why Zobeide, after having so furiously whipped those two bitches,
that by the mussulman religion are reckoned unclean animals, should
cry with them, wipe off their tears, and kiss them: they muttered
among themselves, and the caliph, who being more impatient than the
rest, longed exceedingly to be informed of the cause of so strange
an action, and could not forbear making signs to the vizier to ask
the question; the vizier turned his head another way; but being
pressed by repeated signs, he answered by others, that it was not
yet time for the caliph to satisfy his curiosity.

Zobeide sat still some time in the middle of the room, where she had
whipped the two bitches, to recover herself of the fatigue; and fair
Safie called to her, Dear sister, will you not be pleased to return
to your place, that I may also act my part? Yes, sister, replied
Zobeide; and then went, and sat down upon the sofa, having the
caliph, Giafar, and Mesrour on her right hand, and the three
calenders, with the porter, on her left.

Here, said Scheherazade to the sultan, Sir, what has been hitherto
told your majesty must, without doubt, appear very strange; but what
yet remains is more wonderful; and I am persuaded your majesty will
think so, if you will be pleased to give me leave to finish the
story next night: the sultan agreed to it, and got up because it was
day.




THIRTY-FIFTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade was no sooner awake next morning, but she called, Sister,
if you are not asleep, pray continue the fine story of the three
sisters. The sultaness remembering where she left off, addressed
herself to the sultan, and went on as follows: Sir, after Zobeide
sat down, the whole company was silent for a while; at last Safie,
sitting on a chair in the middle of the room, spoke to her sister
Amine --Dear sister, I conjure you to rise up; you know well enough
what I would say. Amine rose, and went into another closet, near to
that where the bitches were, and brought out a case covered with
yellow satin, richly embroidered with gold, and green silk: she came
near Safie, and opened the case, from whence she took a lute, and
presented it to her; and after some time spent in tuning it, Safie
began to play, and accompanying it with her voice, she sung a song
about the torments that absence creates to lovers, with so much
sweetness, that it charmed the caliph and all the company. Having
sung with a great deal of passion and action, she said to lovely
Amine, Pray take it sister, for I can do no more; my voice fails me:
oblige the company with a tune, and a song, in my room. Very
willingly, replied Amine, who, taking the lute from her sister
Safie, sat down in her place.

Amine, after some small trial, to see whether the instrument was in
tune, played and sung almost as long upon the same subject, but with
so much vehemency, and she was so much affected, or rather
transported, by the words of the song, that her strength failed her
as she made an end of it.

Zobeide, willing to testify her satisfaction, said, Sister, you have
done wonders, and we may easily see that you feel the grief you have
expressed in so lively a manner. Amine was prevented from answering
this civility, her heart being so sensibly touched at the same
moment, that she was obliged, for air, to uncover her neck and
breast, which did not appear so fair as might have been expected
from such a lady as she, but on the contrary, black and full of
scars, which frighted all the spectators. However, this gave her no
ease, but she fell into a fit. --Here Scheherazade stopped, saying,
Sir, I had almost forgot that it is day. With this she ended her
discourse, and the sultan arose from bed. And though this prince had
not resolved to defer the death of the sultaness, he could not, at
this time, have determined to take away her life; his curiosity was
so great to hear out the story, which had so many unheard-of events.




THIRTY-SIXTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade awaked her sister as formerly, saying, Dear sister, I pray
you to continue the story of the ladies and the calenders. Upon
which she resumed her discourse in the manner following:--

When Zobeide and Safie ran to help their sister, one of the
calenders could not forbear to say, We had better have slept in the
streets than have come hither, had we thought to have seen such
spectacles. The caliph, who heard this, came to him and the other
calenders, and asked them what might be the meaning of all this.
They answered, Sir, we know no more than you do. What! says the
caliph, are you not of the family? nor can you resolve us concerning
the two black bitches, and the lady that fainted away, and has been
so basely abused? Sir, said the calenders, this is the first time
that ever we were in the house, and we came in but a few minutes
before you.

This increased the caliph’s astonishment. It may be, says, he,
this other man that is with you may know something of it. One of the
calenders made a sign for the porter to come near, and asked him
whether he knew why those two black bitches had been whipped, and
why Amine’s bosom was so scarred? Sir, said the porter, I can
swear by heaven, that if you know nothing of all this, I know as
little as you do. It is true, I live in this city, but I never was
in the house until now; and if you are surprised to see me here, I
am as much to find myself in your company; --and that which
increases my wonder is, that I have not seen one man with these
ladies.

The caliph and his company, as well as the calenders, supposed the
porter had been one of the family, and hoped he could inform them of
what they desired to know; but finding he could not, and resolving
to satisfy his curiosity, cost what it would, he said to the rest,
Look ye, we are here seven men, and have but three women to deal
with; let us try if we can oblige them to satisfy us, and if they
refuse it by fair means, we are in a condition to force them to it.

The grand vizier Giafar was against this method, and shewed the
caliph what might be the consequence of it; but, without discovering
the prince to the calenders, addressed him as if he had been a
merchant, thus: Sir, consider, I pray you, that our reputation lies
at stake. You know very well upon what conditions these ladies were
ready to receive us, and we also agreed to them; what will they say
of us if we break them? We shall be still more to blame, if any
mischief befall us, for it is not likely that they would demand such
a promise of us, if they did not know themselves to be in a
condition to make us repent the breaking of it.

Here the vizier took the caliph aside, and whispered to him thus:
Sir, the night will soon be at an end; and if your majesty will only
be pleased to have so much patience, I will take these ladies
to-morrow morning, and bring them before your throne, where you may
be informed of all that you desire to know. Though this advice was
very judicious, the caliph rejected it, bade the vizier hold his
tongue, and said he would not stay till then, but would have
satisfaction in the matter presently.

The next business was to know who should carry the message. The
caliph endeavoured to prevail with the calenders to speak first, but
they excused themselves; and at last they agreed that the porter
should be the man: and as they were consulting how to word this
fatal question, Zobeide returned from her sister Amine, who was
recovered of her fit, drew near them, and, having overheard them
speaking pretty loud, and with some passion, said, Gentlemen, what
is the subject of your discourse? what are you disputing about?

The porter answered immediately, Madam, these gentlemen pray you to
let them understand wherefore you wept over your two bitches after
you whipped them so severely, and how that lady’s bosom, who
lately fainted away, comes to be so full of scars? This is what I am
ordered to ask in their name.

At these words, Zobeide looked with a stern countenance; and,
turning towards the caliph and the rest of the company, Is this
true, gentlemen, said she, that you have given him order to ask me
this question? All of them, except the vizier Giafar, who spoke not
a word, answered, Yes. On which she told them, in a tone that
sufficiently expressed her resentment, Before we granted you the
favour of being received into our house, and to prevent all occasion
of trouble from you, because we are alone, we did it upon condition
that you should not speak of anything that did not concern you, lest
you might come to hear that which would not please you; and yet,
after having received and entertained you as well as we possibly
could, you make no scruple to break your promise. It is true that
our easy temper has occasioned this, but that shall not excuse you,
for your proceedings are very unhandsome. As she spoke these words,
she gave three hard knocks with her foot, and clapping her hands as
often together, cried, Come quick. Upon this, a door flew open, and
seven strong, sturdy black slaves, with scimetars in their hands,
rushed in; every one seized a man, threw him on the ground, and
dragged him into the middle of the room, in order to cut off his
head.

We may easily conceive what a fright the caliph was in: he then
repented, but too late, that he had not taken his vizier’s advice.
In the mean time, this unhappy prince, Giafar, Mesrour, the porter,
and the calenders, were upon the point of losing their lives by
their indiscreet curiosity. --But before they would strike the fatal
blow, one of the slaves said to Zobeide and her sisters, High,
mighty, and adorable mistresses, do you command us to cut their
throats? Stay, says Zobeide, I must examine them first. The
frightened porter interrupted her thus: In the name of heaven, do
not make me die for another man’s crime! I am innocent --they are
to blame. Alas! said he, crying, how pleasantly did we pass our
time! Those blind calenders are the cause of this misfortune; there
is no town in the world but suffers wherever these inauspicious
fellows come. Madam, I beg you not to destroy the innocent with the
guilty, and consider, that it is more glorious to pardon such a
wretch as I am, who have no way to help myself, than to sacrifice me
to your resentment.

Zobeide, notwithstanding her anger, could not but laugh within
herself at the porter’s lamentation; but, without answering him,
she spoke a second time to the rest: Answer me, said she, and tell
me who you are, otherwise you shall not live one moment longer. I
cannot believe you to be honest men, nor persons of authority or
distinction in your own countries; for if you were, you would have
been modest and more respectful to us.

The caliph, who was naturally impatient, was infinitely more
impatient than the rest, to find his life depend upon the command of
a lady justly incensed; but he began to conceive some hopes, when he
saw she would know who they were; for he imagined she would not take
away his life, when once she came to be informed who he was;
--therefore he spoke with a low voice to the vizier, who was near
him, to declare speedily who he was; but the vizier, being more
prudent, resolved to save his master’s honour, and not let the
world know the affront he had brought upon himself by his own
weakness; and therefore answered, We have what we deserve.

But if he would have spoke in obedience to the caliph, Zobeide did
not give him time, for, having turned to the calenders, and seeing
them all three blind with one eye, she asked if they were brothers.
One of them answered, No, madam, no otherwise than as we are
calenders; that is to say, as we observe the same rules. --Were you
born blind of the right eye? replied she. No, madam, answered he; I
lost my eye in such a surprising adventure, that it would be
instructive to every body were it in writing. After that misfortune,
I shaved my beard and eyebrows, and took the habit or a calender,
which I now wear.

Zobeide asked the other two calenders the same question, and had the
same answer; but he who spoke last added, Madam, to show you that we
are no common fellows, and that you may have some consideration for
us, be pleased to know, that we are all three sons of kings; and
though we never met together till this evening, yet we have had tune
enough to make that known to one another; and I assure you, that the
kings from whom we derive our being made some noise in the world.

At this discourse, Zobeide assuaged her anger, and said to the
slaves, Give them their liberty awhile, but stay here. Those who
tell us their history, and the occasion of their coming, do them no
hurt, let them go where they please: but do not spare those who
refuse to give us that satisfaction. --Here Scheherazade stopped;
and her silence, as well as day-light, giving the sultan to know
that it was time for him to rise, he got up, and resolved to hear
the rest of the story next night; for he was impatient to know who
these three one-eyed calenders were.




THIRTY-SEVENTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade, who also took a great deal of pleasure to hear the
sultaness’s stories, said to her, about the close of the following
night, Dear sister, if you be not asleep, I conjure you to go on
with the agreeable story of the three calenders.

Scheherazade asked leave of the sultan, and having obtained it, Sir,
said she, the three calenders, the caliph, the grand vizier Giafar,
the eunuch Mesrour, and the porter, were all in the middle of the
hall, seated upon a foot-carpet, in the presence of the three
ladies, who sat upon a sofa, and the slaves stood ready to do
whatever their mistresses should command.

The porter, understanding that he might extricate himself from
danger by telling his history, spoke first, and said, Madam, you
know my history already, and the occasion of my coming hither; so
that what I have to say will be very short. My lady, your sister
there, called me this morning at the place where I plied as porter
to see if any body would employ me, that I might get my bread. I
followed her to a vintner’s, then to an herb-shop, then to one
that sold oranges, lemons, and citrons, then to a grocer’s, next
to a confectioner’s, and a druggist’s, with my basket upon my
head as full as I was able to carry it: then I came hither, where
you had the goodness to suffer me to continue till now, a favour
that I shall never forget. This, madam, is my history.

When the porter had done, Zobeide said to him, Go, march, let us see
you no more here. Madam, replied the porter, I beg you to let me
stay: it would not be just, after the rest have had the pleasure to
hear my history, that I should not also have the satisfaction to
hear their’s. And, having spoken thus, sat down at the end of the
sofa, glad at heart to have escaped the danger that had frightened
him so much. After him, one of the three calenders, directing his
speech to Zobeide, as the principal of the three ladies, and the
person that commanded him to speak, began his story thus:--




The History of the First Calender, a King’s Son.


Madam, in order to inform you how I lost my right eye, and why I was
obliged to put myself into a calender’s habit, I must tell you,
that I am a king’s son born: the king my father had a brother that
reigned, as he did, over a neighbouring kingdom; and the prince his
son and I were nearly of the same age.

After I had learned my exercises, and the king my father granted me
such liberty as suited my dignity, I went regularly every year to
see my uncle, at whose court I amused myself for a month or two, and
then returned again to my father’s. These several journies
cemented a firm and intimate friendship between the prince my cousin
and myself. The last time I saw him he received me with greater
demonstrations of tenderness than he had done at any time before;
and, resolving one day to give me a treat, he made great
preparations for that purpose. We continued a long time at table;
and after we had both supped, Cousin, said he, you will hardly be
able to guess how I have been employed since your last departure
from hence, now about a year past. I have had a great many men at
work to perfect a design I have in my mind: I have caused an edifice
to be built, which is now finished so as to be habitable; you will
not be displeased if I show it you. But first you are to promise me,
upon oath, that you will keep my secret, according to the confidence
I repose in you.

The affection and familiarity that subsisted between us would not
allow me to refuse him any thing. I very readily took the oath
required of me: upon which he said to me, Stay here till I return
--I will be with you in a moment; and accordingly he came with a
lady in his hand, of singular beauty, and magnificently apparelled.
He did not intimate who she was, neither did I think it was polite
in me to inquire. We sat down again with this lady at table, where
we continued some time, conversing upon indifferent subjects, and
now and then filling a glass to each other’s health. After which
the prince said, Cousin, we must lose no time; therefore pray oblige
me by taking this lady along with you, and conducting her to such a
place, where you will see a tomb newly built in form or a dome. You
will easily know it, the gate is open; go in there together, and
tarry till I come, which will be very speedily.

Being true to my oath, I made no farther inquiry, but took the lady
by the hand, and, by the directions which the prince my cousin had
given me, I brought her to the place, by the light of the moon,
without missing one step of the way. We were scarcely got thither,
when we saw the prince following after, carrying a little pitcher
with water, a hatchet, and a little bag with plaster.

The hatchet served him to break down the empty sepulchre in the
middle of the tomb; he took away the stones one after another, and
laid them in a corner. When all this was taken away, he digged up
the ground, where I saw a trap-door under the sepulchre, which he
lifted up, and underneath perceived the head of a staircase leading
into a vault. Then my cousin, speaking to the lady, said, Madam, it
is by this way that we are to go to the place I told you of. Upon
which the lady drew nigh, and went down, and the prince began to
follow; but first, turning to me, said, My dear cousin, I am
infinitely obliged to you for the trouble you have taken; I thank
you. Adieu. I cried, Dear cousin, what is the meaning of this? Be
content, replied he; you may return back the same way you came.

Scheherazade having proceeded thus far, saw day appear, which
prevented her proceeding any farther. The sultan got up, but longed
very much to know the design of the prince and his lady, who seemed
as if they had a mind to bury themselves alive; and impatiently
waited for next night, that he might be thoroughly informed of it.




THIRTY-EIGHTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade awaked the sultaness next night as usual, and prayed her
to continue the history of the first calender. Schahriar having also
signified to the sultaness, that it would be very pleasing to him,
she resumed the thread of her discourse as follows:

Madam, said the calender to Zobeide, I could get nothing farther
from him, but was obliged to take leave of him. As I returned to my
uncle’s palace, the vapours of the wine got up into my head;
however, I got to my apartment, and went to bed. Next morning, when
I awaked, I began to reflect upon what had happened the night
before; and after recollecting all the circumstances of such a
singular adventure, I fancied it was nothing but a dream. Full of
these thoughts, I sent to see if the prince, my cousin, was ready to
receive a visit from me; but when they brought word back that he did
not lie in his own lodgings that night, they knew not what was
become of him, and were in much trouble about it, I conceived that
the strange event of the tomb was but too true. I was sensibly
afflicted at it; and stealing away privately from my people, I went
to the public burying-place, where there was a vast number of tombs
like that which I had seen. I spent the day in viewing them one
after another, but could not find that I sought for, and thus I
spent four days successively in vain.

You must know, that all this while the king my uncle was absent, and
had been hunting for several days; and I grew weary of staying for
him, and having prayed his ministers to make my apology to him at
his return, I left his palace, and set out towards my father’s
court, from which I had never been so long absent before. I left the
ministers of the king my uncle in great trouble, to think what was
become of the prince my cousin: but because of the oath I had made
to keep his secret, I durst not tell them of any thing that I had
seen or knew, in order to make them easy.

I arrived at my father’s capital, the usual place of his
residence, where, contrary to custom, I found a great guard at the
gate of the palace, who surrounded me as I entered. I asked the
reason, and the commanding officer replied, Prince, the army has
proclaimed the grand vizier king, instead of your father, who is
dead, and I take you prisoner in the name of the new king. At these
words the guards laid hold of me, and carried me before the tyrant.
I leave you to judge, madam, how much I was surprised and grieved.

This rebel vizier had long entertained a mortal hatred against me,
for this reason: when I was a stripling, I loved to shoot in a
cross-bow; and being one day upon the terrace of the palace with my
bow, a bird happening to come by, I shot, but missed him, and the
ball by misfortune hit the vizier, who was taking the air upon the
terrace of his own house, and put out one of his eyes. As soon as I
understood it, I not only sent to make my excuses to him, but did it
in person: yet he always resented it, and, as opportunity offered,
made me sensible of it: but now, madam, that he had me in his power,
he expressed his resentment in a very barbarous manner; for he came
to me like a madman, as soon as ever he saw me, and thrusting his
finger into my right eye, pulled it out himself; and so, madam, I
became blind of one eye.

But the usurper’s cruelty did not stop here; he ordered me to be
shut up in a box, and commanded the executioner to carry me into the
country, to cut off my head, and leave me to be devoured by the
birds of prey. The executioner and another man carried me thus shut
up on horseback into the country, in order to execute the
usurper’s barbarous sentence; but by my prayers and tears, I moved
the executioner’s compassion. Go, said he to me, get you speedily
out of the kingdom, and take heed of ever returning to it, otherwise
you will certainly meet your own ruin, and be the cause of mine. I
thanked him for the favour he did me; and as soon as I was left
alone, I comforted myself for the loss of my eye, by considering
that I had very narrowly escaped much greater danger.

Being in such a condition, I could not travel far at a time: I
retired to remote places while it was day, and travelled as far by
night as my strength would allow me. At last I arrived in the
dominions of the king my uncle, and came to his capital.

I gave him a long detail of the tragical cause of my return, and of
the sad condition he saw me in. Alas! cried he, was it not enough
for me to have lost my son, but must I have news also of the death
of a brother I loved so dearly, and see you also reduced to this
deplorable condition? He told me how uneasy he was, that he could
hear nothing of his son, notwithstanding all the diligence and
inquiry he could make. At these words the unfortunate father burst
out into tears, and was so much afflicted, that, pitying his grief,
it was impossible for me to keep the secret any longer; so that,
notwithstanding my oath to the prince my cousin, I told the king his
father all that I knew.

His majesty listened to me with some sort of comfort; and when I had
done, Nephew, said he, what you tell me gives me some hope. I knew
that my son ordered that tomb to be built, and I can guess pretty
near at the place; and with the idea you still have of it, I fancy
we shall find it; but since he ordered it to be built privately, and
you took your oath to keep his secret, I am of opinion that we ought
to go in quest of it alone, without saying any thing. But he had
another reason for keeping the matter secret, which he did not then
tell me, and an important reason it was, as you will perceive by the
sequel of my discourse.

We disguised ourselves, and went out by a door of the garden which
opened into the field, and soon found what we sought for. I knew the
tomb, and was the more rejoiced at it, because I had formerly sought
it a long time in vain. We entered, and found the iron trap pulled
down upon the entrance of the staircase; we had much ado to raise
it, because the prince had fastened it on the inside with the water
and plaster formerly mentioned, but at last we did get it up.

The king my uncle descended first, I followed, and we went down
about fifty steps. When we came to the foot of the stairs, we found
a sort of ante-chamber, full of a thick smoke, of an ill scent,
which obscured the lamp that gave a very faint light.

From this ante-chamber we came into another, very large, supported
by great columns, and lighted by several branched candlesticks.
There was a cistern in the middle, and provisions of several sorts
standing on one side of it; but we were very much surprised to see
nobody. Before us there appeared an high sofa, which we mounted by
several steps, and over this, there appeared a very large bed, with
the curtains drawn close. The king went up, and opening the
curtains, perceived the prince his son and the lady in bed together,
but burnt and changed to a coal, as if they had been thrown into a
great fire, and taken out again before they were consumed.

But what surprised me most of all was, that though this spectacle
filled me with horror, the king my uncle, instead of testifying his
sorrow to see the prince his son in such a frightful condition, spit
on his face, and said to him with a disdainful air, ‘This is the
punishment of this world, but that of the other will last to
eternity;’ and not content with this, he pulled off his sandal,
and gave his son a great blow on the cheek with it.

But, sir, said Scheherazade, it is day. I am sorry your majesty’s
time will not allow you to hear me farther. This story appearing
very strange to the sultan, he got up resolved to hear the rest of
it next night.




THIRTY-NINTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade being awake sooner than ordinary, called her sister
Scheherazade. My good sultaness, said she, I pray you make an end of
your story of the first calender, for I am ready to die with
impatience till I know the issue of it. Well then, said
Scheherazade, you remember how the first calender continued his
story to Zobeide: I cannot enough express, madam, said he, how much
I was astonished when I saw the king my uncle abuse the prince his
son thus after he was dead. Sir, said I, whatever grief this dismal
sight is capable to impress upon me, I am forced to suspend it, on
purpose to ask your majesty what crime the prince my cousin may have
committed, that his corpse should deserve this sort of treatment?
--Nephew, replied the king, I must tell you, that my son (who is
unworthy of that name) loved his sister from his infancy, as she did
him; I did not hinder their growing love, because I did not foresee
the pernicious consequence of it. This tenderness increased as they
grew in years to such a height, that I dreaded the end of it. At
last I applied such remedies as were in my power. I not only gave my
son a severe reprimand in private, laying before him the horrible
nature of the passion he entertained, and the eternal disgrace he
would bring upon my family, if he persisted in such criminal
courses, but I also represented the same to my daughter; and I shut
her up so close that she could have no conversation with her
brother. But that unfortunate creature had swallowed so much of the
poison, that all the obstacles which by my prudence I could lay in
the way served only to inflame her love.

My son, being persuaded of his sister’s constancy, on pretence of
building a tomb, caused this subterraneous habitation to be made, in
hopes to find one day or other an opportunity to possess himself of
that object which was the cause of his flame, and to bring her
hither. He took advantage of my absence to enter by force into the
place of his sister’s confinement; but this was a circumstance
which my honour would not suffer me to make public: and after so
damnable an action, he came and shut himself up with her in this
place, which he has supplied, as you see, with all sorts of
provisions, that he might enjoy his detestable pleasures for a long
time, which ought to be a subject of horror to all the world; but
God, who would not suffer such an abomination, has justly punished
them both. At these words, he melted into tears, and I joined mine
with his.

After a while, casting his eyes upon me, Dear nephew, cried he,
embracing me, if I have lost that unworthy son, I shall haply find
in you what will better supply his place. The reflections he made on
the doleful end of the prince and princess his daughter, made us
both fall into a new fit of weeping.

We went up the same stairs again, and departed at last from that
dismal place. We let down again the trap-door, and covered it with
earth, and such other materials as the tomb was built of, on purpose
to hide, as much as lay in our power, so terrible an effect of the
wrath of God.

We had not been very long got back to the palace, unperceived by any
one, but we heard a confused noise of trumpets, drums, and other
instruments of war. We soon understood by the thick cloud of dust,
which almost darkened the air, that it was the arrival of a
formidable army: and it proved to be the same vizier that had
dethroned my father, and usurped his throne, who, with a vast number
of troops, was also come to possess himself of that of the king my
uncle.

That prince, who then had only his usual guards about him, could not
resist so many enemies; they invested the city, and the gates being
opened to them without any resistance, they very soon became masters
of the city, and broke into the palace where the king my uncle was,
who defended himself till he was killed, and sold his life at a dear
rate: for my part, I fought as well as I could for a while; but
seeing we were forced to submit to a superior power, I thought on my
retreat and safety, which I had the good fortune to effect by some
back ways, and got to one of the king’s servants, on whose
fidelity I could depend.

Being thus surrounded with sorrows, and persecuted by fortune, I had
recourse to a stratagem, which was the only means left me to save my
life; I caused my beard and eyebrows to be shaved, and putting on a
calender’s habit, I passed, unknown by any, out of the city; after
that, by degrees, I found it easy to get out of my uncle’s
kingdom, by taking the by-roads.

I avoided passing through towns, until I was got into the empire of
the mighty governor of the mussulmen, the glorious and renowned
Caliph Haroun Alraschid, when I thought myself out of danger; and
considering what I was to do, I resolved to come to Bagdad,
intending to throw myself at the feet of that monarch, whose
generosity is every where applauded. I shall move him to compassion,
said I to myself, by the relation of my extraordinary misfortunes,
and without doubt he will take pity on such an unfortunate prince,
and not suffer me to implore his assistance in vain.

In short, after a journey of several months, I arrived yesterday at
the gate of this city, into which I entered about the dusk of the
evening; and stopping a little while to revive my spirits, and to
consider which way I was to turn, this other calender you see here
next to me came up: he saluted me, and I him. --You appear, said I,
to be a stranger, as I am. --You are not mistaken, replied he. He
had no sooner returned this answer, but that third calender you see
there overtook us. He saluted us, and told us he was a stranger
newly come to Bagdad; so as brethren we joined together, resolving
not to separate from one another.

Meanwhile it was late, and we knew not where to seek a lodging in
the city, where we had no acquaintance, and had never been before.
But good fortune having brought us before your gate, we made bold to
knock, when you received us with so much kindness, that we are
incapable to return you suitable thanks. This, madam, said he, is in
obedience to your commands, the account I was to give you why I lost
my right eye, wherefore my beard and eyebrows are shaved, and how I
came to be with you at this present time.

It is enough, said Zobeide; you may retire to what place you think
fit. The calender made his excuse, and begged the ladies’ leave to
stay till he had heard the relations of his two comrades, whom I
cannot, said he, leave with honour; and till he might also hear
those of the three other persons that were in company.

Here Scheherazade said to the sultan, Sir, the daylight which you
see prevents me from going on with the story of the second calender;
but if your majesty will hear it to-morrow, you will find as much
satisfaction in that as in the story of the first. To which the
sultan gave consent, and so got up, in order to go to council.




FORTIETH NIGHT.


Dinarzade, not doubting to find as much delight in the story of the
second calender as she had in the first, failed not to call upon the
sultaness before day. If you be not asleep, sister, said she, I
would pray you to begin the story that you promised me; upon which
Scheherazade addressed her discourse to the sultan, and spoke as
follows:

Sir, the story of the first calender seemed very strange to the
whole company, but especially to the caliph; who, notwithstanding
the slaves stood by with their scimeters in their hands, could not
forbear whispering to the vizier --Many stories have I heard, but
never any thing that came near the story of the calender. Whilst he
was saying this, the second calender began, addressing his speech to
Zobeide.




Story of the Second Calender, a King’s Son.


Madam, said he, to obey your command, and to show you by what
strange accident I became blind of the right eye, I must of
necessity give you the whole account of my life.

I was scarce past my infancy, when the king my father (for you must
know, madam, I am a prince by birth) perceived that I was endowed
with a great deal of sense, and spared nothing that was proper for
improving it: he employed all the men in his dominions that excelled
in science and art, to be constantly about me.

No sooner was I able to read and write, but I learnt the Alcoran
from the beginning to the end by heart; that admirable book, which
contains the foundation, the precepts, and the rules of our
religion; and that I might be thoroughly instructed in it, I read
the works of the most approved authors, by whose commentaries it had
been explained. I added to this study that of all the traditions
collected from the mouth of our prophet, by the great men that were
contemporary with him. I was not satisfied with the knowledge of all
that had any relation to our religion, but made also a particular
search into our histories. I made myself perfect in polite learning,
in the works of poets, and versification. I applied myself to
geography, chronology, and to speak our Arabian language in its
purity; not forgetting in the mean time all such exercises as were
proper for a prince to understand. But one thing which I was fond
of, and succeeded in to admiration, was, to form the characters of
our Arabian language, wherein I surpassed all the writing masters of
our kingdom that had acquired the greatest reputation.

Fame did me more honour than I deserved, for she not only spread the
renown of my talents through all the dominions of the king my
father, but carried it as far as the Indian court, whose potent
monarch, desirous to see me, sent an ambassador with rich presents,
to demand me of my father, who was extremely glad of this embassy
for several reasons; he was persuaded that nothing could be more
commendable in a prince of my age, than to travel and visit foreign
courts; and he was very glad to gain the friendship of the Indian
sultan. I departed with the ambassador, but with no great retinue,
because of the length and difficulty of the journey.

When we had travelled about a month, we discovered at a distance a
great cloud of dust, and under that we saw very soon fifty horsemen,
well armed, that were robbers, coming towards us on full gallop.
Scheherazade perceiving day, told the sultan of it, who got up; but
desiring to know what passed between the fifty men on horseback and
the Indian ambassador, this prince was somewhat impatient till next
night came.




FORTY-FIRST NIGHT.


It was almost day when Dinarzade awoke next morning, and called to
her sister, If you be not asleep, dear sister, I pray you continue
the story of the second calender. Scheherazade began in this manner:

Madam, said the calender, (always speaking to Zobeide,) as we had
ten horses laden with baggage and other presents, that I was to
carry to the Indian sultan from the king my father, and my retinue
was but small, you may easily judge that these robbers came boldly
up to us; and not being in a posture to make any opposition, we told
them, that we were ambassadors belonging to the sultan of the
Indies, and hoped they would attempt nothing contrary to that
respect that is due to them, thinking by this means to save our
equipage and our lives: but the robbers most insolently replied, For
what reason would you have us show any respect to the sultan your
master? We are none of his subjects, nor are we upon his
territories. Having spoken thus, they surrounded and fell upon us: I
defended myself as long as I could; but finding myself wounded, and
seeing the ambassador, with his servants and mine, lying on the
ground, I made use of what strength was yet remaining in my horse,
who was also very much wounded, and separated myself from the crowd,
and rode away as fast as he could carry me; but he happening all of
a sudden to fall under me, by weariness and the loss of blood, he
fell down dead. I got rid of him in a trice; and finding that I was
not pursued, it made me judge the robbers were not willing to quit
the booty they had got.

Scheherazade, perceiving day coming on, was obliged to stop here. O
sister, said Dinarzade, to-morrow I shall be more diligent, in hopes
you will make reparation to the sultan for the loss that his
curiosity has sustained through my neglect. Schahriar arose without
saying one word, and went to his usual consultation.



FORTY-SECOND NIGHT.


Dinarzade failed not to call the sultaness a good while before day.
My dear sister, said she, if you be not asleep, I pray you resume
the story of the calender. I consent to it, said Scheherazade; and
so continued it in these words:

Here you see me, said the calender, alone, wounded, destitute of
help, and in a strange country: I durst not betake myself to the
high road, fearing I might fall again into the hands of these
robbers. When I had bound up my wound, which was not dangerous, I
walked on the rest of the day, and arrived at the foot of a
mountain, where I perceived a passage into a cave; I went in, and
staid there that night with little satisfaction, after I had eaten
some fruits that I gathered by the way.

I continued my journey for several days following, without finding
any place of abode; but after a month’s time, I came to a large
town, well inhabited, and situated so much the more advantageously,
as it was surrounded with several rivers, so that it enjoyed
perpetual spring.

The pleasant objects which then presented themselves to my view
afforded me some joy, and suspended for a time the sorrow with which
I was overwhelmed to find myself in such a condition. My face,
hands, and feet, were black and sun-burnt; and, by my long journey,
my shoes and stockings were quite worn out, so that I was forced to
walk bare-footed; and besides, my clothes were all in rags. I
entered into the town to inform myself where I was, and addressed
myself to a tailor that was at work in his shop; who, perceiving by
my air that I was a person of more note than my outward appearance
bespoke me to be, made me sit down by him, and asked me who I was,
from whence I came, and what had brought me thither? I did not
conceal any thing of all that had befallen me, nor made I any
scruple to discover my quality.

The tailor listened with attention to my words; but after I had done
speaking, instead of giving me any consolation, he augmented my
sorrow. Take heed, said he, how you discover to any person what you
have now declared to me; for the prince of this country is the
greatest enemy that the king your father has, and he will certainly
do you some mischief, when he comes to hear of your being in this
city. I made no doubt of the tailor’s sincerity, when he named the
prince: but since the enmity which is between my father and him has
no relation to my adventures, I must beg your pardon, madam, if I
pass it over with silence.

I returned the tailor thanks for his good advice, and showed myself
inclinable wholly to follow his counsel, and assured him that his
favours should never be forgotten by me. And as he believed I could
not but be hungry, he ordered something to be brought for me to eat,
and offered me at the same time a lodging in his house, which I
accepted. Some days after, finding me pretty well recovered of the
fatigue I had endured by a long and tedious journey, and reflecting
that most princes of our religion did apply themselves to some art
or calling that might be serviceable to them upon occasion, he asked
me if I had learned any thing whereby I might get a livelihood, and
not be burdensome to any man? I told him that I understood the laws,
both divine and human; that I was a grammarian and poet; and above
all, that I understood writing perfectly well. By all this, said he,
you will not be able in this country to purchase yourself one morsel
of bread: nothing is of less use here than those sciences; but if
you will be advised by me, said he, dress yourself in a labourer’s
habit; and since you appear to be strong, and of a good
constitution, you shall go into the next forest, and cut fire wood,
which you may bring to the market to be sold: and I can assure you
it will turn to so good an account that you may live by it, without
dependance upon any man; and by this means you will be in a
condition to wait for the favourable minute, when Heaven shall think
fit to dispel those clouds of misfortune that thwart your happiness,
and oblige you to conceal your birth: I will take care to supply you
with a rope and a hatchet.

The fear of being known, and the necessity I was under of getting a
livelihood, made me agree to this proposal, notwithstanding all the
meanness and hardships that attended it. The day following the
tailor bought me a rope, a hatchet, and a short coat, and
recommended me to some poor people who gained their bread after the
same manner, that they might take me into their company. They
conducted me to the wood, and the first day I brought in as much
upon my head as brought me half a piece of gold, which is the money
of that country: for though the wood is not far distant from the
town, yet it was very scarce there, by reason that few or none would
be at the trouble to go and cut it. I gained a good sum of money in
a short time, and repaid my tailor what he had advanced for me.

I continued this way of living for a whole year; and one day, that
by chance I was gone farther into the wood than usual, I happened to
light on a very pleasant place, where I began to cut down wood; and
in pulling up the root of a tree, I espied an iron ring, fastened to
a trap-door of the same metal. I took away the earth that covered
it, and having lifted it up, saw stairs, which I went down, with my
axe in my band.

When I was come to the bottom of the stairs, I found myself in a
large palace, which put me into great consternation, because of a
great light, which appeared as clear in it as if it had been above
ground, in the open air. I went forward along a gallery, supported
by pillars of jasper, the base and capitals of massy gold; but
seeing a lady of a noble and free air, and extremely beautiful,
coming towards me, my eyes were taken off from beholding any other
object but her alone.

Here Scheherazade stopped, because day appeared: but Dinarzade said,
Dear sister, I confess I am extremely well pleased with what you
have told us to-day, and I imagine that the following part must be
no less surprising. --You are not mistaken, said the sultaness, for
the remainder of this story of the second calender is better worth
my ford the sultan’s attention, than all that he has hitherto
heard. --I doubt that, said Schahriar, as he was getting up; but we
shall know that to-morrow.




FORTY-THIRD NIGHT.


The sultaness being awakened as usual, gave the sultan an account
that the second calender continued his story thus: Being desirous,
said he, to spare the lady the trouble to come to me, I made haste
to meet her: and as I was saluting her with a low bow, she asked me,
What are you, a man or a genie? --A man, madam, said I: I have no
correspondence with genies. --By what adventure, said she, fetching
a deep sigh, are you come hither? I have lived here these
twenty-five years, and never saw any man but yourself during that
time.

Her great beauty, which had already smitten me, and the sweetness
and civility wherewith she received me, emboldened me to say to her,
Madam, before I have the honour to satisfy your curiosity, give me
leave to tell you, that I am infinitely satisfied with this
unexpected meeting, which offers me an occasion of consolation in
the midst of my affliction; and perhaps it may give me an
opportunity to make you also more happy than you are. I gave her a
true account by what strange accident she saw me, the son of a king,
in such a condition as then I appeared in her presence; and how
fortune directed that I should discover the entrance into that
magnificent prison where I had found her, but, according to
appearance, in an unpleasant situation.

Alas! prince, said she, sighing once more, you have just cause to
believe this rich and pompous prison cannot be otherwise than a most
wearisome abode; the most charming place in the world being no way
delightful when we are detained there contrary to our will. It is
not possible but you have heard of the great Epitimarus, king of the
isle of Ebene, so called from that precious wood it produces in
abundance; I am the princess his daughter.

The king, my father, had chosen for me a husband, a prince that was
my cousin: but, on my wedding-night, in the midst of the rejoicing
that was in the court and the capital city of the kingdom of the
isle of Ebene, before I was given to my husband, a genie took me
away. I fainted at the same moment, and lost my senses; but when I
came to myself again, I found myself in this place. I was a long
time inconsolable, but time and necessity have accustomed me to see
and receive the genie. Twenty-five years, as I told you before, I
have continued in this place; where, I must confess, I have every
thing that I can wish for necessary to life, and also every thing
that can satisfy a princess fond of dress and fashions.

Every ten days, said the princess, the genie comes hither to lie
with me one night, which he never exceeds; and the excuse he makes
for it is, that he is married to another wife, who would grow
jealous if she came to know how unfaithful he was to her. Meanwhile,
if I have occasion for him by day or night, as soon as I touch a
talisman, which is at the entrance into my chamber, the genie
appears. It is now the fourth day since he was here, and I do not
expect him before the end of six more: so, if you please, you may
stay five days and keep me company, and I will endeavour to
entertain you according to your quality and merit. I thought myself
too fortunate, to have obtained so great a favour without asking it,
to refuse so obliging a proffer. The princess made me go into a
bagnio, which was the most handsome, the most commodious, and the
most sumptuous that could be imagined; and when I came forth,
instead of my own clothes, I found another very costly suit, which I
did not esteem so much for its richness, as because it made me look
worthy to be in her company. We sat down on a sofa covered with rich
tapestry, with cushions to lean upon of the rarest Indian brocade;
and some time after she covered a table with several dishes of
delicate meats. We ate together, and passed the remaining part of
the day with much satisfaction; and at night she received me to her
bed.

The next day, as she contrived every means to please me, she brought
in, at dinner, a bottle of old wine, the most excellent that ever
was tasted; and out of complaisance, she drank some part of it with
me. When my head grew hot with the agreeable liquor, Fair princess,
said I, you have been too long thus buried alive: follow me, and
enjoy the real day, from which you have been deprived so many years,
and abandon this false light that you have here. --Prince, replied
she, with a smile, leave this discourse; if you out of ten days will
grant me nine, and resign the last to the genie, the fairest day
that ever was would be nothing in my esteem. --Princess, said I, it
is the fear of the genie that makes you speak thus; for my part, I
value him so little, that I will break in pieces his talisman, with
the conjuration that is written about it. Let him come, I will
expect him; and how brave or redoubtable soever he be, I will make
him feel the weight of my arm: I swear solemnly that I will
extirpate all the genies in the world, and him first. The princess,
who knew the consequence, conjured me not to touch the talisman; for
that would be a means, said she, to rum both you and me: I know what
belongs to genies better than you. The fumes of the wine did not
suffer me to hearken to her reasons; but I gave the talisman a kick
with my foot, and broke it in several pieces.

At these words Scheherazade perceiving day, grew silent, and the
sultan got up, not doubting but the breaking of the talisman had
some remarkable event, and therefore resolved to hear that story to
the end.




FORTY-FOURTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade being awaked somewhat before day, said to the sultaness,
Sister, if you are not asleep, I pray you acquaint us with what
happened in the subterranean palace after the prince had broken the
talisman. --I am just going to relate it, said Scheherazade. Upon
which, resuming her narrative, she continued her discourse thus, in
the person of the second calender.

The talisman was no sooner broken, but the palace began to shake,
and was ready to fall, with a hideous noise like thunder,
accompanied with flashes of lightning, and a great darkness. This
terrible noise in a moment dispelled the fumes of my wine, and made
me sensible, but too late, of the folly I had committed. Princess,
cried I, what means all this? She answered in a fright, and without
any concern for her own misfortune, Alas! you are undone, if you do
not escape presently.

I followed her advice, and my fears were so great, that I forgot my
hatchet and cords. I was scarcely got to the stairs by which I came
down, when the enchanted palace opened at once, and made a passage
for the genie; he asked the princess, in great anger, What has
happened to you, and why did you call me? --A qualm at my stomach,
said the princess, made me fetch this bottle which you see here, out
of which I drank twice or thrice, and by mischance made a false
step, and fell upon the talisman, which is broken, and that is all.

At this answer, the furious genie told her, You are a false woman,
and a liar: how came that axe and those cords there? --I never saw
them till this moment, said the princess. Your coming in such an
impetuous manner has, it may be, forced them up in some place, as
you came along, and so brought them hither without your knowing it.

The genie made no other answer but what was accompanied with
reproaches and blows, of which I heard the noise. I could not endure
to hear the pitiful cries and shouts of the princess, so cruelly
abused: I had already laid off the suit she made me put on, and
taken my own, which I had laid on the stairs the day before, when I
came out of the bagnio: I made haste up stairs, more distracted with
sorrow and compassion, as I had been the cause of so great a
misfortune; and by sacrificing the fairest princess on earth to the
barbarity of a merciless genie, I was become the most criminal and
ungrateful of mankind. It is true, said I, she has been a prisoner
these twenty-five years; but, liberty excepted, she wanted nothing
that could make her happy. My folly has put an end to her happiness,
and brought upon her the cruelty of an unmerciful devil: I let down
the trap-door, covered it again with earth, and returned to the city
with a burden of wood, which I bound up without knowing what I did,
so great was my trouble and sorrow.

My landlord, the tailor, was very much rejoiced to see me: Your
absence, said he, has disquieted me very much, by reason you had
entrusted me with the secret of your birth, and I knew not what to
think; I was afraid somebody had discovered you: God be thanked for
your return. I thanked him for his zeal and affection, but not a
word durst I say of what had passed, nor the reason why I came back
without my hatchet and cords.

I retired to my chamber, where I reproached myself a thousand times,
for my excessive imprudence: Nothing, said I, could have paralleled
the princess’s good fortune and mine, had I forborne to break the
talisman.

While I was thus giving myself over to melancholy thoughts, the
tailor came in. An old man, said he, whom I do not know, brings me
here your hatchet and cords, which he found in his way, as he tells
me, and understood by your comrades that go along with you to the
woods, that you lodge here; come out and speak to him, for he will
deliver them to none but yourself.

At this discourse I changed colour, and fell a trembling. While the
tailor was asking me the reason, my chamber door opened at once, and
the old man, having no patience to stay, appeared to us with my
hatchet and cords. This man was the genie, the ravisher of the fair
princess of the isle of Ebene, who had thus disguised himself, after
he had treated her with the utmost barbarity. I am a genie, said he,
son of the daughter of Eblis, prince of genies: is not this your
hatchet? said he, speaking to me, and are not these your cords?

Here Scheherazade saw day, and left off. The sultan found the story
of the second calender too curious not to desire that he might hear
it out; and therefore got up, with an intention to hear the rest
next morning.




FORTY-FIFTH NIGHT.


The day following, Dinarzade called upon the sultaness, My dear
sister, pray tell us how the genie treated the prince. --I wish to
satisfy your curiosity, replied Scheherazade; and then resumed her
story of the second calender thus:

The calender continuing his discourse to Zobeide, Madam, said he,
after the genie had put the question to me, he gave me no time to
answer, nor was it in my power, so much had his terrible aspect
disordered me. He grasped me by the middle, dragged me out of the
chamber, and mounting into the air, carried me up to the skies with
such swiftness, that I perceived I was got so high without being
able to take notice of the way he carried me in so few moments. He
descended again in like manner to the earth, which on a sudden he
caused to open with a stroke of his foot, and so sunk down at once,
where I found myself in the enchanted palace, before the fair
princess of the isle of Ebene. But alas! what a spectacle was there!
I saw what pierced me to the heart; this poor princess was quite
naked, weltering in her blood, and laid upon the ground, more like
one dead than alive, with her cheeks bathed in tears.

Perfidious wretch, said the genie to her, pointing at me, is not
this your gallant? She cast her languishing eyes upon me, and
answered mournfully, I do not know him; I never saw him till this
moment. --What! said the genie, he is the cause of thy being in the
condition thou art justly in; and yet darest thou say thou dost not
know him? --If I do not know him, said the princess, would you have
me make a lie on purpose to ruin him? --Oh then, said the genie,
pulling out a scimitar, and presenting it to the princess, if you
never saw him before, take the scimitar and cut off his head.
--Alas! replied the princess, how is it possible that I should
execute what you would force me to do? My strength is so far spent
that I cannot lift up my arm; and if I could, how should I have the
heart to take away the life of an innocent man, and one whom I do
not know? --This refusal, said the genie to the princess,
sufficiently informs me of your crime. Upon which, turning to me,
And thou, said he, dost thou not know her?

I should have been the most ungrateful wretch, and the most
perfidious of all mankind, if I had not shown myself as faithful to
the princess as she was to me, who had been the cause of her
misfortunes; therefore I answered the genie, How should I know her,
when I never saw her till now? --If it be so, said he, take the
scimitar, and cut off her head: on this condition I will set thee at
liberty, for then I shall be convinced that thou didst never see her
till this very moment, as thou sayest. --With all my heart, replied
I, and took the scimitar in my hand.

But sir, said Scheherazade, it is day, and I ought not to abuse your
majesty’s patience. --These are wonderful events, said the sultan
to himself. We shall know tomorrow if the prince was so cruel as to
pay obedience to the genie’s command.




FORTY-SIXTH NIGHT.


When the night was near at an end, Dinarzade said to the sultaness,
Sister, if you be not asleep, I would pray you to continue the story
which you could not finish yesterday. --I will, says Scheherazade,
and without loss of time you shall understand that the second
calender went on thus:

Do not think, madam, that I drew near to the fair princess of the
isle of Ebene to be the executioner of the genie’s barbarity. I
did it only to demonstrate by my behaviour, as much as possible,
that as she had shown her resolution to sacrifice her life for my
sake, I would not refuse to sacrifice mine for her’s. The
princess, notwithstanding her pain and suffering, understood my
meaning; which she signified by an obliging look, and made me
understand her willingness to die for me; and that she was satisfied
to see how willing I was also to die for her. --Upon this, I stepped
back and threw the scimitar on the ground. I shall forever, said I
to the genie, be hateful to all mankind, should I be so base as to
murder, I do not only say a person whom I do not know, but a lady
like this, who is ready to give up the ghost: do with me what you
please, since I am in your power: I cannot obey your barbarous
commands.

I see, said the genie, that you both outbrave me, and insult my
jealousy; but both of you shall know, by the treatment I give you,
what I am capable to do. At these words the monster took up the
scimitar, and cut off one of her hands, which left her only so much
of life as to give me a token with the other that she bid me adieu
for ever: for the blood she had lost before, and that which gushed
out then, did not permit her to live above one or two moments after
this barbarous cruelty, the sight of which threw me into a fit. When
I was come to myself again, I expostulated with the genie, why he
made me languish in expectation of death; Strike, cried I, for I am
ready to receive the mortal blow, and expect it as the greatest
favour you can show me. But instead of agreeing to that, Look ye,
said he, how genies treat their wives whom they suspect of
unfaithfulness: she has received thee here; and were I certain that
she had put any further affront upon me, I would put thee to death
this minute: but I will content myself to transform thee into a dog,
ape, lion, or bird; take thy choice of any of these, I will leave it
to thyself.

These words gave me some hopes to mollify him: O genie, said I,
moderate your passion, and since you will not take away my life,
give it me generously: I shall always remember your clemency, if you
pardon me, as one of the best men in the world pardoned one of his
neighbours that bore him a mortal hatred. The genie asked me what
had passed between those two neighbours and said he would have
patience till he heard the story, which I told him thus; and I
believe, madam, you will not take it ill if I also relate it to you.




The Story of the envious Man, and of him that he envied.


In a considerable town, two persons dwelt next door to one another:
one of them conceived such a violent hatred against the other, that
he who was hated resolved to remove his dwelling farther off, being
persuaded that their being neighbours was the only cause of his
animosity; for though he had done him several pieces of service, he
found, nevertheless, that his hatred was nothing diminished;
therefore he sold his house, with what goods he had left, and
retired to the capital city of that kingdom, which was not far
distant. He bought a little spot of ground, which lay about half a
league from the city; he had a house convenient enough, with a fine
garden, and a pretty spacious court, wherein there was a deep well,
which was not in use.

The honest man having made this purchase, put on a dervise’s or
monk’s habit, to lead a retired life, and caused several cells to
be made in the house, where in a short time he established a
numerous society of dervises. He soon came to be publicly known by
his virtue, through which he acquired the esteem of many people, as
well of the commonalty as of the chief of the city: in short, he was
extremely honoured and cherished by every one. People came from afar
to recommend themselves to his prayers; and all who came to live
with him published what blessings they received through his means.

The great reputation of this honest man having spread to the town
from whence he came, it touched the envious man so much to the
quick, that he left his house and affairs with a resolution to go
and ruin him. With this intent he went to the new convent of
dervises, of which his former neighbour was the head, who received
him with all imaginable tokens of friendship. The envious man told
him that he was come on purpose to communicate a business of
importance to him, which he could not do but in private; and that
nobody may hear us, let us, said he, take a walk in your court; and
seeing night begins to draw on, command your dervises to retire to
their cells. The head of the dervises did as he required.

When the envious man saw that he was alone with this good man, he
began to tell his errand, walking side by side in the court, till he
saw his opportunity; and getting the good man near the brink of the
well, he gave him a thrust, and pushed him into it, without any body
being witness to so wicked an action. Having done thus, he marched
off immediately, got out at the gate of the convent without being
known to any one, and went home to his own house, well satisfied
with his journey, being fully persuaded that the object of his
hatred was no more in this world; but he found himself highly
mistaken.

Scheherazade could go no farther, because day began to appear. The
sultan conceived great indignation against the envious man, and said
to himself, I heartily wish that no hurt may have come to this
honest man: I hope to hear to-morrow that Heaven did not forsake him
on this occasion.




FORTY-SEVENTH NIGHT.


If you be not asleep, sister, said Dinarzade, next morning, I
conjure you to tell us if the honest dervise came safe and sound out
of the well. --Yes, replied Scheherazade, and the second calender
pursued his story thus: This old well, said he, was inhabited by
fairies and genies, which happened luckily for the relief of the
head of the convent: for they received and supported him, and
carried him to the bottom, so that he got no hurt. He perceived well
enough that there was something extraordinary in his fall, which
must otherwise have cost him his life; whereas he neither saw nor
felt any thing. But he soon heard a voice, which said, Do you know
what honest man this is, to whom we have done this piece of service?
Another voice answered, No. To which the first replied, Then I will
tell you. This man, out of charity, the greatest that ever was
known, left the town he lived in, and has established himself in
this place, in hopes to cure one of his neighbours of the envy he
had conceived against him; he had acquired such a general esteem,
that the envious man, not able to endure it, came hither on purpose
to ruin him, which he had performed, had it not been for the
assistance which we have given this honest man, whose reputation is
so great, that the sultan, who keeps his residence in the
neighbouring city, was to pay him a visit tomorrow, to recommend the
princess his daughter to his prayers.

Another voice asked, What need had the princess of the dervise’s
prayers? To which the first answered, You do not know, it seems,
that she is possessed by genie Maimoun, the son of Dimdim, who is
fallen in love with her. But I know well how this good head of the
dervises may cure her; the thing is very easy, and I will tell it
you. He has a black cat in his convent, with a white spot at the end
of her tail, about the bigness of a small piece of Arabian money;
let him only pull seven hairs out of the white spot, burn them, and
smoke the princess’s head with the fume, she will not only be
presently cured, but be so safely delivered from Maimoun, the son of
Dimdim, that he will never dare to come near her a second time.

The head of the dervises remembered every word of the discourse
between the fairies and the genies, who were very silent all the
night after. The next morning by break of day, when he could discern
one thing from another, the well being broken down in several
places, he saw a hole, by which he crept out with ease.

The other dervises, who had been seeking for him, were rejoiced to
see him: he gave them a brief account of the wickedness of that man
to whom he had given so kind a reception the day before, and retired
into his cell. It was not long till the black cat, of whom the
fairies and the genies had made mention in their discourses the
night before, came to fawn upon her master, as she was accustomed to
do: he took her up, and pulled out seven hairs of the white spot
that was upon her tail, and laid them aside for his use when
occasion should serve.

The sun was not high, when the sultan, who would leave no means
untried that he thought could restore the princess to perfect
health, arrived at the gate of the convent. He commanded his guards
to halt, whilst he with his principal officers went in. The dervises
received him with profound respect.

The sultan called their head aside, and said, Good sheich, it may be
you know already the cause of my coming hither. --Yes, sir, replied
he very gravely, if I do not mistake, it is the disease of the
princess which procures me this unmerited honour.

That is the very thing, replied the sultan. You will give me new
life, if your prayers, as I hope they will, can procure my
daughter’s health. --Sir, said the good man, if your majesty will
be pleased to let her come hither, I am in hopes, through God’s
assistance and favour, she shall return in perfect health.

The prince, transported with joy, sent immediately to fetch his
daughter, who very soon appeared with a numerous train of ladies and
eunuchs, but masked, so that her face was not seen. The chief of the
dervises caused a pall to be held over her head, and he had no
sooner thrown the seven hairs upon the burning coals, but the genie
Maimoun, the son of Dimdim, gave a great cry, without any thing
being seen, and left the princess at liberty; upon which she took
off the veil from her face, and rose up to see where she was,
saying, Where am I, and who brought me hither? At which words, the
sultan, overcome with excess of joy, embraced his daughter, and
kissed her eyes? he also kissed the chief of the dervises’ hands,
and said to his officers, Tell me your opinion, what reward does he
deserve, that has thus cured my daughter? They all cried, he
deserves her in marriage. --This is what I had in my thoughts, said
the sultan; and I make him my son-in-law from this moment. Some time
after the prime vizier died, and the sultan conferred the place on
the dervise. The sultan himself also died without heirs male; upon
which, the religious orders and the militia gathered together, and
the good man was declared and acknowledged sultan by general consent.

Day light appearing, Scheherazade was obliged to break off her
story. Schahriar looked upon the dervise to be worthy of the crown
he had got, but was desirous to know if the envious man did not die
for spite; and got up with an intention to hear it next night.




FORTY-EIGHTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade, when it was time, addressed her speech to the sultaness
thus: My dear sister, said she, if you be not asleep, I would pray
you to continue the story of the hated and envious man. With all my
heart, answered Scheherazade. The second calender continued his
story thus: The honest dervise, said he, being mounted on the throne
of his father-in-law, as he was one day in the midst of his
courtiers upon a march, he espied the envious man among the crowd of
people that stood as he passed along, and calling one of the viziers
that attended him, whispered him in his ear thus; Go bring me that
man you see there; but, take care you do not frighten him. The
vizier obeyed, and when the envious man was brought into his
presence, the sultan said, Friend, I am extremely glad to see you.
Upon which he called an officer, Go immediately, said he, and cause
to be paid the man out of my treasury one hundred pieces of gold:
let him have also twenty loads of the richest merchandize in my
storehouses, and a sufficient guard to conduct him to his house.
After he had given this charge to the officer, he bid the envious
man farewell, and proceeded on his march.

When I had finished the recital of this story to the genie, the
murderer of the princess of the isle of Ebene, I made the
application to himself thus: O genie! you see here, that this
bountiful sultan did not content himself with forgetting the design
of the envious man to take away his life, but treated him kindly,
and sent him back with all the favours which I just now related. In
short, I made use of all my eloquence, praying him to imitate so
good an example, and to grant me pardon; but it was impossible for
me to move his compassion.

All that I can do for thee, said he, is, that I will not take thy
life: do not flatter thyself that I will send thee safe and sound
back; I must let thee feel what I am able to do by my enchantments.
So saying, he laid violent hands on me, and carried me across the
vault of the subterranean palace, which opened to give him passage;
he flew up with me so high, that the earth seemed to be only a
little white cloud; from thence he came down again like lightning,
and alighted upon the ridge of a mountain.

There he took up a handful of earth, and pronounced or rather
muttered some words which I did not understand, and threw it upon
me: Quit the shape of a man, said he to me, and take on thee that of
an ape. He vanished immediately, and left me alone, transformed into
an ape, overwhelmed with sorrow, in a strange country, not knowing
whether I was near or far from my father’s dominions.

I went down from the top of the mountain, and came into a plain
country, which took me a month’s time to travel through, and then
I came to the sea-side. It happened to be then a great calm, and I
espied a vessel about half a league from the shore: unwilling to
lose this good opportunity, I broke off a large branch from a tree,
which I carried with me to the sea-side, and set myself astride upon
it, with a stick in each hand to serve me for oars.

I launched out in this posture, and advanced near the ship. When I
was nigh enough to be known, the seamen and passengers that were
upon the deck thought it an extraordinary sight, and all of them
looked upon me with great astonishment. In the mean time I got
aboard, and laying hold of a rope, I jumped upon the deck, but
having lost my speech, I found myself in great perplexity; and
indeed the risk I ran then was nothing less than when I was at the
mercy of the genie.

The merchants, being both superstitious and scrupulous, believed I
should occasion some mischief to their voyage, if they received me;
therefore, said one, I will knock him down with a handspike; says
another, I will shoot an arrow through his guts: says a third, Let
us throw him into the sea. Some of them would not have failed to
have executed their design, if I had not got to that side where the
captain was, when I threw myself at his feet, and took him by the
coat in a begging posture. This action, together with the tears
which he saw gush from my eyes, moved his compassion, so that he
took me under his protection, threatening to be revenged on him that
would do me the least hurt; and he himself made very much of me,
while I on my part, though I had no power to speak, showed all
possible signs of gratitude by my gestures.

The wind that succeeded the calm was gentle and favourable, and did
not change for fifty days, but brought us safe to the port of a fine
city, well peopled, and of great trade, the capital of a powerful
state, where we came to an anchor.

Our vessel was speedily surrounded with an infinite number of boats
full of people, who came to congratulate their friends upon their
safe arrival, or to inquire for those they had left behind them in
the country from whence they came, or out of curiosity to see a ship
that came from a far country.

Amongst the rest, some officers came on hoard, desiring to speak
with the merchants, in the name of the sultan. The merchants
appearing, one of the officers told them, The sultan, our master,
hath commanded us to acquaint you, that he is glad of your safe
arrival, and prays you to take the trouble, every one of you, to
write some lines upon this roll of paper: and that his design by
this may be understood, you must know that we had a prime vizier,
who, besides a great capacity to manage affairs, understood writing
to the highest perfection. This minister is lately dead, at which
the sultan is very much troubled: and since he can never behold his
writing without admiration, he has made a solemn vow, not to give
the place to any man but to him who can write as well as he did.
Many people have presented their writings; but, to this day, nobody
in all this empire, has been judged worthy to supply the vizier’s
place.

Those merchants that believed they could write well enough to
pretend to this high dignity, wrote one after another what they
thought fit. After they had done, I advanced, and look the roll out
of the gentleman’s hand; but all the people, especially the
merchants, cried out, He will tear it, or throw it into the sea;
till they saw how properly I held the roll, and made a sign that I
would write in my turn: then they were of another opinion, and their
fear turned into admiration. However, since they had never seen an
ape that could write, nor could be persuaded that I was more
ingenious than other apes, they offered to snatch the roll out of my
hand; but the captain took my part once more. Let him alone, said
he; suffer him to write. If he only scribbles the paper, I promise
you that I will punish him upon the spot; if, on the contrary, he
writes well, as I hope he will, because I never saw an ape so clever
and ingenious, and so quick of apprehension, I do declare that I
will own him as my son. I had one that had not half the wit that he
has. Perceiving that nobody opposed my design, I took the pen, and
wrote six sorts of hands used among the Arabians, and each specimen
contained an extemporary distich or quatrain in praise of the
sultan. My writing did not only excel that of the merchants, but, I
venture to say, they had not before seen any such fair writing in
that country. When I had done, the officers took the roll, and
carried it to the sultan.

Thus far was Scheherazade come in her story, when day-light
appeared. Sir, said she to Schahriar, if I had time to continue, I
would give your majesty an account of things far more surprising
than what I have already told. The sultan, who had resolved to hear
the end of the story, got up without saying a word.




FORTY-NINTH NIGHT.


The next morning, Dinarzade, being awake before day, called the
sultaness, and said, Sister, if you be not asleep, pray let us hear
the rest of the adventures that befel the ape. I believe my lord the
sultan is no less curious to know it than myself. You shall both be
soon satisfied, answered Scheherazade. The second calender continued
his story thus:--

The sultan took little notice of any of the other writings, but
considered mine, which was so much to his liking, that he said to
the officers, Take the finest horse in my stable, with the richest
harness, and a robe of the most sumptuous brocade, to put upon that
person who wrote the six hands, and bring him hither to me. At this
command the officers could not forbear laughing; the sultan grew
angry at their boldness, and was ready to punish them; till they
told him, Sir, we humbly beg your majesty’s pardon: these hands
were not written by a man, but by an ape. What do you say? said the
sultan: those admirable characters, are they not written by the
hands of a man? No, sir, replied the officers: we do assure your
majesty that it was an ape, who wrote them in our presence. The
sultan was too much surprised at this account not to desire a sight
of me; and therefore said, Do what I command you, and bring me
speedily that wonderful ape.

The officers returned to the vessel, and shewed the captain their
order, who answered, The sultan’s command must be obeyed.
Whereupon they clothed me with that rich brocade robe, and carried
me ashore, where they set me on horseback, whilst the sultan waited
for me at his palace, with a great number of courtiers, whom he
gathered together to do me the more honour.

The cavalcade being begun, the harbour, the streets, the public
places, windows, terraces, palaces, and houses, were filled with an
infinite number of people of all sorts, who flocked from all parts
of the city to see me; for the rumour was spread in a moment, that
the sultan had chosen an ape to be his grand vizier; and after
having served for a spectacle to the people, who could not forbear
to express their surprise by redoubling their shouts and cries, I
arrived at the palace of the sultan.

I found the prince on his throne in the midst of the grandees: I
made my bow three times very low, and at last kneeled and kissed the
ground before him, and afterwards sat down on my seat in the posture
of an ape. The whole assembly admired me, and could not comprehend
how it was possible that an ape should understand so well to pay the
sultan his due respect; and he himself was more astonished than any.
In short, the usual ceremony of the audience would have been
complete, could I have added speech to my behaviour; but apes do
never speak, and the advantage I had of having been a man did not
allow me that privilege.

The sultan dismissed his courtiers, and none remained by him but the
chief of the eunuchs, a little young slave, and myself. He went from
his chamber of audience into his own apartment, where he ordered
dinner to be brought. As he sat at table, he gave me a sign to come
near and eat with them: to show my obedience, I kissed the ground,
stood up, sat down at table, and ate with discretion and moderation.

Before the table was uncovered, I espied a writing-desk, which I
made a sign should be brought me: having got it, I wrote upon a
large peach some verses after my way, which testified my
acknowledgment to the sultan; who having read them after my
presenting him the peach, it increased his astonishment. When the
table was uncovered, they brought him a particular liquor, of which
he caused them to give me a glass. I drank and wrote upon it some
new verses, which explained the state I was reduced to, after many
sufferings. The sultan read them likewise, and said, A man that was
capable of doing so much would be above the greatest of men.

The sultan caused them to bring in a chess-board, and asked me by a
sign, if I understood that game, and would play with him? I kissed
the ground, and laying my hand upon my head, signified that I was
ready to receive that honour. He won the first game, but I won the
second and third; and perceiving he was somewhat displeased at it, I
made a quatrain to pacify him; in which I told him, that two potent
armies had been fighting furiously all day, but that they made up a
piece towards the evening, and passed the remaining part of the
night very peaceably together upon the field of battle.

So many circumstances appearing to the sultan far beyond what ever
any one had either seen or known of the cleverness or sense of apes,
he determined not to be the only witness of those prodigies himself,
but having a daughter, called the Lady of Beauty, on whom the chief
of the eunuchs, then present waited, Go, said the sultan to him, and
bid your lady come hither: I am desirous she should share my
pleasure.

The eunuch went, and immediately brought the princess, who had her
face uncovered; but she was no sooner come into the room, than she
put on her veil, and said to the sultan, Sir, your majesty must
needs have forgotten yourself: I am very much surprised that your
majesty has sent for me to appear among men. How, daughter! said the
sultan, you do not know what you say: here is nobody but the little
slave, the eunuch your governor, and myself, who have the liberty to
see your face; and yet you lower your veil, and blame me for having
sent for you hither. --Sir, said the princess, your majesty shall
soon understand that I am not in the wrong. That ape you see before
you, though he has the shape of an ape, is a young prince, son of a
great king; he has been metamorphosed into an ape by enchantment. A
genie, the son of the daughter of Eblis, has maliciously done him
this wrong, after having cruelly taken away the life of the princess
of the isle of Ebene, daughter to the king Epitimarus.

The sultan, astonished at this discourse, turned towards me, and
spoke no more by signs, but in plain words asked me, if it was true
what his daughter said? Seeing I could not speak, I put my hand to
my head to signify that what the princess spoke was true. Upon this
the sultan said again to his daughter, How do you know that this
prince has been transformed by enchantment into an ape? --Sir,
replied the Lady of Beauty, your majesty may remember that when I
was past my infancy, I had an old lady waited upon me; she was a
most expert magician, and taught me seventy rules of magic, by
virtue of which I can transport your capital city into the midst of
the sea in the twinkling of an eye, or beyond mount Caucasus. By
this science I know all enchanted persons at first sight; I know who
they are, and by whom they have been enchanted; therefore do not be
surprised if I should forthwith relieve this prince, in spite of the
enchantment, from that which hinders him to appear in your sight
what he naturally is. Daughter, said the sultan, I did not believe
you to have understood so much. --Sir, replied the princess, these
things are curious and worth knowing: but I think I ought not to
boast of them. --Since it is so, said the sultan, you can dispel the
prince’s enchantment. --Yes, sir, said the princess, I can restore
him to his first shape again. --Do it then, said the sultan, you
cannot do me a greater pleasure; for I will have him to be my
vizier, and he shall marry you. --Sir, said the princess, I am ready
to obey you in all that you should be pleased to command me.

Scheherazade, as she spoke, espied day, and broke off her story of
the second calender: and Schahriar, judging the sequel would be as
diverting as the former part of it, resolved to hear it next day.




FIFTIETH NIGHT.


Dinarzade called the sultaness at the usual hour, saying, Sister, if
you be not asleep, pray do us the favour to tell us how the Lady of
Beauty restored the second calender to his former shape. You shall
hear it, said Scheherazade: The calender resumed his discourse thus:

The princess, the Lady of Beauty, went into her apartment, from
whence she brought in a knife, which had some Hebrew words engraven
on the blade; she made the sultan, the master of the eunuchs, the
little slave, and myself, go down into a private court of the
palace, and there left us under a gallery that went round it. She
placed herself in the middle of the court, where she made a great
circle, and within it she wrote several words in Arabian characters,
some of them ancient, and others of those which they call the
characters of Cleopatra.

When she had finished and prepared the circle as she thought fit,
she placed herself in the centre of it, where she began abjurations,
and repeated verses out of the Koran. The air grew insensibly dark,
as if it had been night, and the whole world about to be dissolved:
we found ourselves struck with a panic, and this fear increased the
more when we saw the genie, the son of the daughter of Eblis, appear
on a sudden in the shape of a lion of a frightful size.

As soon as the princess perceived this monster, You dog, said she,
instead of creeping before me, dare you present yourself in this
shape, thinking to frighten me? --And thou, replied the lion, art
thou not afraid to break the treaty which was solemnly made and
confirmed between us by oath, not to wrong or do one another any
hurt? --O! thou cursed creature! replied the princess, I can justly
reproach thee with doing so. --The lion answered fiercely, Thou
shalt quickly have thy reward for the trouble thou hast given me to
return: with that he opened his terrible throat, and ran at her to
devour her; but she, being on her guard, leaped backward, got time
to pull out one of her hairs, and by pronouncing three or four
words, changed herself into a sharp sword, wherewith she cut the
lion through the middle in two pieces.

The two parts of the lion vanished, and the head only was left,
which changed itself into a large scorpion. Immediately the princess
turned herself into a serpent, and fought the scorpion, who, finding
himself worsted, took the shape of an eagle, and flew away; but the
serpent at the same time took also the shape of an eagle, that was
black and much stronger, and pursued him, so that we lost the sight
of them both.

Some time after they had disappeared, the ground opened before us,
and out of it came forth a cat, black and white, with her hair
standing upright, and mewing in a frightful manner; a black wolf
followed her close, and gave her no time to rest. The cat, being
thus hard beset, changed herself into a worm, and being nigh to a
pomegranate that had accidentally fallen from a tree that grew on
the side of a canal, which was deep, but not broad, the worm pierced
the pomegranate in an instant, and hid itself, but the pomegranate
swelled immediately, and became as big as a gourd, which mounting up
to the roof of the gallery, rolled there for some space, backward
and forward, fell down again into the court, and broke into several
pieces.

The wolf, who had in the meantime transformed itself into a cock,
fell to picking up the seeds of the pomegranate one after another;
but finding no more, he came towards us with his wings spread,
making a great noise, as if he would ask us whether there was any
more seed. There was one lying on the brink of the canal, which the
cock perceiving as he went back, ran speedily thither; but just as
he was going to pick it up, the seed rolled into the river, and
turned into a little fish.

But I see day, sir, said Scheherazade; had it not come so suddenly,
I am persuaded what I had farther to say would have given your
majesty a great deal of satisfaction. Upon this she stopped, and the
sultan arose: but his thoughts being altogether taken up with such
unheard-of adventures, he was extremely impatient till he heard the
rest of the story.




FIFTY-FIRST NIGHT.


Dinarzade made no scruple to disturb the sultaness next morning, and
called to her, Sister, if you be not asleep, pray begin where you
left off that wonderful story last night: I am very desirous to know
what followed after all those metamorphoses. Scheherazade
recollected where she had stopped, and addressing her discourse to
the sultan, Sir, said she, the second calender continued his story
after this manner.

The cock jumped into the river and was turned into a pike, that
pursued the small fish; they continued both under water above two
hours, and we knew not what was become of them, but all on a sudden
we heard terrible cries, which made us tremble, and a little while
after we saw the genie and princess all in flames. They threw
flashes of fire out of their mouths at each other, till they came to
close quarters; then the two fires increased, with a thick burning
smoke, which mounted so high, that we had reason to fear it would
set the palace on fire. But we very soon had a more pressing
occasion of fear, for the genie having got loose from the princess,
came to the gallery where we stood, and blew flames of fire upon us.
We had all perished if the princess, running to out assistance, had
not by her cries forced him to retire, and defend himself against
her; yet, notwithstanding all her exertions, she could not hinder
the sultan’s beard from being burnt, and his face spoiled, the
chief of the eunuchs from being stifled, and burnt on the spot, and
a spark from entering my right eye, and making it blind. The sultan
and I expected nothing but death, when we heard a cry of Victory,
victory! and on a sudden the princess appeared in her natural shape,
but the genie was reduced to a heap of ashes.

The princess came near to us, that she might not lose time, called
for a cup-full of water, which the young slave, who had received no
damage, brought her. She took it, and after pronouncing some words
over it, threw it upon me, saying, if thou art become an ape by
enchantment, change thy shape, and take that of a man, which thou
hadst before. These words were hardly uttered, till I became a man
as I was before, one eye only excepted.

I was preparing myself to give thanks to the princess, but she
prevented me by addressing herself to her father, thus; Sir, I have
gained the victory over the genie, as your majesty may see; but it
is a victory that costs me dear; I have but a few minutes to live,
and you will not have the satisfaction to make the match you
intended; the fire has pierced me during the terrible combat, and I
find it consumes me by degrees. This would not have happened, had I
perceived the last of the pomegranate seeds, and swallowed it, as I
did the other when I was changed into a cock; the genie had fled
thither as to his last entrenchment, and upon that the success of
the combat depended, which would have been successful, and without
danger to me. This slip obliged me to have recourse to fire, and to
fight with those mighty arms as I did between heaven and earth, in
your presence: for, in spite of all his redoubtable art and
experience, I made the genie know that I understood more than he: I
have conquered and reduced him to ashes, but I cannot escape death,
which is approaching.

Here Scheherazade broke off the story of the second calender, and
said to the sultan, Sir, daylight appears, which forbids me to say
any more; but if your majesty thinks fit to let me live till to
morrow, you shall hear the end of this story. Schahriar consented,
and got up according to custom to take care of the affairs of his
empire.




FIFTY-SECOND NIGHT.


Dinarzade awaking some time before day, called upon the sultaness,
and said, My dear sister, if you be not asleep, I would pray you to
finish the story of the second calender. Scheherazade resumed her
discourse, and went on as follows:

The calender always directing his speech to Zobeide, told her,
Madam, the sultan suffered the princess, the Lady of Beauty, to go
on with the recital of her combat, and when she had done, he spoke
to her in a tone that sufficiently testified his grief. My daughter,
said he, you see in what condition your father is; alas! I wonder
that I am yet alive! Your governor, the eunuch, is dead; and the
prince whom you have delivered from his enchantment has lost one of
his eyes. He could speak no more, for his tears, sighs, and sobs,
made him speechless; his daughter and I were exceeding sensible of
his sorrow, and wept with him.

In the mean time, while we were vying with each other in grief, the
princess cried, I burn! I burn! She found that the fire which
consumed her, had at last seized upon her whole body, which made her
still cry, I burn, until death had made an end of her intolerable
pains. The effect of that fire was so extraordinary, that in a few
moments she was wholly reduced to ashes, as was the genie.

I cannot tell you, madam, how much I was grieved at so dismal a
spectacle; I had rather all my life have continued an ape or a dog,
than to have seen my benefactress thus miserably perish. The sultan
being afflicted beyond all that can be imagined, cried out
piteously, and beat himself on his head and stomach, until being
quite overcome with grief, he fainted away, which made me fear for
his life. In the mean time the eunuchs and officers came running at
the sultan’s cries, and with very much ado brought him to himself
again. There was no need for that prince and me to give them a long
narrative of this adventure, in order to convince them of their
great loss. The two heaps of ashes, into which the princess and the
genie had been reduced, were sufficient demonstration. The sultan
was hardly able to stand, but was forced to be supported by them
till he could get to his apartment.

When the noise of the tragical event had spread itself through the
palace and the city, all the people bewailed the misfortune of the
princess, the Lady of Beauty, and were much affected by the
sultan’s affliction. Every one was in deep mourning for seven
days, and many ceremonies were performed. The ashes of the genie
were thrown into the air, but those of the princess were gathered
into a precious urn, to be kept, and the urn was set in a stately
tomb, which was built for that purpose on the same place where the
ashes had lain.

The grief which the sultan conceived for the loss of his daughter
threw him into a fit of sickness, which confined him to his chamber
for a whole month. He had not fully recovered strength when he sent
for me: Prince, said he, hearken to the orders that I now give you;
it will cost you your life if you do not put them into execution. I
assured him of exact obedience; upon which he went on thus: I have
constantly lived in perfect felicity, and was never crossed by any
accident; but by your arrival all the happiness I possessed is
vanished: my daughter is dead, her governor is no more, and it is
through a miracle that I am yet alive. You are the cause of all
those misfortunes, for which it is impossible that I should be
comforted; therefore depart from hence in peace, without further
delay, for I myself must perish, if you stay any longer: I am
persuaded that your presence brings mischief along with it. This is
all I have to say to you. Depart, and take care of ever appearing
again in my dominions; no consideration whatsoever shall hinder me
from making you repent of it. I was going to speak, but he stopped
my mouth by words full of anger: and so I was obliged to remove from
his palace, rejected, banished, an outcast from the world, and not
knowing what would become of me. Before I left the city I went into
a bagnio, where I caused my beard and eyebrows to be shaved, and put
on a calender’s habit. I began my journey, not so much deploring
my own miseries, as the death of the two fair princesses, of which I
have been the occasion. I passed through many countries without
making myself known; at last I resolved to come to Bagdad, in hopes
to get myself introduced to the commander of the faithful, to move
his compassion by giving him an account of my strange adventures. I
came hither this evening, and the first man I met was this calender,
our brother, who spoke before me. You know the remaining part,
madam, and the cause of my having the honour to be here.

When the second calender made an end of his story, Zobeide, to whom
he had addressed his speech, told him, It is well, you may go which
way you please; I give you leave: but instead of departing, he also
petitioned the lady to show him the same favour she had vouchsafed
to the first calender, and went and sat down by him. But, sir, said
Scheherazade, as she spoke these words, it is day, and I must not
proceed: I dare however assure you, that how agreeable soever this
story of the second calender may seem to you, that of the third will
be no less worthy of your hearing, if your majesty be pleased to
have patience. The sultan being desirous to know whether it would
appear so wonderful as the last, got out of bed with a resolution to
prolong Scheherazade’s life farther, though the delay he had
granted was determined several days before.




FIFTY-THIRD NIGHT.


About the latter end of the following night, Dinarzade addressed
herself to the sultaness thus: Dear sister, I pray, until day
appear, which will be very soon, be pleased to relate some of the
fine stories you have read. --I would willingly, said Schahriar,
hear the story of the third calender. --Sir, replied Scheherazade,
you shall be obeyed. The third calender, perceiving it was his turn
to speak, addressed his speech as the rest had done, to Zobeide, and
began in this manner:




The History of the Third Calender, a King’s Son.


My story, most honourable lady, very much differs from what you have
heard already. The two princes that spoke before me have each lost
an eye by the pure effects of their destiny, but mine I lost through
my own fault, and by hastening to seek my own misfortune, as you
shall hear by the sequel of the story. My name is Agib, and I am the
son of a king who was called Cassib. After his death I took
possession of his dominions, and resided in the same city where he
lived before. The city is situated on the sea-coast, has one of the
finest and safest harbours in the world, an arsenal capable of
fitting out for sea one hundred and fifty men of war that are always
ready, and fifty merchantmen, and light frigates, and pleasure-boats
besides. My kingdom is composed of several fine provinces upon the
main land, besides a number of spacious islands, every one of which
lies almost in sight of my capital city.

The first thing I did was to visit the provinces. I afterwards
caused my whole fleet to be fitted out and manned, and went to my
islands to gain the hearts of my subjects by my presence, and to
confirm them in their loyalty; and some time after I returned, I
went thither again. These voyages giving me some taste for
navigation, I took so much pleasure in it, that I resolved to make
some discoveries beyond my islands; to which end I caused only ten
ships to be fitted out, embarked on board them, and set sail.

Our voyage was very successful for forty days together: but on the
forty-first night the wind became contrary, and withal so
boisterous, that we were near being lost in the storm. About break
of day the wind grew calm, the clouds dispersed, and the sun having
brought back fair weather, we came close to an island, where we
remained two days to take in fresh provisions; after which we put
off again to sea. After ten days’ sail, we were in hopes of seeing
land; for the tempests we had gone through had so much abated my
curiosity, that I gave orders to steer back to my own coast; but I
perceived at the same time, that my pilot knew not where we were.
Upon the tenth day, a seaman being sent to look out for land from
the main-mast head, gave notice that on starboard and larboard he
could see nothing but the sky and the sea, which bounded the
horizon; but just before us, upon the stern, he saw a great
blackness.

The pilot changed colour at this relation; and, throwing his turban
on the deck with one hand, and beating his breast with the other,
cried, Oh, sir! we are all lost! not one of us will escape! and,
with all my skill, it is not in my power to prevent it. --Having
spoke thus, he fell to crying like a man who foresaw unavoidable
ruin: his despair put the whole ship’s crew in fear. I asked him
what reason he had thus to despair? He told me the tempest, which he
had outlived, had brought us so far out of our course, that
to-morrow about noon we should come near to that black place, which
is nothing else but the black mountain, that is, a mine of adamant,
which at this very minute draws all your fleet towards it, by virtue
of the iron and the nails that are in your ships; and when we come
to-morrow at a certain distance, the strength of the adamant will
have such a force, that all the nails will be drawn out of the sides
and bottoms of the ships, and fasten to the mountain; so that your
vessel will fall to pieces, and sink to the bottom: and as the
adamant has a virtue to draw all iron to it, whereby its attraction
becomes stronger, this mountain on the side of the sea is covered
over with nails, drawn out of an infinite number of vessels that
have perished by it; and this preserves and augments its virtue at
the same time.

This mountain, continued the pilot, is very rugged: on the top of it
there is a dome of fine brass, supported by pillars of the same; and
upon the top of that dome there stands a horse of the same metal,
with a rider on his back, who has a plate of lead fixed to his
breast, upon which some talismanic characters are engraven. Sir, the
tradition is, that this statue is the chief cause that so many ships
and men have been lost and sunk in this place, and that it will ever
continue to be fatal to all those who have the misfortune to come
near to it, until it shall be thrown down.

The pilot, having ended his discourse, began to weep afresh, and all
the rest of the ship’s company did the like. I had no other
thought but that my days were there to have an end. In the mean
time, every one began to provide for his own safety, and to that end
took all imaginable precautions; and, being uncertain of the event,
they all made one another their heirs, by virtue of a will, for the
benefit of those that should happen to be saved.

The next morning we perceived the black mountain very plain, and the
idea we had conceived of it made it appear more frightful than it
was. About noon we were come so near, that we found what the pilot
had foretold to be true; for we saw all the nails and iron about the
ships fly towards the mountain, where they fixed, by the violence of
the attraction, with a horrible noise: the ships split asunder, and
sunk into the sea, which was so deep about the place, that we could
not sound it. All my people were drowned; but God had mercy on me,
and permitted me to save myself by means of a plank, which the wind
drove ashore just at the foot of the mountain. I did not receive the
least hurt; and my good fortune brought me to a landing place, where
there were steps that went up to the top of the mountain.

Scheherazade would have gone on with her story, but day appearing,
she was obliged to keep silence. The sultan was convinced by this
beginning that the sultaness had not deceived him; and therefore we
are not to wonder that he did not order her to die that day.




FIFTY-FOURTH NIGHT.


For heaven’s sake, cried Dinarzade, next morning, if you be not
asleep, sister, go on with the story of the third calender. My dear
sister, said Scheherazade, the prince renewed his discourse thus:--

At the sight of these steps, said he, for there was not a bit of
ground, either on the right or left, whereon a man could set his
foot, I gave thanks to God, and recommended myself to his holy
protection, as I began to mount the steps, which were so narrow,
rugged, and hard to get up, that had the wind blown ever so little,
it would have thrown me down into the sea. But at last I got up to
the top, without any accident. I came into the dome, and, kneeling
on the ground, gave God thanks for his mercies to me.

I passed the night under the dome; and in my sleep, an old grave man
appeared to me, and said, Hearken, Agib: as soon as thou art awake,
dig up the ground under thy feet; thou shalt find a bow of brass,
and three arrows of lead, that are made under certain
constellations, to deliver mankind from the many calamities that
threaten them. Shoot the three arrows at the statue, and the rider
shall fall into the sea, but the horse will fall down by thy side,
which thou must bury in the same place from whence thou tookest the
bow and arrows. This being done, the sea will swell and rise up to
the foot of the dome that stands upon the top of the mountain: when
it comes up so high, thou shalt see a boat with one man holding an
oar in each hand; --this man is also of metal, but different from
that thou hast thrown down; step on board to him, without mentioning
the name of God, and let him conduct thee. He will in ten days’
time bring thee into another sea, where thou shalt find an
opportunity to get home to thy country safe and sound, provided, as
I have told thee, thou dost not mention the name of God during the
whole voyage.

This was the substance of the old man’s discourse. When I awoke, I
was very much comforted by the vision, and did not fail to observe
every thing that he had commanded me. I took the bow and arrows out
of the ground, shot at the horseman, and, with the third arrow, I
overthrew him: he fell into the sea, and the horse fell by my side,
which I buried in the place whence I took the bow and arrows. In the
mean time, the sea swelled, and rose up by degrees; when it came as
high as the foot of the dome that stood upon the top of the
mountain, I saw afar off a boat rowing towards me, and I returned
God thanks that every thing succeeded according to my dream.

At last the boat made land, and I saw the man was made of metal, as
I had dreamt. I stepped aboard, and took great heed not to pronounce
the name of God, neither spoke I one word. I sat down, and the man
of metal began to row off from the mountain. He rowed without
ceasing till the ninth day, when I saw some islands, which gave me
hopes that I should escape all the danger that I feared. The excess
of my joy made me forget what I was forbidden to do: Blessed be God!
said I; God be praised!

I had no sooner spoken these words, but the boat sunk with the man
of metal; and, leaving me upon the surface, I swam the remaining
part of the day towards that land which appeared nearest to me. A
very dark night succeeded; and not knowing where I was, I swam at a
venture. My strength at last began to fail, and I despaired of being
able to save myself; when the wind began to blow hard, and a wave,
as big as a mountain, threw me on a flat, where it left me, and drew
back. I made haste to get ashore, fearing another wave might wash me
back again. The first thing I did was to strip, and wring the water
out of my clothes, and then laid them down on the dry sand, which
was still pretty warm by the heat of the day.

Next morning the sun dried my clothes early; I put them on, and went
forward to see where I was. I had not walked very far, till I found
I was got upon a little desert island, though very pleasant, where
there grew several sorts of trees and wild fruits; but I perceived
it was very far from the continent, which much diminished the joy I
conceived for having escaped the danger of the seas. I
notwithstanding recommended myself to God, and prayed him to dispose
of me according to his good will and pleasure. At the same time I
saw a vessel coming from the main land, before the wind, directly to
the island. I doubted not but they were coming to anchor there; and
being uncertain what sort of people they might be, whether friends
or foes, I thought it not safe for me to be seen. I got up into a
very thick tree, from whence I might safely view them. The vessel
came into a little creek, where ten slaves landed, carrying a spade
and other instruments fit for digging up the ground. They went
towards the middle of the island, where I saw them stop and dig the
ground a long while; after which I thought I saw them lift up a
trap-door. They returned again to the vessel, and unladed several
sorts of provisions and furniture, which they carried to that place
where they had broken ground, and so went downward; which made me
suppose it was a subterraneous dwelling.

I saw them once more go to the ship, and return soon after with an
old man, who led a very handsome young lad in his hand, of about
fourteen or fifteen years of age --They all went down at the
trap-door; and, being come up again, having let down the trap-door,
and covered it over with earth, they returned to the creek where the
ship lay: but I saw not the young man in their company. This made me
believe that he staid behind in that place under ground, at which I
could not but be extremely astonished.

The old man and the slaves went aboard again, and the vessel being
got under sail, steered its course towards the main land. When I
perceived they were at such distance that they could not see me, I
came down from the tree, and went directly to the place where I had
seen the ground broken. I removed the earth by degrees, till I found
a stone that was two or three feet square. I lifted it up, and saw
that it covered the head of the stairs, which were also of stone. I
went down, and came into a large room, where there was laid a
foot-carpet, and a couch covered with tapestry, and cushions covered
with rich stuff, upon which the young man sat, with a fan in his
hand. I saw all this by the light of two tapers, together with the
fruits and flower-pots he had standing about him. The young lad was
startled at the sight of me; but to rid him of his fear, I said to
him as I came in, Whoever you be, sir, do not fear any thing: a
king, and the son of a king, as I am, is not capable of doing you
any prejudice; on the contrary, it is probable that your good
destiny has brought me hither to deliver you out of this tomb, where
it seems they have buried you alive, for reasons unknown to me. But
that which makes me wonder, and what I cannot conceive, (for you
must know that I have been witness to all that hath passed since
your coming into this island), is, that you suffered yourself to be
buried in this place without any resistance.

Scheherazade broke off here, and the sultan arose, very impatient to
know why this young lad was thus abandoned in a desert island, as to
which he promised himself satisfaction next night.




FIFTY-FIFTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade perceiving it was time to call upon the sultaness, said,
Sister, if you be not asleep, pray resume the story of the third
calender. Scheherazade gave her no occasion to repeat her request,
and went on in this manner:--

The young man, continued the third calender, recovered himself at
these words, and prayed me, with a smiling countenance, to sit down
by him; which when I had done, he said, Prince, I am to acquaint you
with a matter so extraordinary in itself, that it cannot but
surprise you.

My father is a merchant jeweller, who, through his ingenuity in his
calling, has acquired a great estate. He has many slaves and also
deputies, whom he employs to go as supercargoes to sea with his own
ships, on purpose to maintain the correspondence he has at several
courts, which he furnishes with such precious stones as they want.

He had been married a long while, and without issue, when he
understood by a dream that he should have a son, though his life
would be but short; at which he was very much concerned when he
awoke. --Some days after, my mother acquainted him that she was with
child: and what she supposed to be the time of her conception agreed
exactly with the day of his dream. She was brought to bed of me at
the end of nine months, which occasioned great joy in the family.

My father, who had observed the very moment of my birth, consulted
astrologers about my nativity, who told him, Your son shall live
very happily till the age of fifteen, when he will be in danger of
losing his life, and hardly be able to escape it: but if his good
destiny preserve him beyond that time, he will live to grow very
old. It will be (said they) when the statue of brass, that stands
upon the top of the mountain of adamant, shall be thrown down into
the sea by prince Agib, son of king Cassib; and, as the stars
prognosticate, your son shall be killed fifty days afterwards by
that prince.

As the event of this part of the prediction about the statue agrees
exactly with my father’s dream, it afflicted him so much, that he
was struck to the very heart with it. In the mean time, he took all
imaginable care of my education until this present year, which is
the fifteenth of my age; and he had notice given him yesterday, that
the statue of brass had been thrown into the sea about ten days ago,
by that same prince I told you of. This news has cost him so many
tears, and has alarmed him so much, that he looks not like himself.

Upon these predictions of the astrologers, he has sought by all
means possible to falsify my horoscope, and to preserve my life. It
is not long since he took the precaution to build me this
subterranean habitation to hide me in till the expiration of the
fifty days after the throwing down of the statue; and therefore,
since it was ten days ago that this had happened, he came hastily
hither to hide me, and promised at the end of forty days to come
again, and fetch me out. As for my own part, I am in good hope, and
cannot believe that prince Agib will come to seek for me in a place
under ground in the midst of a desert island. This, my lord, is what
I have to say to you.

While the jeweller’s son was telling me this story, I laughed
within myself at those astrologers who had foretold that I should
take away his life; for I thought myself so far from being likely to
verify what they said, that he had scarce done speaking, when I told
him, with great joy, Dear sir, put your confidence in the goodness
of God, and fear nothing: you may consider it as a debt you was to
pay, but that you are acquitted of it from this very hour. I am glad
that, after my shipwreck, I came so fortunately hither to defend you
against all those that would attempt your death. I will not leave
you till the forty days are expired, of which the foolish
astrologers have made you apprehensive; and, in the mean while, I
will do you all the service that lies in my power; after which, I
shall have the benefit of getting to the main land in your vessel,
with leave of your father, and yourself; and when I am returned into
my kingdom, I shall remember the obligations I owe you, and
endeavour to demonstrate my acknowledgments in a suitable manner.

This my discourse encouraged the jeweller’s son, and inspired him
with confidence in me. I took care not to tell him I was the very
Agib whom he dreaded, lest I should put him into a fright, and took
as much care not to give him any cause to suspect it. We passed the
time in several discourses till night came on: I found the young lad
of ready wit, and partook with him of his provisions, of which he
had enough to have lasted beyond the forty days, though he had more
guests than myself. After supper we continued some time in
discourse: at last we went to bed. The next day, when we got up, I
held the basin and water to him; I also provided dinner, and set it
on the table in due time; after we had done, I invented a play to
divert ourselves, not only for that day, but for those that
followed. I prepared supper after the same manner as I had prepared
dinner; and having supped, we went to bed as formerly. We had time
enough to contract friendship. I found he loved me, and for my part,
I had so great a respect for him, that I have often said to myself,
Those astrologers who predicted to his father, that his son should
die by my hand, were impostors; for it is not possible that I could
commit so base an action. In short, madam, we spent thirty-nine days
in the pleasantest manner that could be, in a place like that under
ground.

The fortieth day appeared; and in the morning, when the young man
awoke, he said to me, with a transport of joy that he could not
restrain, Prince, this is the fortieth day; I am not dead, thanks to
God and your good company. My father will not fail to be here anon,
to give you a testimony of his gratitude for it, and shall furnish
you with all that is necessary for your return to your kingdom: but
in the mean time, said he, I beg you to get ready some water very
warm, to wash my whole body in that portable bagnio, that I may
clean myself, and change my clothes, to receive my father more
cheerfully.

I set the water on the fire, and when it was hot, put it into the
moveable bagnio; the youth went in, and I myself washed and rubbed
him. At last he came out, and laid himself down in his bed that I
had prepared, and covered him with his bed clothes. After he had
slept a while, he awoke, and said, Dear prince, pray do me the
favour to fetch me a melon and some sugar, that I may eat some, and
refresh me.

Out of several melons that remained, I took the best, and laid it on
a plate; and because I could not find a knife to cut it with, I
asked the young man if he knew where there was one. There is one,
said he, upon this cornice over my head. I accordingly saw it there,
and made so much haste to reach it, that while I had it in my hand,
my foot being entangled in the covering, I fell most unhappily upon
the young man, and the knife run into his heart in a minute.

At this spectacle I cried out most hideously; I beat my head, my
face, and breast; I tore my clothes; I threw myself on the ground
with unspeakable sorrow and grief. Alas! I cried, there were only
some hours wanting to have put him out of that danger from which he
sought sanctuary here; and when I myself thought the danger past,
then I became his murderer, and verified the prediction. But, O
Lord! said I, lifting up my face and hands to heaven, I intreat thy
pardon, and if I be guilty of his death, let me not live any longer.

Scheherazade perceiving day, was obliged to break off this doleful
story. The sultan of the Indies was moved with it, and felt very
uneasy to think what would become of the calender after this; and
resolved that Scheherazade should not die that day, because she was
the only person that could resolve him.




FIFTY-SIXTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade awaked the sultaness next morning as usual. If you be not
asleep, sister, said she, pray tell us what passed after the death
of the young man. She went on as follows:

Madam, continued the third calender, addressing himself to Zobeide,
after this misfortune, I would have embraced death without any
reluctance, had it presented itself to me. But what we wish to
ourselves, whether good or bad, will not always happen.
Nevertheless, considering with myself that all my tears and sorrows
would not bring the young man to life again, and the forty days
being expired, I might be surprised by his father, I quitted the
subterranean dwelling, laid down the great stone upon the entry of
it, and covered it with earth.

I had scarce done, when casting my eyes upon the sea towards the
main land, I perceived the vessel coming to fetch home the young
man. I began then to consider what I had best do; I said to myself,
if I am seen by the old man, he will certainly lay hold of me, and
perhaps cause me to be massacred by his slaves when he has seen that
his son is killed: all that I can allege to justify myself will not
persuade him of my innocence. It is better for me then to withdraw,
since it is in my power, than to expose myself to his resentment.

There happened to be near that subterranean habitation a large tree
with thick leaves, which I thought fit to hide me in --I got up to
it, and was no sooner fixed in a place where I could not be seen,
than I saw the vessel come to the same place where she lay the first
time.

This old man and his slaves landed immediately, and advanced towards
the subterranean dwelling, with a countenance that showed some hope;
but when they saw the earth had been newly removed, they changed
colour, particularly the old man. They lifted up the stone, and went
down; they called the young man by his name, but he not answering,
their fears increased; they went down to seek him, and at length
found him lying upon the bed, with the knife in his heart, for I had
not power to take it out. At this sight they cried out lamentably,
which increased my sorrow: the old man fell down in a swoon. The
slaves, to give him air, brought him up in their arms, and laid him
at the foot of the tree where I was; but notwithstanding all the
pains they took to recover him, the unfortunate father continued a
long while in that condition, and made them oftener than once
despair of his life, but at last he came to himself. Then the slaves
brought up his son’s corpse, dressed in his best apparel, and when
they had made a grave, they put him into it. --The old man,
supported by two slaves, and his face covered with tears, threw the
first earth upon him, after which the slaves filled up the grave.

This being done, all the furniture was brought up from under ground,
and, with the remaining provisions, put on board the vessel. The old
man, overcome with sorrow, and not being able to stand, was laid
upon a sort of litter, and carried to the ship which stood out to
sea, and in a short time was out of sight. The daylight which began
to enter the sultan’s apartment, obliged Scheherazade to stop
here; Schahriar arose at the usual hour; and for the same reason as
before, he prolonged the sultaness’s life, and left her with
Dinarzade.




FIFTY-SEVENTH NIGHT.


The next morning, before day, Dinarzade addressed herself to the
sultaness in these words; My dear sister, if you be not asleep, be
pleased to continue the adventures of the third calender. You must
know then, sister, said Scheherazade, that the prince went on with
the relation of his story to Zobeide and the company as follows:

After the old man and his slaves were gone with the vessel, I was
left alone upon the island. I lay that night in the subterranean
dwelling, which they had shut up; and when the day came, I walked
round the island, and stopped in such places as I thought most
proper to repose in.

I led this wearisome life for a whole month; after which I perceived
the sea to be mightily fallen, the island to be much larger, and the
main land seemed to be drawing near me. In fact, the water grew so
low, that there was but a small stream between me and the main land.
I crossed it, and the water did not come above the middle of my leg.
I walked so long upon the slime and sand, that I was very weary; at
last I got upon firm ground, and when at a good distance from the
sea, I saw a good way before me somewhat like a great fire, which
gave me some comfort; for I said to myself, I shall find somebody or
other, it not being possible that this fire should kindle of itself;
but when I came nearer hand, I found my error, and saw that what I
had taken for a fire was a castle of red copper, which the beams of
the sun made to look at a distance as if it had been in flames.

I stopped near the castle, and sat down to admire its admirable
structure, and to rest awhile: I had not taken such a full view of
this magnificent building as it deserved, when I saw ten handsome
young men coming along, as if they had been taking a walk; but what
most surprised me was, that they were all blind of the right eye:
they accompanied an old man, who was very tall, and of a venerable
aspect.

I could not but wonder at the sight of so many half-blind men all
together, and every one blind of the same eye; as I was thinking in
my mind by what adventure all these men could come together, they
came up to me, and seemed very glad to see me. After the first
compliments, they inquired what had brought me thither? I told them
my story would be somewhat tedious, but if they would take the
trouble to sit down, I would satisfy their request. They did so, and
I related to them all that had happened unto me since I left my
kingdom, which filled them with astonishment.

After I had ended my discourse, the young gentlemen prayed me to go
with them into the castle; I accepted the proffer, and we passed
through a great many halls, antechambers, bedchambers, and closets,
very well furnished, and came at last into a spacious hall, where
there were ten small blue sofas set round, separate from one
another, upon which they sat by day, and slept by night. In the
middle of this circle stood an eleventh sofa, not so high as the
rest, but of the same colour, upon which the old man before
mentioned sat down, and the young gentlemen made use of the other
ten; but as each sofa could only contain one man, one of the young
men said to me, Comrade, sit down upon that carpet in the middle of
the room, and do not inquire into any thing that concerns us, nor
the reason why we are all blind of the right eye; be content with
what you see, and let not your curiosity go any farther.

The old man having sat a little while, rose up and went out; but he
returned in a minute or two, brought in supper to those ten
gentlemen, distributed to each man his portion by himself, and
likewise brought me mine, which I eat by myself, as the rest did;
and when supper was almost ended, he presented to each of us a cup
of wine.

They thought my story so extraordinary, that they made me repeat it
after supper, and it furnished conversation for a good part of the
night. One of the gentlemen observing that it was late, said to the
old man, You see it is time to go to bed, and you do not bring us
that with which we may acquit ourselves of our duty. At these words
the old man arose, and went into a closet, from whence he brought
out upon his head ten basins one after another, all covered with
blue stuff: he set one before every gentleman, together with a light.

They uncovered their basins, in which there were ashes, coal-dust,
and lamp-black; they mixed all together, and rubbed and bedaubed
their faces with it, in such a manner that they looked very
frightful. After having thus blacked themselves they fell a weeping
and lamenting, beating their heads and breasts, and cried
continually, This is the fruit of our idleness and debauches.

They continued thus almost the whole night, and when they left off,
the old man brought them water, with which they washed their faces
and hands; they changed all their clothes, which were spoiled, and
put on others; so that they did not look in the least as if they had
been doing so strange an action.

You may judge, madam, how uneasy I was all the while: I wished a
thousand times to break the silence which those young gentlemen had
imposed upon me, and ask questions; nor was it possible for me to
sleep that night.

After we got up next day we went out to walk, when I told them,
Gentlemen, I declare to you, that I must renounce that law which you
prescribed to me last night, for I cannot observe it. You are men of
sense, and do not want wit; you have convinced me of this; yet I
have seen you do such actions as none but madmen could be capable
of. Whatever misfortune befals me, I cannot forbear asking, why you
bedaubed your faces with black? How it comes that each of you have
but one eye? Some singular circumstance must certainly be the cause
of it; therefore I conjure you to satisfy my curiosity. To these
pressing instances they answered only, that it was no business of
mine to ask such questions, and that I should do well to hold my
peace.

We passed that day in conversation upon indifferent subjects; and
when night was come, and every man had supped, the old man brought
in his blue basins, and the young gentlemen bedaubed their faces,
wept and beat themselves, crying, This is the fruit of our idleness
and debauches, as before, and continued the same actions the
following night. At last, not being able to resist my curiosity, I
earnestly prayed them to satisfy me, or show me how to return to my
own kingdom; for it was impossible for me to keep them company any
longer, and to see every night such an odd spectacle, without being
permitted to know the reason.

One of the gentlemen answered in behalf of the rest, Do not wonder
at our conduct in regard to yourself, and that hitherto we have not
granted your request: it is out of mere kindness to save you the
pain of being reduced to the same condition with us. If you have a
mind to try our unfortunate destiny, you need but speak, and we will
give you the satisfaction you desire. I told them I was resolved on
it, let what would be the consequence. Once more, said the same
gentleman, we advise you to restrain your curiosity: it will cost
you the loss of your right eye. No matter, said I; I declare to you,
that if such a misfortune befal me, I will not impute it to you but
to myself.

He farther represented to me, that when I had lost an eye, I must
not hope to stay with them, if I were so minded, because their
number was so complete, and no addition could be made to it. I told
them, that it would be a great satisfaction to me never to part from
such honest gentlemen, but if there were necessity for it, I was
ready to submit; and let it cost what it would, I begged them to
grant my request.

The ten gentlemen perceiving that I was so fixed in my resolution,
took a sheep and killed it, and after they had taken off the skin,
presented me with a knife, telling me it would be useful to me on a
certain occasion, which they should tell me of presently. We must
sew you into this skin, said they, and then leave you; upon which a
fowl of monstrous size, called a roc, will appear in the air, and
taking you to be a sheep, will come down upon you, and carry you up
to the very sky; but let not that frighten you; he will come down
with you again, and lay you on the top of a mountain. When you find
yourself upon the ground, cut the skin with the knife, and throw it
off. As soon as the roc sees you, he will fly away for fear, and
leave you at liberty: do not stay, but walk on till you come to a
prodigious large castle, covered with plates of gold, large
emeralds, and other precious stones: go up to the gate, which always
stands open, and walk in: we have been in the castle as long as we
have been here; we will tell you nothing of what we saw, or what
befel us there: you will learn it yourself; all that we can inform
you, is, that it hath cost each of us our right eye, and the penance
which you have been witness to, is what we are obliged to do,
because we have been there. The history of each of us in particular
is so full of extraordinary adventures, that a large volume would
not contain them. But we must explain ourselves no farther.

Here Scheherazade broke off the discourse, and said to the sultan of
the Indies, Sir, my sister called upon me this morning sooner than
ordinary; I fear I have wearied your majesty’s patience. But now
day appears in very good time, and commands my silence.
Schahriar’s curiosity still prevailed upon him to dispense with
his cruel oath.




FIFTY-EIGHTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade did not call so early this night as she did the last, yet
she called upon the sultaness before day: If you be not asleep,
sister, pray continue the story of the third calender. Scheherazade
resumed it thus, personating the calender in his discourse to
Zobeide.

Madam, when the gentleman had ended this discourse, I wrapt myself
in the sheep’s skin, held fast the knife which was given me; and
after those young gentlemen had been at the trouble to sew the skin
about me, they retired into the hall, and left me on the spot. The
roc they spoke of was not long coming; he fell upon me, took me in
his talons like a sheep, and carried me up to the top of the
mountain.

When I found myself upon the ground, I made use of the knife, cut
the skin, and throwing it off, the roc at the sight of me flew away.
This roc is a white bird, of a monstrous size; his strength is such,
that he can lift up elephants from the plains, and carry them to the
tops of mountains, where he feeds upon them.

Being impatient till I reached the castle, I lost no time; but made
so much haste that I got thither in half a day’s journey, and I
must say that I found it surpassed the description they had given me
of it.

The gate being open, I entered into a court that was square, and so
large that there were round it ninety-nine gates of wood of sanders
and aloes, with one of gold, without reckoning those of several
magnificent stair-cases, that led to apartments above, besides many
more, which I could not see. The hundred doors which I spoke of
opened into gardens or store-houses full of riches, or into places
which contained things wonderful to be seen.

I saw a door standing open just before me, through which I entered
into a large hall, where I found forty young ladies of such perfect
beauty that imagination could not surpass it; they were all most
sumptuously apparelled; and as soon as they saw me rose up, and
without expecting my compliments, said to me, with demonstrations of
joy, noble sir, you are very welcome. And one spoke to me in the
name of the rest, thus: We have been in expectation a long while of
such a gentleman as you: your mien assures us, that you are master
of all the good qualities we can wish for; and we hope you will not
find our company disagreeable or unworthy of your’s.

They forced me, notwithstanding all the opposition I could make, to
sit down on a seat that was higher than their own, and though I
signified that I was uneasy; That is your place, said they; you are
at present our lord, master, and judge, and we are your slaves,
ready to obey your commands.

Nothing in the world, madam, did so much astonish me as the passion
and eagerness of those fair ladies to do me all possible service.
One brought hot water to wash my feet; a second poured sweet scented
water on my hands; others brought me all sorts of necessaries, and
change of apparel; others brought in a magnificent collation; and
the rest came with glasses in their hands to fill me delicious
wines, all in good order, and in the most charming manner possible.
I ate and drank; after which the ladies placed themselves about me,
and desired an account of my travels. I gave them a full relation of
my adventures, which lasted till night came on.

Scheherazade making a stop here, her sister asked her the reason. Do
you not see it is day? said the sultaness; wherefore did you not
call me sooner?

The sultan, expecting some pleasant adventures from the arrival of
the third calender at the palace of the forty ladies, would not
deprive himself of the pleasure of hearing them; and therefore again
put off the death of the sultaness.




FIFTY-NINTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade slept as long this night as she did the last; and when it
was almost day, she called to the sultaness, Dear sister, if you be
not asleep, pray tell us what passed in the fine castle where you
left us yesterday. I will, said Scheherazade; and, addressing her
speech to the sultan, said, Sir, the calender resumed his narrative
after this manner:--

When I had made an end of my story, which I related to the forty
ladies, some of them that sat nearest to me staid to keep me
company, whilst the rest, seeing it was dark, rose up to fetch
tapers. They brought a prodigious quantity, which made such a
wonderful light, as if it had been day, and they were so properly
disposed, that nothing could be more beautiful.

Other ladies covered a table with dry fruits, sweetmeats, and every
thing proper to relish the liquor; a sideboard was set out with
several sorts of wine and other liquors. Some of the ladies came in
with musical instruments; and when every thing was ready, they
invited me to sit down to supper. The ladies sat down with me, and
we continued a long while at supper. They that were to play upon the
instruments and sing rose up, and formed a most charming concert.
The others began a sort of ball, and danced two and two, one after
another, with a wonderful good grace.

It was past midnight ere those divertisements ended. At length one
of the ladies said to me, You are doubtless wearied by the journey
you have taken to-day; it is time for you to go to rest --your
lodging is prepared; but before you depart, make choice of any of
us you like best to be your bed-fellow. I answered, that I knew
better than to offer to make my own choice, since they were all
equally beautiful, witty, and worthy of my respects and service,
and that I would not be guilty of so much incivility as to prefer
one before another.

The same lady that spoke to me before, answered, We are very well
satisfied of your civility, and find you are afraid to create a
jealousy among us, which occasions your modesty: but let not this
hinder you; we assure you that the good fortune of her whom you
choose shall cause no jealousy; for we are agreed among ourselves,
that every one of us shall have the same honour till it go round;
and when forty days are past, to begin again; --therefore make your
free choice, and lose no time to go and take the repose you stand in
need of. I was obliged to yield to their intreaties, and offered my
hand to the lady that spoke; she, in return, gave me her’s, and we
were conducted to a sumptuous apartment, where they left us; and
then every one retired to their own apartment. But day appears, sir,
said Scheherazade to the sultan; and your majesty, I hope, will
permit me to leave the calender prince with his lady. Schahriar
returned no answer, but said to himself, as he got up, I must allow
that the story is extraordinary, and I should be very much to blame
not to hear it out.




SIXTIETH NIGHT.


Dinarzade did not fail about the latter end of the next night to
address the sultaness thus: If you be not asleep, sister, pray
relate to us the remaining part of the wonderful story of the third
calender. --Most willingly, said Scheherazade. The prince continued
it thus: I was scarce dressed next morning, when the other
thirty-nine ladies came into my chamber, all in different dresses
from those they had on the day before: they bade me good-morrow, and
inquired after my health; after which they carried me to a bath,
where they washed me themselves, and whether I would or no, served
me with every thing I stood in need of; and when I came out of the
bath, they made me put on another suit much richer than the former.

We passed the whole day almost constantly at table; and when it was
bed-time, they prayed me again to make choice of one of them to keep
me company. In short, madam, not to weary you with repetitions, I
must tell you that I continued a whole year among those forty
ladies, and received them into my bed one after another: and during
all the time of this voluptuous life, we met not with the least kind
of trouble. When the year was expired, I was strangely surprised
that these forty ladies, instead of appearing with their usual
cheerfulness to ask how I did, entered one morning into my chamber
all in tears. They embraced me with great tenderness one after
another, saying, Adieu, dear prince, adieu! for we must leave you.
Their tears affected me; I prayed them to tell me the reason of
their grief, and of the separation they spoke of. For God’s sake,
fair ladies, let me know, said I, if it be in my power to comfort
you, or if my assistance can be any way useful to you. Instead of
returning a direct answer, Would to God, said they, we had never
seen or known you! Several gentlemen have honoured us with their
company before you; but never one of them had that comeliness, that
sweetness, that pleasantness of humour, and that merit which you
possess; we know not how to live without you. After they spoke these
words, they began to weep bitterly. My dear ladies, said I, be so
kind as not to keep me in suspense any longer: tell me the cause of
your sorrow. --Alas, said they, what but the necessity of parting
from you could be capable of grieving us? It may so happen that we
shall never see you again; but if you be so minded, and possess
sufficient self-command, it is not impossible for us to meet again.
--Ladies, said I, I understand not your meaning; pray explain
yourselves more clearly.

Oh then, said one of them, to satisfy you, we must acquaint you that
we are all princesses, daughters of kings: we live here together in
such a manner as you have seen; but at the end of every year we are
obliged to be absent forty days upon indispensable duties, which we
are not permitted to reveal; and afterwards we return again to this
castle. Yesterday was the last of the year, and we must leave you
this day, which is the cause of our grief. Before we depart we will
leave you the keys of every thing, especially those belonging to the
hundred doors, where you will find enough to satisfy your curiosity,
and to sweeten your solitude during our absence: but for your own
welfare, and our particular concern in you, we recommend unto you to
forbear opening the golden door: for if you do we shall never see
you again: and the fear of this augments our grief. We hope,
nevertheless, that you will follow the advice we give you, as you
tender your own quiet, and the happiness of your life; therefore
take heed that you do not give way to indiscreet curiosity, for you
will do yourself a considerable prejudice. We conjure you not to
commit this fault, but to let us have the satisfaction of finding
you here again after forty days. We would willingly carry the key of
the golden door along with us; but that it would be an affront to a
prince like you to question your discretion and modesty.
--Scheherazade wished to go on; but she saw day appear, and stopped.
The sultan being curious to know what the third calender would do
when the forty ladies were gone, and had left him alone in the
castle, deferred the hearing of it till next day.




SIXTY-FIRST NIGHT.


The officious Dinarzade being awake long before day, called to the
sultaness; If you be not asleep, sister, consider that it is time to
tell the remaining part of the story to our lord the sultan.
Scheherazade, addressing herself to the sultan, said, Sir, your
majesty may be pleased to know that the calender pursued his story
thus:

Madam, said he, this discourse of the fair princesses grieved me
extremely. I omitted not to make them sensible how much their
absence would afflict me. I thanked them for their good advice, and
assured them that I would follow it, and willingly do what was much
more difficult in order to secure the happiness of passing the rest
of my days with ladies of such rare qualifications. We took leave of
one another with much tenderness, and having embraced them all, they
departed, and I was left alone in the castle.

Their agreeable company, the good cheer, the concert of music, and
other pleasures, had so much diverted me during the whole year, that
I neither had time nor the least desire to see the wonderful things
contained in this enchanted palace. I did not so much as take notice
of a thousand rare objects that were every day in my sight; for I
was so occupied with the charming beauty of those ladies, and took
so much pleasure in seeing them wholly employed to oblige me, that
their departure afflicted me very sensibly; and though their absence
was to be only forty days, it seemed to me an age to live without
them.

I promised myself not to forget the important advice they had given
me, not to open the golden door; but as I was permitted to satisfy
my curiosity in every thing else, I took the first of the keys of
the other doors, which were hung in good order.

I opened the first door, and came into an orchard, which I believe
the universe could not equal. I could not imagine any thing that
could surpass it, but that which our religion promises us after
death: the symmetry, the neatness, the admirable order of the trees,
the abundance and diversity of a thousand sorts of unknown fruits,
their freshness and beauty, ravished my sight.

I ought not to forget, madam, to acquaint you, that this delicious
orchard, was watered after a very particular manner; there were
channels so artificially and proportionably dug, that they carried
water in abundance to the roots of such trees as wanted it for
making them produce their leaves and flowers. Others carried it to
those that had their fruit budded; some carried it in lesser
quantities to those whose fruits were swelling, and others carried
only so much as was just requisite to water those which had their
fruit come to perfection, and only wanted to be ripened. They far
exceeded the ordinary fruits of our gardens in bigness. Lastly,
those channels that watered the trees, whose fruit was ripe, had no
more moisture than just what would preserve them from withering.

I could never be weary of looking at and admiring so sweet a place;
and I should never have left it, had I not conceived a great idea of
the other things which I had not seen. I went out at last with my
mind filled with those wonders; I shut that door, and opened the
next.

Instead of an orchard, I found a flower-garden, which was no less
extraordinary in its kind. It contained a spacious plot, not watered
so profusely as the former, but with greater niceness, furnishing no
more water than just what each flower required. The roses,
jessamines, violets, daffodills, hyacinths, anemonies, tulips,
crows-foots, pinks, lilies, and an infinite number of flowers, which
do not grow in other places but at certain times, were there
flourishing all at once, and nothing could be more delicious than
the fragrant smell of this garden.

I opened the third door, where I found a large aviary, paved with
marble of several fine uncommon colours. The cage was made of sandal
wood and wood of aloes. It contained a vast number of nightingales,
goldfinches, canary-birds, larks, and other rare singing-birds,
which I never heard of; and the vessels that held their seed and
water were of the most precious jasper or agate.

Besides, this aviary was so exceedingly neat, that considering its
extent, one would think there could not be less than a hundred
persons to keep it so clean; but all this while not one soul
appeared, either here or in the gardens where I had been; and yet I
could not perceive a weed, or any superfluous thing there. The sun
went down, and I retired, charmed with the chirping notes of the
multitude of birds, who then began to perch upon such places as
suited them to repose on during the night. I went to my chamber,
resolving to open all the rest of the doors the days following,
excepting that of gold.

I failed not to open the fourth door next day, and if what I had
seen before was capable of surprising me, that which I saw then put
me in a perfect ecstasy. I went into a large court surrounded with
buildings of an admirable structure, the description of which I will
pass by, to avoid prolixity.

This building had forty doors, all open, and through each of them
was an entrance into a treasury, several of which would purchase the
largest kingdoms. The first contained heaps of pearls; and, what is
almost incredible, the number of those stones which are most
precious, and as large as pigeons’ eggs, exceeding the number of
those of the ordinary size. In the second treasury there were
diamonds, carbuncles, and rubies; in the third, emeralds; in the
fourth, ingots of gold; in the fifth, money; in the sixth, ingots of
silver; in the two following there was also money. The rest
contained amethysts, chrysolites, topazes, opals, turquoises, and
hyacinths, with all the other stones unknown to us, without
mentioning agate, jasper, cornelian, and coral, of which there was a
storehouse filled, not only with branches, but whole trees.

Transported with amazement and admiration, I cried out to myself,
after having seen all these riches, If all the treasures of the
kings of the universe were gathered together in one place, they
could not come near this: what good fortune have I to possess all
this wealth with so many admirable princesses.

I shall not stay, madam, to tell you the particulars of all the
other rare and precious things I saw the following days. I shall
only say that thirty-nine days afforded me but just as much time as
was necessary to open ninety-nine doors, and to admire all that
presented itself to my view; so that there was only the hundredth
door left, the opening of which was forbidden to me.

Day began to appear in the apartments of the sultan of the Indies,
which imposed silence upon Scheherazade. But Schahriar was too much
taken with this pleasing story, not to hear the remainder of it next
day, and accordingly he got up with that resolution.




SIXTY-SECOND NIGHT.


Dinarzade, who had as ardent a desire as Schahriar to hear what
wonderful things were locked up by the key belonging to the golden
door, called the sultaness very early. If you be not asleep, sister,
pray make an end of that amazing story of the third calender. He
went on thus, said Scheherazade; I was come to the fortieth day
after the departure of those charming princesses, and had I but
retained so much power over myself as I ought to have had, I should
have been this day the happiest of all mankind, whereas now I am the
most unfortunate. They were to return next day, and the pleasure of
seeing them again ought to have restrained my curiosity: but through
my weakness, which I shall ever repent, I yielded to the temptation
of the evil spirit, who gave me no rest till I had involved myself
in those misfortunes that I have since suffered.

I opened that fatal door, which I promised not to meddle with, and
had not moved my foot to go in, when a smell that was pleasant
enough, but contrary to my constitution, made me faint away.
Nevertheless, I came to myself again, and instead of taking notice
of this warning to shut the door, and forbear satisfying my
curiosity, I went in, after I had stood some time in the air, to
carry off the scent, which did not incommode me any more. I found a
large place, very well vaulted; the pavement was strewed over with
saffron; several candlesticks of massy gold, with lighted tapers
that smelled of aloes and ambergris, lighted the place; and this
light was augmented by lamps of gold and silver, that burnt with oil
made of several sorts of sweet-scented materials.

Among a great many objects that engaged my attention, I perceived a
black horse, of the handsomest and best shape that ever was seen. I
went nearer, the better to observe him, and found he had a saddle
and bridle of massy gold, curiously wrought. One side of his trough
was filled with clean barley and sesame, and the other with
rose-water: I took him by the bridle, and led him forth to view him
by the light; I got on his back, and would have had him move; but he
not stirring, I whipped him with a switch I had taken up in his
magnificent stable; and he had no sooner felt the stroke, than he
began to neigh with a horrible noise, and extending his wings which
I had not seen before, he flew up with me into the air, quite out of
sight. I thought on nothing then but to sit fast; and considering
the fear that had seized upon me, I sat very well. He afterwards
flew down again towards the earth, and lighting upon the terrace of
a castle, without giving me any time to dismount, he shook me out of
the saddle with such force, that he threw me behind him, and with
the end of his tail struck out mine eye.

Thus I became blind of one eye; and then I began to remember the
predictions of the ten young gentlemen. The horse flew again out of
sight. I got up very much troubled at the misfortune I had brought
upon myself; I walked upon the terrace, covering my eye with one of
my hands, for it pained me exceedingly, and then came down, and
entered into a hall, which I knew presently by the ten sofas in a
circle, and the eleventh in the middle, lower than the rest, to be
the same castle from whence I was taken away by the roc.

The ten half-blind gentlemen were not in the hall when I came in,
but came soon after, with the old man. They were not at all
surprised to see me again, nor at the loss of my eye; but said, We
are sorry that we cannot congratulate you upon your return, as we
could have desired; but we are not the cause of your misfortune. --I
should be in the wrong to accuse you, said I; for I have drawn it
upon myself, and I can charge the fault upon no other person. --If
it be a consolation to the unfortunate, said they, to have
companions, this example may afford us a subject of rejoicing. All
that has happened to you, we have also undergone; we tasted all
sorts of pleasure, during a year successively; and we had continued
to enjoy the same happiness still, had we not opened the golden
door, when the princesses were absent. You have been no wiser than
us, and have had likewise the same punishment. We would gladly
receive you among us, to perform such penance as we do, though we
know not how long it may continue; but we have already declared the
reasons that hinder us; therefore depart from hence, and go to the
court of Bagdad, where you shall meet with him that can decide your
destiny. They told me the way I was to travel, and I left them.

On the road I caused my beard and eyebrows to be shaven, and assumed
a calender’s habit. I have had a long journey, but at last I
arrived this evening in this city, where I met these my brother
calenders at the gate, being strangers as well as myself. We
wondered much at one another to see we were all three blind of the
same eye; but we had not leisure to discourse long of our common
calamities. We had only so much time as to come hither, to implore
those favours which you have been generously pleased to grant us.

The third calender having finished this relation of his adventures,
Zobeide addressed her speech to him and his fellow calenders thus:
Go wherever you think fit; you are all three at liberty. But one of
them answered, Madam, we beg you to pardon our curiosity, and permit
us to hear those gentlemen’s stories, who have not yet spoke. Then
the lady turned to that side where the caliph, the vizier Giafar,
and Mesrour stood, whom she knew not; but said to them, It is now
your turn to tell me your adventures, therefore speak.

The grand vizier Giafar, who had always been the spokesman, answered
Zobeide thus: Madam, in order to obey you, we need only to repeat
what we have said already, before we entered your house. We are
merchants of Moussoul, that came to Bagdad to sell our merchandize
that lies in the khan where we lodge. We dined to-day with several
other persons of our profession, at a merchant’s house of this
city; who, after he had treated us with choice dainties and
excellent wines, sent for men and women dancers, and musicians. The
great noise we made brought in the watch, who arrested some of the
company, and we had the good fortune to escape; but it being already
late, and the door of our khan shut up, we knew not whither to
retire. It was our hap, as we passed along this street, to hear
mirth at your house, which made us determine to knock at your gate.
This is all the account that we can give you, in obedience to your
commands.

Zobeide having heard this discourse, seemed to hesitate upon what
she should say; which the calenders perceiving, prayed her to grant
the same favour to the three Moussoul merchants as she had done to
them. Well, then, said she, I give my consent, for you shall all be
equally obliged to me: I pardon you all, provided you depart
immediately out of this house, and go whither you please.

Zobeide having given this command in a tone that signified she would
be obeyed, the caliph, the vizier, Mesrour, the three calenders, and
the porter, departed, without saying one word; for the presence of
the seven slaves with their weapons kept them in awe. When they were
out of the house, and the door shut, the caliph said to the
calenders, without making himself known, You gentlemen strangers,
that are newly come to town, which way do you design to go, since it
is not yet day? It is that which perplexes us, sir, said they.
Follow us, replied the caliph, and we will bring you out of danger.
After saying these words, he whispered to the vizier, Take them
along with you, and to-morrow morning bring them to me; I will cause
their history to be put in writing, for it deserves a place in the
annals or my reign.

The vizier Giafar took the three calenders along with him, the
porter went to his quarters, and the caliph and Mesrour returned to
the palace. The caliph went to bed, but could not get a wink of
sleep, his spirits were so perplexed by the extraordinary things he
had seen and heard: but, above all, he was most concerned to know
who Zobeide was, what reason she could have to be so severe to the
two black bitches, and why Amine had her bosom so mortified. Day
began to appear whilst he was thinking upon these things; he arose
and went to his council-chamber, where he used to give audience, and
sat upon his throne.

The grand vizier came in a little after, and paid his respects as
usual. Vizier, said the caliph, the affairs that we have to consider
at present are not very pressing; that of the three ladies and the
two black bitches is much more so: my mind cannot be at ease till I
am thoroughly satisfied in all those matters that have surprised me
so much. --Go, bring these ladies and the calenders at the same
time; make haste, and remember that I impatiently expect your return.

The vizier, who knew his master’s quick and fiery temper, made
haste to obey, and went to the ladies, to whom he communicated, in a
civil way, the orders he had to bring them before the caliph,
without taking any notice of what had passed the night before at
their house.

The ladies put on their veils, and went with the vizier. As he
passed by his own house, he took the three calenders along with him;
and they in the mean time, had got notice that they had both seen
and spoke with the caliph without knowing him. The vizier brought
them to the palace with so much diligence, that the caliph was much
pleased. This prince, that he might keep decorum before all the
officers of his court who were then present, gave orders that those
ladies should be placed behind the hanging of the door of the room
next his bedchamber, and kept by him the three calenders, who, by
their respectful behaviour, gave sufficient proof, that they were
not ignorant before whom they had the honour to appear.

When the ladies were placed, the caliph turned towards them, and
said, Ladies, when I shall acquaint you that I came last night
disguised in a merchant’s habit into your house, it will certainly
alarm you, and make you fear that you have offended me; and perhaps
you believe that I have sent for you for no other purpose but to
show some marks of my resentment; but be not afraid; you may rest
assured that I have forgotten all that has past, and am very well
satisfied with your conduct. I wish that all the ladies of Bagdad
had as much discretion as you have given proof of before me. I shall
always remember the moderation you made use of, after the incivility
that we had committed. I was then a merchant of Moussoul, but am at
present Haroun Alraschid, the seventh caliph of the glorious house
of Abbas, that holds the place of our great prophet. I have only
sent for you to know who you are, and to ask you for what reason one
of you, after severely whipping the two black bitches, did weep with
them? And I am no less curious to know why another of you has her
bosom so full of scars.

Though the caliph pronounced these words very distinctly, and the
three ladies heard him well enough, yet the vizier Giafar did, out
of ceremony, repeat them over again.

But, sir, said Scheherazade, it is day; and if your majesty thinks
fit that I shall go on with the rest of this story, you will be
pleased to prolong my life until to-morrow. The sultan agreed to it,
knowing that Scheherazade would relate the history of Zobeide, which
he had a great desire to hear.




SIXTY-THIRD NIGHT.


Dear sister, said Dinarzade, about break of day, if you be not
asleep, pray tell us the story of Zobeide, for, doubtless, that lady
told it to the caliph. She certainly did, said Scheherazade, after
that prince by his discourse had encouraged her to it. And it was in
this manner that she satisfied his curiosity:--




The story of Zobeide.


Commander of the faithful, said she, the relation which I am about
to give your majesty is one of the strangest that ever was heard.
The two black bitches and myself are sisters by the same father and
mother; and I shall acquaint you by what strange accident they came
to be metamorphosed. The two ladies who live with me, and are now
here, are also my sisters by the father’s side, but by another
mother; she that has the scars upon her breast is named Amine, the
other’s name is Safie, and mine Zobeide.

After our father’s death, the estate that he left us was equally
divided among us; and as soon as these two sisters received their
portions, they went from me to live with their mother. My other two
sisters and myself staid with our mother, who was then alive, and
when she died, left each of us a thousand sequins. As soon as we
received our portions, the two elder, (for I am the youngest,) being
married, followed their husbands, and left me alone. Some time
after, my eldest sister’s husband sold all that he had, and with
that money and my sister’s portion, they went both into Africa,
where her husband, by riotous living and debauchery, spent all; and,
finding himself reduced to poverty, he found a pretext for divorcing
my sister, and put her away.

She returned to this city; and, having suffered incredible hardships
by the way, came to me in so lamentable a condition, that it would
have moved the hardest heart to compassion. I received her with all
the tenderness she could expect; and, inquiring into the cause of
her sad condition, she told me with tears how inhumanly her husband
had dealt by her. I was so much concerned at her misfortune that it
drew tears from my eyes. I put her into a bath, and clothed her with
my own apparel, and spoke to her thus: Sister, you are the elder,
and I esteem you as my mother; during your absence, God has blest
the portion that fell to my share, and the employment I follow to
feed and bring up silk-worms. Assure yourself there is nothing I
have but is at your service, and as much at your disposal as my own.

We lived very comfortably together for some months; and as we were
often discoursing together about our third sister, and wondering we
heard no news of her, she came in as bad a condition as the elder;
her husband had treated her after the same manner, and I received
her likewise with the same affection as I had done the former.

Some time after, my two sisters, on pretence that they would not be
chargeable to me, told me they had thoughts to marry again. I
answered them, that if their putting me to charge was all the
reason, they might lay those thoughts aside, and be very welcome to
stay with me; for what I had would be sufficient to maintain us all
three in a manner answerable to our condition. --But, said I, I
rather believe you have a mind to marry again; which if you have, I
am sure it will very much surprise me; after the experience you have
had of the small satisfaction there is in wedlock, is it possible
you dare venture a second time? You know how rare it is to meet with
a husband that is a real honest man. Believe what I say, and let us
live together as comfortable as we can. All my persuasion was in
vain; they were resolved to marry, and so they did. But after some
months were past, they came back again, and begged my pardon a
thousand times for not following my advice. You are our youngest
sister, said they, and abundantly more wise than we; but if you will
vouchsafe to receive us once more into your house, and account us
your slaves, we shall never commit such a fault again. My answer
was, Dear sisters, I have not altered my mind in respect to you
since we last parted from one another; come again, and take part of
what I have. Upon this I embraced them again, and we lived together
as we did formerly.

We continued thus a whole year in perfect love and tranquillity;
and, seeing that God had increased my small stock, I projected a
voyage by sea, to hazard somewhat in trade. To this end I went with
my two sisters to Balsora, where I bought a ship ready fitted for
sea, and laded her with such merchandise as I brought from Bagdad.
We set sail with a fair wind, and soon cleared the Persian gulf; and
when we got into the ocean, we steered our course to the Indies, and
the twentieth day saw land. --It was a very high mountain, at the
bottom of which we saw a great town; and, having a fresh gale, we
soon reached the harbour, where we cast anchor.

I had not patience to stay till my sisters were dressed to go along
with me, but went ashore in the boat by myself; and making directly
to the gate of the town, I saw there a great number of men upon
guard, some sitting, and others standing with batons in their hands;
and they had all such dreadful countenances that it frightened me;
but perceiving they had no motion, not so much as with their eyes, I
took courage, and went nearer, and then found they were all turned
into stones. I entered the town, and passed through the several
streets, wherein stood every where men in various attitudes, but all
motionless and petrified. On that side where the merchants lived I
found most of the shops shut, and in such as were open I likewise
found the people petrified. I looked up to the chimnies, but saw no
smoke, which made me conjecture that the inhabitants, both within
and without, were all turned into stone.

Being come into a vast square, in the heart of the city, I perceived
a great gate, covered with plates of gold, the two leaves of which
stood open, and a curtain of silk stuff seemed to be drawn before
it; I also saw a lamp hanging over the gate. After I had well
considered the fabric, I made no doubt but it was the palace of the
prince who reigned over that country; and being very much astonished
that I had not met with one living creature, I went thither in hopes
to find some. I entered the gate, and was still more surprised when
I saw none but the guards in the porches, all petrified, some
standing, some sitting, and some lying.

I crossed over a large court, where I saw a stately building just
before me, the windows of which were inclosed with gates of massy
gold. I supposed it to be the queen’s apartment, and went into a
large hall, where there stood several black eunuchs turned into
stone. I went from thence into a room richly hung and furnished,
where I perceived a lady in the same situation. I knew it to be the
queen by the crown of gold that hung over her head, and a necklace
of pearl about her neck, each of them as big as a nut: I went up
close to her to view it, and never beheld a finer sight.

I stood some time, and admired the riches and magnificence of the
room; but, above all, the foot-cloth, the cushions, and the sofas,
which were all lined with Indian stuff of gold, with pictures of men
and beasts, in silver, admirably executed.

Scheherazade would have continued longer, but day-light put a stop
to her discourse. The sultan was highly pleased with the story: I
must, said he, as he was getting out of bed, know what all this
wonderful petrifaction of men will come to.




SIXTY-FOURTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade was so extremely pleased with the beginning of this story
of Zobeide, that she did not fail to call the sultaness before day.
If you be not asleep, sister, pray let us know what Zobeide saw more
in this strange palace. Scheherazade answered, The lady continued
the story to the caliph in this manner:--

Sir, said she, I went out of the chamber where the petrified queen
was, and passed through several other apartments and closets richly
furnished, and at last came into a vast large room, where was a
throne of massy gold, raised several steps above the floor, and
enriched with large inchased emeralds, and a bed upon the throne of
rich stuff, embroidered with pearls. What surprised me more than all
the rest was a sparkling light which came from above the bed. Being
curious to know from whence it came. I mounted the steps, and,
lifting up my head, I saw a diamond as big as the egg of an ostrich,
lying upon a low stool; it was so pure, that I could not find the
least blemish in it, and it sparkled so bright, that I could not
endure the lustre of it when I saw it by day.

On each side of the bed’s head there stood a lighted flambeau, but
for what use I could not comprehend; however, it made me imagine
that there was some living creature in this place, for I could not
believe that these torches continued thus burning of themselves.
Several other rarities detained my curiosity in this room, which was
inestimable, were it only for the diamond I mentioned.

The doors being all open, or but half shut, I surveyed some other
apartments, that were as fine as those I had already seen. I looked
into the offices and store-rooms, which were full of infinite
riches, and I was so much taken with the sight of all the wonderful
things, that I forgot myself, and did not think on my ship or my
sisters; my whole design was to satisfy my curiosity: mean time
night came on, which put me in mind that it was time to retire. I
was for returning the same way I came in, but I could not find it; I
lost myself among the apartments; and finding I was come back again
to that large room where the throne, the couch, the large diamond,
and the torches stood, I resolved to take my night’s lodging
there, and to depart the next morning betimes, to get aboard my
ship. I laid myself down upon the couch, not without some dread to
be alone in a desolate place; and this fear hindered my sleep.

About midnight I heard a voice like that of a man reading the Koran,
after the same manner, and in the same tone which we read in our
mosque. Being extremely glad to hear it, I got up immediately, and
taking a torch in my hand to light me, I passed from one chamber to
another, on that side where the voice came from: I came to the
closet door, where I stood still, nowise doubting that it came from
thence. I set down my torch upon the ground, and looking through a
window, I found it to be an oratory. In short, it had, as we have in
our mosques, a niche that shows where we must turn to say our
prayers; there were also lamps hung up, and the two candlesticks
with large tapers of white wax burning.

I saw a little carpet laid down, like those we have to kneel upon
when we say our prayers, and a comely young man sat upon this
carpet, reading with great devotion the Koran, which lay before him
upon a desk. At the sight of this I was transported with admiration.
I wondered how it came to pass that he should be the only living
creature in a town where all the people were turned into stones, and
I did not doubt but there was something in it very extraordinary.

The door being only half shut, I opened it and went in, and standing
upright before the niche, I said this prayer aloud; “Praise be to
God, who has favoured us with a happy voyage, and may he be
graciously pleased to protect us in the same manner, until we arrive
again in our own country. Hear me, O Lord, and grant my request.”

The young man cast his eyes upon me, and said, My good lady, pray
let me know who you are, and what has brought you to this desolate
city? And in return I will tell you who I am, what happened to me,
why the inhabitants of this city are reduced to that state you see
them in, and why I alone am safe and sound in the midst of such a
terrible disaster.

I told him in few words from whence I came, what made me undertake
the voyage, and how I safely arrived at the port after twenty
days’ sailing; and when I had done, I prayed him to perform his
promise, and told him how much I was struck by the frightful
desolation which I had seen in all places as I came along.

My dear lady, said the young man, have patience for a moment. At
these words he shut the Koran, put it into a rich case, and laid it
in the niche. I took that opportunity to observe him, and perceived
so much good nature and beauty in him, that I felt such strange
emotions in myself as I had never done before. He made me sit down
by him; and before he began his discourse, I could not forbear
saying to him, with an air that discovered the sentiments I was
inspired with, Amiable sir, dear object of my soul, I can scarce
have patience to wait for an account of all those wonderful things
that I have seen since the first time I came into your city; and my
curiosity cannot be satisfied too soon; therefore, pray sir, let me
know by what miracle you alone are left alive among so many persons
that have died in so strange a manner.

Scheherazade broke off here, and said to Schahriar, Sir, perhaps
your majesty does not perceive it is day; should I continue my
discourse any longer, I should trespass on your patience. The sultan
got up, resolving next night to hear the remainder of this wonderful
story.




SIXTY-FIFTH NIGHT.


If you be not asleep, sister, said Dinarzade, next morning, before
it was day, I would pray you to resume the story of Zobeide, and
acquaint us with what passed between her and the young man that she
found alive in the palace you gave us so fine a description of. --I
will immediately satisfy you, said the sultaness. Zobeide went on
with her story thus:

Madam, said the young man, you have given me to understand you have
a knowledge of the true God, by the prayer you just now addressed to
him. I will acquaint you with the most remarkable effect of his
greatness and power. You must know, that this city was the
metropolis of a mighty kingdom, over which the king my father did
reign. That prince, his whole court, the inhabitants of the city,
and all his other subjects, were magi, worshippers of fire, and of
Nardoun, the ancient king of the giants, who rebelled against God.

And though I was begotten and born of an idolatrous father and
mother, I had the good fortune in my youth to have a governess who
was a good mussulman; I had the Koran by heart, and understood the
explanation of it perfectly well. Dear prince, would she oftentimes
say, there is but one true God; take heed that you do not
acknowledge and adore any other. She taught me to read Arabic, and
the book she gave me to preach upon was the Koran. As soon as I was
capable of understanding it, she explained to me all the heads of
this excellent book, and infused piety into my mind, unknown to my
father, or any body else. She happened to die, but not before she
had perfectly instructed me in all that was necessary to convince me
of the mussulman religion. After her death, I persisted with
constancy in the belief I was in; and I abhor the false god Nardoun,
and the adoration of fire.

It is about three years and some months ago, that a thundering voice
was heard all of a sudden so distinctly through the whole city, that
nobody could miss hearing it. The words were these: ‘Inhabitants,
abandon the worship of Nardoun, and of fire, and worship the only
God that shows mercy.’

This voice was heard three years successively, but nobody was
converted; so the last day of the year, at four o’clock in the
morning, all the inhabitants in general were changed in an instant
into stone, every one in the same condition and posture they
happened to be then in. The king, my father, had the same fate, for
he was metamorphosed into a black stone, as he is to be seen in this
palace; and the queen, my mother, had the like destiny.

I am the only person that did not suffer under that heavy judgment,
and ever since I have continued to serve God with more fervency than
before. I am persuaded, dear lady, that he has sent you hither for
my comfort, for which I render him infinite thanks; for I must own
that this solitary life is very uneasy.

All these expressions, and particularly the last, increased my love
to him extremely. Prince, said I, there is no doubt but Providence
hath brought me into your port, to present you with an opportunity
of withdrawing from this dismal place. The ship that I came in may
in some measure persuade you that I am in some esteem at Bagdad,
where I have left also a considerable estate; and I dare engage to
promise you sanctuary there, until the mighty commander of the
faithful, who is vice-regent to our prophet, whom you acknowledge,
show you the honour that is due to your merit. This renowned prince
lives at Bagdad, and as soon as he is informed of your arrival in
his capital, you will find that it is not in vain to implore his
assistance. It is impossible you can stay any longer in a city where
all the objects you see must renew your grief: my vessel is at your
service, where you may absolutely command as you shall think fit. He
accepted the offer, and we discoursed the remaining part of the
night about our embarkment.

As soon as it was day we left the palace, and came aboard my ship,
where we found my sisters, the captain, and the slaves, all very
much troubled for my absence. After I had presented my sisters to
the prince, I told them what had hindered my return to the vessel
the day before, how I had met with the young prince, his story, and
the cause of the desolation of so fine a city.

The seamen were taken up several days in unlading the merchandise I
brought along with me, and embarking, instead of that, all the
precious things in the palace, as jewels, gold, and money. We left
the furniture and goods, which consisted of an infinite quantity of
plate, &c. because our vessel could not carry it, for it would have
required several vessels more to carry all the riches to Bagdad that
we might have chosen to take with us.

After we had laded the vessel with what we thought fit, we took such
provisions and water aboard as were necessary for our voyage (for we
had still a great deal of those provisions left that we had taken in
at Balsora:) at last we set sail with a wind as favourable as we
could wish.

Here Scheherazade saw day, and stopped her discourse; the sultan
arose without speaking a word; but he proposed to himself to hear
the end of Zobeide’s story, and the wonderful deliverance of this
young prince.




SIXTY-SIXTH NIGHT.


When the ensuing night was almost past, Dinarzade, impatient to know
the success of Zobeide’s voyage, called the sultaness: My dear
sister, day begins to break; for God’s sake continue the story of
yesternight, and tell us whether the prince and Zobeide arrived safe
at Bagdad. I will, said Scheherazade.

Zobeide, addressing herself to the caliph, went on thus:

Sir, said she, the young prince, my sisters, and myself, enjoyed
ourselves for some time very agreeably: but alas! this good
understanding did not last long, for my sisters grew jealous of the
friendship between the prince and me, and maliciously asked me one
day, what we should do with him when we came to Bagdad? I perceived
immediately that they put this question to me on purpose to discover
my inclinations; therefore resolving to put it off with a jest, I
answered them, I will take him for my husband; and upon that,
turning myself to the prince, Sir, I humbly beg of you to give your
consent; for as soon as we come to Bagdad, I design to offer you my
person to be your slave, to do you all the service that is in my
power, and to resign myself wholly to your commands.

The prince answered, I know not, madam, whether you be in jest or
no; but for my own part, I seriously declare, before these ladies,
your sisters, that from this moment I heartily accept your offer,
not with any intention to have you as a slave, but as my lady and
mistress; nor will I pretend to have any power over your actions. At
these words my sisters changed colour, and I could perceive
afterwards that they did not love me as formerly.

We were come into the Persian gulf, and not far from Balsora, where
I hoped, considering the fair wind, we might have arrived the day
following; but in the night, when I was asleep, my sisters watched
their time, and threw me overboard. They did the same to the prince,
who was drowned. I swam some minutes on the water; but by good
fortune, or rather miracle, I felt ground. I went towards a black
place, that, by what I could discern in the dark, seemed to be land,
and actually was a flat on the coast; which, when day came, I found
to be a desert island, lying about twenty miles from Balsora. I soon
dried my clothes in the sun; and as I walked along, I found several
sorts of fruit, and likewise fresh water, which gave me some hopes
of preserving my life.

I laid myself down in a shade, and soon after I saw a winged
serpent, very large and long, coming towards me, wriggling to the
right and to the left, and hanging out his tongue, which made me
think he had got some hurt. I arose, and saw a larger serpent
following him, holding him by the tail, and endeavouring to devour
him. I had compassion on him, and instead of flying away, I had the
boldness and courage to take up a stone that by chance lay by me,
and threw it with all my strength at the great serpent, whom I hit
on the head and killed him. The other, finding himself at liberty,
took to his wings and flew away. I looked a long while after him in
the air, as an extraordinary thing; but he flew out of sight, and I
lay down again in another place in the shade, and fell asleep.

When I awaked, judge how I was surprised to see by me a black woman,
of a lively and agreeable complexion, who held tied together in her
hand, two bitches of the same colour. I sat up and asked her who she
was. I am, said she, the serpent whom you delivered not long since
from my mortal enemy. I knew not how to acknowledge the great
kindness you did me, but by doing what I have done. I knew the
treachery of your sisters, and to avenge you on them, as soon as I
was set at liberty by your generous assistance, I called several of
my companions together, fairies like myself. We have carried into
your storehouses at Bagdad all your lading that was in your vessel,
and afterwards sunk it.

These two black bitches are your sisters, whom I have transformed
into this shape, but this punishment is not sufficient; for I will
have you treat them in such a manner as I shall direct.

At those words the fairy took me fast under one of her arms, and the
two bitches in the other, and carried me to my house in Bagdad,
where I found in my storehouses all the riches which were laden on
board my vessel. Before she left me, she delivered me the two
bitches, and told me, If you will not be changed into a bitch as
they are, I ordain you, in the name of him that governs the sea, to
give each of your sisters every night a hundred lashes with a rod,
for the punishment of the crime they have committed against your
person, and the young prince whom they drowned. I was forced to
promise that I would obey her order. Since that time I have whipped
them every night, though with regret, whereof your majesty has been
a witness, I give evidence by my tears with how much sorrow and
reluctance I must perform this cruel duty; and in this your majesty
may see I am more to be pitied than blamed. If there be any thing
else, with relation to myself, that you desire to be informed of, my
sister Amine will give you the full discovery of it, by the relation
of her story.

[Illustration: ZOBEIDE AFTER RESCUING THE FAIRY.]

After the caliph had heard Zobeide with a great deal of
astonishment, he desired his grand vizier to pray fair Amine to
acquaint him wherefore her breast was marked with so many scars.

But, sir, said Scheherazade, it is day, and I dare not detain your
majesty any longer. Schahriar being persuaded that the story which
Scheherazade was to relate would explain the former, said to
himself, I must have the pleasure of hearing this story out: upon
which he arose, and resolved that Scheherazade should live one day
longer.




SIXTY-SEVENTH NIGHT.


Dinarzade longed to hear the story of Amine, and therefore waked the
sultaness a long while before day, saying, Dear sister, pray let us
know why fair Amine had her breast so covered with scars. --I
consent to it, said the sultaness; and that no time may be lost, you
may know that Amine addressed herself to the caliph, and began her
story after this manner:




The story of Amine.


Commander of the faithful, said she, to avoid repeating what your
majesty has already heard by my sister’s story, I shall only add,
that after my mother had taken a house for herself to live in during
her widowhood, she gave me in marriage, with the portion my father
left me, to a gentleman that had one of the best estates in the city.

I had scarce been a year married, when I became a widow, and was
left in possession of all my husband’s estate, which amounted to
ninety thousand sequins. The interest of this money was sufficient
to maintain me very honourably. In the mean time, when my first six
months’ mourning was over, I caused to be made me ten suits of
clothes, very rich, so that each suit came to a thousand sequins;
and when the year was past, I began to wear them.

One day as I was busy alone about my domestic affairs, I was told
that a lady desired to speak to me. I ordered her to be brought in.
She was a person advanced in years: she saluted me by kissing the
ground, and told me, kneeling, dear lady, excuse the freedom I take
to trouble you; the confidence I have in your charity makes me thus
bold. I must acquaint your ladyship, that I have an orphan daughter,
who is to be married this day: she and I are both strangers, and
have no acquaintance in this town; which much perplexes me, for we
wish the numerous family with whom we are going to ally ourselves to
think we are not altogether strangers, and without credit;
therefore, most beautiful lady, if you would vouchsafe to honour the
wedding with your presence, we shall be infinitely obliged to you,
because the ladies of your country will then know that we are not
looked upon here as despicable wretches, when they shall come to
understand that a lady of your quality did us that honour. But alas,
madam, if you refuse this request, we shall be altogether disgraced,
and dare not address ourselves to any other.

This poor woman’s discourse, mixed with tears, moved my
compassion. Good woman, said I, do not afflict yourself; I am
willing to grant you the favour you desire; tell me what place I
must come to, and I will meet you as soon as I am dressed. The old
woman was so transported with joy at my answer, that she kissed my
feet without my being able to hinder it. Good charitable lady, said
she, rising up, God will reward the kindness you have showed to your
servants, and make your heart as joyful as you have made theirs. It
is too soon yet to give yourself that trouble: it will be time
enough when I come to call you in the evening. So farewell, madam,
said she, till I have the honour to see you again.

As soon as she was gone, I took the suit I liked best, with a
necklace of large pearl, bracelets, pendents in my ears, and rings
set with the finest and most sparkling diamonds; for my mind
presaged what would befal me.

When night drew on, the old woman came to call me, with a
countenance full of joy; she kissed my hands, and said, My dear
lady, the relations of my son-in-law, who are the principal ladies
of the town, are now met together; you may come when you please, I
am ready to wait on you. We went immediately, she going before, and
I followed her, with a good number of my maids and slaves, very well
dressed. We stopt in a wide street, newly swept and watered, at a
spacious gate with a lantern before it, by the light of which I
could read this inscription over the gate in golden letters: “Here
is the abode of everlasting pleasures and content.” The old woman
knocked, and the gate was opened immediately.

They brought me to the lower end of the court, into a large hall,
where I was received by a young lady of admirable beauty. She came
up to me, and after having embraced me, she made me sit down by her
upon a sofa, where there was a throne of precious wood, set with
diamonds. Madam, said she, you are brought hither to assist at a
wedding; but I hope this marriage will prove otherwise than what you
expected. I have a brother, one of the handsomest men in the world:
he is fallen so much in love with the fame of your beauty, that his
fate depends wholly upon you, and he will be the unhappiest of men
if you do not take pity on him. He knows your quality, and I can
assure you he is in nowise unworthy of your alliance. If my prayers,
madam, can prevail, I shall join them with his, and humbly beg you
will not refuse the offer of being his wife.

After the death of my husband, I had no thought of marrying again:
but I had no power to refuse the offer made by so charming a lady.
As soon as I had given consent by silence, accompanied with a blush,
the young lady clapt her hands; and immediately a closet door
opened, out of which came a young man of a majestic air, and so
graceful a behaviour, that I thought myself happy to have made so
great a conquest. He sat down by me, and by the discourse we had
together, I found that his merits far exceeded the account his
sister had given me of him. When she saw that we were satisfied with
one another, she clapt her hands a second time, and out came a cadi,
or scrivener, who wrote our contract of marriage, signed it himself,
and caused it to be attested by four witnesses he brought along with
him. The only thing that my new spouse made me promise, was, that I
should not be seen by nor speak with any other man but himself; and
he vowed to me, upon that condition, that I should have no reason to
complain of him. Our marriage was concluded and finished after this
manner; so I became the principal actress in a wedding whereunto I
was only invited as a guest.

After we had been married a month, I had occasion for some stuffs. I
asked my husband’s leave to go out and buy them, which he granted;
and I took that old woman along with me, of whom I spoke before, she
being one of the family, and two of my own female slaves.

When we came to the street where the merchants dwell, the old woman
told me, Dear mistress, since you want silk stuffs, I must carry you
to a young merchant of my acquaintance: he has of all sorts, and it
will prevent your wearying yourself by going from one shop to
another. I can assure you that he is able to furnish you with that
which nobody else can. I was easily persuaded, and we entered into a
shop belonging to a young merchant who was tolerably handsome. I sat
down, and bade the old woman desire him to show me the finest silk
stuffs he had. The woman bade me speak myself; but I told her it was
one of the articles of my marriage contract, not to speak to any man
but my husband, which I ought to keep.

The merchant shewed me several stuffs, of which one pleased me
better than the rest; but I bade her ask the price. He answered the
old woman, I will not sell it for gold or money, but I will make her
a present of it, if she will give me leave to kiss her cheek. I
ordered the old woman to tell him that he was very rude to propose
such a thing; but instead of obeying me, she said, What the merchant
desires of you is no such great matter; you need not speak, but only
present him your cheek, and the business will soon be done. The
stuff pleased me so much that I was foolish enough to take her
advice. The old woman and my slaves stood up, that nobody should
see, and I put up my veil; but instead of a kiss, the merchant bit
me till the blood came.

The pain and surprise were so great, that I fell down in a swoon,
and continued in it so long, that the merchant had time to shut his
shop, and fly for it. When I came to myself, I found my cheek all
bloody; the old woman and my slaves took care to cover it with my
veil, that the people who came about us could not perceive it, but
supposed it to be only a fainting fit.

Scheherazade, as she spoke these words, perceived day, and held her
peace. The sultan finding the story both extraordinary and pleasant,
rose up, with a design to hear the rest of it.




SIXTY-EIGHTH NIGHT.


When next night was near at an end, Dinarzade awaked and called to
the sultaness, If you please, sister, pray continue the story of
Amine. Scheherazade answered, the lady resumed it thus:

The old woman who was with me, being extremely troubled at this
accident, endeavoured to comfort me; My dear mistress, said she, I
beg your pardon, for I am the cause of this misfortune, having
brought you to this merchant, because he is my countryman; but I
never thought he would be guilty of such a villanous action. But do
not grieve: let us make haste to go home; I will give you a medicine
that shall perfectly cure you in three day’s time, so that the
least mark shall not be seen. The fit had made me so weak that I was
scarce able to walk: but at last I got home, where I had a second
fit, as I went into the chamber. Meanwhile, the old woman applied
her remedy, so that I came to myself, and went to bed.

My husband came to me at night, and seeing my head bound up, asked
me the reason. I told him I had the head-ache, and hoped he would
inquire no further; but he took a candle, and saw my cheek was hurt.
How comes this wound? said he. And though I was not very guilty, yet
I could not think of owning the thing; besides, to make such a
confession to a husband, I thought was somewhat indecent; therefore
I told him, That as I was going to seek for that stuff you gave me
leave to buy, a porter carrying a load of wood came so close by me,
as I went through a narrow street, that one of the sticks gave me a
rub on the cheek; but it is not much hurt. This put my husband in
such a passion, that he vowed he should not go unpunished; for I
will to-morrow give orders to the lieutenant of the police to seize
upon all those brutes of porters, and cause them to be hanged. Being
afraid to occasion the death of so many innocent persons, I told
him, Sir, I should be sorry that so great a piece of injustice
should be committed. Pray do not do it; for I should deem myself
unpardonable if I were the cause of so much mischief. Then tell me
sincerely, said he, how came you by this wound? I answered, That it
came through the inadvertency of a broom-seller upon an ass, who
coming behind me, and looking another way, his ass gave me such a
push that I fell down, and hurt my cheek upon some glass. --Is it
so? said my husband; then to-morrow morning, before sun-rising, the
grand vizier Giafar shall have an account of this insolence, and he
shall cause all the broom-sellers to be put to death. --For the love
of God, sir, said I, let me beg of you to pardon them, for they are
not guilty. --How, madam, said he, what is it I must believe? Speak,
for I am absolutely resolved to know the truth from your own mouth.
--Sir, said I, I was taken with a giddiness in my head, and fell
down, and that is the whole matter.

At these last words, my husband lost all patience. Oh! cried he, I
have given ear to your lies too long; with that, clapping his hands,
in came three slaves: Pull her out of bed, said he, and lay her in
the middle of the floor. The slaves obeyed his orders, one holding
me by the head, and another by the feet: he commanded a third to
fetch him a scimitar; and when he had brought it, Strike, said he;
cut her in two in the middle, and then throw her into the Tigris to
feed the fishes. This is the punishment I give to those to whom I
have given my heart, if they falsify their promise. When he saw that
the slave made no haste to obey his orders, Why do you not strike?
said he. Who is it that holds you? What are you waiting for?

Madam, then said the slave, you are near the last moments of your
life; consider if you have any thing to dispose of before you die. I
begged leave to speak one word, which was granted me. I lifted up my
head, and looking wistfully to my husband, Alas! said I, to what
condition am I reduced! must I then die in the prime of my youth? I
could say no more, for my tears and sighs prevented me. My husband
was not at all moved, but, on the contrary, went on to reproach me;
so that to have made answer would have been in vain. I had recourse
to entreaties and prayers; but he had no regard to them, and
commanded the slaves to proceed to execution. The old woman who had
been his nurse came in just at that moment, fell down upon her
knees, and endeavoured to appease his wrath. My son, said she, since
I have been your nurse, and brought you up, let me beg the favour of
you to grant me her life; consider that he who kills shall be
killed, and that you will stain your reputation, and lose the esteem
of mankind. What will the world say of such a bloody rage? She spoke
these words in such an affecting manner, accompanied with tears,
that she prevailed upon him at last.

Well then, said he to his nurse, for your sake I will spare her
life; but she shall carry some marks along with her to make her
remember the crime. With that, one of the slaves, by his order, gave
me so many blows as hard as he could strike, with a little cane,
upon my sides and breast, that he fetched both skin and flesh away,
so that I lay senseless. After that he caused the same slaves, the
executioners of his fury, to carry me into a house, where the old
woman took care of me. I kept my bed four months; at last I
recovered; the scars you saw yesterday, against my will, have
remained ever since.

As soon as I was able to walk, and go abroad, I resolved to go to
the house which was my own by my first husband, but I could not find
the place. My second husband, in the heat of his wrath, was not
content to have razed it to the ground, but caused all the street
where it stood to be pulled down. I believe such a violent
proceeding was never heard of before; but against whom should I make
my complaint? The author had taken such care that he was not to be
found, neither could I know him again if I saw him; and suppose I
had known him, is it not easily seen that the treatment I met with
proceeded from absolute power? How then dared I make any complaint?

Being desolate, and unprovided of every thing, I had recourse to my
dear sister Zobeide, who gave your majesty just now an account of
her adventures; to her I made known my misfortune; she received me
with her accustomed goodness, and advised me to bear it with
patience. This is the way of the world, said she, which either robs
us of our means, our friends, or our lovers, and oftentimes of all
at once. And at the same time, to confirm what she had said, she
gave me an account of the loss of the young prince, occasioned by
the jealousy of her two sisters; she told me also by what accident
they were transformed into bitches; and in the last place, after a
thousand testimonials of her love towards me, she showed me my
youngest sister, who had likewise taken sanctuary with her after the
death of her mother.

Thus we gave God thanks, who had brought us together again,
resolving to live a single life, and never to separate any more, for
we have enjoyed this peaceable way of living a great many years; and
as it was my business to mind the affairs of the house, I always
took pleasure to go myself, and buy in what we wanted. I happened to
go abroad yesterday, and the things I bought I caused to be brought
home by a porter, who proved to be a sensible and jocose fellow, and
we kept him with us for a little diversion. Three calenders happened
to come to our door as it began to grow dark, and prayed us to give
them shelter till the next morning. We gave them entrance, but upon
certain conditions, which they agreed unto; and after we had made
them sit down at the table by us, they gave us a concert of music
after their fashion, and at the same time we heard knocking at our
gate. These were the three merchants of Moussoul, men of a very good
mien, who begged the same favour which the calenders had obtained
before. We consented to it upon the same conditions, but neither of
them kept their promise; and though we had power as well as justice
on our side to punish them, yet we contented ourselves with
demanding from them the history of their lives, and consequently
confined our revenge to dismissing them after they had done, and
depriving them of the lodging they requested.

The caliph Haroun Alraschid was very well satisfied with these
strange stories, and declared publicly his astonishment at what he
had heard.

But, sir, said Scheherazade, day begins to break; so that I have not
time to acquaint your majesty what the caliph did to put an end to
the enchantment of the two black bitches. Schahriar supposing that
the sultaness would finish the story of the five ladies and the
three calenders the next night, rose up, and suffered her to live
till next morning.




SIXTY-NINTH NIGHT.


For the love of heaven, sister, said Dinarzade, before it was day,
if you be not asleep, tell us how the two black bitches were brought
to their former shape, and what became of the three calenders. --I
will satisfy your curiosity, said Scheherazade. Then addressing her
discourse to Schahriar, she pursued it thus:

Sir, the caliph having satisfied his curiosity, thought himself
obliged to give some marks of grandeur and generosity to the
calender princes, and also to give the three ladies some proofs of
his bounty. He himself, without making use of his minister, the
grand vizier, spoke to Zobeide: Madam, this fairy, that shewed
herself to you in the shape of a serpent, and imposed such a
rigorous command upon you, did she not tell you where her place of
abode was? Or rather, did she not promise to see you, and restore
those bitches to their natural shape?

Commander of the faithful, answered Zobeide, I forgot to tell your
majesty, that the fairy left with me a bundle of hair, saying
withal, that her presence would one day be of use to me; and then,
if I only burnt two tufts of this hair, she would be with me in a
moment, though she were beyond mount Caucasus. --Madam, said the
caliph, where is the bundle of hair? She answered, ever since that
time, I have had such a particular care of it, that I always carry
it about me. Upon which she pulled it out, just opened the case
where it was, and showed it to him. Well then, said the caliph, let
us make the fairy come hither; you could not call her in a better
time, for I long to see her.

Zobeide having consented to it, fire was brought in, and she threw
the whole bundle of hair into it. The palace began to shake at that
very instant, and the fairy appeared before the caliph, in the shape
of a lady very richly dressed.

Commander of the faithful, said she to the prince, you see I am
ready to come and receive your commands. The lady who gave me this
call by your order did me a particular piece of service; to make my
gratitude appear, I revenged her of her sisters inhumanity by
changing them into bitches; but if your majesty commands it, I will
restore them to their former shape.

Handsome fairy, said the caliph, you cannot do me a greater
pleasure; vouchsafe them that favour, and after that I will find
some means to comfort them for their hard penance. But besides, I
have another boon to ask in favour of that lady, who has had such
cruel usage from an unknown husband; and as you undoubtedly know a
great many things, we have reason to believe that you cannot be
ignorant of this. Oblige me with the name of this barbarous fellow,
who could not be contented to exercise his barbarous cruelty upon
her person, but has also most unjustly taken from her all her
substance. I only wonder how such an unjust and inhuman action could
be performed in spite of my authority, and not come to my ears.

To oblige your majesty, answered the fairy, I will restore the two
bitches to their former state, and I will so cure the lady of her
scars, that it shall never appear she was so beaten; and at last I
will tell you who it was that did it.

The caliph sent for the two bitches from Zobeide’s house; and when
they came a glass of water was brought to the fairy by her desire;
she pronounced over it some words, which nobody understood; then
throwing some part of it upon Amine, and the rest upon the bitches,
the latter became two ladies of surprising beauty, and the scars
that were upon Amine vanished away. After which, the fairy said to
the caliph, Commander of the faithful, I must now discover to you
the unknown husband you inquire after; he is very near related to
yourself, for it is prince Amin, your eldest son, who falling
passionately in love with this lady, by the fame he had heard of her
beauty, by an intrigue got her brought to his house, where he
married her. As to the strokes he caused to be given her, he is in
some measure excusable; for the lady, his spouse, had been a little
too easy, and the excuses she had made were capable of making him
believe she was more faulty than she really was. This is all I can
say to satisfy your curiosity; and at these words she saluted the
caliph, and vanished.

The prince being filled with admiration, and having much
satisfaction in the changes that had happened through his means, did
such things as will perpetuate his memory to all ages. First, he
sent for his son Amin, and told him that he was informed of his
secret marriage, and how he had wounded Amine upon a very slight
cause. Upon this the prince did not wait for his father’s
commands, but received her again immediately.

After which the caliph declared that he would give his own heart and
hand to Zobeide, and offered the other three sisters to the
calenders, who were sons of kings, who accepted them for their
brides with much joy. The caliph assigned each of them a magnificent
palace in the city of Bagdad, promoted them to the highest dignities
of his empire, and admitted them to his counsels.

The town-clerk of Bagdad being called, with witnesses, wrote the
contracts of marriage; and the famous caliph Haroun Alraschid, by
making the fortune of so many persons that had suffered such
incredible calamities, drew a thousand blessings upon himself.




The Story of Sindbad, the Sailor.


Dinarzade having awakened her sister the sultaness, as usual, and
prayed her to tell another story, Scheherazade asked leave of the
sultan, and having obtained it, began thus:

Sir, in the reign of the same caliph Haroun Alraschid, whom I
formerly mentioned, there lived at Bagdad a poor porter called
Hindbad. [4] One day, when the weather was excessively hot, he was
employed to carry a heavy burden from one end of the town to the
other. Being very weary, and having still a great way to go, he came
into a street where a delicate western breeze blew on his face, and
the pavement of the street being sprinkled with rose-water, he could
not desire a better place to rest in; therefore, laying off his
burden, he sat down by it, near a great house.

He was mightily pleased that he stopt in this place, for an
agreeable smell of wood of aloes, and of pastils, that came from the
house, mixing with the scent of rose-water, did completely perfume
and embalm the air; besides, he heard from within a concert of
several sorts of instrumental music, accompanied with the harmonious
notes of nightingales, and other birds, peculiar to that climate.
This charming melody, and the smell of several sorts of victuals,
made the porter think there was a feast, and great rejoicings within.

His occasions leading him seldom that way, he knew not who dwelt in
the house; but to satisfy his curiosity, he went to some of the
servants, whom he saw standing at the gate in magnificent apparel,
and asked the name of the master of the house. How, replied one of
them, do you live in Bagdad, and know not that this is the house of
Signor Sindbad, the sailor, that famous traveller, who has sailed
round the world?

The porter, who had heard of this Sindbad’s riches, could not but
envy a man whose condition he thought to be as happy as his own was
deplorable; and his mind being fretted with those reflections, he
lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, loud enough to be heard,
Almighty Creator of all things, consider the difference between
Sindbad and me: I am every day exposed to fatigues and calamities,
and can scarce get coarse barley-bread for myself and my family,
whilst happy Sindbad profusely expends immense riches, and leads a
life of continual pleasure. What has he done to obtain from thee a
lot so agreeable? And what have I done to deserve one so miserable?
Having finished his expostulation, he struck his foot against the
ground, like a man swallowed up of grief and despair.

Whilst the porter was thus indulging his melancholy, a servant came
out of the house, and taking him by the arm, bid him follow him, for
Signor Sindbad, his master, wanted to speak with him. --Here day
beginning to appear, Scheherazade broke off her story, but resumed
it again next morning as follows:




SEVENTIETH NIGHT.


Sir, your majesty may easily imagine that poor Hindbad was not a
little surprised at this compliment; for, considering what he had
said, he was afraid Sindbad had sent for him to punish him;
therefore he would have excused himself, alleging that he could not
leave his burden in the middle of the street. But Sindbad’s
servants assured him they would look to it, and pressed the porter
so, that he was obliged to yield.

The servants brought him into a great hall, where abundance of
people sat round a table covered with all sorts of fine dishes. At
the upper end, there sat a grave, comely, venerable gentleman, with
a long white beard, and behind him stood a number of officers and
domestics, all ready to serve him; this grave gentleman was Sindbad.
The porter, whose fear was increased at the sight of so many people,
and of a banquet so sumptuous, saluted the company trembling.
Sindbad bid him draw near, and sitting him down at his right hand,
served him himself, and gave him excellent wine, of which there was
a good store upon the side board.

When dinner was over, Sindbad began his discourse to Hindbad: and
calling him brother, according to the manner of the Arabians when
they are familiar one with another, he asked him his name and
employment, --Signor, answered he, my name is Hindbad. --I am very
glad to see you, replied Sindbad, and I dare say the same for all
the company; but I would be glad to hear from your own mouth what it
was you said awhile ago in the street. For Sindbad had heard it
himself through the window, before he sat down at table, and that
occasioned his calling for him.

Hindbad, being surprised at the question, hung down his head, and
replied, Signor, I confess that my weariness put me out of humour,
and occasioned me to speak some indiscreet words, which I beg you to
pardon. --Oh! do not think I am so unjust, replied Sindbad, to
resent such a thing as that; I consider your condition, and instead
of upbraiding you with your complaints, I commiserate you: but I
must rectify your mistake concerning myself. You think, no doubt,
that I have acquired without labour and trouble the ease and
conveniency which I now enjoy: but do not mistake; I did not attain
to this happy condition without enduring more trouble of body and
mind, for several years, than can well be imagined. Yes, gentlemen,
added he, speaking to the whole company, I can assure you my
troubles were so extraordinary, that they were capable of
discouraging the most covetous man from undertaking such voyages as
I did, to acquire riches. Perhaps you have never heard a distinct
account of my wonderful adventures, and the dangers I met with in my
seven voyages; and since I have this opportunity, I am willing to
give you a faithful account of them, not doubting but it will be
acceptable.

And because Sindbad was to tell this story, particularly upon the
porter’s account, he ordered his burden to be carried to the place
appointed, and began thus:




The story of Sindbad, the Sailor.
His first Voyage.


My father left me a considerable estate, the best part of which I
spent in debauchery during my youth; but I perceived my error, and
reflected that riches were perishable, and quickly consumed by such
ill managers as myself. I farther considered, that by my irregular
way of living I wretchedly mispent my time, which is the most
valuable thing in the world. I remembered the saying of the great
Solomon, which I had frequently heard from my father: That death is
more tolerable than poverty. Struck with those reflections, I
collected the remains of my furniture, and sold all my patrimony by
public auction to the highest bidder. Then I entered into a contract
with some merchants, who traded by sea: I took the advice of such as
I thought most capable to give it me; and resolving to improve what
money I had, I went to Balsora, [5] and embarked with several
merchants on board a ship which we jointly fitted up.

We set sail, and steered our course towards the East Indies, through
the Persian gulf, which is formed by the coasts of Arabia Felix on
the right, and by those of Persia on the left, and, according to
common opinion, is seventy leagues at the broadest place. The
eastern sea, as well as that of the Indies, is very spacious; it is
bounded on one side by the coasts of Abyssinia, and is 4500 leagues
in length to the isles of Vakvaq. [6] At first I was troubled with
the sea-sickness, but speedily recovered my health, and was not
afterwards troubled with that disease.

In our voyage we touched at several islands, where we sold or
exchanged our goods. One day, whilst under sail, we were becalmed
near a little island, even almost with the surface of the water,
which resembled a green meadow. The captain ordered his sails to be
furled, and permitted such persons as had a mind to land upon the
island, amongst whom I was one. But while we were diverting
ourselves with eating and drinking, and recovering ourselves from
the fatigue of the sea, the island on a sudden trembled, and shook
us terribly.

Here Scheherazade stopped, because day appeared, but resumed her
discourse next morning as follows.




SEVENTY-FIRST NIGHT.


Sir, Sindbad pursued his story thus: They perceived the trembling of
the island on board the ship, and called us to re-embark speedily,
or we should all be lost; for what we took for an island was only
the back of a whale. The nimblest got into the sloop; others betook
themselves to swimming; but, for my part, I was still upon the back
of the whale when he dived into the sea, and had time only to catch
hold of a piece of wood that we had brought out of the ship to make
a fire. Meanwhile, the captain, having received those on board who
were in the sloop, and taken up some of those that swam, resolved to
improve the favourable gale that was just risen, and hoisting his
sails, pursued his voyage, so that it was impossible to recover the
ship.

Thus was I exposed to the mercy of the waves, and struggled for my
life all the rest of the day and the following night. Next morning I
found my strength gone, and despaired of saving my life, when
happily a wave threw me against an island. [7] The bank was high and
rugged, so that I could scarcely have got up, had it not been for
some roots of trees, which fortune seemed to have preserved in this
place for my safety. Being got up, I lay down upon the ground half
dead, until the sun appeared: then, though I was very feeble, both
by reason of my hard labour and want of food, I crept along to seek
some herbs fit to eat, and had not only the good luck to find some,
but likewise a spring of excellent water, which contributed much to
recover me. After this I advanced farther into the island, and came
at last into a fine plain, where I perceived a horse feeding at a
great distance. I went towards him, between hope and fear, not
knowing whether I was going to lose my life or save it. When I came
near, I perceived it to be a very fine mare, tied to a stake. Whilst
I looked upon her, I heard the voice of a man from under ground, who
immediately appeared to me, and asked who I was. I gave him an
account of my adventure; after which, taking me by the hand, he led
me into a cave, where there were several other people, no less
amazed to see me than I was to see them.

I eat some victuals which they offered me, and then, having asked
them what they did in such a desert place, they answered, that they
were grooms belonging to king Mihrage, sovereign of the island; and
that every year, at the same season, they brought thither the
king’s mares, and fastened them as I saw that mare, until they
were covered by a horse that came out of the sea, who, after he had
done so, endeavoured to destroy the mares; but they hindered him by
their noise, and obliged him to return to the sea; after which they
carried home the mares, whose foals were kept for the king’s use,
and called sea-horses. They added, that they were to get home
to-morrow, and had I been one day later, I must have perished,
because the inhabited part of the island was at a great distance,
and it would have been impossible for me to have got thither without
a guide.

Whilst they entertained me thus, the horse came out of the sea, as
they had told me, covered the mare, and afterwards would have
devoured her; but upon a great noise made by the grooms, he left
her, and went back to the sea.

Next morning, they returned with their mares to the capital of the
island, took me with them, and presented me to king Mihrage. [8] He
asked me who I was? By what adventure I came into his dominions?
And, after I had satisfied him, he told me he was much concerned for
my misfortune, and at the same time ordered that I should want
nothing; which his officers were so generous and careful as to see
exactly fulfilled.

Being a merchant, I frequented with men of my own profession, and
particularly inquired for those who were strangers, if perhaps I
might hear any news from Bagdad, or find an opportunity to return
thither: for king Mihrage’s capital is situated on the bank of the
sea, and has a fine harbour, where ships arrive daily from the
different quarters of the world. I frequented also the society of
the learned Indians, and took delight to hear them discourse; but
withal, I took care to make my court regularly to the king, and
conversed with the governors and petty kings, his tributaries, that
were about him. They asked me a thousand questions about my country;
and I being willing to inform myself as to their laws and customs,
asked them every thing that I thought worth knowing.

There belongs to this king an island named Cassel: they assured me,
that every night a noise of drums [9] was heard there, whence the
mariners fancied that it was the residence of Degial. [10] I had a
great mind to see this wonderful place, and in my way thither saw
fishes of 100 and 200 cubits long, [11] that occasion more fear than
hurt; for they are so fearful, that they will fly upon the rattling
of two sticks or boards. I saw likewise other fishes about a cubit
in length, that had heads like owls. [12]

As I was one day at the port, after my return, a ship arrived, and,
as soon as she cast anchor, they began to unload her, and the
merchants on board ordered their goods to be carried into the
magazine. As I cast my eye upon some bales, and looked to the name,
I found my own, and perceived the bales to be the same that I had
embarked at Balsora. I also knew the captain: but being persuaded
that he believed me to be drowned, I went and asked him whose bales
these were. He replied, that they belonged to a merchant of Bagdad,
called Sindbad, who came to sea with him; but one day, being near an
island, as we thought, he went ashore, with several other
passengers, upon this supposed island, which was only a monstrous
whale that lay asleep upon the surface of the water: but as soon as
he felt the heat of the fire they had kindled upon his back to dress
some victuals, he began to move, and dived under water: most of the
persons who were upon him perished, and among them unfortunate
Sindbad. Those bales belonged to him, and I am resolved to trade
with them until I meet with some of his family, to whom I may return
the profit. Captain, said I, I am that Sindbad whom you thought to
be dead, and those bales are mine. --Here Scheherazade stopt till
next morning, and went on as follows:




SEVENTY-SECOND NIGHT.


Sindbad, pursuing the story, said to the company, When the captain
heard me speak thus, O heaven! said he, whom can we ever trust
now-a-days? There is no faith left among men. I saw Sindbad perish
with my own eyes, and the passengers on board saw it as well as I;
and yet you tell me you are that Sindbad. What impudence is this! To
look on you, one would take you to be a man of probity; and yet you
tell a horrible falsehood, in order to possess yourself of what does
not belong to you. Have patience, captain, replied I; do me the
favour to hear what I have to say. Very well, said he, speak; I am
ready to hear you. Then I told him how I escaped, and by what
adventure I met with the grooms of king Mihrage, who brought me to
his court.

He began to abate of his confidence upon my discourse, and was soon
persuaded that I was no cheat; for there came people from his ship
who knew me, paid me great compliments, and expressed much joy to
see me alive. At last he knew me himself, and, embracing me, Heaven
be praised, said he, for your happy escape; I cannot enough express
my joy for it. There are your goods; take and do with them what you
will. I thanked him, acknowledged his probity, and, in requital,
offered him part of my goods as a present, which he generously
refused.

I took out what was most valuable in my bales, and presented it to
king Mihrage, who, knowing my misfortune, asked me how I came by
such rarities? I acquainted him with the whole story. He was
mightily pleased at my good luck, accepted my present, and gave me
one much more considerable in return. Upon this, I took leave of
him, and went aboard the same ship, after I had exchanged my goods
for the commodities of that country. I carried with me wood of
aloes, sandal, camphire, nutmegs, cloves, pepper, and ginger. We
passed by several islands, and at last arrived at Balsora, from
whence I came to this city, with the value of 100,000 sequins. [13]
My family and I received one another with all the transports of
sincere friendship. I bought slaves of both sexes, fine lands, and
built me a great house; and thus I settled myself, resolving to
forget the miseries I had suffered, and to enjoy the pleasures of
life.

Sindbad stopped here, and ordered the musicians to go on with their
concerts, which his story had interrupted. The company continued to
eat and drink till the evening, when it was time to retire; when
Sindbad sent for a purse of one hundred sequins, and giving it to
the porter, said, Take this, Hindbad; return to your home, and come
back to-morrow to hear some more of my adventures. The porter went
home, astonished at the honour done him, and the present made him.
The relation of it was very agreeable to his wife and children, who
did not fail to return thanks to God for what providence had sent
him by the hand of Sindbad.

Hindbad put on his best clothes next day, and returned to the
bountiful traveller, who received him with a pleasant air, and
caressed him heartily. When all the guests were come, dinner was set
upon the table, and continued a long time. When it was ended,
Sindbad, addressing himself to the company, said, Gentlemen, be
pleased to give me audience, and listen to the adventures of my
second voyage; they deserve your attention better than the first.
Upon which every one held his peace, and Sindbad went on thus:--




Second Voyage of Sindbad, the Sailor.


I designed, after my first voyage, to spend the rest of my days at
Bagdad, as I had the honour to tell you yesterday; but it was not
long ere I grew weary of a quiet life. My inclination to trade
revived. I bought goods proper for the commerce I intended, and put
to sea a second time, with merchants of known probity. We embarked
on board a good ship, and, after recommending ourselves to God, set
sail. We traded from island to island, and exchanged commodities
with great profit. One day we landed on an island covered with
several sorts of fruit-trees, but so unpeopled, that we could
neither see man nor beast upon it. We went to take a little fresh
air in the meadows, and along the streams that watered them. Whilst
some diverted themselves with gathering flowers, and others with
gathering fruits, I took my wine and provisions, and sat down by a
stream betwixt two great trees, which formed a curious shape. I made
a very good meal, and afterwards fell asleep. I cannot tell how long
I slept, but when I awaked the ship was gone. Here Scheherazade
broke off, because day appeared, but next night continued the story
thus:




SEVENTY-THIRD NIGHT.


I was very much surprised, said Sindbad, to find the ship gone. I
got up, and looked about every where, and could not see one of the
merchants who landed with me. At last I perceived the ship under
sail, but at such a distance, that I lost sight of her in a very
little time.

I leave you to guess at my melancholy reflections in this sad
condition; I was ready to die with grief. I cried out sadly, beat my
head and breast, and threw myself down upon the ground, where I lay
some time in a terrible agony, one afflicting thought being
succeeded by another still more afflicting. I upbraided myself a
hundred times for not being content with the produce of my first
voyage, that might well have served me all my life. But all this was
in vain, and my repentance out of season.

At last I resigned myself to the will of God; and not knowing what
to do, I climbed up to the top of a great tree, from whence I looked
about on all sides to see if there was any thing that could give me
hopes. When I looked towards the sea, I could see nothing but sky
and water; but looking towards the land, I saw something white; and
coming down from the tree, I took up what provisions I had left, and
went towards it, the distance being so great that I could not
distinguish what it was.

When I came nearer, I thought it to be a white bowl, of a prodigious
height and bigness; and when I came up to it, I touched it, and
found it to be very smooth. I went round to see if it was open on
any side, but saw it was not, and that there was no climbing up to
the top of it, it was so smooth. It was at least fifty paces round.

By this time the sun was ready to set, and all of a sudden the sky
became as dark as if it had been covered with a thick cloud. I was
much astonished at this sudden darkness, but much more when I found
it occasioned by a bird of a monstrous size, that came flying
towards me. I remembered a fowl, called _roc_, that I had often
heard mariners speak of, and conceived that the great bowl, which I
so much admired, must needs be its egg. In short, the bird alighted,
and sat over the egg to hatch it. As I perceived her coming, I crept
close to the egg, so that I had before me one of the legs of the
bird, which was as big as the trunk of a tree. I tied myself
strongly to it with the cloth that went round my turban, in hopes
that when the roc [14] flew away next morning, she would carry me
with her out of this desert island. And after having passed the
night in this condition, the bird actually flew away next morning,
as soon as it was day, and carried me so high that I could not see
the earth; she afterwards descended all of a sudden, with so much
rapidity that I lost my senses: but when the roc was settled, and I
found myself upon the ground, I speedily untied the knot, and had
scarce done so when the bird, having taken up a serpent of a
monstrous length in her bill, flew away. [15]

The place where it left me was a very deep valley, encompassed on
all sides with mountains, so high that they seemed to reach above
the clouds, and so full of steep rocks that there was no possibility
of getting out of the valley. This was a new perplexity; so that
when I compared this place with the desert island from which the roc
brought me, I found that I had gained nothing by the change.

As I walked through this valley, I perceived it was strewed with
diamonds, some of which were of a surprising bigness. I took a great
deal of pleasure to look upon them; but speedily I saw at a distance
such objects as very much diminished my satisfaction, and which I
could not look upon without terror; that was, a great number of
serpents, so big and so long, that the least of them was capable of
swallowing an elephant. They retired in the day-time to their dens,
where they hid themselves from the roc, their enemy, and did not
come out but in the night-time.

I spent the day in walking about the valley, resting myself at times
in such places as I thought mast commodious. When night came on, I
went into a cave, where I thought I might be in safety. I stopped
the mouth of it, which was low and strait, with a great stone, to
preserve me from the serpents, but not so exactly fitted as to
hinder light from coming in. I supped on part of my provisions; but
the serpents, which began to appear, hissing about in the mean time,
put me into such extreme fear, that you may easily imagine I did not
sleep. When day appeared the serpents retired, and I came out of the
cave trembling. I can justly say, that I walked a long time upon
diamonds, without feeling an inclination to touch any of them. At
last I sat down, and notwithstanding my uneasiness, not having shut
my eyes during the night, I fell asleep, after having eaten a little
more of my provisions: but I had scarce shut my eyes, when
something, that fell by me with great noise, awaked me. This was a
great piece of fresh meat; and at the same time I saw several others
fall down from the rocks in different places.

I always looked upon it to be a fable, when I heard mariners and
others discourse of the valley of diamonds, and of the stratagems
made use of by merchants to get jewels from thence; but then I found
it to be true. For, in reality, those merchants come to the
neighbourhood of this valley when the eagles have young ones, and
throwing great joints of meat into the valley, the diamonds, upon
whose points they fall, stick to them; the eagles, which are
stronger in this country than any where else, pounce with great
force upon those pieces of meat, and carry them to their nests upon
the top of the rocks, to feed their young with; at which time the
merchants, running to their nests, frighten the eagles by their
noise, and take away the diamonds that stick to the meat. [16] And
this stratagem they make use of to get the diamonds out of the
valley, which is surrounded with such precipices that nobody can
enter it.

I believed till then that it was not possible for me to get out of
this abyss, which I looked upon as my grave; but then I changed my
mind, for the falling in of those pieces of meat put me in hopes of
a way of saving my life. --Here day began to appear, which obliged
Scheherazade to break off; but she went on with it next night as
follows:




SEVENTY-FOURTH NIGHT.


Sir, said she to the sultan, Sindbad continued the story of the
adventure of his second voyage thus: I began to gather together the
largest diamonds that I could see, and put them into the leathern
bag in which I used to carry my provisions. I afterwards took the
largest piece of meat I could find, tied it close round me with the
cloth of my turban, and then laid myself upon the ground, with my
face downward, the bag of diamonds being tied fast to my girdle, so
that it could not possibly drop off.

I had scarce laid me down before the eagles came: each of them
seized a piece of meat, and one of the strongest having taken me up,
with a piece of meat on my back, carried me to his nest on the top
of the mountain. The merchants fell straightway to shouting, to
frighten the eagles; and when they had obliged them to quit their
prey, one of them came to the nest where I was. He was very much
afraid when he saw me; but recovering himself, instead of inquiring
how I came thither, he began to quarrel with me, and asked why I
stole his goods. You will treat me, replied I, with more civility,
when you know me better. Do not trouble yourself; I have diamonds
enough for you and myself too, more than all the other merchants
together. If they have any, it is by chance; but I chose myself in
the bottom of the valley all those which you see in this bag: and
having spoken these words, I showed them to him. I had scarce done
speaking, when the other merchants came trooping about us, much
astonished to see me; but they were much more surprised when I told
them my story. Yet they did not so much admire my stratagem to save
myself, as my courage to attempt it.

They carried me to the place where they staid all together, and
there having opened my bag, they were surprised at the largeness of
my diamonds, and confessed that in all the courts where they had
been they never saw any that came near them. I prayed the merchant
to whom the nest belonged whither I was carried (for every merchant
had his own) to take as many for his share as he pleased. He
contented himself with one, and that too the least of them; and when
I pressed him to take more, without fear of doing me any injury: No,
said he, I am very well satisfied with this, which is valuable
enough to save me the trouble of making any more voyages, to raise
as great a fortune as I desire.

I spent the night with those merchants, to whom I told my story a
second time, for the satisfaction of those who had not heard it. I
could not moderate my joy when I found myself delivered from the
danger I have mentioned: I thought myself to be in a dream, and
could scarce believe myself to be out of danger.

The merchants had thrown their pieces of meat into the valley for
several days: and each of them being satisfied with the diamonds
that had fallen to his lot, we left the place next morning all
together, and travelled near high mountains, where there were
serpents of a prodigious length, which we had the good fortune to
escape. We took the first port we came at, and came to the isle of
Roha, where the trees grow that yield camphire. This tree is so
large, and its branches so thick, that a hundred men may easily sit
under its shade. The juice, of which the camphire is made, runs out
from a hole bored in the upper part of the tree, is received in a
vessel, where it grows to a consistency, and becomes what we call
camphire; and the juice thus drawn out, the tree withers and dies.

There is in this island the rhinoceros, a creature less than the
elephant, but greater than the buffalo; they have a horn upon their
nose, about a cubit long; this horn is solid, and cleft in the
middle from one end to the other, and there is upon it white lines,
representing the figure of a man. The rhinoceros fights with the
elephant, runs his horn into his belly, and carries him off upon his
head; but the blood and the fat of the elephant running into his
eyes, and making him blind, he falls to the ground; and then,
strange to relate, the roc comes and carries them both away in her
claws, to be food for her young ones.

I pass over many other things peculiar to this island, lest I should
be troublesome to you. Here I exchanged some of my diamonds for good
merchandise. From thence we went to other isles; and at last, having
touched at several trading towns of the main land, we landed at
Balsora, from whence I went to Bagdad. There I immediately gave
great alms to the poor, and lived honourably upon the vast riches I
had brought, and gained with so much fatigue. Thus Sindbad ended the
story of the second voyage, gave Hindbad another hundred sequins,
and invited him to come next day to hear the story of the third. The
rest of the guests returned to their houses, and came again the next
day at the same hour; and one may be sure the porter did not fail,
having by this time almost forgot his former poverty. When dinner
was over, Sindbad demanded attention, and gave them an account of
his third voyage, as follows:




Sindbad, the Sailor’s third Voyage.


The pleasures of the life which I then led soon made me forget the
risks I had run in my two former voyages; but being then in the
flower of my age, I grew weary of living without business; and
hardening myself against the thought of any danger I might incur, I
went from Bagdad, with the richest commodities of the country, to
Balsora: there I embarked again with the merchants. We made a long
voyage, and touched at several ports, where we drove a considerable
trade. One day, being out in the main ocean, we were attacked by a
horrible tempest, which made us lose our course. The tempest
continued several days, and brought us before the port of an island,
where the captain was very unwilling to enter; but we were obliged
to cast anchor there. When we had furled our sails, the captain told
us that this and some other neighbouring islands [17] were inhabited
by hairy savages, who would speedily attack us; and though they were
but dwarfs, yet our misfortune was such that we must make no
resistance, for they were more in number than the locusts; and if we
happened to kill one of them, they would all fall upon us, and
destroy us. --Here day beginning to appear, Scheherazade broke off
her story, and continued it next night, as follows:




SEVENTY-FIFTH NIGHT.


This discourse of the captain, said Sindbad, put the whole company
into a great consternation; and we found very soon, to our cost,
that what he had told us was but too true: an innumerable multitude
of frightful savages, covered all over with red hair, and about two
feet high, [18] came swimming towards us, and encompassed our ship
in a little time. They spoke to us as they came near, but we
understood not their language; they climbed up the sides of the ship
with so much agility as surprised us. We beheld all this with mortal
fear, without daring to offer to defend ourselves, or to speak one
word to divert them from their mischievous design. In short, they
took down our sails, cut the cable, and hauled to the shore, made us
all get out, and afterwards carried the ship into another island,
from whence they came. All travellers carefully avoided that island
where they left us, it being very dangerous to stay there, for a
reason you shall hear anon; but we were forced to bear our
affliction with patience.

We went forward into the island, where we found some fruits and
herbs to prolong our lives as long as we could; but we expected
nothing but death. As we went on, we perceived at a distance a great
pile of building, and made towards it. We found it to be a palace,
well built, and very lofty, with a gate of ebony of two leaves,
which we thrust open. We entered the court, where we saw before us a
vast apartment, with a porch, having on one side a heap of men’s
bones, and on the other a vast number of roasting spits. We trembled
at this spectacle, and being weary with travelling, our legs failing
under us, we fell to the ground, being seized with deadly fear, and
lay a long time motionless.

The sun was set, and whilst we were in the lamentable condition just
mentioned, the gate of the apartment opened with a great noise, and
there came out the horrible figure of a black man, as high as a tall
palm tree. He had but one eye, and that in the middle of his
forehead, where it looked as red as a burning coal. His foreteeth
were very long and sharp, and stood out of his mouth, which was as
deep as that of a horse; his upper lip hung down upon his breast;
his ears resembled those of an elephant, [19] and covered his
shoulders; and his nails were as long and crooked as the talons of
the greatest birds. At the sight of so frightful a giant we lost all
sense, and lay like dead men. [20]

At last we came to ourselves, and saw him sitting in the porch,
looking at us. When he had considered us well, he advanced towards
us, and laying his hands upon me, he took me up by the nape of my
neck, and turned me round as a butcher would do a sheep’s head.
After having viewed me well, and perceiving me to be so lean that I
had nothing but skin and bone, he let me go. He took up all the
rest, one by one, viewed them in the same manner, and the captain
being the fattest, he held him with one hand, as I would do a
sparrow, and thrusting a spit through him, kindled a great fire,
roasted, and eat him in his apartment for his supper; which being
done, he returned to his porch, where he lay and fell asleep,
snoring louder than thunder. He slept thus till morning. For our
parts, it was not possible for us to enjoy any rest; so that we
passed the night in the most cruel fear that can be imagined. Day
being come, the giant awaked, got up, went out, and left us in the
palace.

When we thought him at a distance, we broke the melancholy silence
we had kept all night, and every one grieving more than another, we
made the palace resound with our complaints and groans. Though there
were a great many of us, and we had but one enemy, we had not at
first the presence of mind to think of delivering ourselves from him
by his death. This enterprise, however, though hard to put in
execution, was the only design we ought naturally to have formed.

We thought of several other things, but determined nothing; so that
submitting to what it should please God to order concerning us, we
spent the day in running about the island for fruit and herbs to
sustain our lives. When evening came, we sought for a place to lie
in, but found none; so that we were forced, whether we would or not,
to return to the palace.

The giant failed not to come back, and supped once more upon one of
our companions; after which he slept, and snored till day, and then
went out, and left us as formerly. Our condition was so very
terrible, that several of my comrades designed to throw themselves
into the sea, rather than die so strange a death; and those who were
of this mind argued with the rest to follow their example: upon
which one of the company answered, that we were forbidden to destroy
ourselves; but allowing it to be lawful, it was more reasonable to
think of a way to rid ourselves of the barbarous tyrant who designed
so cruel a death for us.

Having thought of a project for that end, I communicated the same to
my comrades, who approved it. Brethren, said I, you know there is a
great deal of timber floating upon the coast: if you will be advised
by me, let us make several floats of it that may carry us; and when
they are done, leave them there till we think fit to make use of
them. In the mean time we will execute the design to deliver
ourselves from the giant; and if we succeed, we may stay here with
patience till some ship pass by, that may carry us out of this fatal
island; but if it happen to miscarry, we will speedily get to our
floats, and put to sea. I confess, that by exposing ourselves to the
fury of the waves, we run a risk of losing our lives; but if we do,
is it not better to be buried in the sea, than in the entrails of
this monster, who has already devoured two of us? My advice was
relished, and we made floats capable of carrying three persons each.

We returned to the palace towards the evening, and the giant arrived
a little while after. We were forced to conclude on seeing another
of our comrades roasted. But at last we revenged ourselves on the
brutish giant thus: After he had made an end of his cursed supper,
he lay down on his back and fell asleep. As soon as we heard him
snore, [21] according to his custom, nine of the boldest among us,
and myself, took each of us a spit, and putting the points of them
into the fire till they were burning hot, we thrust them into his
eye all at once, and blinded him. The pain occasioned him to make a
frightful cry, and to get up and stretch out his hands, in order to
sacrifice some of us to his rage: but we ran to such places as he
could not find us; and after having sought for us in vain, he groped
for the gate, and went out, howling dreadfully. --Scheherazade
stopped here, but next night resumed her story thus:




SEVENTY-SIXTH NIGHT.


We went out of the palace after the giant, continued Sindbad, and
came to the shore, where we had left our floats, and put them
immediately into the sea. We waited till day, in order to get upon
them, in case the giant came towards us with any guide of his own
species; but we hoped if he did not appear by sun-rising, and gave
over his howling, which we still heard, that he would die; and if
that happened to be the case, we resolved to stay in that island,
and not to risk our lives upon the floats; but day had scarce
appeared, when we perceived our cruel enemy, accompanied with two
others almost of the same size, leading him, and a great number more
coming before him with a very quick pace.

When we saw this, we made no delay, but got immediately upon our
floats, and rowed off from the shore. The giants, who perceived
this, took up great stones, and running to the shore, entered the
water up to the middle, and threw so exactly, that they sunk all the
floats but that I was upon, and all my companions, except the two
with me, were drowned. We rowed with all our might, and got out of
the reach of the giants: but when we got out to sea, we were exposed
to the mercy of the waves and winds, and tossed about, sometimes on
one side, and sometimes on another, and spent that night and the
following day under a cruel uncertainty as to our fate; but next
morning we had the good luck to be thrown upon an island, where we
landed with much joy. We found excellent fruit there, that gave us
great relief, so that we pretty well recovered our strength.

In the evening we fell asleep on the bank of the sea, but were
awaked by the noise of a serpent as long as a palm tree, whose
scales made a rustling as he crept along. He swallowed up one of my
comrades, notwithstanding his loud cries, and the efforts he made to
rid himself of the serpent; which, shaking him several times against
the ground, crushed him; and we could hear him gnaw and tear the
poor wretch’s bones, when we had fled a great distance from him.
Next day we saw the serpent again, to our great terror; when I cried
out, O Heaven, to what dangers are we exposed! We rejoiced yesterday
at our having escaped from the cruelty of a giant and the rage of
the waves, and now are we fallen into another danger altogether as
terrible.

As we walked about we saw a large tall tree, upon which we designed
to pass the following night, for our security; and having satisfied
our hunger, we mounted it accordingly. A little while after the
serpent came hissing to the root of the tree, raised itself up
against the trunk of it, and meeting with my comrade, who sat lower
than I, swallowed him at once, and went off.

I staid upon the tree till it was day, and then came down, more like
a dead man than one alive, expecting the same fate with my two
companions. This filled me with horror, so that I was going to throw
myself into the sea; but nature prompting us to a desire to live as
long as we can, I withstood this temptation to despair, and
submitted myself to the will of God, who disposes of our lives at
his pleasure.

In the mean time I gathered together a great quantity of small wood,
brambles, and dry thorns, and making them up into faggots, made a
great circle with them round the tree, and also tied some of them to
the branches over my head. Having done this, when the evening came I
shut myself up within this circle, with this melancholy piece of
satisfaction, that I had neglected nothing which could preserve me
from the cruel destiny with which I was threatened. The serpent
failed not to come at the usual hour, and went round the tree,
seeking for an opportunity to devour me, but was prevented by the
rampart I had made; so that he lay till day, like a cat watching in
vain for a mouse that has retired to a place of safety. When day
appeared he retired, but I dared not leave my fort until the sun
arose.

I was fatigued with the toil he had put me to, and suffered so much
by his poisonous breath, that death seemed more eligible to me than
the horror of such a condition. I came down from the tree, and not
thinking on the resignation I had made to the will of God the
preceding day, I ran towards the sea, with a design to throw myself
into it headlong. --Here Scheherazade stopt, because day appeared;
and next night continued her story thus:




SEVENTY-SEVENTH NIGHT.


Sindbad pursued the account of his third voyage thus: God, said he,
took compassion on my desperate state; for just as I was going to
throw myself into the sea, I perceived a ship at a considerable
distance. I called as loud as I could, and taking the linen from my
turban, displayed it, that they might observe me. This had the
desired effect; all the crew perceived me, and the captain sent his
boat for me. As soon as I came aboard, the merchants and seamen
flocked about me to know how I came to that desert island; and after
I had told them of all that befell me, the oldest of them said to
me, they had several times heard of the giants that dwelt in that
island, that they were cannibals, and eat men raw as well as
roasted; and as to the serpents, they added, that there were
abundance in the isle, that hid themselves by day, and came abroad
by night. After having testified their joy at my escaping so many
dangers, they brought me the best of what they had to eat; and the
captain, seeing that I was all in rags, was so generous as to give
me one of his own suits. We were at sea for some time, touched at
several islands, and at last landed on that of Salabat, [22] where
there grows sanders, a wood of great use in physic. We entered the
port, and came to an anchor. The merchants began to unload their
goods, in order to sell or exchange them. In the mean time, the
captain came to me, and said, Brother, I have here a parcel of goods
that belonged to a merchant, who sailed some time on board this
ship; and he being dead, I design to dispose of them for the benefit
of his heirs, when I know them. The bales he spoke of lay on the
deck, and showing them to me, he said, There are the goods; I hope
you will take care to sell them, and you shall have factorage. I
thanked him that he gave me an opportunity to employ myself, because
I hated to be idle.

The clerk of the ship took an account of all the bales, with the
names of the merchants to whom they belonged: and when he asked the
captain in whose name he should enter those he gave me the charge
of, Enter them, said the captain, in the name of Sindbad the sailor.
I could not hear myself named without some emotion; and looking
steadfastly at the captain, I knew him to be the person who, in my
second voyage, had left me in the island where I fell asleep by a
brook, and set sail without me, or sending to see for me: but I
could not remember him at first, he was so much altered since I saw
him.

And as for him, who believed me to be dead, I could not wonder at
his not knowing me. But, captain, said I, was the merchant’s name
to whom these bales belonged, Sindbad? --Yes, replied he, that was
his name; he came from Bagdad, and embarked on board my ship at
Balsora. One day, when we landed at an island to take in water and
other refreshments, I know not by what mistake, I set sail without
observing that he did not re-embark with us; neither I nor the
merchants perceived it till four hours after. We had the wind in our
stern, and so fresh a gale, that it was not then possible for us to
tack about for him. --You believe him then to be dead? said I.
--Certainly, answered he. --No, captain, said I; look upon me, and
you may know that I am Sindbad, whom you left in that desert island.
I fell asleep by a brook, and when I awaked, I found all the company
gone. At these words the captain looked steadfastly upon me. --Here
Scheherazade perceiving day, broke off her story, and next day
resumed it thus:




SEVENTY-EIGHTH NIGHT.


The captain, continued Sindbad, having considered me attentively,
knew me at last, embraced me, and said, God be praised that fortune
has supplied my defect. There are your goods, which I always took
care to preserve, and to make the best of them at every port where I
touched. I restore them to you, with the profit I have made of them.
I took them from him, and at the same time acknowledged how much I
owed to him.

From the isle of Salabat we went to another, where I furnished
myself with cloves, cinnamon, and other spices. As we sailed from
that island we saw a tortoise that was twenty cubits in length and
breadth. [23] We observed also a fish which looked like a cow, and
gave milk, [24] and its skin is so hard that they usually make
bucklers of it. I saw another which had the shape and colour of a
camel. [25] in short, after a long voyage, I arrived at Balsora, and
from thence returned to the city of Bagdad, with so much riches that
I knew not what I had. I gave a great deal to the poor, and bought
another great estate in addition to what I had already.

Thus Sindbad finished the history of his third voyage; gave another
hundred sequins to Hindbad, and invited him to dinner again next
day, to hear the story of his fourth voyage. Hindbad and the company
retired, and next day, when they returned, Sindbad, after dinner,
continued the story of his adventures.




Sindbad, the Sailor’s, fourth Voyage.


The pleasure, said he, and the divertisements I took after my third
voyage, had not charms enough to divert me from another. I was again
prevailed upon by my passion for traffic, and curiosity to see new
things. I therefore settled my affairs, and having provided a stock
of goods fit for the places where I designed to trade, I set out on
my journey. I took the way of Persia, of which I travelled over
several provinces, and then arrived at a port, where I embarked. We
set sail, and having touched at several ports of the main land, and
some of the eastern islands, we put out to sea, and were overtaken
by such a sudden gust of wind as obliged the captain to furl his
sails, and to take all other necessary precautions to prevent the
danger that threatened us: but all was in vain; our endeavours had
no effect, the sails were torn in a thousand pieces, and the ship
was stranded; so that a great many of the merchants and seaman were
drowned, and the cargo lost.

Scheherazade perceiving day, held her peace; but resumed her story
next night, as follows:




SEVENTY-NINTH NIGHT.


I had the good fortune, continued Sindbad, with several of the
merchants and mariners, to get a plank, and we were carried by the
current to an island which lay before us; there we found fruit and
spring-water, which preserved our lives. We staid all night near the
place where the sea cast us ashore, without consulting what we
should do, our misfortune had dispirited us so much.

Next morning, as soon as the sun was up, we walked from the shore,
and advancing into the island, saw some houses, to which we went;
and as soon as we came thither we were encompassed by a great number
of blacks, who seized us, shared us among them, and carried us to
their respective habitations. [26]

I, and five of my comrades, were carried to one place: they made us
sit down immediately, and gave us a certain herb, which they made
signs to us to eat. My comrades not taking notice that the blacks
eat none themselves, consulted only the satisfying of their own
hunger, and fell to eating with greediness: but I, suspecting some
trick, would not so much as taste it, which happened well for me;
for in a little time after I perceived my companions had lost their
senses, and that when they spoke to me they knew not what they said.

The blacks fed us afterwards with rice, prepared with oil of
cocoa-nuts; and my comrades, who had lost their reason, eat of it
greedily. I eat of it also, but very sparingly. The blacks gave us
that herb at first on purpose to deprive us of our senses, [27] that
we might not be aware of the sad destiny prepared for us; and they
gave us rice on purpose to fatten us; for, being cannibals, their
design was to eat us as soon as we grew fat. They did accordingly
eat my comrades, who were not sensible of their condition; but my
senses being entire, you may easily guess, gentlemen, that instead
of growing fat, as the rest did, I grew leaner every day. The fear
of death under which I laboured, turned all my food into poison. I
fell into a languishing distemper, which proved my safety; for the
blacks, having killed and eat up my companions, seeing me to be
withered, lean, and sick, deferred my death till another time.

Mean while I had a great deal of liberty, so that there was scarce
any notice taken of what I did; and this gave me an opportunity one
day to get at a distance from the houses, and to make my escape. An
old man who saw me, and suspected my design, called to me as loud as
he could to return; but instead of obeying him, I redoubled my pace,
and quickly got out of sight. At that time there was none but the
old man about the houses, the rest being abroad, and not to come
home till night, which was pretty usual with them: therefore, being
sure that they could not come time enough to pursue me, I went on
till night, when I stopped to rest a little, and to eat some of the
provisions I had taken care of; but I speedily set forward again,
and travelled seven days, avoiding those places which seemed to be
inhabited, and lived for the most part upon cocoa-nuts, which served
me both for meat and drink. On the eighth day I came near the sea,
and saw all of a sudden white people like myself gathering pepper,
[28] of which there was great plenty in that place. This I took to
be a good omen, and went to them without any scruple. --Scheherazade
broke off here, and went on with the story next night, as follows:




EIGHTIETH NIGHT.


The people who gathered pepper, continued Sindbad, came to meet me
as soon as they saw me, and asked me, in Arabic, who I was, and
whence I came. I was overjoyed to hear them speak in my own
language, and satisfied their curiosity by giving them an account of
my shipwreck, and how I fell into the hands of the blacks. Those
blacks, replied they, eat men; and by what miracle did you escape
their cruelty? I told them the same story I now tell you, at which
they were wonderfully surprised.

I staid with them till they had gathered their quantity of pepper,
and then sailed with them to the island from whence they came. They
presented me to their king, who was a good prince. He had the
patience to hear the relation of my adventures, which surprised him;
and he afterwards gave me clothes, and commanded care to be taken of
me.

The island was very well peopled, plentiful in every thing, and the
capital was a place of great trade. This agreeable retreat was very
comfortable to me after my misfortune, and the kindness of this
generous prince towards me completed my satisfaction. In a word,
there was not a person more in favour with him than myself; and, by
consequence, every man in court and city sought to oblige me; so
that in a very little time I was looked upon rather as a native than
a stranger.

I observed one thing which to me appeared very extraordinary. All
the people, the king himself not excepted, rode their horses without
bridle or stirrups. This made me one day take the liberty to ask the
king how that came to pass. His majesty answered, that I talked to
him of things which nobody knew the use of in his dominions.

I went immediately to a workman, and gave him a model for making the
stock of a saddle. When that was done, I covered it myself with
velvet and leather, and embroidered it with gold. I afterwards went
to a locksmith, who made me a bridle according to the pattern I
showed him, and then he made me also some stirrups. When I had all
things completed, I presented them to the king, and put them upon
one of his horses. His majesty mounted immediately, and was so
pleased with them, that he testified his satisfaction by large
presents to me. I could not avoid making several others for his
ministers and principal officers of his household, who all of them
made me presents that enriched me in a little time. I also made for
the people of best quality in the city, which gained me great
reputation and regard.

As I made my court very constantly to the king he said to me one
day, Sindbad, I love thee; and all my subjects who know thee treat
thee according to my example. I have one thing to demand of thee,
which thou must grant. --Sir, answered I, there is nothing but what
I will do, as a mark of my obedience to your majesty, whose power
over me is absolute. --I have a mind thou shouldst marry, replied
he, that so thou mayst stay in my dominion, and think no more of thy
own country. --I dared not resist the prince’s will, and so he
gave me one of the ladies of his court, a noble, beautiful, chaste,
and rich lady. The ceremonies of marriage being over, I went and
dwelt with the lady, and for some time we lived together in perfect
harmony. I was not, however, very well satisfied with my condition,
and therefore designed to make my escape on the first occasion, and
to return to Bagdad, which my present settlement, how advantageous
soever, could not make me forget.

While I was thinking on this, the wife of one of my neighbours, with
whom I had contracted a very strict friendship, fell sick, and died.
I went to see and comfort him in his affliction, and finding him
swallowed up with sorrow, I said to him as soon as I saw him, God
preserve you and grant you a long life. --Alas! replied he, how do
you think I should obtain that favour you wish me? I have not above
an hour to live. --Pray, said I, do not entertain such a melancholy
thought; I hope it will not be so, but that I shall enjoy your
company for many years. --I wish you, said he, a long life; but for
me, my days are at an end, for I must be buried this day with my
wife. [29] This is a law which our ancestors established in this
island, and always observed it inviolably. The living husband is
interred with the dead wife, and the living wife with the dead
husband. Nothing can save me; every one must submit to this law.

While he was entertaining me with an account of this barbarous
custom, the very hearing of which frighted me cruelly, his kindred,
friends, and neighbours came in a body to assist at the funerals.
They put on the corpse the woman’s richest apparel, as if it had
been her wedding-day, and dressed her with all her jewels; then they
put her into an open coffin, and lifting it up, began their march to
the place of burial. The husband walked at the head of the company,
and followed the corpse. They went up to a high mountain, and when
they came thither, took up a great stone, which covered the mouth of
a very deep pit, and let down the corpse, with all its apparel and
jewels. Then the husband, embracing his kindred and friends,
suffered himself to be put into another open coffin without
resistance, with a pot of water, and seven little loaves, and was
let down in the same manner as they let down his wife. The mountain
was pretty long, and reached to the sea. The ceremony being over,
they covered the hole again with the stone, and returned.

It is needless, gentlemen, for me to tell you that I was the only
melancholy spectator of this funeral, whereas the rest were scarcely
moved at it, the practice was so customary to them. I could not
forbear speaking my thoughts of this matter to the king: Sir, said
I, I cannot but wonder at the strange custom in this country, of
burying the living with the dead. I have been a great traveller, and
seen many countries, but never heard of so cruel a law. --What do
you mean, Sindbad? said the king: it is a common law. I shall be
interred with the queen, my wife, if she die first. --But, sir, said
I, may I presume to ask your majesty, if strangers be obliged to
observe this law? --Without doubt, replied the king, (smiling at the
occasion of my question,) they are not exempted, it they be married
in this island.

I went home very melancholy at this answer; for the fear of my
wife’s dying first, and that I should be interred alive with her,
occasioned me very mortifying reflections. But there was no remedy;
I must have patience, and submit to the will of God. I trembled,
however, at every little indisposition of my wife: but alas! in a
little time my fears came upon me all at once, for she fell sick,
and died in a few days.

Scheherazade stopt here for that time, and resumed the thread of her
story next night thus:




EIGHTY-FIRST NIGHT.


You may judge at my sorrow, continued Sindbad; to be interred alive,
seemed to me as deplorable an end as to be devoured by cannibals.
But I must submit; the king and all his court would honour the
funeral with their presence, and the most considerable people of the
city did the like. When all was ready for the ceremony, the corpse
was put into a coffin, with all her jewels and magnificent apparel.
The cavalcade began, and as second actor in this doleful tragedy, I
went next the corpse, with my eyes full of tears, bewailing my
deplorable fate. Before I came to the mountain, I made an essay on
the minds of the spectators: I addressed myself to the king in the
first place, and then to all those who were round me and bowing
before them to the earth, to kiss the border of their garments, I
prayed them to have compassion upon me. Consider, said I, that I am
a stranger, and ought not to be subject to this rigorous law, and
that I have another wife and children in my own country. [30] It was
to no purpose for me to speak thus, no soul was moved at it; on the
contrary, they made haste to let down my wife’s corpse into the
pit, and put me down the next moment in an open coffin, with a
vessel full of water, and seven loaves. In short, the fatal ceremony
being performed, they covered up the mouth of the pit,
notwithstanding the excess of my grief, and my lamentable cries.

As I came near the bottom, I discovered, by help of the little light
that came from above, the nature of this subterraneous place; it was
a vast long cave, and might be about fifty fathom deep. I
immediately smelt an insufferable stench, proceeding from the
multitude of dead corpses which I saw on the right and left; nay, I
fancied that I heard some of them sigh out their last. However, when
I got down, I immediately left my coffin, and getting at a distance
from the corpses, held my nose, and lay upon the ground, where I
staid a long time, bathed in tears. Then, reflecting on my sad lot,
It is true, said I, that God disposes all things according to the
decrees of his providence; but, poor Sindbad, art not thou thyself
the cause of thy being brought to die so strange a death? Would to
God thou hadst perished in some of those tempests which thou hast
escaped! Then thy death had not been so lingering and terrible in
all its circumstances. But thou hast drawn all this upon thyself by
thy cursed avarice. Ah! unfortunate wretch, shouldst thou not rather
have staid at home, and quietly enjoyed the fruits of thy labour?

Such were the vain complaints with which I made the cave to echo,
beating my head and stomach out of rage and despair, and abandoning
myself to the most afflicting thoughts. Nevertheless, I must tell
you, that instead of calling death to my assistance in that
miserable condition, I felt still an inclination to live, and to do
all I could to prolong my days. I went groping about, with my nose
stopped, for the bread and water that was in my coffin, and I took
some of it. Though the darkness of the cave was so great that I
could not distinguish day and night, yet I always found my coffin
again, and the cave seemed to be more spacious and fuller of corpses
than it appeared to me at first. I lived for some days upon my bread
and water, which being all spent at last, I prepared for death. --At
these words Scheherazade left off, but resumed the story next night
thus:




EIGHTY-SECOND NIGHT.


As I was thinking of death, continued Sindbad, I heard the stone
lifted up from the mouth of the cave, and immediately the corpse of
a man was let down. When men are reduced to necessity, it is natural
for them to come to extreme resolutions. While they let down the
woman, I approached the place where her coffin was to be put, and as
soon as I perceived they were covering again the mouth of the cave,
I gave the unfortunate wretch two or three great blows over the
head, with a large bone that I found; which stunned, or, to say the
truth, killed her. I committed this inhuman action merely for the
sake of the bread and water that was in her coffin, and thus I had
provisions for some days more. When that was spent, they let down
another dead woman, and a live man: I killed the man in the same
manner, and, as good luck would have it for me, there was then a
sort of mortality in the town, so that by this means I did not want
for provisions.

One day, as I despatched another woman, I heard something walking,
and blowing or panting as it walked. I advanced towards that side
from whence I heard the noise, and upon my approach the thing puffed
and blew harder, as if it had been running away from me. I followed
the noise, and the thing seemed to stop sometimes, but always fled
and blew as I approached. I followed it so long, and so far, till at
last I perceived a light, resembling a star; I went on towards that
light, and sometimes lost sight of it, but always found it again,
and at last discovered that it came through a hole in the rock,
large enough for a man to get out at.

Upon this I stopped some time to rest myself, being much fatigued
with pursuing this discovery so fast: afterwards coming up to the
hole, I went out of it, and found myself upon the bank of the sea. I
leave you to guess the excess of my joy: it was such, that I could
scarce persuade myself of its being real.

But when I was recovered from my surprise, and convinced of the
truth of the matter, I found the thing which I had followed, and
heard puff and blow, to be a creature which came out of the sea, and
was accustomed to enter at that hole to feed upon the dead
carcasses. [31]

I examined the mountain, and perceived it to be situated betwixt the
sea and the town, but without any passage or way to communicate with
the latter, the rocks on the side of the sea were so rugged and
steep. I fell down upon the shore to thank God for this mercy, and
afterwards entered the cave again to fetch bread and water, which I
did by day-light, with a better appetite than I had done since my
interment in the dark hole.

I returned thither again, and groped about among the biers for all
the diamonds, rubies, pearls, gold bracelets, and rich stuffs I
could find; these I brought to the shore, and tying them up neatly
into bales, with the cords that let down the coffins, I laid them
together upon the bank, waiting till some ship passed by, without
fear of rain, for it was not then the season.

After two or three days, I perceived a ship that had but just come
out of the harbour, and passed near the place where I was. I made a
sign with the linen of my turban, and called to them as loud as I
could. They heard me, and sent a boat to bring me on board, when the
mariners asked by what misfortune I came thither: I told them that I
had suffered shipwreck two days ago, and made shift to get ashore
with the goods they saw. It was happy for me that those people did
not consider the place where I was, nor inquire into the probability
of what I told them; but, without more ado, took me on board with my
goods. When I came to the ship, the captain was so well pleased to
have saved me, and so much taken up with his own affairs, that he
also took the story of my pretended shipwreck upon trust, and
generously refused some jewels which I offered him.

We passed by several islands, and among others that called the isle
of Bells, [32] about ten days’ sail from Serendib, with a regular
wind, and six from that of Kela, where we landed. This island
produces lead mines, Indian canes, [33] and excellent camphire.

The king of the isle of Kela is very rich and potent, and the isle
of Bells, which is about two days’ journey in extent, is also
subject to him. The inhabitants are so barbarous that they still eat
human flesh. After we had finished our commerce in that island, we
put to sea again, and touched at several other ports: at last I
arrived happily at Bagdad with infinite riches, of which it is
needless to trouble you with the detail.

Out of thankfulness to God for his mercies, I gave great alms for
the support of several mosques, and for the subsistence of the poor,
and employed myself wholly in enjoying my kindred and friends, and
making merry with them.

Here Sindbad finished the relation of his fourth voyage, which was
more surprising to the company than all the three former. He gave a
new present of a hundred sequins to Hindbad, whom he prayed to
return with the rest next day at the same hour, to dine with him,
and hear the story of his fifth voyage. Hindbad and the rest of his
guests took leave of him, and retired. Next morning when they all
met, they sat down at table, and when dinner was over, Sindbad began
the relation of his fifth voyage, as follows:




The fifth voyage of Sindbad the sailor.


The pleasures I enjoyed had again charms enough to made me forget
all the troubles and calamities I had undergone, without curing me
of my inclination to make new voyages. Therefore I bought goods,
ordered them to be packed up and loaded, and set out with them for
the best sea-port; and there, that I might not be obliged to depend
upon a captain, but have a ship at my own command, I staid till one
was built on purpose, at my own charge. When the ship was ready, I
went on board with my goods; but not having enough to load her, I
took on board with me several merchants of different nations, with
their merchandize.

We sailed with the first fair wind, and, after a long navigation,
the first place we touched at was a desert island, where we found an
egg of a roc, equal in bigness to that I formerly mentioned. There
was a young roc in it, just ready to be hatched, and the bill of it
began to appear.

At these words Scheherazade stopt, because day began to enter the
sultan’s apartment; but next night she resumed her story thus:




EIGHTY-THIRD NIGHT.


Sindbad, the sailor, said she, continued the relation of his fifth
voyage as follows: The merchants whom I had taken on board my ship,
and who landed with me, broke the egg with hatchets, and made a hole
in it, from whence they pulled out the young roc, piece after piece,
and roasted it. I had earnestly persuaded them not to meddle with
the egg, but they would not listen to me.

Scarcely had they made an end of their treat, when there appeared in
the air, at a considerable distance from us, two great clouds. The
captain whom I hired to manage my ship, knowing, by experience, what
it meant, cried that it was the male and female roc that belonged to
the young one, and pressed us to re-embark with all speed, to
prevent the misfortune which he saw would otherwise befall us. We
made haste to do so, and set sail with all possible diligence.

In the mean time, the two rocs approached with a frightful noise,
which they redoubled when they saw the egg broken, and their young
one gone. But having a mind to avenge themselves, they flew back
towards the place from whence they came, and disappeared for some
time, while we made all the sail we could, to prevent that which
unhappily befell us.

They returned, and we observed that each of them carried between
their talons, stones, or rather rocks, of a monstrous size. When
they came directly over my ship, they hovered, and one of them [34]
let fall a stone; but by the dexterity of the steersman, who turned
the ship with the rudder, it missed us, and, falling by the side of
the ship into the sea, divided the waters so, that we almost could
see to the bottom. The other roc, to our misfortune, threw the stone
so exactly upon the middle of the ship, that it split in a thousand
pieces. The mariners and passengers were all killed by the stone, or
sunk. I myself had the last fate; but as I came up again, I
fortunately caught hold of a piece of the wreck, and sometimes
swimming with one hand, and sometimes with the other, but always
holding fast my board, the wind and the tide favouring me, I came to
an island, whose shore was very steep. I overcame that difficulty,
however, and got ashore.

I sat down upon the grass, to recover myself a little from the
fatigue; after which I got up, and went into the island to view it.
It seemed to be a delicious garden. I found trees every where, some
of them bearing green, and others ripe fruits, and streams of fresh
pure water, with pleasant windings and turnings. I ate of the
fruits, which I found excellent, and drank of the water, which was
very pleasant.

Night being come, I lay down upon the grass in a convenient place
enough, but I could not sleep an hour at a time, my mind was so
disturbed with the fear of being alone in so desert a place. Thus I
spent the best part of the night in fretting, and reproached myself
for my imprudence in not staying at home, rather that undertaking
this last voyage. These reflections carried me so far, that I began
to form a design against my own life; but daylight dispersed those
melancholy thoughts, and I got up, and walked among the trees, but
not without apprehensions of danger.

When I was a little advanced into the island, I saw an old man, [35]
who appeared very weak and feeble. He sat upon the bank of a stream,
and at first I took him to be one who had been shipwrecked like
myself. I went towards him and saluted him, but he only bowed his
head a little. I asked him what he did there; but, instead of
answering me, he made a sign for me to take him upon my back, and
carry him over the brook, signifying that it was to gather fruit.

I believed him really to stand in need of my help, so took him upon
my back, and, having carried him over, bid him get down, and for
that end stooped, that he might get off with ease; but instead of
that, (which I laugh at every time I think of it,) the old man, who
to me appeared very decrepit, clasped his legs nimbly about my neck,
and then I perceived his skin to resemble that of a cow. He sat
astride upon my shoulders, and held my throat so tight, that I
thought he would have strangled me, the fright of which made me
faint away, and fall down.

[Illustration: THE OLD MAN OF THE SEA.]

Day appearing, Scheherazade was obliged to stop here, but pursued
her story thus next night:




EIGHTY-FOURTH NIGHT.


Notwithstanding my fainting, continued Sindbad, the ill-natured old
fellow kept fast about my neck, but opened his legs a little to give
me time to recover my breath. When I had done so, he thrust one of
his feet against my stomach, and struck me so rudely on the side
with the other, that he forced me to rise up against my will. Being
got up, he made me walk under the trees, and forced me now and then
to stop, to gather and eat fruit such as we found. He never left me
all day, and when I lay down to rest me by night, he laid himself
down with me, holding always fast about my neck. Every morning he
pushed me to make me awake, and afterwards obliged me to get up and
walk, and pressed me with his feet. You may judge, then, gentlemen,
what trouble I was in, to be loaded with such a burden, which I
could by no means rid myself from.

One day I found in my way several dry calabashes that had fallen
from a tree; I took a large one, and after cleaning it, pressed into
it some juice of grapes, [36] which abounded in the island; having
filled the calabash, I set it in a convenient place, and coming
hither again some days after, I took up my calabash, and setting it
to my mouth, found the wine to be so good, that it made me presently
not only forget my sorrow, but I grew vigorous, and was so
light-hearted, that I began to sing and dance as I walked along.

The old man perceiving the effects which this drink had upon me, and
that I carried him with more ease than I did before, made a sign to
me to give him some of it. I gave him the calabash, and the liquor
pleasing his palate, he drank it all off. There being enough of it
to fuddle him, he became drunk immediately, and the fumes getting up
into his head, he began to sing after his manner, and to dance with
his breech upon my shoulders. His jolting made him vomit, and he
loosened his legs from about me by degrees; so finding that he did
not press me as before, I threw him upon the ground, where he lay
without motion, and then I took up a great stone, with which I
crushed his head to pieces.

I was extremely rejoiced to be freed thus for ever from this cursed
old fellow, and walked upon the bank of the sea, where I met the
crew of a ship that had cast anchor to take in water to refresh
themselves. They were extremely surprised to see me, and to hear the
particulars of my adventures. You fell, said they, into the hands of
the old man of the sea, and are the first that ever escaped
strangling by him. He never left those he had once made himself
master of, till he destroyed them, and he had made this island
famous by the number of men he has slain; so that the merchants and
mariners who landed upon it dared not to advance into the island but
in numbers together.

After having informed me of those things, they carried me with them
to the ship: the captain received me with great satisfaction when
they told him what had befallen me. He put out again to sea, and
after some days’ sail we arrived at the harbour of a great city,
whose houses were built with good stone.

One of the merchants of the ship who had taken me into his
friendship, obliged me to go along with him, and carried me to a
place appointed for a retreat for foreign merchants. He gave me a
great bag, and having recommended me to some people of the town, who
used to gather cocoa-nuts, he desired them to take me with them to
do the like: “Go,” said he, “follow them, and do as you see
them do, and do not separate from them, otherwise you endanger your
life.” Having thus spoke, he gave me provisions for the journey,
and I went with them.

We came to a great forest of trees, extremely straight and tall, and
their trunks so smooth, that it was not possible for any man to
climb up to the branches that bore the fruit. All the trees were
cocoa-trees, and when we entered the forest, we saw a great number
of apes, of several sizes, that fled as soon as they perceived us,
and climbed up to the top of the trees with surprising swiftness.

Scheherazade would have gone on, but day appearing, prevented her,
and next night she resumed her discourse as follows:




EIGHTY-FIFTH NIGHT.


The merchants with whom I was, continued Sindbad, gathered stones,
and threw them at the apes on the top of the trees. I did the same,
and the apes, out of revenge, threw cocoa-nuts at us as fast, and
with such gestures, as sufficiently testified their anger and
resentment: we gathered up the cocoa-nuts, and from time to time
threw stones to provoke the apes; so that by this stratagem we
filled our bags with cocoa-nuts, which it had been impossible for us
to have done otherwise.

When we had gathered our number, we returned to the city, where the
merchant who sent me to the forest gave me the value of the cocoas I
brought: Go on, said he, and do the like every day, until you have
got money enough to carry you home. I thanked him for his good
advice, and insensibly gathered together so many cocoa-nuts as
amounted to a considerable sum.

The vessel in which I came, sailed with merchants, who loaded her
with cocoa-nuts. I expected the arrival of another, which landed
speedily for the like loading. I embarked on board the same all the
cocoa-nuts that belonged to me, and when she was ready to sail, I
went and took leave of the merchant who had been so kind to me; but
he could not embark with me, because he had not finished his
business.

We set sail towards the islands, [37] where pepper grows in great
plenty. From thence we went to the isle of Comari, [38] where the
best sort of wood of aloes grows, and whose inhabitants have made it
an inviolable law to themselves, to drink no wine, nor to suffer any
place of debauch. I exchanged my cocoa, in those two islands, for
pepper and wood of aloes, and went, with other merchants, a pearl
fishing. [39] I hired divers, who fetched me up those that were very
large and pure. I embarked joyfully, in a vessel that happily
arrived at Balsora; from thence I returned to Bagdad, where I made
vast sums of my pepper, wood of aloes, and pearls. I gave the tenth
of my gains in alms, as I had done upon my return from other
voyages, and endeavoured to ease myself from my fatigues by
diversions of all sorts.

When Sindbad had finished his story, he ordered one hundred sequins
to Hindbad, who retired with all the other guests; but next morning,
the same company returned to dine with rich Sindbad, who, after
having treated them as formerly, demanded audience, and gave the
following account of his sixth voyage:




The sixth Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor.


Gentlemen, said he, you long, without doubt, to know, how after
being shipwrecked five times, and escaping so many dangers, I could
resolve again to try my fortune, and expose myself to new hardships:
I am astonished at it myself when I think on it, and must certainly
have been induced to it by my stars. But be that as it will, after a
year’s rest, I prepared for a sixth voyage, notwithstanding the
entreaties of my kindred and friends, who did all that was possible
to prevent me.

Instead of taking my way by the Persian gulf, I travelled once more
through several provinces of Persia and the Indies, and arrived at a
sea-port, where I embarked on board a ship, the captain of which was
resolved on a long voyage.

It was very long indeed, but at the same time so unfortunate, that
the captain and pilot lost their course, and knew not where they
were. They found it at last, but we had no reason to rejoice at it.
We were all seized with extraordinary fear, when we saw the captain
quit his post, and cry out. He threw off his turban, pulled the hair
of his beard, and beat his head like a madman. We asked him the
reason, and he answered, that he was in the most dangerous place in
all the sea. A rapid current carries the ship along with it, and we
shall all of us perish in less than a quarter of an hour. Pray to
God to deliver us from this danger; we cannot escape it, if he does
not take pity on us. At these words, he ordered the sails to be
changed; but all the ropes broke, and the ship, without its being
possible to help it, was carried by the current to the foot of an
inaccessible mountain, where she run ashore, and was broken to
pieces, yet so that we saved our lives, our provisions, and the best
of our goods.

This being over, the captain said to us, God has done what pleased
him; we may every man dig our grave here, and bid the world adieu;
for we are all in so fatal a place, that none shipwrecked here did
ever return to their homes again. His discourse afflicted us sorely,
and we embraced each other with tears in our eyes, bewailing our
deplorable lot.

The mountain, at the foot of which we were cast, was the coast of a
very long and large island. This coast was covered all over with
wrecks, and by the vast number of men’s bones we saw every where,
and which filled us with horror, we concluded, that abundance of
people had died there. It is also incredible to tell, what a
quantity of goods and riches we found cast ashore there. All those
objects served only to augment our grief. Whereas, in all other
places, rivers run from their channels into the sea, here a great
river of fresh water [40] runs out of the sea into a dark cave,
whose entrance is very high and large. What is most remarkable in
this place is, that the stones of the mountain are of crystal,
rubies, or other precious stones. Here is also a sort of fountain of
pitch or bitumen, [41] that runs into the sea, which the fishes
swallow, and then vomit it up again, turned into ambergris; and this
the waves throw up on the beach in great quantities. Here also grow
trees, most of which are wood of aloes, equal in goodness to those
of Comari.

To finish the description of this place, which may well be called a
gulf, since nothing ever returns from it --it is not possible for
ships to get off from it, when once they come within such a distance
of it. If they be driven thither by a wind from the sea, the wind
and the current ruin them; and it they come into it when a land-wind
blows, which might seem to favour their getting out again, the
height of the mountain stops the wind, and occasions a calm, so that
the force of the current runs them ashore, where they are broken to
pieces, as ours was; and that which completes the misfortune is,
that there is no possibility to get to the top of the mountain, or
to get out any manner of way.

We continued upon the shore like men out of their senses, and
expected death every day. At first, we divided our provisions as
equally as we could, and thus every one lived a longer or shorter
time, according to their temperance, and the use they made of their
provisions.

Scheherazade perceiving day, left off speaking, but next night she
resumed the story as follows:




EIGHTY-SIXTH NIGHT.


Those who died first, continued Sindbad, were interred by the rest,
and as for my part, I paid the last duty to all my companions: nor
are you to wonder at this, for besides that I husbanded the
provision that fell to my share better than they, I had provisions
of my own, which I did not share with my comrades, yet when I buried
the last, I had so little remaining, that I thought I could not hold
out long, so that I dug a grave, resolving to lie down in it,
because there was none left alive to inter me. I must confess to you
at the same time, that while I was thus employed, I could not but
reflect upon myself as the cause of my own ruin, and repented that I
had ever undertaken this last voyage; nor did I stop at reflections
only, but had well nigh hastened my own death, and began to tear my
hands with my teeth.

But it pleased God once more to take compassion on me, and put it in
my mind to go to the bank of the river which ran into the great
cave; where, considering the river with great attention, I said to
myself, This river, which runs thus under ground, must come out
somewhere or other. If I make a float, and leave myself to the
current, it will bring me to some inhabited country, or drown me. If
I be drowned, I lose nothing, but only change one kind of death for
another; and if I get out of this fatal place, I shall not only
avoid the sad fate of my comrades, but perhaps find some new
occasion of enriching myself. Who knows but fortune waits upon my
getting off this dangerous shelf, to compensate my shipwreck with
usury?

I immediately went to work on a float. I made it of large pieces of
timber and cables, for I had choice of them, and tied them together
so strong, that I had made a very solid little float. When I had
finished, I loaded it with some bales of rubies, emeralds,
ambergris, rock-crystal, and rich stuffs. Having balanced all my
cargo exactly, and fastened them well to the float, I went on board
it with two little oars that I had made, and leaving it to the
course of the river, I resigned myself to the will of God.

As soon as I came into the cave, I lost all light, and the stream
carried me I knew not whither. Thus I floated some days in perfect
darkness, and once found the arch so low that it very nigh broke my
head, which made me very cautious afterwards to avoid the like
danger. All this while I eat nothing but what was necessary to
support nature; yet, notwithstanding this frugality, all my
provisions were spent. Then a pleasing sleep seized upon me. I
cannot tell how long it continued; but when I awakened, I was
surprised to find myself in the middle of a vast country, at the
brink of a river, where my float was tied amidst a great number of
negroes. I got up as soon as I saw them, and saluted them. They
spoke to me, but I did not understand their language. I was so
transported with joy, that I knew not whether I was asleep or awake;
but being persuaded that I was not asleep, I recited the following
words in Arabic, aloud: Call upon the Almighty, he will help thee;
thou needest not perplex thyself about any thing else: shut thy
eyes, and while thou art asleep, God will change thy bad fortune
into good.

One of the blacks, who understood Arabic, hearing me speak thus,
came towards me, and said, Brother, be not surprised to see us; we
are inhabitants of this country, and came hither to-day to water our
fields, by digging little canals from this river, which comes out of
the neighbouring mountain. We perceived something floating upon the
water, went speedily to see what it was, and perceiving your float,
one of us swam into the river, and brought it hither, where we
fastened it, as you see, until you should awake. Pray tell us your
history, for it must be extraordinary; how did you venture yourself
into this river, and whence did you come? I begged of them first to
give me something to eat, and then I would satisfy their curiosity.
They gave me several sorts of food; and when I had satisfied my
hunger, I gave them a true account of all that had befallen me,
which they listened to with admiration. As soon as I had finished my
discourse, they told me, by the person who spoke Arabic, and
interpreted to them what I said, that it was one of the most
surprising stories they ever heard, and that I must go along with
them, and tell it their king myself; the story is too extraordinary
to be told by any other than the person to whom it happened. I told
them I was ready to do whatever they pleased.

They immediately sent for a horse, which was brought in a little
time; and having made me get upon him, some of them walked before me
to show me the way, and the rest took my float and cargo, and
followed me.

Here, Scheherazade was obliged to stop, because day appeared; but
towards the close of the next night, resumed the thread of her story
thus:




EIGHTY-SEVENTH NIGHT.


We marched thus altogether, till we came to the city of Serendib,
[42] for it was in that island I landed. The blacks presented me to
their king; I approached his throne, and saluted him as I used to do
the kings of the Indies; that is to say, I prostrated myself at his
feet, and kissed the earth. The prince ordered me to rise up,
received me with an obliging air, and made me come up, and sit down
near him. He first asked me my name, and I answered, They call me
Sindbad the sailor, because of the many voyages I had undertaken,
and I am a citizen of Bagdad. But, replied he, how came you into my
dominions, and from whence came you last?

I concealed nothing from the king; I told him all that I have now
told you, and his majesty was so surprised and charmed with it, that
he commanded my adventure to be written in letters of gold, and laid
up in the archives of his kingdom. At last my float was brought in,
and the bales opened in his presence: he admired the quantity of
wood of aloes and ambergris; but, above all, the rubies and
emeralds, for he had none in his treasury that came near them.

Observing that he looked on my jewels with pleasure, and viewed the
most remarkable among them one after another, I fell prostrate at
his feet, and took the liberty to say to him, Sir, not only my
person is at your majesty’s service, but the cargo of the float,
and I would beg of you to dispose of it as your own. He answered me
with a smile, Sindbad, I will take care not to covet any thing of
yours, nor take any thing from you that God has given you; far from
lessening your wealth, I design to augment it, and will not let you
go out of my dominions without marks of my liberality. All the
answer I returned, was prayers for the prosperity of that prince,
and commendations of his generosity and bounty. He charged one of
his officers to take care of me, and ordered people to serve me at
his own charge. The officer was very faithful in the execution of
his orders, and caused all the goods to be carried to the lodgings
provided for me.

I went every day, at a set hour, to make my court to the king, and
spent the rest of my time in seeing the city, and what was most
worthy of notice.

The isle of Serendib is situated just under the equinoctial line;
[43] so that the days and nights there are always of twelve hours
each, and the island is eighty parasangs [44] in length, and as many
in breadth.

The capital city stands in the end of a fine valley, formed by a
mountain in the middle of the island, which is the highest in the
world. [45] It is seen three days sail off at sea. There are rubies
and several sorts of minerals in it, and all the rocks are for the
most part emery, a metalline stone made use of to cut and smooth
other precious stones. There grow all sorts of rare plants and
trees, especially cedars and cocoa-trees. There is also a pearl
fishery in the mouth of its river, and in some of its valleys there
are found diamonds. I made, by way of devotion, a pilgrimage to the
place where Adam was confined after his banishment from paradise,
and had the curiosity to go to the top of it.

When I came back to the city, I prayed the king to allow me to
return to my country, which he granted me in the most obliging and
most honourable manner. He would needs force a rich present upon me;
and when I went to take my leave of him, he gave me one much more
considerable, and at the same time charged me with a letter for the
commander of the faithful, our sovereign, saying to me, I pray you
give this present from me, and this letter, to Caliph Haroun
Alraschid, and assure him of my friendship. I took the present and
letter in a very respectful manner, and promised his majesty
punctually to execute the commission with which he was pleased to
honour me. Before I embarked, this prince sent for the captain and
the merchants who were to go with me, and ordered them to treat me
with all possible respect.

The letter from the king of Serendib was written on the skin of a
certain animal, of great value, because of its being so scarce, and
of a yellowish colour. [46] The characters of the letters were of
azure, and the contents as follows:

‘The king of the Indies, before whom march a hundred elephants,
who lives in a palace that shines with a hundred thousand rubies,
and who has in his treasury twenty thousand crowns, enriched with
diamonds, to Caliph Haroun Alraschid:

‘Though the present we send you be inconsiderable, receive it
however as a brother and a friend, in consideration of the hearty
friendship which we bear for you, and of which we are willing to
give you proof. We desire the same part in your friendship,
considering that we believe it to be our merit being of the same
dignity with yourself. We conjure you this in quality of a brother.
Adieu.’

The present consisted, first, of one single ruby [47] made into a
cup, about half a foot high, an inch thick, and filled with round
pearls of half a dram each. Second, the skin of a serpent, whose
scales were as large as an ordinary piece of gold, and had the
virtue to preserve from sickness those who lay upon it. [48] Third,
fifty thousand drams of the best wood of aloes, with thirty grains
of camphire as big as pistachios. And fourth, a she slave of
ravishing beauty, whose apparel was all covered over with jewels.

The ship set sail, and after a very long and successful navigation,
we landed at Balsora; from thence I went to Bagdad, where the first
thing I did was to acquit myself of my commission. Scheherazade
stopt because day appeared, and next night proceeded thus:




EIGHTY-EIGHTH NIGHT.


I took the king of Serendib’s letter, continued Sindbad, and went
to present myself at the gate of the commander of the faithful,
followed by the beautiful slave, and such of my own family as
carried the presents. I gave an account of the reason of my coming,
and was immediately conducted to the throne of the caliph. I made my
reverence by prostration, and after a short speech, gave him the
letter and present. When he had read what the king of Serendib wrote
to him, he asked me if that prince was really so rich and potent as
he had said in his letter? I prostrated myself a second time, and
rising again, Commander of the faithful, said I, I can assure your
majesty he doth not exceed the truth on that head. I am witness of
it. There is nothing more capable of raising a man’s admiration
than the magnificence of his palace. When the prince appears in
public, he has a throne fixed on the back of an elephant, and
marches betwixt two ranks of his ministers, favourites, and other
people of his court; before him, upon the same elephant, an officer
carries a golden lance in his hand; and behind the throne there is
another, who stands upright, with a column of gold, on the top of
which there is an emerald half a foot long, and an inch thick;
before him march a guard of a thousand men, clad in cloth of gold
and silk, and mounted on elephants richly caparisoned.

While the king is on his march, the officer who is before him on the
same elephant, cries, from time to time, with a loud voice, Behold
the great monarch, the potent and redoubtable sultan of the Indies,
whose palace is covered with a hundred thousand rubies, and who
possesses twenty thousand crowns of diamonds. Behold the crowned
monarch greater than the great Solima [49] and the great Mihrage.
[50] After he had pronounced those words, the officer behind the
throne cries in his turn, This monarch, so great and so powerful,
must die, must die, must die. And the officer before replies, Praise
be to him who lives for ever.

Farther, the king of Serendib is so just, that there are no judges
in his dominions. His people have no need of them. They understand
and observe justice exactly of themselves.

The caliph was much pleased with my discourse. The wisdom of that
king, said he, appears in his letter, and after what you tell me, I
must confess, that his wisdom is worthy of his people, and his
people deserve so wise a prince. Having spoken thus, he dismissed
me, and sent me home with a rich present.

Sindbad left off speaking, and his company retired, Hindbad having
first received a hundred sequins; and next day they returned to hear
the relation of his seventh and last voyage, as follows:




The seventh and last Voyage of Sindbad the Sailor.


Being returned from my sixth voyage, I absolutely laid aside all
thoughts of travelling any farther; for, beside that my years now
required rest, I was resolved no more to expose myself to such risk
as I had run; so that I thought of nothing but to pass the rest of
my days in quiet. One day as I was treating a parcel of my friends,
one of my servants came, and told me, that an officer of the caliph
asked for me. I rose from the table and went to him. The caliph,
said he, has sent me to tell you, that he must speak with you. I
followed the officer to the palace, where being presented to the
caliph, I saluted him, by prostrating myself at his feet. Sindbad,
said he to me, I stand in need of you; you must do me the service to
carry my answer and present to the king of Serendib. It is but just
I should return his civility.

This command of the caliph to me was like a clap of thunder.
Commander of the faithful, replied I, I am ready to do whatever your
majesty shall think fit to command me; but I beseech you most humbly
to consider what I have undergone. I have also made a vow never to
go out of Bagdad. Hence, I took occasion to give him a large and
particular account of all my adventures, which he had the patience
to hear out.

As soon as I had finished, I confess, said he, that the things you
tell me are very extraordinary, yet you must, for my sake, undertake
this voyage which I propose to you. You have nothing to do but to go
to the isle of Serendib, and deliver the commission which I give
you. After that you are at liberty to return. But you must go; for
you know it would be indecent, and not suitable to my dignity, to be
indebted to the king of that island. Perceiving that the caliph
insisted upon it, I submitted, and told him that I was willing to
obey. He was very well pleased at it, and ordered me a thousand
sequins for the charge of my journey.

I prepared for my departure in a few days, and as soon as the
caliph’s letter and present were delivered to me, I went to
Balsora, where I embarked, and had a very happy voyage. I arrived at
the isle of Serendib, where I acquainted the king’s ministers with
my commission, and prayed them to get me speedy audience. They did
so, and I was conducted to the palace in an honourable manner, where
I saluted the king by prostration, according to custom. That prince
knew me immediately, and testified very great joy to see me. O
Sindbad, said he, you are welcome; I swear to you I have many times
thought of you since you went hence; I bless the day upon which we
see one another once more. I made my compliment to him, and after
having thanked him for his kindness to me, I delivered the
caliph’s letter and present, which he received with all imaginable
satisfaction.

The caliph’s present was a complete set of cloth of gold, valued
at one thousand sequins; fifty robes of rich stuff, a hundred other
of white cloth, the finest of Cairo, Suez, Cusa, [51] and
Alexandria; [52] a royal crimson bed, and a second of another
fashion; a vessel of agate broader than deep, an inch thick, and
half a foot wide, the bottom of which represented in bas-relief a
man with one knee on the ground, who held a bow and an arrow, ready
to let fly at a lion. He sent him also a rich table, which,
according to tradition, belonged to the great Solomon. The
caliph’s letter was as follows:

‘Greeting in the name of the sovereign guide of the right way, to
the potent and happy sultan, from Abdallah Haroun Alraschid, whom
God hath set in the place of honour, after his ancestors of happy
memory:

‘We received your letter with joy, and send you this from the
council of our port; the garden of superior wits. We hope, when you
look upon it, you will find our good intention, and be pleased with
it. Adieu.’

The king of Serendib was highly pleased that the caliph answered his
friendship. A little time after this audience, I solicited leave to
depart, and had much difficulty to obtain it. I obtained it however
at last, and the king, when he dismissed me, made me a very
considerable present. I embarked immediately to return to Bagdad,
but had not the good fortune to arrive there as I hoped. God ordered
it otherwise.

Three or four days after my departure, we were attacked by corsairs,
who easily seized upon our ship, because it was no vessel of force.
Some of the crew offered resistance, which cost them their lives.
But for me and the rest, who were not so imprudent, the corsairs
saved us, on purpose to make slaves of us.

Day beginning to appear, Scheherazade was obliged to keep silence,
but next night resumed the story thus:




EIGHTY-NINTH NIGHT.


Sir, said she to the sultan of the Indies, Sindbad continuing his
story, told the company, We were all stripped, and instead of our
own clothes, they gave us sorry rags, and carried us into a remote
island, where they sold us.

I fell into the hands of a rich merchant, who, as soon as he bought
me, carried me to his house, treated me well, and clad me handsomely
for a slave. Some days after, not knowing who I was, he asked me if
I understood any trade? I answered, that I was no mechanic, but a
merchant, and that the corsairs who sold me, robbed me of all I had.
But tell me, replied he, can you shoot with a bow? I answered, that
the bow was one of my exercises in my youth, and I had not yet
forgot it. Then he gave me a bow and arrows, and taking me behind
him upon an elephant, carried me to a vast forest some leagues from
the town. We went a great way into the forest, and when he thought
fit to stop, he bid me alight; then showing me a great tree, Climb
up that tree, said he, and shoot at the elephants as you see them
pass by, for there is a prodigious number of them in this forest,
and if any of them fall, come and give me notice of it. Having
spoken thus, he left me victuals, and returned to the town, and I
continued upon the tree all night.

I saw no elephant during that time, but next morning, as soon as the
sun was up, I saw a great number: I shot several arrows among them,
and at last one of the elephants fell; the rest retired immediately,
and left me at liberty to go and acquaint my patron with my booty.
When I had told him the news, he gave me a good meal, commended my
dexterity, and caressed me highly. We went afterwards together to
the forest, where we dug a hole for the elephant; my patron
designing to return when it was rotten, and to take his teeth, &c.
to trade with.

I continued this game for two months, and killed an elephant every
day, getting sometimes upon one tree, and sometimes upon another.
One morning, as I looked for the elephants, I perceived with an
extreme amazement, that, instead of passing by me across the forest
as usual, they stopped, and came to me with a horrible noise, in
such a number that the earth was covered with them, and shook under
them. They encompassed the tree where I was, with their trunks
extended, and their eyes all fixed upon me. At this frightful
spectacle I continued immoveable, and was so much frightened, that
my bow and arrows fell out of my hand.

My fears were not in vain; for after the elephants had stared upon
me some time, one of the largest of them put his trunk round the
foot of the tree, and pulled so strong, that he plucked it up, and
threw it on the ground; I fell with the tree, and the elephant
taking me up with his trunk, laid me on his back, where I sat more
like one dead than alive, with my quiver on my shoulder: he put
himself at the head of the rest, who followed him in troops, and
carried me to a place where he laid me down on the ground, and
retired with all his companions. Conceive, if you can, the condition
I was in: I thought myself to be in a dream; at last, after having
lain some time, and seeing the elephants gone, I got up, and found I
was upon a long and broad hill, covered all over with the bones and
teeth of elephants. I confess to you that this object furnished me
with abundance of reflections. I admired the instinct of those
animals; I doubted not but that was their burying-place, and that
they carried me thither on purpose to tell me that I should forbear
to persecute them, since I did it only for their teeth. I did not
stay on the hill, but turned towards the city, and, after having
travelled a day and a night, I came to my patron; I met no elephant
in my way, which made me think they had retired farther into the
forest, to leave me at liberty to come back to the hill without any
obstacle.

As soon as my patron saw me; Ah, poor Sindbad, said he, I was in
great trouble to know what had become of you. I have been at the
forest, where I found a tree newly pulled up, and a bow and arrows
on the ground, and after having sought for you in vain, I despaired
of ever seeing you more. Pray, tell me what befell you, and by what
good hap thou art still alive. I satisfied his curiosity, and going
both of us next morning to the hill, he found to his great joy that
what I had told him was true. We loaded the elephant upon which we
came with as many teeth as he could carry; and when we were
returned, Brother, said my patron, for I will treat you no more as
my slave, after having made such a discovery as will enrich me, God
bless you with all happiness and prosperity. I declare before him
that I give you your liberty. I concealed from you what I am now
going to tell you.

The elephants of our forest have every year killed us a great many
slaves, whom we sent to seek ivory. For all the cautions we could
give them, those crafty animals killed them one time or other. God
has delivered you from their fury, and has bestowed that favour upon
you only. It is a sign that he loves you, and has use for your
service in the world. You have procured me incredible gain. We could
not have ivory formerly, but by exposing the lives of our slaves,
and now our whole city is enriched by your means. Do not think I
pretend to have rewarded you by giving you your liberty; I will also
give you considerable riches. I would engage all our city to
contribute towards making your fortune, but I will have the glory of
doing it myself.

To this obliging discourse I replied, Patron, God preserve you. Your
giving me my liberty is enough to discharge what you owe me, and I
desire no other reward for the service I had the good fortune to do
to you and your city, but leave to return to my own country. Very
well, said he, the monsoon [53] will in a little time bring ships
for ivory. I will send you home then, and give you wherewith to bear
your charges. I thanked him again for my liberty, and his good
intentions towards me. I staid with him, expecting the monsoon; and
during that time, we made so many journeys to the hill, that we
filled all our warehouses with ivory. The other merchants, who
traded in it, did the same thing, for it could not be long concealed
from them. At these words Scheherazade, perceiving day, broke off.




NINETIETH NIGHT. [54]


Sir, said she to the sultan of the Indies, Sindbad went on with his
seventh voyage thus:

The ships arrived at last, and my patron himself having made choice
of the ship wherein I was to embark, he loaded half of it with ivory
on my account, he laid in provisions in abundance for my passage,
and besides obliged me to accept a present of the curiosities of the
country of great value. After I had returned him a thousand thanks
for all his favours, I went aboard. We set sail, and as the
adventure which procured me this liberty was very extraordinary, I
had it continually in my thoughts.

We stopped at some islands to take in fresh provisions. Our vessel
being come to a port on the main land in the Indies, we touched
there, and not being willing to venture by sea to Balsora, I landed
my proportion of the ivory, resolving to proceed on my journey by
land. I made vast sums of my ivory, I bought several rarities, which
I intended for presents, and when my equipage was got ready, I set
out in company of a large caravan of merchants. I was a long time on
the way, and suffered very much; but endured all with patience, when
I considered that I had nothing to fear from the seas, from pirates,
from serpents, nor of the other perils I had undergone.

All these fatigues ended at last, and I came safe to Bagdad. I went
immediately to wait upon the caliph, and gave him an account of my
embassy. That prince told me he had been uneasy, by reason I was so
long in returning, but that he always hoped God would preserve me.
When I told him of the adventure of the elephants, he seemed to be
much surprised at it, and would never have given any credit to it
had he not known my sincerity. He reckoned this story, and the other
relations I had given him, to be so curious, that he ordered one of
his secretaries to write them in characters of gold, and lay them up
in his treasury. I retired very well satisfied with the honours I
received, and the presents which he gave me; and after that I gave
myself up wholly to my family, kindred, and friends.

Sindbad here finished the relation of his seventh and last voyage,
and then, addressing himself to Hindbad, Well, friend, said he, did
you ever hear of any person that suffered so much as I have done, or
of any mortal that has gone through so many perplexities? Is it not
reasonable that, after all this, I should enjoy a quiet and pleasant
life? As he said this, Hindbad drew near to him, and kissing his
hand, said, I must acknowledge, sir, you have gone through terrible
dangers; my troubles are not comparable to yours: if they afflict me
for a time, I comfort myself with the thoughts of the profit I get
by them. You not only deserve a quiet life, but are worthy besides
of all the riches you enjoy, because you make such a good and
generous use of them. May you therefore continue to live in
happiness and joy, till the day of your death. Sindbad gave him a
hundred sequins more, received him into the number of his friends,
and desired him to quit his porter’s employment, and come and dine
every day with him, that he might all his days have reason to
remember Sindbad the sailor.




The three Apples.


The Caliph Haroun Alraschid one day commanded the grand vizier
Giafar, to come to his palace the night following. Vizier, said he,
I will take a walk around the town, to inform myself what people
say, and particularly how they are pleased with my officers of
justice. If there be any against whom they have reason of just
complaint, we will turn them out, and put others in their stead who
shall officiate better. If, on the contrary, there be any that have
gained their applause, we will have that esteem for them which they
deserve. The grand vizier being come to the palace at the hour
appointed, the caliph, he, and Mesrour, the chief of the eunuchs,
disguised themselves so that they could not be known, and went out
all three together.

They passed through several places, and by several markets; and as
they entered a small street, they perceived, by the light of the
moon, a tall man, with a white beard, who carried nets on his head,
and a club in his hand. The old man, said the caliph, does not seem
to be rich; let us go to him, and inquire into his circumstances.
Honest man, said the vizier, who art thou? The old man replied, Sir,
I am a fisher, but one of the poorest and most miserable of the
trade; I went from my house about noon to go a fishing, and from
that time to this I have not been able to catch one fish; and at the
same time I have a wife and small children, and nothing to maintain
them.

The caliph, moved with compassion, said to the fisherman, Hast thou
the courage to go back and cast thy net once more? We will give thee
a hundred sequins for what thou shalt bring up. At this proposal,
the fisherman, forgetting all his day’s toil, took the caliph at
his word; and with him, Giafar and Mesrour, returned to the Tigris;
he saying to himself: These gentlemen seem to be too honest and
reasonable not to reward my pains; and if they give me the hundredth
part of what they promise me, it will be a great deal.

They came to the bank of the river, and the fisherman throwing in
his net, when he drew it again, brought up a trunk, close shut, and
very heavy. The caliph made the grand vizier pay him a hundred
sequins immediately, and sent him away. Mesrour, by his master’s
order, carried the trunk on his shoulder; and the caliph was so very
eager to know what was in it, that he returned to the palace with
all speed. When the trunk was opened, they found in it a large
basket made of palm leaves, shut up, and the covering of it sewed
with red thread. To satisfy the caliph’s impatience, they would
not take time to unrip it, but cut the thread with a knife, and they
took out of the basket a bundle wrapt up in a sorry piece of
hanging, and bound about with a rope, which being untied, and the
bundle opened, they found, to their great amazement, the corpse of a
young lady, whiter than snow, all cut in pieces.

The astonishment of the caliph at this dreadful spectacle may be
more easily imagined than expressed; his surprise was instantly
changed into passion, and darting an angry look at the vizier, Ah!
thou wretch, said he, is this your inspection into the actions of my
people? Do they commit such impious murders under thy ministry in my
capital city, and throw my subjects into the Tigris, that they may
cry for vengeance against me at the day of judgment? If thou dost
not speedily revenge the murder of this woman by the death of her
murderer, I swear by heaven, that I will cause thee to be hanged,
and forty more of thy kindred. Commander of the faithful, replied
the grand vizier, I beg your majesty to grant me time to make
inquiry. I will allow thee no more, said the caliph, than three
days; therefore, thou must look to it.

The vizier Giafar went home in great confusion of mind. Alas! said
he, how is it possible, that in such a vast and populous city as
Bagdad, I should be able to detect a murderer, who undoubtedly
committed the crime without witness, and perhaps may be already gone
from hence? Any other but I would take some wretched person out of
prison, and cause him to die, to satisfy the caliph; but I will not
burden my conscience with such a barbarous action; I will rather die
than save my life at that rate.

He ordered the officers of the police and justice to make strict
search for the criminal; they sent their servants about, and they
themselves were not idle, for they were no less concerned in this
matter than the vizier. But all their endeavours amounted to
nothing; what pains soever they took they could not find out the
murderer; so that the vizier concluded his life to be gone, unless
some remarkable providence hinder it.

The third day being come, an officer came to this unfortunate
minister with a summons to follow him, which the vizier obeyed. The
caliph asked him for the murderer. He answered, with tears in his
eyes, Commander of the faithful, I have not found any person that
could give me the least account of him. The caliph, full of fury and
rage, gave him many reproachful words, and ordered that he and forty
Bermecides [55] more should be hanged up at the gate of the palace.

In the mean while, the gibbets were preparing, and orders were sent
to seize forty Bermecides more in their houses; a public crier was
sent about the city to cry thus, by the caliph’s order:-- Those
who have a desire to see the grand vizier Giafar hanged, and forty
more Bermecides of his kindred, let them come to the square before
the palace.

When all things were ready, the criminal judge and a great many
officers belonging to the palace, brought out the grand vizier with
the forty Bermecides, and set each of them at the foot of the gibbet
designed for them, and a rope was put about each of their necks. The
multitude of people that filled the square, could not without grief
and tears behold this tragical sight; for the grand vizier and the
Bermecides were loved and honoured on account of their probity,
bounty, and impartiality, not only in Bagdad, but through all the
dominions of the caliph.

Nothing could prevent the execution of this prince’s too severe
and irrevocable sentence, and the lives of the most honest people in
the city were just going to be taken away, when a young man of
handsome mien and good apparel, pressed through the crowd till he
came where the grand vizier was, and after he had kissed his hand,
said, Most excellent vizier, chief of the emirs of this court, and
comforter of the poor, you are not guilty of the crime for which you
stand here. Withdraw, and let me expiate the death of the lady that
was thrown into the Tigris. It was I who murdered her, and I deserve
to be punished for it.

Though these words occasioned great joy to the vizier, yet he could
not but pity the young man, in whose look he saw something, that
instead of being ominous, was engaging; but as he was about to
answer him, a tall man, pretty well in years, who had likewise
forced his way through the crowd, came up to him, saying, Sir, do
not believe what this young man tells you; I killed that lady who
was found in the trunk, and this punishment ought only to fall upon
me. I conjure you in the name of God not to punish the innocent for
the guilty. Sir, said the young man to the vizier, I do protest that
I am he who committed this vile act, and nobody else had any hand in
it. --My son, said the old man, it is despair that brought you
hither, and you would anticipate your destiny. I have lived a long
time in the world, and it is time for me to be gone; let me,
therefore, sacrifice my life for yours. Sir, said he again to the
vizier, I tell you once more I am the murderer; let me die without
any more ado.

The controversy between the old man and the young one obliged the
grand vizier Giafar to carry them both before the caliph, which the
judge criminal consented to, being very glad to serve the vizier.
When he came before the prince, he kissed the ground seven times,
and spake after this manner: Commander of the faithful, I have
brought here before your majesty this old man and this young man,
who both confess themselves to be the sole murderers of the lady.
Then the caliph asked the criminals, which of them it was that so
cruelly murdered the lady, and threw her into the Tigris. The young
man assured him it was he, but the old man maintained the contrary.
Go, said the caliph to the grand vizier, and cause them both to be
hanged. But, sir, said the vizier, if only one of them be guilty, it
would be unjust to take the lives of both. At these words, the young
man spoke again --I swear by the great God, who has raised the
heaven so high, that I am the man who killed the lady, cut her in
quarters, and threw her into the Tigris about four days ago. I
renounce my part of happiness amongst the just at the day of
judgment, if what I say be not true; therefore I am he that ought to
suffer. The caliph being surprised at this oath, believed him,
especially since the old man made no answer to this. Whereupon,
turning to the young man, Thou wretch, said he, what was it that
made thee commit that detestable crime, and what is it that moves
thee to offer thyself voluntarily to die? Commander of the faithful,
said he, if all that has passed between that lady and me were set
down in writing, it would be a history that might be very useful for
other men. I command thee, then, to relate it, said the caliph. The
young man obeyed, and began. His history was thus:




The Story of the Lady that was murdered, and of the young Man, her
Husband.


Commander of the faithful, your majesty may be pleased to know, that
this murdered lady was my wife, the daughter of this old man you see
here, who is my own uncle by the father’s side. She was not above
twelve years old when he gave her to me, and it is now eleven years
ago. I have three children by her, all boys, yet alive; and I must
do her that justice to say, that she never gave me the least
occasion for offence. She was chaste, of good behaviour, and made it
her whole business to please me; and, for my part, I loved her
entirely, and rather prevented her in granting any thing she
desired, than opposed it.

About two months ago, she fell sick; I took all imaginable care of
her, and spared nothing that could procure her a speedy recovery.
After a month she began to grow better, and had a mind to go to the
bath. Before she went out of the house, Cousin, said she, (for so
she used to call me out of familiarity,) I long for some apples; if
you would get me any, you would please me extremely. I have longed
for them a great while; and I must own it is come to that height,
that if I be not satisfied very soon, I fear some misfortune will
befall me. With all my heart, said I, I will do all that is in my
power to make you easy.

I went immediately round all the markets and shops in the town to
seek for apples, but I could not get one, though I offered to pay a
sequin a-piece. I returned home very much dissatisfied at my
disappointment; and for my wife, when she returned from the bagnio,
and saw no apples, she became so very uneasy, that she could not
sleep all night I got up betimes in the morning, and went through
all the gardens, but had no better success than the day before; only
I happened to meet an old gardener, who told me that all my pains
would signify nothing, for I could not expect to find apples any
where but in your majesty’s garden at Balsora. As I loved my wife
passionately, and would not have any neglect to satisfy her
chargeable upon me, I dressed myself in a traveller’s habit, and
after I had told her my design, I went to Balsora, and made my
journey with so great diligence, that I returned at the end of
fifteen days, with three apples, which cost me a sequin a-piece;
there were no more left in the garden, so that the gardener would
not let me have them cheaper. As soon as I came home, I presented
them to my wife; but her longing was over, so she satisfied herself
with receiving them, and laid them down by her. In the mean time,
she continued sickly, and I knew not what remedy to get for her.

Some few days after I returned from my journey, I was sitting in my
shop in the public place where all sorts of fine stuffs are sold,
and saw an ugly, tall, black slave come in, with an apple in his
hand, which I knew to be one of those I had brought from Balsora. I
had no reason to doubt it, because I was certain there was not one
to be had in all Bagdad, nor in any of the gardens about it. I
called to him, and said, Good slave, prithee tell me where thou
hadst this apple? It is a present, said he, smiling, from my
mistress. I went to see her to-day, and found her out of order. I
saw three apples lying by her, and asked her where she had them. She
told me, the good man, her husband, had made a fortnight’s journey
on purpose for them, and brought them her. We had a collation
together, and when I took my leave of her, I brought away this apple
that you see.

This discourse put me out of my senses. I rose, shut up my shop, ran
home with all speed, and going to my wife’s chamber, looked
immediately for the apples; and seeing only a couple, asked what was
become of the third. Then my wife turning her head to the place
where the apples lay, and perceiving there were but two, answered me
coldly, Cousin, I know not what is become of it. At this answer, I
did verily believe what the slave told me to be true; and at the
same time, giving myself up to madness and jealousy, I drew my knife
from my girdle, and thrust it into the unfortunate creature’s
throat. I afterwards cut off her head, and divided her body into
four quarters, which I packed up in a bundle, and hiding it in a
basket, sewed it up with a thread of red yarn, put all together in a
trunk, and when night came, I carried it on my shoulder down to the
Tigris, where I sunk it.

The two youngest of my children were already put to bed and asleep,
the third was gone abroad; but at my return, I found him sitting by
my gate, weeping very sore. I asked him the reason: Father, said he,
I took this morning from my mother, without her knowledge, one of
those three apples you brought her, and I kept it a long while; but
as I was playing some time ago with my little brother, in the
street, a tall slave that went by, snatched it out of my hands, and
carried it with him. I ran after him, demanded it back, and besides,
told him, that it belonged to my mother, who was sick, and that you
had made a fortnight’s journey to fetch it; but all to no purpose
--he would not restore it. And as I still followed him, crying out,
he turned and beat me, and then ran away as fast as he could from
one lane to another, till at length I lost sight of him. I have
since been walking without the town expecting your return, to pray
you, dear father, not to tell my mother of it, lest it should make
her worse; and when he had said these words, he fell a weeping again
more bitterly than before.

My son’s discourse afflicted me beyond all measure. I then found
myself guilty of an enormous crime, and repented too late of having
so easily believed the calumnies of a wretched slave, who, from what
he had learnt of my son, invented that fatal lie.

My uncle here present, came just at the time to see his daughter;
but instead of finding her alive, understood from me that she was
dead, for I concealed nothing from him; and without staying for his
censure, declared myself the greatest criminal in the world.

Upon this, instead of reproaching me, he joined his tears with mine,
and we wept three days together, without intermission; he for the
loss of a daughter whom he always loved tenderly, and I for the loss
of a dear wife, of whom I had deprived myself after so cruel a
manner, by giving too easy credit to the report of a lying slave.

This, commander of the faithful, is the sincere confession your
majesty commanded from me. You have heard now all the circumstances
of my crime, and I most humbly beg of you to order the punishment
due for it; how severe soever it may be, I shall not in the least
complain, but esteem it too easy and gentle.

The caliph was very much astonished at the young man’s relation.
But this just prince, finding that he was rather to be pitied than
condemned, began to speak in his favour: This young man’s crime,
said he, is pardonable before God, and excusable with men. The
wicked slave is the sole cause of this murder --it is he alone that
must be punished; wherefore, said he, looking upon the grand vizier,
I give you three day’s time to find him out; if you do not bring
him within that space, you shall die in his stead. The unfortunate
Giafar, who thought himself now out of danger, was terribly
perplexed at this new order of the caliph; but as he durst not
return any answer to this prince, whose hasty temper he knew too
well, he departed from his presence, and retired to his house with
tears in his eyes, persuading himself he had but three days to live;
for he was so fully persuaded that he should not find the slave,
that he made not the least inquiry about him. Is it possible, said
he, that in such a city as Bagdad, where there is an infinite number
of negro slaves, I should be able to find him out that is guilty? So
that unless God be pleased to bring it about, as he hath already
detected the murderer, nothing can save my life.

He spent the two first days in mourning with his family, who sat
around him weeping and complaining of the caliph’s cruelty. The
third day being come, he prepared himself to die with courage, as an
honest minister, and one that had nothing to trouble his conscience;
he sent for notaries and witnesses, who signed the last will he made
in their presence. After which, he took leave of his wife and
children, and bid them the last farewell. All his family were
drowned in tears, so that there never was a more sorrowful
spectacle. At last, the messenger came from the caliph to tell him
that he was out of all patience, haring heard nothing from him, nor
concerning the negro slave which he had commanded him to search for;
I am therefore ordered, said he, to bring you before his throne. The
afflicted vizier made ready to follow the messenger; but as he was
going out, they brought him his youngest daughter, about five or six
years of age. The nurses that attended her, presented her to her
father to receive his last blessing.

As he had a particular love for that child, he prayed the messenger
to give him leave to stop for a moment; and taking his daughter in
his arms, he kissed her several times. As he kissed her, he
perceived she had somewhat in her bosom that looked bulky, and had a
sweet scent. My dear little one, said he, what hast thou in thy
bosom? My dear father, said she, it is an apple, upon which is
written the name of our lord and master, the caliph; our slave Rihan
[56] sold it me for two sequins.

At these words apple and slave, the grand vizier cried out with
surprise, intermixed with joy, and putting his hand into the
child’s bosom, pulled out the apple. He caused the slave, who was
not far off, to be brought immediately; and when he came, Rascal,
said he, where hadst thou this apple? My lord, said the slave, I
swear to you, that I neither stole it in your house, nor out of the
commander of the faithful’s garden, but the other day, as I was
going along a street where three or four small children were at
play, one of them having it in his hand, I snatched it from him, and
carried it away. The child ran after me, telling me it was none of
his own, but belonged to his mother, who was sick, and that his
father, to save her longing, had made a long journey, and brought
home three apples, whereof this was one, which he had taken from his
mother, without her knowledge. He said what he could to make me give
it him back, but I would not; and so I brought it home, and sold it
for two sequins to the little lady, your daughter; and this is the
whole truth of the matter.

Giafar could not enough admire, how the roguery of a slave had been
the cause of an innocent woman’s death, and almost of his own. He
carried the slave along with him; and when he came before the
caliph, he gave that prince an exact account of all that the slave
had told him, and the chance that had brought him to the discovery
of his crime.

Never was any surprise so great as that of the caliph, yet he could
not prevent himself from falling into excessive fits of laughter. At
last, he recovered himself, and with a serious mien, told the
vizier, that since his slave had been the occasion of a strange
accident, he deserved an exemplary punishment. Sir, I must own it,
said the vizier, but his guilt is not irremissible. I remember a
strange story of a vizier of Cairo, called Nourreddin Ali, [57] and
Bedreddin Hassan, [58] of Balsora; and since your majesty delights
to hear such things, I am ready to tell it, upon condition, that if
your majesty finds it more astonishing than that which gives me
occasion to tell it, you will be pleased to pardon my slave. I am
content, said the caliph; but you undertake a hard task, for I do
not believe you can save your slave, the story of the apples being
so very singular. Upon this, Giafar began his story thus:




The Story of Nourreddin Ali and Bedreddin Hassan.


Commander of the faithful, there was in former days a sultan of
Egypt, a strict observer of justice, gracious, merciful, and
liberal; and his valour made him terrible to his neighbours. He
loved the poor, and protected the learned, whom he advanced to the
highest dignities. This sultan had a vizier, who was prudent, wise,
sagacious, and well versed in other sciences. This minister had two
sons, very handsome men, and who, in every thing, followed his own
footsteps. The eldest was called Schemseddin [59] Mohammed, and the
younger Nourreddin Ali. The last especially was endowed with all the
good qualities that any man could possess.

The vizier, their father, being dead, the sultan sent for them; and
after he had caused them both to put on the usual robes of a vizier,
I am as sorry, said he, for the loss of your father as you
yourselves; and because I know you live together, and love one
another entirely, I will bestow his dignity upon you conjunctly. Go,
and imitate your father’s conduct.

The two new viziers humbly thanked the sultan, and went home to
their house, to make due preparation for their father’s interment.
They did not go abroad for a month, and then went to court, where
they appeared continually on council days. When the sultan went out
a hunting, one of the brothers went along with him, and this honour
they had by turns. One evening, as they were talking after supper,
the next day being the elder brother’s turn to go a hunting with
the sultan, he said to his younger brother, Since neither of us is
yet married, and we live so lovingly together, a thought is come
into my head: let us both marry in one day, and let us choose two
sisters out of some family that may suit our quality; --what do you
think of this fancy? I must tell you, brother, answered Nourreddin
Ali, that it is very suitable to our friendship --there cannot be a
better thought; for my part, I am ready to agree to any thing you
should think fit. But hold, this is not all, said Schemseddin
Mohammed; my fancy carries me farther: suppose both our wives should
conceive the first night of our marriage, and should happen to be
brought to bed on one day, yours of a son, and mine of a daughter
--we will give them to one another in marriage, when they come to
age. Nay, said Nourreddin Ali, aloud, I must acknowledge that this
prospect is admirable; such a marriage will perfect our union, and I
willingly consent to it. But then, brother, said he farther, if this
marriage should happen, would you expect that my son should settle a
jointure on your daughter? There is no difficulty in that, replied
the other; for I am persuaded, that besides the usual articles of
the marriage contract, you will not fail to promise, in his name, at
least three thousand sequins, three good manors, and three slaves.
No, said the younger, I will not consent to that: are we not
brethren, and equal in title and dignity? Do not you and I both know
what is just? The male being nobler than the female, it is your part
to give a large dowry with your daughter. By what I perceive, you
are a man that would have your business done at another man’s
charge.

Although Nourreddin Ali spoke these words in jest, his brother,
being of an ill-temper, was offended at it, and falling into a
passion, A mischief upon your son, said he, since you prefer him
before my daughter! I wonder you had so much confidence as to
believe him worthy of her; --you must needs have lost your judgment
to think you are my equal, and say we are colleagues. --I would have
you to know, you fool, that since you are so impudent, I would not
marry my daughter to your son, though you would give him more than
you are worth. This pleasant quarrel between two brothers about the
marriage of their children before they were born, went so far, that
Schemseddin Mohammed concluded with threatening: Were I not
to-morrow, said he, to attend the sultan, I would treat you
according as you deserve; but at my return, I shall make you
sensible that it does not become a younger brother to speak so
insolently to his elder brother, as you have done to me. Upon this,
he retired to his apartment, and his brother went to bed.

Schemseddin Mohammed rose very early next morning, and goes to the
palace to attend the sultan, who went to hunt about Cairo, near the
pyramids. As for Nourreddin Ali, he was very uneasy all the night;
and, considering that it would not be possible for him to live
longer with a brother, who treated him with so much haughtiness, he
provided a good mule, furnished himself with money, jewels,
provisions and victuals, and having told his people that he was
going on a private journey for two or three days, he departed.

When he was out of Cairo, he rode by the desert towards Arabia; but
his mule happening to tire by the way, he was forced to continue his
journey on foot. A courier that was going to Balsora, by good
fortune, overtaking him, took him up behind him. As soon as the
courier came to Balsora, Nourreddin Ali alighted, and returned him
thanks for his kindness. As he went about to seek for a lodging, he
saw a person of quality, with a great retinue, coming along, to whom
all the people showed the greatest respect, and stood still till he
passed by; Nourreddin Ali stopt among the rest. This was the grand
vizier to the sultan of Balsora, who walked through the city to see
that the inhabitants kept good order and discipline.

This minister casting his eyes by chance on Nourreddin Ali, found
something extraordinary in his aspect, looked very attentively upon
him, and as he came near him, and saw him in a traveller’s habit,
he stood still, asked him who he was, and from whence he came. Sir,
said Nourreddin Ali, I am an Egyptian, born at Cairo, and have left
my country because of the unkindness of a near relation, and am
resolved to travel through the world, and rather to die than to
return home again. The grand vizier, who was a reverend old
gentleman, after hearing these words, said to him, Son, beware; do
not pursue your design; there is nothing but misery in the world;
you are not sensible of the hardships you must endure: come, follow
me; I may perhaps make you forget the thing that has forced you to
leave your own country.

Nourreddin Ali followed the grand vizier who soon perceived his good
qualities, and fell so much in love with him, that one day he said
to him in private, My son, I am, as you see, so far gone in years,
that there is no likelihood I shall live much longer. Heaven has
bestowed only one daughter upon me, who is as beautiful as you are
handsome, and now fit for marriage. Several people of the greatest
quality at this court have desired her for their sons, but I could
not grant their request. I have a love for you, and think you so
worthy to be received into my family, that, preferring you before
all those that have sought her, I am ready to accept you for my
son-in-law. If you like the proposal, I will acquaint the sultan my
master that I have adopted you by this marriage, and I will pray him
to grant you the reversion of my dignity of grand vizier in the
kingdom of Balsora. In the mean time nothing being more requisite
for me than ease in my old age, I will not only put you in
possession of my estate, but leave the administration of public
affairs to your management.

When the grand vizier had made an end of this kind and generous
proposal, Nourreddin Ali fell at his feet, and expressing himself in
terms that demonstrated his joy and gratitude, told the vizier that
he was at his command in every thing. Upon this the vizier sent for
his chief domestics, ordered them to furnish the great hall of his
palace, and prepare a great feast: he afterwards sent to invite the
nobility of the court and city to honour him with their company; and
when they were all met, (Nourreddin Ali having now told him who he
was,) he said to those lords, for he thought it proper to speak thus
on purpose to satisfy such of them to whom he had refused his
alliance, --I am now, my lords, to discover a thing to you which
hitherto I have kept secret. I have a brother, who is grand vizier
to the sultan of Egypt, as I am to the sultan of this kingdom. This
brother has but one son, whom he would not marry in the court of
Egypt, but sent him hither to marry my daughter, that both our
branches may be re-united. His son, whom I knew to be my nephew as
soon as I saw him, is the young gentleman I here present to you, and
is to be my son-in-law. I hope you will do me the honour to be
present at this wedding, which I am resolved to celebrate this day.
The noblemen, who could not take it ill that he preferred his nephew
before all the great matches that had been proposed to him, said
that he had very good reason for what he did, were willing to be
witnesses to the ceremony, and wished that God might prolong his
days to enjoy the satisfaction of the happy match.

The lords met at the vizier of Balsora’s house, having testified
their satisfaction at the marriage of his daughter with Nourreddin
Ali, sat down to dinner, which lasted a long while; and the latter
course was sweetmeats, of which every one, according to custom, took
what they thought fit. The notaries came in with the marriage
contract, the chief lords signed it, and when the company departed,
the grand vizier ordered his servants to prepare a bath, and had
every thing in readiness for Nourreddin Ali to bathe. He had fine
new linen, and every thing else provided for him in the most curious
manner. When he had washed and dried himself, he was going to put on
his former apparel, but had an extraordinary rich suit brought him.
Being dressed and perfumed with the most odoriferous essences, he
went to see the grand vizier, his father-in-law, who was exceedingly
well pleased with his genteel mien; and having made him sit down, My
son, said he, you have declared unto me who you are, and the quality
you had at the court of Egypt. You have also told me of a difference
betwixt you and your brother, which occasioned you to leave your
country. I desire you to make me your entire confidant, and to
acquaint me with the cause of your quarrel; for now you have no
reason either to doubt me, or to conceal any thing from me.

Nourreddin Ali gave him an account of every circumstance of the
quarrel; at which the vizier burst out into a fit of laughter, and
said, This is one of the oddest things that I ever have heard: is it
possible, my son, that your quarrel should rise so high about an
imaginary marriage? I am sorry you fell out with your elder brother
upon such a frivolous matter; but I find he is in the wrong to be
angry at what you only spoke in jest, and I ought to thank Heaven
for that difference which has procured me such a son-in-law. But,
said the old gentleman, it is late, and time for you to retire; go
to your bride, my son, she expects you; to-morrow I will present you
to the sultan, and hope he will receive you in such a manner as
shall satisfy us both.

Nourreddin Ali took leave of his father-in-law, and went to his
spouse’s apartment. It is remarkable, continued Giafar, that
Schemseddin Mohammed happened also to marry at Cairo the very same
day that this marriage was solemnized at Balsora, the particulars of
which are as fellow:

After Nourreddin Ali left Cairo, with an intention never to return,
Schemseddin Mohammed, his elder brother, who was gone a hunting with
the sultan of Egypt, did not come back in a month; for the sultan
loved that game extremely, and therefore continued the sport all
that while. Schemseddin at his return ran to Nourreddin Ali’s
apartment, but was much surprised when he understood, that under
pretence of taking a journey of two or three days, he went away on a
mule the same day that the sultan went a hunting, and had never
appeared since. It vexed him so much the more, because he did not
doubt but the hard words he had given him were the cause of his
going away. He sent a messenger in search of him, who went to
Damascus, and as far as Aleppo, but Nourreddin was then at Balsora.
When the courier returned, and brought word that he heard no news of
him, Schemseddin Mohammed intended to make further inquiry after him
in other parts, and in the mean time had a fancy to marry, and
matched with the daughter of one of the greatest lords in Cairo,
upon the same day his brother married the daughter of the grand
vizier of Balsora.

But this is not all, said Giafar: at the end of nine months
Schemseddin Mohammed’s wife was brought to bed of a daughter at
Cairo, and on the same day Nourreddin’s wife brought forth a son
at Balsora, who was called Bedreddin Hassan.

The grand vizier of Balsora testified his joy by great gifts and
public entertainments for the birth of his grandson: and to show his
son-in-law the great esteem he had for him, he went to the palace,
and most humbly besought the sultan to grant Nourreddin Ali his
office, that he might have the comfort before his death to see his
son-in-law made grand vizier in his stead.

The sultan, who had taken a great liking to Nourreddin, when his
father presented him after his marriage, and had ever since heard
every body speak well of him, readily granted his father-in-law’s
request, and caused Nourreddin immediately to put on the robe of
grand vizier.

The next day, when the father saw his son-in-law preside in council,
as he himself had done, and perform all the offices of grand vizier,
his joy was complete. Nourreddin Ali behaved himself so well in
every thing, that one would have thought he had been all his
lifetime employed in such affairs. He continued afterwards to assist
in council every time when the infirmities of age would not permit
his father-in-law to appear.

The old gentleman died about four years after, with great
satisfaction to see a branch of his family that promised so fair to
support the grandeur of it.

Nourreddin Ali performed his last duty to him with all possible love
and gratitude. And as soon as his son Bedreddin Hassan had attained
to the age of seven years, he provided him a most excellent tutor,
who taught him such things as became his birth. The child had a
ready wit, and a genius capable of receiving all the good
instructions that could be given.

After Bedreddin Hassan had been two years under the tuition of his
master, who taught him perfectly to read, he learnt the Koran by
heart. His father, Nourreddin Ali, put him afterwards to other
tutors, by whom his mind was cultivated to such a degree, that when
he was twelve years of age he had no more occasion for them; and
then, as his physiognomy promised wonders, he was admired by all
that looked upon him.

Hitherto, Nourreddin Ali had kept him to his study, and had not yet
brought him in public; but now he carried him to the palace, on
purpose to have the honour of kissing the sultan’s hand, who
received him very graciously. The people that saw him in the streets
were charmed with his gentle mien, and gave him a thousand blessings.

His father proposing to make him capable of supplying his place,
spared no cost for that end, and brought him up to business of the
greatest moment, on purpose to qualify him betimes. In short, he
omitted nothing to advance a son he loved so well. But as he began
to enjoy the fruits of his labour, he was all of a sudden taken with
a violent fit of sickness; and finding himself past recovery,
disposed himself to die a good mussulman.

In that last and precious moment he forgot not his son Bedreddin,
but called for him, and said, My son, you see this world is
transitory; there is nothing durable but in that which I shall
speedily go to. You must therefore from henceforth begin to fit
yourself for this charge, as I have done; you must prepare for it
without murmuring, and so as to have no trouble of conscience for
not acting the part of a real honest man. As for your religion, you
are sufficiently instructed in it by what you have learnt from your
tutors and your own study; and as to what belongs to an honest man,
I shall give you some instructions, which I hope you will make good
use of. As it is a necessary thing to know one’s self, and that
you cannot come to that knowledge without you first understand who I
am, I shall now tell it you.

I am, said he, a native of Egypt; my father, your grandfather, was
first minister to the sultan of that kingdom. I myself had the
honour to be vizier to that same sultan, and so has my brother, your
uncle, who I suppose is yet alive; his name is Schemseddin Mohammed.
I was obliged to leave him, and come into this country, where I have
raised myself to the high dignity I now enjoy. But you will
understand all these matters more fully by a manuscript that I shall
give you.

At the same time Nourreddin Ali pulled out his pocket-book, which he
had written with his own hand, and carried always about him, and
giving it to Bedreddin Hassan, Take it, said he, and read it at your
leisure; you will find, among other things, the day of my marriage,
and that of your birth; these are such circumstances as perhaps you
may hereafter have occasion to know, therefore you must keep it very
carefully.

Bedreddin Hassan being most afflicted to see his father in that
condition, and sensibly touched with this discourse, could not but
weep when he received the pocket-book, and promised at the same time
never to part with it.

That very moment Nourreddin Ali fainted, so that it was thought he
would have expired; but he came to himself again, and uttered these
words:

My son, said he, the first instruction I give you is, not to make
yourself familiar with all sorts of people. The way to live happy is
to keep your mind to yourself, and not to tell your thoughts easily.

Secondly, Not to do violence to any body whatever; for in that case
you will draw every body’s hatred upon you. You ought to consider
the world as a creditor, to whom you owe moderation, compassion, and
forbearance.

Thirdly, Not to say a word when you are reproached: for, as the
proverb says, He that keeps silence is out of danger. And in this
case particularly you ought to practise it. You also know what one
of our poets says upon this subject, That silence is the ornament
and safeguard of life; That our speech ought not to be like a storm
of rain that spoils all. Never did any man yet repent of having
spoken too little, whereas many have been sorry that they spoke so
much.

Fourthly, To drink no wine, for that is the source of all vices.

Fifthly, To be frugal in your way of living: if you do not squander
your estate away, it will maintain you in time of necessity. I do
not mean you should be either too liberal or too niggardly; for
though you have never so little, if you husband it well, and lay it
out on proper occasions, you shall have many friends; but if, on the
contrary, you have great riches, and make but a bad use of them, all
the world will forsake you, and leave you to yourself.

In short, Nourreddin Ali continued till the last moment of his
breath to give good advice to his son; and when he was dead, he was
magnificently interred with all the honours due to his quality.
Bedreddin Hassan, of Balsora, for so he was called, because born in
that town, was so overwhelmed with grief for the death of his
father, that instead of a month’s time to mourn, according to
custom, he kept himself close shut up in tears and solitude about
two months, without seeing any body, or so much as going abroad to
pay his duty to the sultan of Balsora; who, being displeased at his
neglect, looked upon it as a slight put on his court and person,
suffered his passion to prevail, and in his fury, called for the new
grand vizier, (for he had created a new one as soon as Nourreddin
Ali died,) commanded him to go to the house of the deceased, and
seize upon it, with all his other houses, lands, and effects,
without leaving any thing for Bedreddin Hassan, and to bring him
prisoner along with him.

The new grand vizier, accompanied with a great many messengers
belonging to the palace, justices, and other officers, went
immediately to execute his commission. But one of Bedreddin
Hassan’s slaves happening accidentally to come into the crowd, no
sooner understood the vizier’s errand, but he ran before in all
haste to give his master warning. He found him sitting in the porch
of his house, as melancholy as if his father had been but newly
dead. He fell down at his feet out of breath, and after he had
kissed the hem of his garment, cried out, My lord, save yourself
immediately. Bedreddin Hassan, lifting up his head, What is the
matter? what news dost thou bring? --My lord, said he, there is no
time to be lost; the sultan is horribly incensed against you, and he
has sent people to take all you have, and also to seize your person.

The words of this faithful and affectionate slave put Bedreddin
Hassan into great confusion. May not I have so much time, said he,
as to take some money and jewels along with me? --No, sir, replied
the slave; the grand vizier will be here this moment: begone
immediately; save yourself. Bedreddin Hassan rose up from his sofa
in all haste, put his feet in his sandals, and after he had covered
his head with the tail of his gown, that his face might not be
known, he fled, without knowing what way to go, to avoid the
impending danger.

The first thought that came into his head was to get out of the next
gate with all speed. He ran without stopping till he came to the
public burying-ground, and since it was growing dark, he resolved to
pass that night on his father’s tomb. It was a large edifice, in
form of a dome, which Noureddin Ali built when he was alive.
Bedreddin met a very rich Jew by the way, who was a banker and
merchant, and was returning from a place where his affairs had
called him to the city.

Isaac, the Jew, after he had paid his respects to Bedreddin Hassan,
by kissing his hand, said, My lord, dare I be so bold as to ask
whither you are going at this time of night all alone, and so much
troubled? Has any thing disquieted you? --Yes, said Bedreddin; a
while ago I was asleep, and my father appeared to me in a dream,
looking very fiercely upon me, as if he were extraordinarily angry.
I started out of my sleep very much frightened, and came out
immediately to go and pray upon his tomb.

My lord, said the Jew (who did not know the true reason why
Bedreddin left the town,) your father of happy memory, and my good
lord, had store of merchandize in several vessels, which are yet at
sea, and belong to you; I beg the favour of you to grant me the
first refusal of them before any other merchant I am able to pay
down ready money for all the goods that are in your ships: and to
begin, if you will give me those that happen to come in the first
ship that arrives in safety, I will pay you down in part of payment
a thousand sequins. And drawing out a bag from under his gown, he
showed it him, sealed up with one seal.

Bedreddin Hassan being banished from home, and dispossessed of all
that he had in the world, looked upon this proposal of the Jew as a
favour from heaven, and therefore accepted it with a great deal of
joy. My lord, said the Jew, then you sell unto me, for a thousand
sequins, the lading of the first of your ships that shall arrive in
port. --Yes, answered Bedreddin, I sell it you for a thousand
sequins; it is done. Upon this the Jew delivered him the bag of a
thousand sequins, and offered to count them, but Bedreddin Hassan
saved him the trouble, and said he would trust his word. Since it is
so, my lord, said he, be pleased to favour me with a small note in
writing of the bargain we have made. And having said this, he pulled
the inkhorn from his girdle, and taking a small reed out of it
neatly cut for writing, he presented it to him, with a piece of
paper he took out of his letter-case; and whilst he held the
inkhorn, Bedreddin Hassan wrote these words:

“This writing is to testify, that Bedreddin Hassan of Balsora has
sold to Isaac the Jew, for the sum of one thousand sequins, received
in hand, the lading of the first of his ships that shall arrive in
this port.

    “Bedreddin Hassan of Balsora.”

This note he delivered to the Jew, who put it in his letter-case,
and then took his leave of him.

While Isaac pursued his journey to the city, Bedreddin Hassan made
the best of his way to his father Nourreddin Ali’s tomb. When he
came to it, he bowed his face to the ground, and, with his eyes full
of tears, deplored his miserable condition. Alas! said he,
unfortunate Bedreddin, what will become of thee? Whither canst thou
fly for refuge against the unjust prince that persecutes thee? Was
it not enough to be afflicted for the death of so dear a father?
Must fortune needs add new misfortunes to just complaints? He
continued a long time in this posture, but at last rose up again,
and leaning his head upon his father’s sepulchre, his sorrows
returned more violently than before; so that he sighed and mourned,
till, overcome with heaviness, he stretched himself all along upon
the floor, and fell asleep.

He had not slept long, when a genie, who had retired to that
cemetery during the day, and was intending, according to his custom,
to range about the world at night, espying this young man in
Nourreddin Ali’s tomb, he entered, and finding Bedreddin lying on
his back, was surprised at his beauty. When the genie had
attentively considered Bedreddin Hassan, he said to himself, To
judge of this creature by his good mien, he would seem to be an
angel of the terrestrial paradise, whom God has sent to put the
world in a flame with his beauty. At last after he had satisfied
himself with looking upon him, he took a flight into the air, where
meeting by chance with a fairy, they saluted one another; after
which, he said to her, Pray descend with me into the cemetery, where
I stay, and I will show you a prodigious beauty, which is worthy
your admiration as well as mine. The fairy consented, and both
descended; in an instant they came into the tomb. Look ye, said the
genie to the fairy, showing her Bedreddin Hassan, did you ever see a
young man of a better shape, and more beautiful than this?

The fairy having attentively observed Bedreddin, returned to the
genie: I must confess, said she, that he is a very handsome man; but
I just now came from seeing an object at Cairo, more admirable than
this, and if you will hear me, I will tell you a strange story
concerning her. You will very much oblige me in so doing, answered
the genie. You must know then, said the fairy, (for I will tell it
you at length), that the sultan of Egypt has a vizier called
Schemseddin Mohammed, who has a daughter of about twenty years of
age, the most beautiful and complete person that ever was known. The
sultan having heard of this young lady’s beauty, sent the other
day for her father, and told him, I understand you have a daughter
to marry; I have a mind to marry her: will not you consent to it?
The vizier, who did not expect this proposal, was troubled at it;
and instead of accepting it joyfully, which another in his place
would certainly have done, he answered the sultan, May it please
your majesty, I am not worthy of the honour you confer upon me, and
I most humbly beseech you to pardon me, if I do not agree to your
request. You know I had a brother called Nourreddin Ali, who had the
honour, as well as myself, to be one of your viziers: we had some
difference together, which was the cause of his leaving me on a
sudden, and since that time I have had no account of him till within
these four days, that I heard he died at Balsora, being grand vizier
to the sultan of that kingdom.

He has left a son behind him, and there having been an agreement
between us to match our children together, if ever we had any, I am
persuaded he intended that match when he died, and being desirous to
fulfil the promise on my part, I conjure your majesty to grant me
leave. You have in your court many other lords who have daughters as
well as I, on whom you may please to bestow that honour.

The sultan of Egypt, provoked at this bold denial of Schemseddin
Mohammed, said to him in a passion, which he could not restrain, Is
this the way you requite my proposal to stoop so low as to desire
your alliance? I know how to revenge your daring to prefer another
to me, and I swear that your daughter shall be married to the most
contemptible and ugly of all my slaves; and having spoken those
words, he angrily bid the vizier begone, who went home to his house
full of confusion, and extraordinarily sad.

This very day, the sultan sent for one of his grooms who is
hump-backed, big-bellied, crook-legged, and as ugly as a hobgoblin;
and after having commanded Schemseddin Mohammed to consent to marry
his daughter to this ghastly slave, he caused the contract to be
made and signed by witnesses in his own presence. The preparations
for this fantastical wedding are all ready, and this very moment all
the slaves belonging to the lords of the court of Egypt are waiting
at the door of a bath, each with a flambeau in his hand, for the
crook-backed groom, who is bathing himself, to go along with them to
his bride, who is already dressed to receive him; and when I
departed from Cairo, the ladies met for that purpose were going to
conduct her in her nuptial attire to the hall, where she is to
receive her hump-backed bridegroom, and is this minute now expecting
him. I have seen her, and do assure you, that no person can look
upon her without admiration.

When the fairy left off speaking, the genie said to her, Whatever
you think or say, I cannot be persuaded that the girl’s beauty
exceeds that of this young man. I will not dispute it with you,
answered the fairy; for I must confess he deserves to be married to
that charming creature which they design for hump-back. And I think
it were a deed worthy of us to obstruct the sultan of Egypt’s
injustice, and to put this young gentleman in the room of the slave.
--You are in the right, answered the genie; I am extremely obliged
to you for so good a thought, let us deceive him. I consent to your
revenge upon the sultan of Egypt; let us comfort a distressed
father, and make his daughter as happy as she thinks herself
miserable. I will no my utmost endeavour to make this project
succeed, and I am persuaded you will not be backward. I will be at
the pains to carry him to Cairo before he awake, and afterwards
leave it to your care to carry him elsewhere, when we have
accomplished our design.

The fairy and the genie having thus concerted what they had to do,
the genie lifted up Bedreddin Hassan gently, and with an
inconceivable swiftness carried him through the air, and set him
down at the door of a public house, next to the bath, whence
hump-back was to come with the train of slaves that waited for him.
Bedreddin Hassan awaked that very moment, and was mightily surprised
to find himself in the middle of a city he knew not. He was going to
cry out, and to ask where he was; but the genie touched him gently
on the shoulder, and forbid him to speak a word. Then he put a torch
in his hand, and bid him go and mix with the crowd at the door of
the bath --follow them till you come into a hall, where they are
going to celebrate a marriage. The bridegroom is a hump-backed
fellow, and by that you will easily know him. Put yourself at the
right hand as you go in, and then immediately open the purse of
sequins you have in your bosom, and distribute them among the
musicians and dancers as they go along; and when you are got into
the hall, give money also to the female slaves you see about the
bride, when they come near you; but every time you put your hand in
your purse, be sure to take out a whole handful, and do not spare
them. Observe to do every thing exactly as I have told you, with
great presence of mind; be not afraid of any person or thing, and
leave the rest to a superior power, who will order matters as he
thinks fit.

Young Bedreddin being well instructed in all that he was to do,
advanced towards the door of the bath; the first thing he did was to
light his torch as that of a slave; and then mixing among them as if
he belonged to some nobleman of Cairo, he marched along as they did,
and followed hump-back, who came out of the bath, and mounted a
horse out of the sultan’s own stable.

Bedreddin Hassan coming near to the musicians, and men and women
dancers, who went just before the bridegroom, pulled out time after
time whole handfuls of sequins, which he distributed among them; and
as he thus gave his money with an unparalleled grace and engaging
mien, all who received it cast their eyes upon him; and after they
had a full view of his face, they found him so handsome and comely,
that they could not look off again.

At last they came to Schemseddin Mohammed’s gate, who was
Bedreddin Hassan’s uncle, and little thought his nephew was so
near. The doorkeepers, to prevent any disorder, kept back all the
slaves that carried torches, and would not let them come in.
Bedreddin was likewise refused; but the musicians, who had free
entrance, stood still, and protested they would not go in, if they
hindered him from going along with them. He is not one of the
slaves, said they: look upon him, and you will soon be satisfied as
to that. He is certainly a young stranger who is curious to see the
ceremonies observed at weddings in this city; and saying thus, they
put him in the midst of them, and carried him in, whether the
porters would or no; they took his torch out of his hand, and gave
it to the first they met: having brought him into the hall, they
placed him at the right hand of the hump-backed bridegroom, who sat
near the vizier’s daughter on a throne most richly adorned.

She appeared very lovely in all her dresses, but in her face there
was nothing to be seen but vexation and mortal grief. The cause of
this was easy to be guessed at, when she had by her side a
bridegroom so very deformed; and so unworthy of her love. The throne
of that ill matched couple was in the midst of a sofa. The ladies of
the emirs, viziers, and those of the sultan’s bedchamber, and
several other ladies of the court and city, were placed on each
side, a little lower, every one according to their quality, and all
of them so finely and richly dressed, that it was one of the
pleasantest sights that could be seen, each of them holding a large
wax taper in their hand.

When they saw Bedreddin Hassan come into the room, they all fixed
their eyes upon him, and admiring his shape, his behaviour, and the
beauty of his face, they could not forbear looking upon him. When he
was set down, every one left their seats and came near to him to
have a full view of his face, and almost all of them, as they turned
to their seats, found themselves moved with tender passion.

The disparity between Bedreddin Hassan and the hump-backed groom,
who made such a horrible figure, occasioned a great murmuring among
the company, insomuch that the ladies cried out, We must give our
bride to this handsome young gentleman, and not to this ugly
hump-back. Nor did they rest here, but uttered imprecations against
the sultan, who, abusing his absolute power, would unite ugliness
and beauty together. They did also upbraid the bridegroom, so as
they put him quite out of countenance, to the great satisfaction of
the spectators, whose shouts for some time put a stop to the concert
of music in the hall. At last, the musicians began again, and the
women who had dressed the bride came all about her.

At the sound of the instruments, the bride changed her dress seven
different times, and each time that she did so, she rose up from her
seat, followed by her bride-woman, and passed by hump-back, without
giving him one look, and went towards Bedreddin Hassan, before whom
she presented herself in her new attire. On this occasion,
Bedreddin, according to the instructions given him by the genie,
failed not to put his hands in his purse, and pulled out handfuls of
sequins, which he distributed among the women that followed the
bride. Nor did he forget the players and dancers, but also threw
money to them. It was pleasant to see how they pushed one another to
gather it up. They showed themselves very thankful, and made him
signs that the young bride should be for him, and not for the
hump-back fellow. The women that attended her, told her the same
thing, and did not value whether the groom heard them or not; for
they put a thousand tricks upon him, which very much pleased the
spectators.

When the ceremony of changing habits was passed, the music ceased
and went away, but made a sign to Bedreddin Hassan to stay behind.
The ladies did the same, and went all home, but those that belonged
to the house. The bride went into a closet, whither her woman
followed to undress her, and none remained in the hall but the
hump-back groom, Bedreddin Hassan, and some of the domestics.

Hump-back, who was furiously mad at Bedreddin, suspecting him to be
his rival, gave him a cross look, and said, And thou, what dost thou
wait for? Why art thou not gone as well as the rest? Begone.
Bedreddin having no pretence to stay, withdrew, not knowing what to
do with himself. But he was not gone out of the porch, when the
genie and the fairy met and stopped him. Whither are you going? said
the fairy; stay, for hump-back is not in the hall, he is gone out
about some business; you have nothing to do but return, and
introduce yourself into the bride’s chamber. As soon as you are
alone with her, tell her boldly that you are her husband, that the
sultan’s intention was only to make sport with the groom; and to
make this pretended bridegroom some amends, you had caused to be
prepared for him in the stable, a good dish of cream. And then tell
her all the fine things you can think on to persuade her; for being
so handsome as you are, little persuasion will do; she will think
herself happy in being deceived so agreeably. In the mean time, we
will take care that the hump-back shall not return, and let nothing
hinder you from passing the night with your bride, for she is yours,
and none of his.

While the fairy thus encouraged Bedreddin, and instructed him how he
should behave himself, hump-back was really gone out of the room:
for the genie went to him in the shape of a great cat mewing at a
most fearful rate. The fellow called to the cat, he clapped his
hands to make her flee; but instead of that the cat stood upon her
hinder feet, staring with her eyes like fire, looking fiercely at
him, mewing louder than she did at first, and growing bigger till
she was as large as an ass. At this sight, hump-back would have
cried out for help, but his fear was so great, that he stood gaping,
and could not utter one word; and that he might have no time to
recover, the genie changed himself immediately into a large buffalo,
and in this shape, called to him with a voice that redoubled his
fear, Thou hump-backed villain! At these words, the affrighted groom
cast himself upon the ground, and covering his face with his gown,
that he might not see this dreadful beast, Sovereign prince of
buffaloes, said he, what is it you want of me? --Wo be to thee,
replied the genie; hast thou the boldness to venture to marry my
mistress? O my lord, said hump-back, I pray you to pardon me; if I
am guilty, it is through ignorance; I did not know that this lady
had a buffalo to her sweetheart; command me in any thing you please,
I give you my oath that I am ready to obey you. --By death, replied
the genie, if thou goest out from hence, or speakest a word till the
sun rises, I will crush thy head to pieces; but then I give thee
leave to go from hence: I warn thee to make despatch, and not to
look back, but if thou hast the imprudence to return, it shall cost
thee thy life. When the genie had done speaking, he transformed
himself into the shape of a man, took hump-back by the legs, and
after having set him against the wall, with his head downwards, if
thou stir, said he, before the sun rise, as I have told thee
already, I will take thee by the heels again, and dash thy head in a
thousand pieces against the wall.

To return to Bedreddin Hassan, who being prompted by the genie and
the presence of the fairy, got into the hall again, from whence he
slipt into the bride-chamber, where he sat down, expecting the
success of his adventure. After a while, the bride arrived,
conducted by an old matron, who came no farther than the door,
exhorting the bridegroom to do his duty like a man, without looking
in to see if it was hump-back or another, and then locked the door,
and retired.

The young bride was mightily surprised, instead of hump-back, to
find Bedreddin Hassan, who came up to her with the best grace in the
world. What! my dear friend, said she, by your being here at this
time of night, you must be my husband’s comrade? --No, madam, said
Bedreddin, I am of another sort of quality than that ugly hump-back.
But, said she, you do not consider that you speak degradingly of my
husband. --He your husband, madam! replied he; can you retain those
thoughts so long? Be convinced of your mistake, madam, for so much
beauty must never be sacrificed to the most contemptible of all
mankind. It is I, madam, that am the happy mortal for whom it is
reserved. The sultan had a mind to make himself merry by putting
this trick upon the vizier your father, but he chose me to be your
real husband. You might have observed how the ladies, the musicians,
the dancers, your women, and all the servants of your family, were
pleased with this comedy. We have sent that hump-backed fellow to
his stable again, where he is just now eating a dish of cream; and
you may rest assured that he will never appear any more before your
eyes.

At this discourse, the vizier’s daughter, who was more like one
dead than alive when she came into the bride-chamber, put on a gay
air, which made her so handsome that Bedreddin was perfectly charmed
with her.

I did not expect, said she, to meet with so pleasing a surprise; and
I had condemned myself to live unhappily all my days. But my good
fortune is so much the greater that I possess in you a man that is
worthy of my tenderest affection.

Having spoken thus, she undressed herself and stept into bed.
Bedreddin Hassan, overjoyed to see himself possessor of so many
charms, made haste to follow her, and laid his clothes upon a chair,
with the bag that he got from the Jew; which, notwithstanding all
the money he had pulled out, was still full. He likewise laid off
his turban, and put on a night-cap that had been ordained for
hump-back, and so went to bed in his shirt and drawers. [60] His
drawers were of blue satin, tied with a lace of gold.

Whilst the two lovers were asleep, the genie, who had met again with
the fairy, told her that it was high time to finish what was begun,
and so successfully carried on hitherto: then let us not be
overtaken by daylight, which will soon appear; go you and bring off
the young man again without awaking him.

The fairy went into the bed-chamber where the two lovers were fast
asleep, and took up Bedreddin Hassan just as he was, that is to say,
in his shirt and drawers; and in company with the genie, with a
wonderful swiftness flew away with him to the gates of Damascus, in
Syria, where they arrived just at the time when the officers of the
mosques, appointed for that end, were calling the people to come to
prayers at break of day. The fairy laid Bedreddin Hassan softly on
the ground, and leaving him close by the gate, departed with the
genie.

The gate of the city being opened, and a great many people assembled
to get out, they were mightly surprised to see Bedreddin Hassan
lying in his shirt and drawers upon the ground. One said, He has
been hard put to it to get away from his mistress, that he could not
get time to put on his clothes. --Look ye, said another, how people
expose themselves: sure enough he has spent most part of the night
in drinking with his friends, till he has got drunk; and then,
perhaps, having occasion to go out, instead of returning, is come
this length, and not having his senses about him, was overtaken with
sleep. Others were of another opinion; but nobody could guess what
had been the occasion of his coming thither.

A small puff of wind happening to blow at the same time, uncovered
his breast, that was whiter than snow. Every one being struck with
admiration at the fineness of his complexion, they spoke so loud
that it awaked the young man.

His surprise was as great as theirs, when he found himself at the
gate of a city where he had never been before, and encompassed by a
crowd of people gazing at him. Gentlemen, said he, for God’s sake
tell me where I am, and what you would have of me? One of the crowd
spoke to him, saying, Young man, the gates of the city were just now
opened, and as we came out we found you lying here in this
condition, and stood still to look on you: Have you lain here all
night? and do not you know that you are at one of the gates of
Damascus? --At one of the gates of Damascus! answered Bedreddin;
sure you mock me. When I lay down to sleep last night I was at
Cairo. When he said these words, some of the people, moved with
compassion for him, said, It is pity that such a handsome young man
should have lost his senses! and so went away.

My son, said an old gentleman to him, you know not what you say. How
is it possible that you, being this morning at Damascus, could be
last night at Cairo? --It is true, for all that, said Bedreddin; for
I swear to you, that I was all day yesterday at Balsora. He had no
sooner said these words, but all the people fell into a fit of
laughter, and cried out, He’s a fool, he’s a madman. There were
some, however, that pitied him because of his youth; and one among
the company said to him, My son, you must certainly be crazed; you
do not consider what you say. Is it possible that a man could
yesterday be at Balsora, the same night at Cairo, and next morning
at Damascus? Sure you are asleep still: come, rouse up your spirits.
--What I say, answered Bedreddin Hassan, is so true, that last night
I was married in the city of Cairo. All those that laughed before
could not forbear laughing again, when he said so. Call yourself to
mind, said the same person that spoke before; you have sure enough
dreamt all this, and that fancy still possesses your brain. --I am
sensible of what I say, answered the young man. Pray can you tell me
how it was possible for me to go in a dream to Cairo, where I am
very certain I was in person, and where my bride was seven times
brought before me, each time dressed in a different habit: and where
I saw an ugly hump-backed follow, to whom they intended to give her?
Besides, I want to know what is become of my gown, my turban, and
the bag of sequins I had at Cairo.

Though he assured them that all these things were matter of fact,
yet they could not forbear to laugh at him; which put him into such
confusion, that he knew not what to think of all those adventures.

After Bedreddin Hassan had confidently affirmed all that he said to
be true, he rose up to go into the town, and every one that followed
him called out, A madman, a fool. Upon this some looked out at their
windows, some came to their doors, and others joined with those that
were about him, calling out as they did, A madman; but not knowing
for what In this perplexity of mind the young gentleman happened to
come before a pastrycook’s shop, and went into it to avoid the
rabble.

This pastrycook had formerly been captain to a troop of Arabian
robbers, who plundered the caravans; and though he was become a
citizen of Damascus, where he behaved himself to every one’s
content, yet he was dreaded by all those that knew him; wherefore,
as soon as he came out to the rabble that followed Bedreddin, they
dispersed.

The pastrycook seeing them all gone, asked him who he was, and what
brought him thither? Bedreddin Hassan told him all, not concealing
his birth, nor the death of his father, the grand vizier. He
afterwards gave him an account why he left Balsora; now, after he
had fallen asleep the night following upon his father’s tomb, he
found himself when he awaked at Cairo, where he had married a lady;
and at last, in what amazement he was, when he found himself at
Damascus, without being able to penetrate into all those wonderful
adventures.

Your history is one of the most surprising, said the pastrycook; but
if you will follow my advice, you shall let no man know those
matters you have revealed to me, but patiently expect till heaven
think fit to put an end to your misfortunes; you shall be free to
stay with me till then; and since I have no children, I will own you
for my son, if you consent to it; and after you are so adopted, you
may freely walk up and down the city, without being exposed any more
to the insults of the rabble.

Though this adoption was below the son of a grand vizier, Bedreddin
was glad to accept of the pastrycook’s proposals, judging it the
best thing he could do, considering his then circumstances. The cook
clothed him, called for witnesses, and went before a notary, where
he acknowledged him for his son. After this Bedreddin staid with him
by the name of Hassan, and learned the pastry trade.

Whilst this passed at Damascus, Schemseddin Mohammed’s daughter
awaked, and finding Bedreddin gone out of bed, supposed he had risen
softly for fear of disturbing her, but he would soon return. As she
was in expectation of him, her father, the vizier (who was mightily
vexed at the affront put upon him by the sultan) came and knocked at
her chamber-door with a resolution to bewail her sad destiny. He
called her by her name, and she knowing him by his voice,
immediately got up, and opened the door. She kissed his hand, and
received him with so much satisfaction in her countenance as
surprised the vizier, (who expected to find her drowned in tears,
and as much grieved as himself.) Unhappy wretch! said he in a
passion, do you appear before me thus? After the hideous sacrifice
you have just consummated, can you see me with so much satisfaction?

The new bride seeing her father angry at her pleasant countenance,
said to him, For God’s sake, sir, do not reproach me wrongfully;
it is not the hump-back fellow, whom I abhor more than death; it is
not that monster I have married; every body laughed him to scorn,
and put him so out of countenance, that he was forced to run away
and hide himself, to make room for a charming young gentleman, who
is my real husband. --What fable do you tell me? said Schemseddin
Mohammed, roughly. What! did not crook-back lie with you to-night?
--No, sir, said she; it was that young gentleman I told you of, who
has large eyes and black eyebrows. At these words, the vizier lost
all patience, and fell into a terrible passion. --Ah! wicked woman,
said he, you will make me distracted! --It is you, father, said she,
that put me out of my senses by your incredulity. --So it is not
true, replied the vizier, that hump-back --Let us talk no more of
hump-back, said she; a curse upon hump-back! must I always have him
cast in my dish? Father, said she, I tell you once more, that I did
not bed with him, but with my dear spouse, who, I believe, is not
very far off.

Schemseddin Mohammed went out to seek him, but instead of seeing him
was mightily surprised to find hump-back with his head on the
ground, and his heels uppermost, as the genie had set him against
the wall. What is the meaning of this? said he; who placed you thus?
Crook-back, knowing it to be the vizier, answered, Alas! alas! it is
you then that would marry me to the mistress of a buffalo, the
sweetheart of an ugly genie; I won’t be your fool; you shan’t
put a trick upon me.

Schemseddin Mohammed, when he heard hump-back speak thus, thought he
was raving, and bid him move, and stand upon his legs. I will take
care how I do that, said hump-back, unless the sun be risen. --Know,
sir, that when I came hither last night, on a sudden, a black cat
appeared to me, and in an instant grew as big as a buffalo. I have
not forgot what he said to me; therefore, you may go about your
business, and leave me here. The vizier, instead of going away, took
him by the heels, and made him get up. Then hump-back ran off as
fast as he could, without looking behind him; and coming to the
palace, presented himself to the sultan, who laughed heartily when
he told him the story how the genie had served him.

Schemseddin Mohammed returned to his daughter’s chamber more
astonished than before. Well, then, my abused daughter, said he, can
you give me no farther light into this matter? --Sir, said she, I
can give you no other account than what I have done already. Here
are my husband’s clothes, which he left upon the chair; perhaps
you may find somewhat there, that may solve your doubt. Then she
showed him Bedreddin’s turban, which he took and examined narrowly
on all sides. I should take this to be a vizier’s turban, if it
were not made after the Moussoul [61] fashion. But perceiving
somewhat to be sewed between the stuff and the lining, he called for
scissors, and having unript it, found the paper which Nourreddin Ali
gave Bedreddin, his son, as he was dying, and which he had put into
his turban for more security.

Schemseddin Mohammed having opened the paper, knew his brother
Nourreddin’s hand, and found this superscription, ‘For my son,
Bedreddin Hassan.’ Before he could make any reflections upon it,
his daughter delivered him the bag that lay under his clothes, which
he likewise opened, and found it full of sequins; for, as I told you
before, notwithstanding all the liberality of Bedreddin, it was
still kept full by the genie and fairy. He read these following
words upon a note in the bag: ‘A thousand sequins belonging to
Isaac the Jew.’ And these lines underneath, which the Jew wrote
before he parted from Bedreddin Hassan. ‘Delivered to Bedreddin
Hassan, for the cargo of the first of those ships that formerly
belonged to Nourreddin Ali, his father, of worthy memory, sold unto
me upon its arrival in this place.’ He had scarce read these
words, when he gave a shout, and fainted away.

The vizier, Schemseddin Mohammed, being recovered from his fit by
the help of his daughter, and the woman she called to her
assistance. Daughter, said he, do not frighten yourself at this
accident; the reason of it is such as you can scarcely believe. Your
bridegroom is your cousin, the son of Nourreddin Ali. The thousand
sequins in the bag puts me in mind of a quarrel I had with my dear
brother; it is, without doubt, the dowry he gives you. God be
praised for all things, and particularly for this miraculous
adventure, which demonstrates his almighty power. Then looking again
upon his brother’s writing, he kissed it several times, shedding
abundance of tears.

He looked over the book from one end to the other, where he found
the date of his brother’s arrival at Balsora, of his marriage, and
of the birth of Bedreddin Hassan; and when he compared the same with
the day of his own marriage, and the birth of his daughter at Cairo,
he admired how every thing did agree so exactly.

The happy discovery put him into such a transport of joy, that he
took up the book, with the ticket of the bag, and showed it to the
sultan, who pardoned what was past, and was so much pleased with the
relation of this adventure, that he caused it, with all its
circumstances, to be put in writing for the use of posterity.

Meanwhile, the vizier Schemseddin Mohammed could not comprehend the
reason why his nephew did not appear; he expected him every moment,
and was impatient to have him in his arms. After he had expected him
seven days in vain, he searched for him through all Cairo, but could
hear no news of him, which perplexed him very much. This is the
strangest adventure, said he, that ever man met with, and not
knowing what alteration might happen, he thought fit to draw up in
writing with his own hand, after what manner the wedding had been
solemnized; how the hall and his daughter’s bed-chamber were
furnished, and other circumstances. He likewise made the turban, the
bag, and the rest of Bedreddin’s things, into a bundle, and locked
them up.

After some days were past, the vizier’s daughter perceived herself
with child, and was brought to bed of a son after nine months. A
nurse was provided for the child, besides other women and slaves to
wait upon him; and his grandfather called him Agib. [62]

When young Agib had attained the age of seven, the vizier, instead
of teaching him to read at home, put him to school with a master,
who was in great esteem; and two slaves were ordered to wait upon
him. Agib used to play with his schoolfellows, and as they were all
inferior to him in quality, they showed him great respect, according
to the example of their master, who many times would pass by faults
in him, that he would not pass by in the rest. This complaisance
spoiled Agib, so that he became proud and insolent, would have his
playfellows bear all from him, and would bear nothing from them, but
be master every where; and if any one took the liberty to thwart
him, he would call them a thousand names, and many times beat them.

In short, all the scholars were weary of his company, and complained
of him to their master. He answered, that they must have patience.
But when he saw that Agib still grew more and more insolent, and
occasioned him a great deal of trouble, Children, said he to his
scholars, I find Agib is a little insolent gentleman; I will show
you a way how to mortify him, so as he shall never torment you any
more: nay, I believe it will make him leave the school. When he
comes again to-morrow, and that you have a mind to play together,
set yourselves round him, and do one of you call out, Come, let us
play, but upon condition, that they who desire to play shall tell
his own name, and the names of his father and mother, and they who
refuse it shall be esteemed bastards, and not suffered to play in
our company.

Next day, when they were gathered together, they failed not to
follow their master’s instructions; they placed themselves round
Agib, and one of them called out, Let us begin a play, but on
condition, that he who cannot tell his own name, and that of his
father and mother, shall not play at all. They all cried out, and so
did Agib, We consent to it. Then he that spoke first asked every one
the question, and all fulfilled the condition except Agib, who
answered, my name is Agib; my mother is called the lady of beauty,
and my father Schemseddin Mohammed, vizier to the sultan.

At these words all the children cried out, Agib, what did you say?
That is not the name of your father, but your grandfather. A curse
on you, said he in a passion; what! dare you say that the vizier
Schemseddin Mohammed is not my father? No, no, cried they, with
great laughter, he is but your grandfather, and you shall not play
with us. Nay, we will take care how we come into your company.
Having spoken thus, they all left him, scoffing him, and laughing
among themselves, which mortified Agib so much that he wept.

This schoolmaster, who was near, and heard all that passed, came
just at the nick of time, and speaking to Agib, said he, Agib, do
not you know that the vizier Schemseddin Mohammed is none of your
father, but your grandfather, and the father of your mother, the
lady of beauty? We know not the name of your father no more than you
do. We only know that the sultan was going to marry your mother to
one of his grooms, a hump-back fellow; but a genie lay with her.
This is hard upon you, and ought to teach you to treat your
schoolfellows with less haughtiness than you have done hitherto.

Little Agib being nettled at this, ran hastily out of the school,
and went home crying. He came straight to his mother’s chamber,
who being alarmed to see him thus grieved, asked him the reason. He
could not answer for tears, his grief was so great; and it was but
now and then he could speak plain enough to repeat what had been
said to him, and occasioned his sorrow.

When he came to himself, Mother, said he, for the love of God be
pleased to tell me who is my father. My son, said she, Schemseddin
Mohammed, that every day makes so much of you, is your father. You
do not tell me truth, said he; he is your father, and none of mine.
But whose son am I? At this question, the lady of beauty calling to
mind her wedding-night, which had been succeeded by a long
widowhood, began to shed tears, repining bitterly at the loss of so
lovely a husband as Bedreddin.

Whilst the lady of beauty and Agib were both weeping, in comes the
vizier, who demanded the reason of their sorrow. The lady told him
the shame Agib had undergone at school, which so much affected the
vizier, that he joined his tears with theirs, and judging from this,
that the misfortune which had happened to his daughter was the
common discourse of the town, he was quite out of patience.

Being thus afflicted, he went to the sultan’s palace, and falling
prostrate at his feet, most humbly prayed him to give him leave to
make a journey into the provinces of the Levant, and particularly to
Balsora, in search of his nephew Bedreddin Hassan. For he could not
bear any longer that the people of the city should believe a genie
had got his daughter with child.

The sultan was much concerned at the vizier’s affliction, approved
his resolution, and gave him leave to go. He caused a passport also
to be written for him, praying, in the most obliging terms that
could be, all kings and princes, in whose dominions the said
Bedreddin might sojourn, to grant that the vizier might bring him
along with him.

Schemseddin Mohammed, not knowing how to express his thankfulness to
the sultan for this favour, thought it his duty to fall down before
him a second time, and the floods of tears he shed gave him
sufficient testimony of his gratitude. At last, having wished the
sultan all manner of prosperity, he took his leave, and went home to
his house, where he disposed every thing for his journey; and the
preparations for it were carried on with so much diligence, that in
four days after he left the city, accompanied by his daughter the
lady of beauty, and his grandson, Agib.

They travelled nineteen days without stopping any where; but on the
twentieth, arriving in a very pleasant mead, at a small distance
from the gate of Damascus, they stopped there, and pitched their
tents upon the banks of a river, that runs through the town, and
gives a very agreeable prospect to its neighbourhood.

The vizier Schemseddin Mohammed declared he would stay in that
pleasant place two days, and pursue his journey on the third. In the
mean time he gave leave to his retinue to go to Damascus: and almost
all of them made use of it: some influenced by curiosity to see a
city they had heard so much of, and others by the opportunity of
vending there the Egyptian goods they had brought with them, or
buying stuffs, and the rarities of the country. The beautiful lady
desiring her son Agib might share in the satisfaction of viewing
that celebrated city, ordered the black eunuch that acted in quality
of his governor, to conduct him thither, and take care he came to no
harm.

Agib, in magnificent apparel, went along with the eunuch, who had a
large cane in his hand. They had no sooner entered the city, than
Agib, fair and glorious as the day, attracted the eyes of the
people. Some got out of their houses to gain a nearer and narrower
view of him; others put their heads out of the windows, and those
who passed along the street were not satisfied in stopping to look
upon him; but kept pace with him, to prolong the pleasure of the
agreeable sight: in fine, there was nobody that did not admire him,
and bestow a thousand benedictions on the father and mother that had
given being to so fine a child. By chance the eunuch and he passed
by the shop where Bedreddin Hassan was, and there the crowd was so
great, that they were forced to halt.

The pastrycook, that had adopted Bedreddin Hassan, had died some
years before, and left him his shop and all his estates. So
Bedreddin became master of the shop, and managed the pastry trade so
dexterously, that he gained great reputation in Damascus. Bedreddin
seeing so great a crowd before his door, that were gazing so
attentively upon Agib, and the black eunuch, stepped out to see them
himself; and having cast his eyes particularly upon Agib, presently
found himself moved, he knew not how, nor why. He was not struck,
like the people, with the brilliant beauty of the boy: another
cause, unknown to him, gave rise to the uneasiness and emotion he
felt. It was the force of blood that wrought in this tender father;
who laying aside his business, made up to Agib, and with an engaging
air, said to him: My little lord, who hast won my soul, be so kind
as to come into my shop, and eat a bit of such fare as I have; that
I may have the pleasure of admiring you at my ease. These words he
pronounced with such tenderness, that tears trickled from his eyes.
Little Agib was moved when he saw it, and turning to the eunuch,
This honest man, said he, has a face that pleases me; he speaks in
such an affectionate manner, that I cannot avoid complying with his
request; let us step into his house and taste his pastry. It would
be a fine thing truly, replied the slave, to see the son of a
vizier, like you, go into a pastrycook’s shop to eat; do not
imagine that I will suffer any such thing. --Alas! my little lord,
cried Bedreddin, it is a great piece of cruelty to trust the conduct
of you in the hands of a person who treats you so harshly. Then
applying himself to the eunuch, My good friend, continued he, pray
do not hinder this young lord from granting me the favour I ask; do
not put that piece of mortification upon me: rather do me the honour
to walk in along with him, and by so doing, you will let the world
know, that, though your outside is brown like a chestnut, your
inside is as white. Do you know, continued he, that I am master of
the secret to make you white, instead of being black as you are?
This set the eunuch a laughing, and then he asked Bedreddin what
that secret was. I will tell you, replied Bedreddin, and so he
repeated some verses in praise of black eunuchs, implying, that it
was by their ministry that the honour of princes and of all great
men was secured. The eunuch was so charmed with these verses, that,
without further hesitation, he suffered Agib to go into the shop,
and went in with him himself.

Bedreddin Hassan was overjoyed in having obtained what he had so
passionately desired, and falling again to the work he had thus
discontinued, I was making, said he, cream-tarts; and you must, with
submission, eat of them. I am persuaded you will find them very
good; for my own mother, who makes them incomparably well, taught me
to make them, and the people send to buy them of me from all
quarters of the town. This said, he took a cream tart out of the
oven, and after strewing upon it some pomegranate kernels and sugar,
set it before Agib, who found it very delicious.

Another was served up to the eunuch, and he gave the same judgment.

While they were both eating, Bedreddin Hassan minded Agib very
attentively; and after looking upon him again and again, it came
into his mind, that for any thing he knew, he might have such a son
by his charming wife, from whom he had been so soon and so cruelly
separated; and the very thought drew tears from his eyes. He was
thinking to have put some question to little Agib about his journey
to Damascus; but the child had no time to gratify his curiosity, for
the eunuch pressing him to return to his grandfather’s tents, took
him away as soon as he had done eating. Bedreddin Hassan, not
contented with looking after him, shut up his shop immediately, and
went after him.

Bedreddin Hassan ran after Agib and the eunuch, and overtook them
before they were got to the gate of the city. The eunuch perceiving
he followed them was extremely surprised. You impertinent fellow,
you, said he, with an angry tone, what do you want? My dear friend,
replied Bedreddin, do not you trouble yourself. I have a little
business out of town, that is just come into my head, and I must
needs go and look after it. This answer, however, did not at all
satisfy the eunuch, who, turning to Agib, said, This is all owing to
you; I foresaw I should repent of my complaisance; you would needs
go into the man’s shop --it was not wisely done in me to give you
leave. Perhaps, replied Agib, he has real business out of town, and
the road is free to every body. While this passed, they kept walking
together, without looking behind them, till they came near the
vizier’s tents, upon which they turned about to see if Bedreddin
followed them. Agib, perceiving he was within two paces of him,
reddened and whitened alternately, according to the different
emotions that affected him. He was afraid the grand vizier, his
grandfather, should come to know he had been in the pastry shop, and
had eaten there. In this dread, he took up a pretty large stone that
lay at his foot, and throwing it at Bedreddin Hassan, hit him in the
forehead, which gave him such a wound, that his face was covered
with blood. Then he took to his heels, and ran under the eunuch’s
tent. The eunuch gave Bedreddin to understand, he had no reason to
complain of a mischance that he had merited and brought upon himself.

Bedreddin turned towards the city, stanching the blood of this wound
with his apron, which he had not put off. I was a fool, said he
within himself, for leaving my house, to take so much pains about
this brat; for doubtless he would never have used me after this
manner, if he had not thought I had some ill design against him.
When he got home, he had his wound dressed, and softened the sense
of his mischance by the reflection, that there was an infinite
number of people upon the earth that were yet more unfortunate than
he.

Bedreddin kept on the pastry trade at Damascus, and his uncle,
Schemseddin Mohammed, went from thence three days after his arrival.
He went by way of Emaus, Hanah, and Halep; then crossed the
Euphrates, and, after passing through Mardin, Moussoul, Singier,
Diarbeker, and several other towns, arrived at last at Balsora; and
immediately after his arrival, desired audience of the sultan, who
was no sooner informed of Schemseddin’s quality than he gave him
audience, received him very favourably, and asked him the occasion
of his journey to Balsora. Sir, replied the vizier Schemseddin
Mohammed, I come to know what is become of the son of Nourreddin
Ali, my brother, who has had the honour to serve your majesty.
Nourreddin Ali, said the sultan, has been dead a long while; as for
his son, all I can tell you of him is, that he disappeared all on a
sudden, about two months after his father’s death, and nobody has
seen him since, notwithstanding all the inquiry I ordered to be
made. But his mother, who is daughter of one of my vizier’s, is
still alive. Schemseddin Mohammed desired leave of the sultan to see
her, and carry her to Egypt; and having obtained his request,
without tarrying till the next day for the satisfaction of seeing
her, inquired after her place of abode, and that very hour went to
her house, accompanied with his daughter and his grandson.

The widow of Nourreddin Ali lived still in the same place where her
husband had lived. It was a fine stately house, adorned with marble
pillars; but Schemseddin did not stop to view it. At his entry, he
kissed the gate, and the piece of marble upon which his brother’s
name was written in letters of gold. He asked to speak with his
sister-in-law, and was told by her servants that she was in a small
building in form of a dome, which they showed to him, in the middle
of a very spacious court. This tender mother used to spend the
greatest part of the day and night in that room, which she had built
for a representation of the tomb of Bedreddin Hassan, whom she took
to be dead after so long absence. At that very minute she was
pouring tears over the thoughts of that dear child, and Schemseddin
Mohammed entering, found her buried in the deepest affliction.

He made his compliment, and after beseeching her to suspend her
tears and sighs, informed her, he had the honour to be her
brother-in-law, and acquainted her with the reason of his journey
from Cairo to Balsora. He also acquainted his sister-in-law with all
that had passed at Cairo on his daughter’s wedding night, and
after informing her of the surprise occasioned by the discovery of
the paper sewed up in Bedreddin’s turban, presented to her Agib
and the beautiful Lady.

The widow of Nourreddin Ali, who had still continued sitting like a
woman dejected and weaned from the affairs of this world, no sooner
understood by his discourse that her dear son, whom she lamented so
bitterly, might still be alive, than she arose, and repeatedly
embraced the beautiful lady and her grandchild, Agib, and perceiving
in the youth the features of Bedreddin, shed tears of a quite
different stamp from what she had been so long accustomed to shed.
She could not forbear kissing the youth, who, for his part, received
her embraces with all the demonstrations of joy he was capable of.
Madam, said Schemseddin Mohammed, it is time to wipe off your tears,
and cease your groans; you must think of going along with us to
Egypt. The sultan of Balsora gives me leave to carry you thither,
and I doubt not you will agree to it. I am in hopes we shall at last
find out your son, my nephew; and if that comes to pass, the history
of him, of you, of my own daughter, and of my own adventures, will
deserve to be committed to writing, and transmitted to posterity.

The widow of Nourreddin Ali heard this proposal with pleasure, and
from that minute, ordered preparations to be made for her departure.
While that was doing, Schemseddin Mohammed desired a second
audience; and after taking leave of the sultan, who dismissed him
with ample marks of respect, and gave him a considerable present for
himself and another of great value for the sultan of Egypt, set out
from Balsora for the city of Damascus.

When he arrived in the neighbourhood of Damascus, he ordered his
tents to be pitched without the gate, at which he designed to enter
the city; and gave out he would tarry there three days, to give his
suite rest, and buy up the best curiosities he could meet with, and
such as were worthy of being presented to the sultan of Egypt.

While he was employed in looking upon and picking out the finest
stuffs that the principal merchants had brought to his tents, Agib
begged the black eunuch, his governor, to carry him through the
city, in order to see what he had not leisure to view as he passed
before, and to know what was become of the pastry cook that he had
wounded with a stone. The eunuch complying with his request, went
along with him towards the city, after leave obtained of the
beautiful lady his mother.

They entered Damascus by the Paradise gate, which lay next to the
tents of the vizier Schemseddin Mohammed. --They walked through the
great squares and the public places where the richest goods were
sold, and took a view of the ancient mosque of the Ommiadæ, [63] at
the hour of prayer, between noon and sunset. [64] After that they
passed by the shop of Bedreddin Hassan, whom they found still
employed in making cream tarts. I salute you, sir, said Agib. Do you
know me? do you remember you ever saw me before? Bedreddin, hearing
these words, cast his eyes upon him, and knowing him, (such was the
surprising effect of paternal love!) felt the same emotion as when
he saw him first of all. He was confused, and, instead of making an
answer, continued a long time without uttering one word. But after
all, recovering himself, My little lord, said he, be so kind as to
come once more with your governor into my house, and taste a cream
tart, I beg your lordship’s pardon for the trouble I gave you in
following you out of town; I was at that time not myself, I did not
know what I did. You drew me after you, and the violence of the
attraction was so strong, that I could not withstand it.

Agib, astonished at what Bedreddin said, replied thus: There is an
excess in the kindness you express, and unless you engage, under
oath, not to follow me when I go from hence, I will not enter into
your house. If you give me your promise, and prove a man of your
word, I will visit you again to-morrow, since the vizier, my
grandfather, is still employed in buying up things for a present to
the sultan of Egypt. My little lord, replied Bedreddin, I will do
whatever you would have me to do. This said, Agib and the eunuch
went into the shop.

Presently after, Bedreddin set before them a cream tart that was
full as good as what they had eaten of when they saw him before.
Come, said Agib, addressing himself to Bedreddin, sit down by me,
and eat with us. Bedreddin sat down, and made offers to embrace
Agib, as a testimony of the joy he conceived upon his sitting by
him. But Agib shoved him off, desiring him to be quiet, not to be
too familiar in his friendship, and to content himself with seeing
and conversing with him. Bedreddin obeyed, and fell to singing a
song, the words of which he composed off-hand, in praise of Agib. He
did not eat, but made it his business to serve his guests. When they
had done eating, he brought them water to wash with, [65] and a very
white napkin to wipe their hands. Then he filled a large china cup
with sherbet, and put snow into it; [66] and offering it to Agib,
This, said he, is sherbet of roses, and the pleasantest you will
meet with all the town over; I am sure you never tasted better. Agib
having drank of it with pleasure, Bedreddin Hassan took the cup from
him, and presented it to the eunuch, who drank it all off at once.

In fine, Agib and his governor having fared well, returned thanks to
the pastrycook for their good entertainment, and moved homewards, it
being then late. When they arrived at the tents of Schemseddin
Mohammed, they repaired immediately to the lady’s tent. Agib’s
grandmother received him with transports of joy: her son, Bedreddin,
ran always in her mind, and in embracing Agib, the remembrance of
him drew tears from her eyes. Ah! my child said she, my joy would be
perfect if I had the pleasure of embracing your father, Bedreddin
Hassan, as I now embrace you. Then sitting down to supper, she made
Agib sit by her, and put several questions to him, relating to the
walk he had been taking along with the eunuch; and when he
complained of his weak stomach, she gave him a piece of cream tart,
which she had made for herself, and was indeed very good, for I told
you before that she could make them better than the best pastry
cooks. She likewise gave some to the eunuch; but both of them had
eaten so heartily at Bedreddin’s house, that they could not taste
a bit.

Agib no sooner touched the piece of cream tart that had been set
before him, than he pretended he did not like it, and left it uncut;
and Schaban, [67] (such was the eunuch’s name,) did the same
thing. The widow of Nourreddin Ali observed with regret that her
grandson did not like the tart. What! said she, does my child thus
despise the work of my hands! Be it known to you, no one in the
world can make such cream tarts besides myself and your father,
Bedreddin Hassan, whom I myself taught to make them. My good mother,
replied Agib, give me leave to tell you, if you do not know how to
make better, there is a pastry-cook in this town that out-does you
in that point. We were at his shop but now, and eat of one that is
much better than yours.

This said, the grandmother, frowning upon the eunuch, How now,
Schaban, said she, was the care of my grandchild committed to you,
to carry him to eat at pastry-shops like a beggar? Madam, replied
the eunuch, it is true, we did stop a little while and talked with
the pastry-cook, but we did not eat with him. Pardon me, said Agib,
we went into his shop, and there eat a cream tart. Upon this, the
lady more incensed against the eunuch than before, rose in a passion
from the table, and running to the tent of Schemseddin Mohammed,
informed him of the eunuch’s crime, and that in such terms, as
tended more to inflame the vizier, than to dispose him to excuse it.

Schemseddin Mohammed, who was naturally passionate, did not fail, on
this occasion, to display his anger. He went forthwith to his
sister-in-law’s tent, and making up to the eunuch, What! said he,
you pitiful wretch, have you the impudence to abuse the trust I
repose in you? Schaban, though sufficiently convicted by Agib’s
testimony, denied the fact still. But the child persisting in what
he had affirmed, Grandfather, said he, I can assure you we not only
eat, but we eat both of us so heartily, that we have no occasion for
supper; besides, the pastry-cook treated us also with a great bowl
of sherbet. Well, cried Schemseddin, turning to Schaban, after all
this, will you continue to deny that you entered the pastry-cook’s
house, and eat there? Schaban had still the impudence to swear it
was not true. Then you are a liar, said the vizier, I believe my
grandchild before I believe you; but after all, said he, if you can
eat up this cream tart that is upon the table, I shall be persuaded
you have truth on your side.

Though Schaban had crammed himself up to the throat before, he
agreed to stand that test, and accordingly took a piece of tart; but
his stomach rising against it, he was obliged to spit it out of his
mouth. Yet he still pursued the lie, and pretended he had over-eat
himself the day before, so that he had not recovered his appetite.
The vizier, irritated with all the eunuch’s frivolous pretences,
and convinced of his guilt, ordered him to lie flat upon the ground,
and to be soundly bastinadoed. In undergoing this punishment, the
poor wretch shrieked out aloud, and at last, confessed the truth. I
own, cries he, that we did eat a cream tart at the pastry-cook’s,
and that it was much better than that upon the table.

The widow of Nourreddin Ali thought it was out of spite to her, and
with a design to mortify her, that Schaban commended the
pastry-cook’s tart: and accordingly said, I cannot believe the
cook’s tarts are better than mine: I am resolved to satisfy myself
upon that head. Where does he live? Go immediately, and buy me one
of his tarts.

The eunuch having received of her what money was sufficient for that
purpose, repaired to Bedreddin’s shop, and addressing himself to
Bedreddin, Good Mr. Pastry-cook, said he, take this money here, and
let me have one of your cream tarts; one of our ladies wants to
taste them. Bedreddin chose one of the best, and gave it to the
eunuch: Take this, said he; I will engage it is an excellent one,
and I can assure you that no person is able to make the like, unless
it be my mother, who perhaps is still alive.

Schaban returned speedily to the tents, and gave the tart to
Nourreddin’s widow, and she, snatching it greedily, broke a piece
off; but no sooner put it to her mouth, than she cried out, and
swooned away. Schemseddin Mohammed, who was present, was extremely
surprised at the accident: he threw water himself upon her face, and
was very active in succouring her. As soon as she came to herself,
My God! cried she, it must needs be my dear son, my dear Bedreddin,
that made this tart.

When the vizier Schemseddin Mohammed heard his sister-in-law say,
that the maker of the tart, brought by the eunuch, must needs be
Bedreddin Hassan, he was overjoyed; but reflecting that his joy
might prove groundless, and in all likelihood the conjecture of
Nourreddin’s widow was false, Madam, said he, why are you of that
mind? Do you think there may not be a pastrycook in the whole world,
that knows how to make cream tarts as well us your son? --I own,
replied she, there may be pastrycooks that can make as good tarts as
he; but forasmuch as I make them after a peculiar manner, and nobody
but my son is let into the secret, it must absolutely be he that
made this. Come, my brother, added she, in a transport, let us call
up mirth and joy; we have at last found what we have been so long
looking for. --Madam, said the vizier in answer, I entreat you to
moderate your impatience, for we shall quickly know the bottom of
it. All we have to do, is to bring the pastrycook hither; and then
you and my daughter will readily distinguish whether it is Bedreddin
or not. But you must both be hid, so as to have a view of Bedreddin,
while he cannot see you; for I would not have our interview and
mutual discovery laid at Damascus. My design is to delay the
discovery till we return to Cairo, where I promise to regale you
with very agreeable diversion.

This said, he left the ladies in their tent, and retired to his own;
where he called for fifty of his men, and said to them, Take each of
you a stick in your hands, and follow Schaban, who will conduct you
to a pastrycook’s in this city. When you arrive there, break and
dash in pieces all you find in the shop: if he asks you why you
commit that disorder, only ask him again if it was not he that made
the cream tart, that was brought from his house. If he says he is
the man, seize his person, fetter him, and bring him along with you;
but take care you do not beat him, nor do him the least harm. Go,
and lose no time.

The vizier’s orders were immediately executed. The detachment
conducted by the black eunuch, went with expedition to Bedreddin’s
house, and broke in pieces the plates, kettles, copper-pans, tables,
and all the other moveables and utensils they met with, and drowned
the sherbet-shop with cream and comfits. Bedreddin, astonished at
the sight, said with a pitiful tone, Pray, good people, why do you
serve me so? What is the matter? What have I done? Was it not you,
said they, that sold this eunuch the cream tart? --Yes, replied he,
I am the man: and who says any thing against it? I defy any one to
make a better. Instead of giving him an answer, they continued to
break all around them, and the oven itself was not spared.

In the mean time the neighbours took the alarm, and surprised to see
fifty armed men commit such a disorder, asked the reason of such
violence; and Bedreddin said once more to the actors of it, Pray
tell me what crime I am guilty of, to have deserved this usage?
--Was it not you, replied they, that made the cream tart you sold to
the eunuch? --Yes, yes, it is I, replied he; I maintain it is a good
one. I do not deserve such usage as you give me. However, without
listening to him, they seized his person, and snatching the cloth
off his turban, tied his hands with it behind his back, and, after
dragging him by force out of his shop, marched off.

The mob gathering, and taking compassion for Bedreddin, took his
part, and offered opposition to Schemseddin’s men; but that very
minute up came some officers from the governor of the city, who
dispersed the people, and favoured the carrying off of Bedreddin;
for Schemseddin Mohammed had in the mean time gone to the
governor’s house to acquaint him with what order he had given, and
to demand the interposition of force to favour the execution; and
the governor, who commanded all Syria in the name of the sultan of
Egypt, was unwilling to refuse any thing to his master’s vizier.
So Bedreddin was carried off, after all his cries and tears.

It was needless for Bedreddin Hassan to ask by the way those who
carried him off, what fault had been found with his cream tart; they
gave him no answer. In short, they carried him to the tents, and
made him stay there till Schemseddin Mohammed returned from the
governor of Damascus’s house.

Upon the vizier’s return, Bedreddin Hassan was brought before him.
My lord, said Bedreddin, with tears in his eyes, pray do me the
favour to let me know wherein I have displeased you. --Why, you
wretch you, said the vizier, was it not you that made the cream tart
you sent me? --I own I am the man, replied Bedreddin; but pray what
crime is that? --I will punish you according to your deserts, said
Schemseddin; it shall cost you your life, for sending me such a
sorry tart. --Good God! cried Bedreddin, what news is this! Is it a
capital crime to make a bad cream tart? --Yes, said the vizier, and
you are to expect no other usage from me.

While this interview lasted, the ladies, who were hid, minded
Bedreddin narrowly, and readily knew him, notwithstanding he had
been so long absent. They were so transported with joy, that they
swooned away; and, when they recovered, would fain have ran up and
fallen upon Bedreddin’s neck; but the promise they had made to the
vizier of not discovering themselves, restrained the tender emotions
of love and of nature.

Schemseddin Mohammed, having resolved to set out that very night,
ordered the tents to be struck, and the necessary preparations to be
made for his journey. And as for Bedreddin, he ordered him to be
clapped into a chest or box well locked, and laid on a camel. When
every thing was got ready, the vizier and his retinue began their
march, and travelled the rest of that night, and all the next day,
without stopping. In the evening they halted, and Bedreddin was
taken out of his cage, in order to be served with the necessary
refreshments, but still carefully kept at a distance from his mother
and his wife; and during the whole expedition, which lasted twenty
days, was served in the same manner.

When they arrived at Cairo, they encamped in the neighbourhood of
that place. Schemseddin called for Bedreddin, gave orders, in his
presence, to a carpenter to get some wood with all expedition, and
make a stake. Heyday, said Bedreddin, what do you mean to do with a
stake? --Why to nail you to it, replied Schemseddin, then to have
you carried through all the quarters of the town, that the people
may have the spectacle of a worthless pastrycook, who makes cream
tarts without pepper. This said, Bedreddin cried out so comically,
that Schemseddin had enough to do to keep his countenance. Good God!
cried he, must I suffer a death, as cruel as it is ignominious, for
not putting pepper in a cream tart? and must I be rifled, and have
all the goods in my house broken to pieces? Must I be imprisoned in
a chest, and at last nailed to a stake, and all for not putting
pepper in a cream tart? Good God! who ever heard of such a thing?
Are these the actions of Mussulmen, of persons that make a
profession of probity and justice, and practise all manner of good
works? --With these words, he shed tears, and then renewing his
complaint; No, continued he, never was man used so unjustly, nor so
severely. Is it possible they should be capable of taking a man’s
life for not putting pepper in a cream tart? Cursed be all cream
tarts, as well as the hour in which I was born! --Would to God I had
died that minute!

Disconsolate Bedreddin did not cease his lamentations; and when the
stake was brought, and the nails to fasten him to it, he cried out
bitterly at the horrid sight. Heaven! said he, can you suffer me to
die an ignominious and painful death? And all this, for what crime?
not for robbery or murder, or renouncing my religion, but for not
putting pepper in a cream tart.

Night being then pretty far advanced, the vizier Schemseddin
Mohammed ordered Bedreddin to be clapped up again in his cage,
saying to him, Stay there till to-morrow; the day shall not be spent
before I give orders for your death. Then the chest or cage was
carried away and laid upon the camel that had brought it from
Damascus: at the same time, all the other camels were loaded again;
and the vizier mounting his horse, ordered the camel that carried
his nephew to march before him, and so entered the city with all his
suite. After passing through several streets, where nobody appeared,
every one being in bed, he arrived at his house, where he ordered
the chest to be taken down, but not opened till farther orders.

While his retinue were unlading the other camels, he took
Bedreddin’s mother and his daughter aside, and addressed himself
to the latter: God be praised, said he, my child, for this happy
occasion of meeting your cousin and your husband. You remember, to
be sure, what order your chamber was in on your wedding-night: go
and put every thing in the very same order they were then in; and in
the mean time, if your memory do not serve you, I can supply it by a
written account, which I caused to be taken upon that occasion: as
for what else is to be done, I will take care of that.

The beautiful lady went joyfully about her father’s orders; and he
at the same time, began to put the things in the hall in the same
order they were in when Bedreddin Hassan was there with the sultan
of Egypt’s hunch backed groom. As he went over his manuscript, his
domestics placed every moveable accordingly. The throne was not
forgot, nor the lighted wax candles. When every thing was put to
rights in the hall, the vizier went into his daughter’s chamber,
and put in their due place Bedreddin’s clothes, with the purse of
sequins. This done, he said to the beautiful lady, Undress yourself,
my child, and go to bed. As soon as Bedreddin enters your room,
complain of his being from you so long, and tell him, that when you
awaked you were astonished you did not find him by you. Press him to
come to bed again; and to-morrow morning you will divert your
mother-in-law and me, in telling us what passes between you and him
this night. This said, he went from his daughter’s apartment, and
left her to undress herself and go to bed.

Schemseddin Mohammed ordered all his domestics to depart the hall,
excepting two or three, whom he ordered to stay there. These he
commanded to go and take Bedreddin out of the chest, to strip him to
his shirt and drawers, to conduct him in that condition to the hall,
to leave him there all alone, and to shut the door upon him.

Bedreddin Hassan, though overwhelmed with grief, had been asleep all
the while, insomuch that the vizier’s domestics had taken him out
of the chest, and stripped him before he awaked, and carried him so
suddenly into the hall, that they did not give him time to bethink
himself where he was. When he found himself all alone in the hall,
he looked round him, and the objects of his sight recalling to
memory the circumstances of his marriage, he perceived, with
astonishment, that it was the same hall where he had seen the
sultan’s groom of the stables. His surprise was still the greater,
when approaching softly to the door of a chamber which he found
open, he spied within his own clothes in the same place where he
remembered to have left them on his wedding-night. My God! said he,
rubbing his eyes, am I asleep or awake?

The beautiful lady, who in the mean time was diverting herself with
his astonishment, opened the curtains of her bed all on a sudden,
and bending her head forward, My dear lord, said she, with a soft,
tender air, what do you do at the door? Prithee come to bed again!
You have been out of bed a long time. I was strangely surprised when
I awaked in not finding you by me. Bedreddin Hassan’s countenance
changed when he perceived that the lady who spoke to him was that
charming person that he had lain with before: so he entered the
room, but calling up the thoughts of all that had passed for a ten
years’ interval, and not being able to persuade himself that it
all could have happened in the compass of one night, he went to the
place where his clothes lay, and the purse of sequins, and after
examining them very carefully, By the living God, cried he, these
are things that I can by no means comprehend! The lady, who was
pleased to see his confusion, said, once more, My lord, come to bed
again; what do you stand at? Then he stepped towards the bed, and
said to her, Pray; madam, tell me, is it long since I left you?
--The question, answered she, surprises me. Did not you rise from me
but now? Sure your thoughts are very busy. --Madam, replied
Bedreddin, I do assure you my thoughts are not very composed. I
remember indeed to have been with you, but I remember, at the same
time, that I have lived since ten years at Damascus. Now, if I was
actually in bed with you this night, I cannot have been with you so
long. These two things are inconsistent. Pray tell me what I am to
think; whether my marriage with you is an illusion, or whether my
absence from you is only a dream? --Yes, my lord, cried she,
doubtless, you were light-headed when you thought you were at
Damascus. Upon this, Bedreddin laughed out heartily, and said, What
a comical fancy is this! I assure you, madam, this dream will be
very pleasant to you. Do but imagine, if you please, that I was at
the gate of Damascus in my shirt and drawers, as I am here now, that
I entered the town with a halloo of a mob that followed and insulted
me; that I fled to a pastry cook’s, who adopted me, taught me his
trade, and left me all he had when he died; that after his death, I
kept a shop. In fine, madam, I had an infinity of other adventures
too tedious to recount: and all I can say, is, that it was well that
I awaked, for they were going to nail me to a stake. --Oh lord! and
for what, cried the lady, feigning astonishment, would they have
used you so cruelly? Sure you must have committed some enormous
crime. --Not in the least, replied Bedreddin; it was for nothing in
the world but a mere trifle, the most ridiculous thing you can think
of. All the crime I was charged with was selling a cream tart that
had no pepper in it. --As for that matter, said the beautiful lady,
laughing heartily, I must say they did you great injustice. --Ah!
madam, replied he, that was not all. For this cursed cream tart, was
every thing in my shop broke to pieces, myself bound and fettered,
and flung into a chest, where I lay so close, that methinks I am
there still. In fine, a carpenter was sent for, and he was ordered
to get ready a stake for me; but thanks be to God, all those things
are no more than a dream.

Bedreddin was not easy all night; he waked from time to time, and
put the question to himself, whether he dreamed or was awake: he
distrusted his felicity, and to be sure whether it was true or not,
opened the curtains, and looked round the room. I am not mistaken,
sure, said he, this is the same chamber where I entered instead of
the hunch-backed groom of the stables, and I am now in bed with the
fair lady that was designed for him. Daylight, which then appeared,
had not yet dispelled his uneasiness, when the vizier Schemseddin
Mohammed, his uncle, knocked at the door, and at the same time went
in to bid him good-morrow.

Bedreddin Hassan was extremely surprised to see, all on a sudden, a
man that he knew so well, and that now appeared with a quite
different air from that with which he pronounced the terrible
sentence of death against him. Ah! cried Bedreddin, it was you that
condemned me so unjustly, to a kind of death, the thoughts of which
make me shudder; and all for a cream tart without pepper. The vizier
fell a laughing, and to put him out of suspense, told him, how, by
the ministry of a genie, (for hunch-back’s relation made him
suspect the adventure,) he had been at his house, and had married
his daughter instead of the sultan’s groom of the stables; then he
acquainted him, that he had discovered him to be his nephew by a
book written by the hand of Nourreddin Ali, and pursuant to that
discovery, had gone from Cairo to Balsora in quest of him. My dear
nephew, added he, embracing him with every expression of tenderness,
I ask your pardon for all I have made you undergo since I discovered
you. I had a mind to bring you to my house before I told you your
happiness; which ought now to be so much the dearer to you, as it
has cost you so much perplexity and affliction. To atone for all
your afflictions, comfort yourself with the joy of being in the
company of those who ought to be dearest to you. While you are
dressing yourself, I will go and acquaint your mother, who is beyond
measure impatient to see you: and will likewise bring to you your
son, whom you saw at Damascus, and for whom you showed so much
affection without knowing him.

No words are of sufficient energy to express the joy of Bedreddin,
when he saw his mother and his son. These three embraced and showed
all the transports that love and tenderness could inspire. The
mother spoke to Bedreddin in the most moving terms; she mentioned
the grief she had felt for his long absence, and the tears she had
shed. --Little Agib, instead of flying his father’s embraces, as
at Damascus, received them with all the marks of pleasure. And
Bedreddin Hassan, divided between two objects so worthy of his love,
thought he could not give sufficient marks of his affection.

While this passed at Schemseddin Mohammed’s, the vizier was gone
to the palace to give the sultan an account of the happy success of
his voyage; and the sultan was so charmed with the recital of the
story, that he ordered it to be taken down in writing, and carefully
preserved among the archives of the kingdom. After Schemseddin’s
return to his house, having prepared a noble feast, he sat down to
table with his family, and all the household passed the day in
festivity and mirth.

The vizier Giafar, having thus made an end of the story of Bedreddin
Hassan, told the caliph Haroun Alraschid, that this was what he had
to relate to his majesty. The caliph found the story so surprising,
that without farther hesitation, he granted his slave Rihan’s
pardon; and to condole the young man for the grief of having
unhappily deprived himself of a woman whom he loved so tenderly,
married him to one of his slaves, bestowed liberal gifts upon him,
and maintained him till he died.




The Story of the Little Hunch-back.


There was in former times at Casgar, upon the utmost skirts of
Tartary, a tailor, that had a pretty wife, whom he doted on, and was
reciprocally loved by her. One day as he sat at work, a little
hunch-back came and eat down at the shop-door, and fell to singing
and playing upon a tabor. The tailor took pleasure to hear him, and
resolved to take him into his house to please his wife. This little
fellow, said he to his wife, will divert us both this evening. He
invited him in, and the other readily accepted of the invitation; so
the tailor shut up his shop, and carried him home. As soon as they
came in, the tailor’s wife having before laid the cloth, it being
supper time, set before them a good dish of fish; but as the little
man was eating, he unluckily swallowed a large bone, of which he
died in a few minutes, notwithstanding all that the tailor and his
wife could do to prevent it. Both were heartily frightened at the
accident, knowing it happened in their house; and there was reason
to fear that if the magistrates happened to hear of it they would be
punished as murderers. However, the husband found an expedient to
get rid of the corpse: he reflected there was a Jewish doctor that
lived just by, and having presently contrived a scheme, his wife and
he took the corpse, the one by the feet, and the other by the head,
and carried it to the physician’s house. They knocked at the door,
from which a steep pair of stairs led to his chamber. The servant
maid came down without any light, and opening the door, asked what
they wanted. Go up again, said the tailor, if you please, and tell
your master, we have brought him a man who is very ill, and wants
his advice. Here, said he, putting a piece of money into her hand,
give him that beforehand, to convince him that we do not mean to
impose on him. While the servant was gone up to acquaint her master
with the welcome news, the tailor and his wife nimbly conveyed the
hunch-backed corpse to the head of the stairs, and leaving it there,
hurried away.

In the mean time, the maid told the doctor, that a man and a woman
waited for him at the door, desiring he would come down and look at
a sick man, whom they had brought with them, and clapping into his
hand the money she had received, the doctor was transported with
joy: being paid beforehand, he thought it was a good patient, and
should not be neglected. Light, light, cried he to the maid; follow
me nimbly. So saying, without staying for the light, he gets to the
stair-head in such haste, that, stumbling against the corpse, he
gave him a kick that made him tumble down to the stair-foot; he had
almost fallen himself along with him. A light! a light! cried he to
the maid; quick, quick! At last, the maid came with a light, and he
went down stairs with her; but when he saw that what he had kicked
down was a dead man, he was so frightened, that he invoked Moses,
Aaron, Joshua, Esdras, and all the other prophets of the law.
Unhappy man that I am! said he, why did I attempt to come down
without a light! I have killed the poor fellow that was brought to
me to be cured; questionless, I am the cause of his death, and
unless Esdras’s ass [68] comes to assist me, I am ruined. Mercy on
me! they will be here out of hand, and drag me out of my house for a
murderer.

Notwithstanding the perplexity and jeopardy he was in, he had the
precaution to shut his door, for fear any one passing by in the
street should observe the mischance of which he reckoned himself to
be the author. Then he took the corpse into his wife’s chamber,
who was ready to swoon at the sight. Alas! cried she, we are utterly
ruined and undone, unless we fall upon some expedient to get the
corpse out of our house this night. Beyond all question, if we
harbour it till morning, our lives must pay for it. What a sad
mischance is this! What did you do to kill this man? That is not the
question, replied the Jew; our business now is to find out a remedy
for such a shocking accident.

The doctor and his wife consulted together how to get rid of his
dead corpse that night. The doctor racked his brain in vain, he
could not think of any stratagem to get clear; but his wife, who was
more fertile in invention, said, I have a thought just come into my
head: let us carry the corpse to the leads of our house, and tumble
him down the chimney into the house of the Mussulman, our next
neighbour.

This Mussulman was one of the sultan’s purveyors for furnishing
oil, butter, and all sorts of fat articles, and had a magazine in
his house, where the rats and mice made prodigious havoc.

The Jewish doctor approving the proposed expedient, his wife and he
took the little hunch-back up to the roof of the house; and,
clapping ropes under his arm-pits, let him down the chimney into the
purveyor’s chamber so softly and dexterously, that he stood
upright against the wall, as if he had been alive. When they found
he had reached the bottom, they pulled up the ropes, and left the
corpse in that posture. They were scarce got down into their
chamber, when the purveyor went into his, being just come from a
wedding-feast, with a lantern in his hand. He was greatly surprised
when, by the light of his lantern, he descried a man standing
upright in his chimney; but being naturally a stout man, and
apprehending it was a thief, he took up a good stick, and making
straight up to the hunch-back, Ah, said he, I thought it was the
rats and mice that eat my butter and tallow, and it is you come down
the chimney to rob me! But I think you will not come here again upon
this errand. This said, he falls upon the man, and gives him many
strokes with his stick. The corpse fell down flat on the ground, and
the purveyor redoubled his blows; but, observing the body not to
move, he stood to consider a little, and then, perceiving it was a
dead corpse, fear succeeded his anger. Wretched man that I am, said
he, what have I done! I have killed a man! Alas! I have carried my
revenge too far. Good God, unless thou pity me, my life is gone!
Cursed, ten thousand times accursed, be the fat and the oil that
gave occasion to this my commission of such a criminal action! He
stood pale and thunderstruck: he thought he saw the officers already
come to drag him to condign punishment, and could not tell what
resolution to take.

[Illustration: HUNCHBACK AND THE SULTAN’S PURVEYOR.]

The sultan of Casgar’s purveyor had never noticed the little
man’s hump-back when he was beating him; but as soon as he
perceived it, he threw out a thousand imprecations against him. Ah,
you cursed hunch-back, cried he, you crooked son of a bitch! would
to God you had robbed me of all my fat, and I had not found you
here! I had not then been so much perplexed for the sake of you and
your vile hunch. Oh! ye stars that twinkle in the heavens, give
light to none but me in this dangerous juncture. As soon as he had
uttered these words, he took the crooked corpse upon his shoulders,
and carried him out of doors to the end of the street, where he set
him upright, resting against a shop, and so trudged home again,
without looking behind him.

A few minutes before the break of day, a Christian merchant, who was
very rich, and furnished the sultan’s palace with various articles
--this merchant, I say, having sat up all night at a debauch,
stepped at that instant out of his house to go to bathe. --Though he
was drunk, he was sensible that the night was far spent, and that
the people would quickly be called to the morning prayers, at break
of day; therefore he quickened his pace to get in time to the bath,
for fear any Mussulman meeting him in his way to the mosque should
carry him to prison for a drunkard. As he came to the end of the
street, he stopped upon some necessary occasion against the shop
where the sultan’s purveyor had put the hunch-backed corpse, which
being jostled, tumbled upon the merchant’s back. The merchant,
thinking it was a robber that came to attack him, knocked him down
with a swinging box on the ear, and after redoubling his blows,
cried out “thieves.”

The outcry alarmed the watch, who came up immediately; and finding a
Christian beating a Mussulman, (for hump-back was of our religion,)
What reason have you, said he, to abuse a Mussulman after this rate?
He would have robbed me, replied the merchant, and jumped upon my
back with intent to take me by the throat. If he did, said the
watch, you have revenged yourself sufficiently; come, get off him.
At the same time he stretched out his hand to help little hump-back
up; but observing he was dead, Oh! said he, is it thus that a
Christian dares to assassinate a Mussulman? So saying, he laid hold
of the Christian, and carried him to the house of the lieutenant of
the police, where he was kept till the judge was stirring, and ready
to examine him. In the mean time, the Christian merchant grew sober,
and the more he reflected upon his adventure, the less could he
conceive how such single blows of his fist could kill the man.

The judge having heard the report of the watch, and viewed the
corpse, which they had taken care to bring to his house,
interrogated the Christian merchant upon it, and he could not deny
the crime, though he had not committed it. But the Judge,
considering that little hump-back belonged to the sultan, for he was
one of his buffoons, would not put the Christian to death, till he
knew the sultan’s pleasure. For this end he went to the palace,
and acquainted the sultan with what had happened, and received from
the sultan this answer: I have no mercy to show to a Christian that
kills a Mussulman; go, do your office. Upon this the judge ordered a
gibbet to be erected, and sent criers all over the city to proclaim,
that they were about to hang a Christian for killing a Mussulman.

At length the merchant was brought out of jail to the foot of the
gallows; and the hangman having put the rope about his neck, was
going to give him a swing, when the sultan’s purveyor pushing
through the crowd, made up to the gibbet, calling to the hangman to
stop, for that the Christian had not committed the murder, but
himself had done it. Upon that the officer who attended the
execution began to question the purveyor, who told him every
circumstance of his killing the little hump-back, and how he
conveyed his corpse to the place where the Christian merchant found
him. You were about, added he, to put to death an innocent person;
for how can he be guilty of the death of a man who was dead before
he came at him? It is enough for me to have killed a Mussulman,
without loading my conscience with the death of a Christian, who is
not guilty.

The sultan of Casgar’s purveyor having publicly charged himself
with the death of the little hunch-backed man, the officer could not
avoid doing justice to the merchant. Let the Christian go, said he
to the executioner, and hang this man in his room, since it appears
by his own confession that he is guilty. Thereupon, the hangman
released the merchant, and clapped the rope around the purveyor’s
neck; but just when he was going to pull him up, he heard the voice
of the Jewish doctor, earnestly entreating him to suspend the
execution, and make room for him to come to the foot of the gallows.

When he appeared before the judge, My lord, said he, this Mussulman
you are going to hang is not guilty; all the guilt lies at my door.
Last night, a man and a woman, unknown to me, came to my door with a
sick man they had brought along; my maid went and opened it without
a light, and received from them a piece of money, with a commission
to come and desire me, in their name, to step down, and look at the
sick person. While she was delivering her message to me, they
conveyed the sick person to the stair-head, and disappeared. I went
down without staying till my servant had lighted a candle, and in
the dark happened to stumble upon the sick person, and kick him down
stairs. At length, I saw he was dead, and that it was the crooked
Mussulman, whose death you are now about to avenge. So my wife and I
took the corpse, and after conveying it up to the roof of our house,
shoved it to the roof of the purveyor, our next neighbour, whom you
were going to put to death unjustly, and let it down the chimney
into his chamber. The purveyor, finding it in his house, took the
little man for a thief; and after beating him, concluded he had
killed him; but that it was not so, you will be convinced by this my
deposition; so that I am the only author of the murder; --and though
it was committed undesignedly, I have resolved to expiate my crime,
that I may not have to charge myself with the death of two
Mussulmen, and hinder you from executing the sultan’s purveyor,
whose innocence I have now revealed. So pray dismiss him, and put me
in his place, for I alone am the cause of the death of the little
man.

The chief justice being persuaded that the Jewish doctor was the
murderer, gave orders to the executioner to seize him, and release
the purveyor. Accordingly the doctor was just going to be hung up,
when the tailor appeared, crying to the executioner to hold his
hand, and make room for him, that he might come and make his
confession to the chief judge. Room being made, My lord, said he,
you have narrowly escaped taking away the lives of three innocent
persons; but if you will have the patience to hear me, I will
discover to you the real murderer of the crook-backed man. If his
death is to be expiated by another, that must be mine. Yesterday,
towards the evening, as I was at work in my shop, and was disposed
to be merry, the little hunch-back came to my door half-drunk, and
sat down before it. He sung a little, and so I invited him to pass
the evening at my house. He accepted of the invitation, and went in
with me. We sat down to supper, and I gave him a plate of fish; but
in eating, a bone stuck in his throat; and though my wife and I did
our utmost to relieve him, he died in a few minutes. His death
afflicted us extremely; and for fear of being charged with it, we
carried the corpse to the Jewish doctor’s house, and knocked at
the door. The maid coming down and opening the door, I desired her
to go up again forthwith, and ask her master to come down and give
his advice to a sick person that we had brought along with us; and
withal, to encourage him, I charged her to give him a piece of
money, which I had put into her hand. When she was gone up again, I
carried the hunch-back up stairs, and laid him upon the uppermost
step, and then my wife and I made the best of our way home. The
doctor coming down, made the corpse fall down stairs, and thereupon
he took himself to be the author of his death. This being the case,
continued he, release the doctor, and let me die in his room.

The chief justice and all the spectators could not sufficiently
admire the strange events that ensued upon the death of the little
crooked man. Let the Jewish doctor go, said the judge, and hang up
the tailor, since he confesses the crime. It is certain, this
history is very uncommon, and deserves to be recorded in letters of
gold. The executioner having dismissed the doctor, made every thing
ready to tie up the tailor.

While the executioner was making ready to hang up the tailor, the
sultan of Casgar, wanting the company of his crooked jester, asked
where he was; and one of his officers told him, The Hunchback, sir,
whom you inquire after, got drunk last night, and contrary to his
custom, slipped out of the palace, and went strolling about the
city, and this morning was found dead. A man was brought before the
chief justice and charged with the murder of him; but when he was
going to be hanged, up came a man, and after him another, who took
the charge upon themselves, and cleared one another. This lasted
some time, and the judge is now examining a third man, who gives
himself out for the real author of the murder.

Upon this intelligence, the sultan of Casgar sent an officer to the
place of execution. Go, said he, in all haste, and tell the judge to
bring the accused persons before me immediately; and, withal, bring
the corpse of poor Humpback, that I may see him once more.
Accordingly, the officer went, and happened to arrive at the place
of execution at the very time that the executioner was going to tie
up the tailor. --He cried aloud to the executioner to suspend the
execution. The hangman knowing the officer, did not dare to proceed,
but untied the tailor; and then the officer acquainted the judge
with the sultan’s pleasure. The judge obeyed, and went straight to
the palace, accompanied by the tailor, the Jewish doctor, and the
Christian merchant; and made four of his men carry the hunch-backed
corpse along with him.

When they appeared before the sultan, the judge threw himself at the
prince’s feet, and after recovering himself, gave him a faithful
relation of what he knew of the story of the hump-backed man. The
story appeared so extraordinary to the sultan, that he ordered his
own historian to write it down with all its circumstances; then
addressing himself to the audience: Did you ever hear, said he, such
a surprising event as this, that has happened upon the account of my
little crooked buffoon? Then the Christian merchant, after falling
down, and touching the earth with his forehead, spoke as follows:
Most puissant monarch, said he, I know a story yet more astonishing
than that you have now spoken of; if your majesty will give me
leave, I will tell it you. The circumstances are such, that nobody
can hear them without emotion. --Well, said the sultan, I give you
leave; and so the merchant went on as follows:




The Story told by the Christian Merchant.


Sir, before I commence the recital of the story you have permitted
me to relate, I beg leave to acquaint you that I have not the honour
to be born in any part of your majesty’s empire. I am a stranger,
born at Cairo, in Egypt, a Copt by nation, and by religion a
Christian. My father was a broker, and got a good estate, which he
left me at his death. I followed his example, and took up the same
employment; and one day at Cairo, as I was standing in the public
inn for the corn merchants, there came up to me a young handsome
man, well dressed, and mounted upon an ass. He saluted me, and
pulling out a handkerchief, in which he had a sample of sesame, or
Turkey corn, asked me what a bushel of such sesame would fetch? I
examined the corn that the young man showed me, and told him, it was
worth a hundred drachms of silver per bushel. Pray, said he, look
out for some merchant to take it at that price, and come to me at
the Victory gate, where you will see a khan at a distance from the
houses. So saying, he left me the sample, and I showed it to several
merchants, who told me, that they would take as much as I could
spare at a hundred and ten drachms per bushel, so that I made an
account to get ten drachms per bushel for my share. Full of the
expectation of this profit, I went to the Victory gate, where I
found the young merchant expecting me, and he carried me into his
granary, which was full of sesame. He had a hundred and fifty
bushels of it, which I measured out, and having carried them off
upon asses, sold them for five thousand drachms of silver. Out of
this sum, said the young man, there is five hundred drachm; coming
to you, at the rate of ten drachms per bushel. This I give to you,
and as for the rest which is to come to me, do you take it out of
the merchant’s hand, and keep it till I call or send for it, for I
have no occasion for it at present. I made answer, it should be
ready for him whenever he pleased to call for it; and so, kissing
his hand, took leave of him with a grateful sense of his generosity.

A month passed before he came near me; then he asked for his four
thousand five hundred drachms of silver. I told him they were ready,
and should be told down to him immediately. He was then mounted on
his ass, and I desired him to alight, and do me the honour to eat a
mouthful with me before he received his money. No, said he, I cannot
alight at present; I have urgent business that obliges me to be at a
place just by here; but I will return this way, and then take the
money, which I desire you would have in readiness. This said, he
disappeared, and I still expected his return, but it was a full
month before he came again. I thought to myself, the young man has
great confidence in me, leaving so great a sum in my hands without
knowing me; any other man would have been afraid I should have run
away with it. To be short, he came again at the end of the third
month, and was still mounted on his ass, but finer dressed than
before.

As soon as I saw the young man, I entreated him to alight, and asked
him if he would not take his money? There is no hurry, said he, with
a pleasant easy air, I know it is in good hands; I will come and
take it when my other money is all gone: Adieu, continued he, I will
come again towards the latter end of the week. With that, he struck
the ass, and was soon out of sight. Well, thought I to myself, he
says he will see me towards the latter end of the week, but it is
likely I may not see him in a great while; I will go and make the
most of his money, and shall get a good profit by it.

And as it happened, I was not out in my conjecture; for it was a
full year before I saw my young merchant again. Then he appeared
indeed, with richer apparel than before, but seemed to have
something on his mind. I asked him to do me the honour to walk into
my house. For this time, replied he, I will go in; but upon this
condition, that you shall put yourself to no extraordinary charge
upon my account. I will do just as you please, said I; only do me
the favour to alight and walk in. Accordingly, he complied, and I
gave orders for an entertainment; and while that was getting ready,
we fell into discourse together. When the entertainment was got
ready, we sat down to table. I observed he took the first mouthful
with his left hand, and not with the right. I could not tell what to
think of it. Said I to myself, ever since I knew this young man, he
always appeared very polite; is it possible he can do this out of
contempt of me? What can be the matter, that he does not make use of
his right hand?

I was very anxious to know, why my guest ate with the left hand.
After we had done eating, and every thing was taken away, we sat
down upon a sofa, and I presented him with a lozenge by way of
dainty, and still he took it with his left hand. Then I said to him,
Pardon, sir, the liberty I take, in asking you what reason you have
for not making use of your right hand? Perhaps you have some
complaint in that hand. Instead of answering, he fetched a deep
sigh, and pulling out his right arm, which he had hitherto kept
under his garment, showed me, to my great astonishment, that his
hand had been cut off. Doubtless, you were alarmed, said he, to see
me feed myself with the left hand; but I leave you to judge whether
it was in my power to do otherwise. May one ask you, said I, by what
mischance it was that you lost your right hand? Upon that, he burst
into tears, and after wiping his eyes, gave me the following
relation.

You must know, said he, that I am a native of Bagdad, the son of a
rich father, the most eminent in that city for quality and for
riches. I had scarce launched into the world, when falling into the
company of travellers, and hearing their wonderful accounts of
Egypt, especially Grand Cairo, I was moved by their discourse, and
felt a longing desire to travel. But my father was then alive, and
had not given me leave. At length, he died; and being now my own
master, I resolved to take a journey to Cairo. I laid out a large
sum of money upon several sorts of fine stuffs of Bagdad and
Moussoul, and so undertook my journey.

Arriving at Cairo, I went to the khan, called the khan of Mesrour,
and there took lodgings, with a warehouse for my bales, which I
brought along with me upon camels. This done, I retired to my
chamber, to rest myself after the fatigue of my journey, and gave
some money to my servants, with orders to go and buy some
provisions, and dress them. After I had eaten, I went and saw the
castle, some mosques, the public squares, and the other places that
were curious.

Next day, I dressed myself, and ordered some of the finest and
richest of my bales to be picked out and carried by my slaves to the
Circassian bezestein, [69] whither I went myself. I no sooner got
there, than I was surrounded with brokers and criers, who had heard
of my arrival. I gave patterns of my stuffs to several of the
criers, who went and cried them, and showed them all over the
bezestein; but none of the merchants offered near so much as they
had cost me in prime cost and carriage. This vexed me, and the
criers observing I was dissatisfied, If you will take our advice,
said they, we will put you in a way to sell your stuffs without loss.

The brokers and the criers having thus promised to put me in a way
of losing nothing by my goods, I asked them, what course they would
have me take. Divide your goods, said they, among several merchants,
and they will sell them by retail; and twice a week, that is, on
Mondays and Thursdays, you may receive what money they take. By this
means, you will get instead of losing, and the merchants will gain
by you; and in the mean while, you will have time to take your
pleasure, and walk about the town, or go upon the Nile.

I took their advice, and carried them to my warehouse; from whence I
brought all my goods to the bezestein, and there divided them among
the merchants whom they represented as most reputable and able to
pay; and the merchants gave me a formal receipt before witnesses,
stipulating withal, that I should not make any demands upon them for
the first month.

Having thus regulated my affairs, my mind was taken up with other
things than the ordinary pleasures. I contracted friendship with
divers persons almost of the same age with myself, who took care to
make the time pass pleasantly. After the first month was expired. I
began to visit my merchants twice a week, taking along with me a
public officer to inspect their books of sale, and a banker to see
they paid me in good money, and to regulate the value of the several
species; and so every pay day I had a good sum of money to carry
home to my lodging at the khan of Mesrour. I went, nevertheless, on
the other days, to pass the morning sometimes at one merchant’s
house, and sometimes at another. In short, I diverted myself in
conversing with them, and seeing what passed in the bezestein.

One Monday, as I sat in a merchant’s shop, whose name was
Bedreddin, a lady of quality, as one might easily perceive by her
air, her habit, and by a well-dressed slave, came into the shop, and
sat down by me. Her external appearance, joined to a natural grace
that shone in all her actions, prejudiced me in her favour, and
inspired me with a longing desire to be better acquainted with her.
I know not whether she observed that I took pleasure in gazing upon
her, and whether this attention on my part was not agreeable to her;
but she let down the crape that hung over the muslin which covered
her face, and so gave me the opportunity of seeing her large black
eyes, which perfectly charmed me. In fine, she inflamed my love to
its height by the agreeable sound of her voice, and her genteel,
graceful carriage in saluting the merchant, and asking him how he
did since she saw him last.

After conversing with him some time upon indifferent subjects, she
gave him to understand that she wanted a sort of stuff with a gold
ground; that she came to his shop, as affording the best choice of
any in all the bezestein; and that if he had any such as she asked
for, he would oblige her in showing them. Bedreddin showed her
several pieces, one of which she pitched upon, and he asked for it
eleven hundred drachms of silver. I agree, said she, to give you so
much, but I have not money enough about me; so I hope you will give
me credit till to-morrow, and in the mean time allow me to carry off
the stuff. I shall not fail, added she, to send to you to-morrow the
eleven hundred drachms I agreed for. Madam, said Bedreddin, I would
give you credit with all my heart, and allow you to carry off the
stuff if it were mine; but it belongs to the young man you see here,
and this is the day on which we settle our accounts. Why, said the
lady in surprise, why do you offer to use me so! Am I not a customer
to your shop? And as often as I have bought of you, and carried home
the things without paying ready money for them, did I ever fail to
send you your money next morning? Madam, said the merchant, it is
true; but this very day I have occasion for the money. There, said
she, throwing the stuff to him, take your stuff; I care not for you
nor all the merchants. You are all alike; you respect nobody. This
said, she rose up in a passion, and walked out.

When I saw, said the young man, that the lady walked away, I felt a
great concern for her; so I called her back, saying, Madam, do me
the favour to return; perhaps I can find a way to content you both.
She returned, saying, it was for my sake that she complied. Mr.
Bedreddin, said I to the merchant, what do you say you must have for
this stuff that belongs to me? I must have, said he, eleven hundred
drachms; I cannot take less. Give it to the lady then, said I, let
her take it home with her; I allow a hundred drachms profit to
yourself, and shall now write you a note, empowering you to discount
that sum upon the other goods you have of mine. In fine, I wrote,
signed, and delivered the note, and then handed the stuff to the
lady. Madam, said I, you may take the stuff with you, and as for the
money, you may either send it to-morrow or next day; or, if you
will, accept the stuff as a present from me. I beg your pardon, sir,
said she, I mean no such thing. You treat me with so much civility,
that I ought never to show myself in the world again, if I did not
show my gratitude to you. May God reward you by an increase of your
fortune; may you live many years when I am dead; may the gate of
heaven be open to you when you remove to the other world, and may
all the city proclaim your generosity.

These words inspired me with some assurance. Madam, said I, I desire
no other reward for the service I have done you, than the happiness
of seeing your face; that will repay me with interest. I had no
sooner spoken than she turned towards me, took off the muslin that
covered her face, and discovered to my eyes a wonderful beauty. I
was so struck, that I could not express my thoughts to her. I could
have looked upon her for ever: but fearing any one should observe
her, she quickly covered her face, and letting down the crape, took
up the piece of stuff and went away, leaving me in a very different
state of mind from what I was in when I came to the shop. I
continued for some time in great disorder and perplexity. Before I
took leave of the merchant, I asked him if he knew the lady: Yes,
said he; she is the daughter of an emir, who left her an immense
fortune at his death.

I went back to the khan of Mesrour, and sat down to supper, bat
could not eat, neither could I shut my eyes all the night, which
seemed the longest night in my life. As soon as it was day I got up,
in hopes to see once more the object that disturbed my repose; and
to engage her affection, I dressed myself yet more nicely than I had
done the day before.

I had but just got to Bedreddin’s shop, when I saw the lady coming
in more magnificent apparel than before, and attended by her slave.
When she came in, she did not mind the merchant, but addressing
herself to me, Sir, said she, you see I am punctual to my word. I am
come on purpose to pay the sum you were so kind as to pass your word
for yesterday, though you had no knowledge of me. Such uncommon
generosity I shall never forget. --Madam, said I, you had no
occasion to be so hasty; I was well satisfied as to my money, and am
sorry you should put yourself to so much trouble about it. --I had
been very unjust, answered she, if I had abused your generosity.
With these words she put the money into my hand, and sat down by me.

Having this opportunity of conversing with her, I made the best use
of it, and mentioned to her the love I had for her; but she rose and
left me very abruptly, as if she had been angry with the declaration
I had made. I followed her with my eyes as long as she was in sight,
and as soon as she was out of sight, I took leave of the merchant,
and walked out of the bezestein, without knowing where I went. I was
musing upon this adventure, when I felt somebody pulling me behind,
and turning about to see who it was, I had the agreeable surprise to
perceive it was the lady’s slave. My mistress, said the slave, I
mean the young lady you spoke with but now in the merchant’s shop,
wants to speak a word with you if you please to give yourself the
trouble to follow me. Accordingly I followed her, and found her
mistress sitting waiting for me in a banker’s shop.

She made me sit down by her, and spoke to this purpose. Dear sir,
said she, do not be surprised that I left you so abruptly. I thought
it not proper, before that merchant, to give a favourable answer to
the discovery you made of your affection to me. But to speak the
truth, I was so far from being offended at it, that I was pleased
when I heard it; and I account myself infinitely happy in having a
man of your merit for my lover. I do not know what impression the
first sight of me could make upon you; but I assure you, I no sooner
saw you than I conceived tender thoughts of you. Since yesterday I
have done nothing but think of what you said to me; and my eagerness
to come and seek you this morning may convince you I have no small
regard for you. --Madam, said I, transported with love and joy,
nothing can be more agreeable to me than what I now hear. No passion
can be greater than that with which I love you, since the happy
moment I cast my eyes upon you; my eyes were then dazzled with so
many charms, that my heart yielded without resistance. --Let us not
trifle away the time in needless discourse, said she, interrupting
me; I make no doubt of your sincerity, and you shall quickly be
convinced of mine. Will you do me the honour to come to my home? or
if you will, I will come to yours. --Madam, said I, I am a stranger
lodged in a khan, which is not a proper place for the reception of a
lady of your quality and me. It is more proper, madam, for me to
come to you at your own home, if you will please to tell me where it
is. The lady complying with this desire; I live, said she, in
Devotion-Street; come on Friday, which is the day after to-morrow,
after noon-prayers, and ask for the house of Abon Schama, surnamed
Bercour, late master of the emirs; there you will find me. This
said, we parted; and I passed the next day in great impatience.

On Friday I got up betimes, and put on my best clothes, with fifty
pieces of gold in my purse. I mounted an ass I had bespoke the day
before, and set out, accompanied by the man that let me the ass.
When we came to Devotion-Street, I directed the owner of the ass to
inquire for the house I wanted; he found it, and conducted me
thither. I paid him liberally, and sent him back; directing him to
observe narrowly where he left me, and not to fail to come back with
the ass next morning, to carry me back again to the khan of Mesrour.

I knocked at the door, and presently two little girl-slaves, white
as snow, and neatly dressed, came and opened it. Be pleased to come
in, sir, said they; our mistress expects you impatiently; these two
days she has talked of nothing but you. I entered the court, and saw
a great pavilion, raised upon seven steps, and surrounded with iron
rails that parted it from a very pleasant garden. Besides the trees
which only embellished the place, and formed an agreeable shade,
there was an infinite number of other trees loaded with all sorts of
fruit. I was charmed with the warbling of a great number of birds,
that joined their notes to the murmurings of a very high water-work,
in the middle of a parterre enamelled with flowers. This water-work
was a very agreeable sight; four large gilded dragons at the angles
of the basin, which was of a square form, spouted out water clearer
than rock-crystal. This delicious place gave me a charming idea of
the conquest I had made. The two little slaves conducted me into a
saloon magnificently furnished; and while one of them went to
acquaint her mistress with my arrival, the other tarried with me,
and pointed out to me the beauties of the hall.

I did not tarry long in the hall, ere the lady I loved appeared,
adorned with pearls and diamonds; but the splendour of her eyes far
outshone that of her jewels. Her shape, which was now not disguised
by the habit she wore in the city, appeared the most slender and
advantageous. I need not mention with what joy we met once more;
that far exceeds all expression. I shall only tell you, that when
the first compliments were over, we sat both down upon a sofa, and
there conversed together with the highest satisfaction. After that,
we had the most delicious messes served up to us; and after eating,
continued our conversation till night. At night we had excellent
wine brought up, and such fruit as is apt to promote drinking; and
timed our cups to the sound of musical instruments, joined to the
voices of the slaves. The lady of the house sung herself, and by her
songs raised my passion to the height. In short, I passed the night
in the full enjoyment of all manner of pleasure.

Next morning I slipt under the bolster of the bed the purse with the
fifty pieces of gold I had brought with me, and took leave of the
lady, who asked me when I would see her again. Madam, said I, I give
you my promise to return this night. She seemed to be transported
with my answer, and conducting me to the door, conjured me at
parting to be mindful of my promise.

The same man that had carried me thither, waited for me with his
ass, which I mounted, and went directly to the khan, ordering the
man to come to me again in the afternoon at a certain hour; to
secure which, I would not pay him till that time came.

As soon as I arrived at my lodging, my first care was to order my
people to buy a good lamb, and several sorts of cakes, which I sent
by a porter as a present to the lady. When that was done, I attended
to my serious business till the owner of the ass came. Then I went
along with him to the lady’s house, and was received by her with
as much joy as before, and entertained with equal magnificence.

Next morning I took leave, and left her another purse with fifty
pieces of gold, and returned to my khan.

I continued to visit the lady every day, and to leave her every time
a purse with fifty pieces of gold, till the merchants whom I
employed to sell my goods, and whom I visited regularly twice a
week, owed me nothing: and, in short, I came at last to be
moneyless, and hopeless of having any more.

In this desperate condition, I walked out of my lodging, not knowing
what course to take, and by chance went towards the castle, where
there was a great crowd of people to see a show given by the sultan
of Egypt. As soon as I came up to them, I wedged in among the crowd,
and by chance happened to stand by a horseman well mounted, and
handsomely clothed, who had upon the pommel of his saddle a bag,
half open, with a string of green silk hanging out of it. I clapped
my hand to the bag, concluding the silk twist might be the string of
a purse within the bag: in the mean time, a porter with a load of
wood upon his back, passed by the other side of the horse, so near
that the gentleman on horseback was forced to turn his head towards
him, to avoid being hurt, or having his clothes torn by the wood. In
that moment did the devil tempt me; I took the string in one hand,
and with the other laid open the mouth of the bag, and pulled out
the purse so dexterously, that nobody perceived it. The purse was
heavy, and I did not doubt but there was gold or silver in it.

As soon as the porter had passed, the horseman, who probably had
some suspicion of what I had done while his head was turned,
presently put his hand to his bag, and finding his purse was gone,
gave me such a blow that he knocked me down. This violence shocked
all who saw it; some took hold of the horse’s bridle, to stop the
gentleman, and asked him, what reason he had to strike me, or how he
came to treat a Mussulman after that rate. Do not you trouble
yourselves, said he briskly; I had reason for what I did: this
fellow is a thief. At these words, I started up, and from my
appearance, every one took my part, and cried out he was a liar, for
that it was incredible a young man such as I, should be guilty of so
base an action; but while they were holding his horse by the bridle
to favour my escape, unfortunately passed by the judge, who seeing
such a crowd about the gentleman on horseback and me, came up and
asked what the matter was. Every body present reflected on the
gentleman for treating me so unjustly upon the pretence of robbery.

The judge did not give ear to all that was said; but asked the
cavalier if he suspected any body else beside me? The cavalier told
him he did not, and gave his reasons why he believed his suspicions
not to be groundless. Upon this, the judge ordered his followers to
seize me, and search me, which they presently did; and finding the
purse upon me, exposed it to the view of all the people. The
disgrace was so great, I could not bear it, but swooned away. In the
mean time the judge called for the purse.

When he had got it in his hand, he asked the horseman if it was his,
and how much money was in it. The cavalier knew it to be his own,
and assured the judge he had put twenty sequins into it. Upon which,
the judge called me before him: Come, young man, said he, confess
the truth; was it you that took the gentleman’s purse from him? Do
not wait for the torture to extort confession. Then, with downcast
eyes, thinking within myself, that if I denied the fact, they
finding the purse about me, would convict me of a lie; to avoid a
double punishment, I looked up and confessed it was I. I had no
sooner made the confession than the judge called people to witness
it, and ordered my hand to be cut off. This sentence was put in
execution immediately upon the spot, to the great regret of all the
spectators; nay, I observed by the cavalier’s countenance, that he
was moved with pity as much as the rest. The judge would likewise
have ordered my foot to be cut off, but I begged the cavalier to
intercede for my pardon, which he did, and obtained it.

When the judge was gone, the cavalier came up to me, and holding out
the purse, I see plainly, said he, that necessity put you upon an
action so disgraceful and unworthy of such a handsome young man as
you are. Here, take that fatal purse; I freely give it you, and am
heartily sorry for the misfortune you have undergone. This said, he
went away; and I being very weak by loss of blood, some of the good
people of the neighbourhood had the charity to carry me into a
house, and gave me a glass of wine; they likewise dressed my arm,
and wrapped up the dismembered hand in a cloth, which I carried away
with me fastened to my girdle.

If I had returned to the khan of Mesrour in this melancholy
condition, I should not have found there such relief as I wanted;
and to offer to go to the young lady was running a great hazard, it
being likely she would not look upon me after she heard of my
disgrace. I resolved, however, to put it to the trial; and to tire
out the crowd that followed me, I turned down several by-streets,
and at last, arrived at the lady’s house very weak, and so much
fatigued, that I presently threw myself down upon a sofa, keeping my
right arm under my garment, for I took great care to conceal my
misfortune.

In the mean time, the lady, hearing of my arrival, and that I was
not well, came to me in all haste, and seeing me pale and dejected,
My dear soul, said she, what is the matter with you? --Madam, said
I, dissembling, I have got a violent pain in my head. The lady
seemed to be much concerned, and asked me to sit down, for I had got
up to receive her. Tell me, said she, how your illness came: the
last time I had the pleasure to see you, you were very well. There
must be something else that you conceal from me; let me know what it
is. I stood silent, and instead of an answer, tears trickled down my
cheeks. I cannot conceive, said she, what it is that afflicts you.
Have I unthinkingly given you any occasion of uneasiness? Or do you
come on purpose to tell me you no longer love me? --It is not that,
madam, said I, fetching a deep sigh; your unjust suspicion is an
addition to my misfortune.

I could not think of discovering to her the true cause. When night
came, supper was brought, and she pressed me to eat; but considering
I could only feed myself with my left hand, I begged to be excused,
upon the plea of having no appetite. Your appetite will return, said
she, if you would but discover what you so obstinately hide from me.
Your inappetency, without doubt, is only owing to your irresolution.
--Alas! madam, said I, I find I must resolve at last. I had no
sooner spoke these words, than she filled me a cup full of wine, and
offering it to me, Drink that, said she, it will give you courage. I
reached out my left hand, and took the cup.

When I had got the cup in my hand, I redoubled my tears and sighs.
Why do you sigh and weep so bitterly? said the lady: and why do you
take the cup with your left hand, rather than your right? --Ah!
madam, said I, excuse me, I beseech you; I have a swelling in my
right hand. --Let me see that swelling, said she: I will open it. I
desired to be excused, alleging it was not ripe enough for opening!
and drank off the cup, which was very large. The fumes of the wine,
joined to my weakness and weariness, set me asleep, and I slept very
soundly till next morning.

In the mean time, the lady curious to know what ailed my right hand,
lifted up my garment that covered it, and saw to her great
astonishment that it was cut off, and that I had brought it along
with me wrapt up in a cloth. She presently apprehended what was my
reason for declining a discovery, notwithstanding all her pressing
solicitation, and passed the night in the greatest uneasiness upon
my disgrace, which she concluded had been occasioned only by the
love I bore to her.

When I awaked, I discerned by her countenance, that she was
extremely grieved. However, that she might not increase my
uneasiness, she said not a word. She called for jelly broth of fowl,
which she had ordered to be prepared, and made me eat and drink to
recruit my strength. After that, I offered to take leave of her, but
she declared I should not go out of her doors. Though you tell me
nothing of the matter, said she, I am persuaded I am the cause of
the misfortune that has befallen you. The grief that I feel upon
that score will quickly make an end of me; but before I die, I must
execute a design for your benefit. She had no sooner said the word
than she called for a judge and witnesses, and ordered a writing to
be drawn up, putting me in possession of her whole property. After
this was done, and every body dismissed, she opened a large trunk,
where lay all the purses I had given her from the commencement of
our amour. There they are all entire, said she; I have not touched
one of them: here is the key: take it, for all is yours. After I had
returned her thanks for her generosity and goodness: What I have
done for you, said she, is nothing; I shall not be satisfied unless
I die, to show how much I love you. I conjured her by all the powers
of love, to give up such a fatal resolution. But all my
remonstrances were ineffectual; she was so afflicted to see me have
but one hand, that she sickened, and died after five or six weeks’
illness.

After mourning for her death as long as was decent, I took
possession of all her estate, a particular account of which she gave
me before she died, and the corn you sold for me was part of it.

What I have now told you will plead my excuse for eating with my
left hand. I am highly obliged to you for the trouble you have given
yourself on my account. I can never sufficiently recompense your
fidelity. Since, thanks to God, I have still a competent estate,
notwithstanding I have spent a great deal, I beg you to accept of
the sum now in your hand, as a present from me. --Over and above
this, I have a proposal to make to you; since by reason of this
fatal accident I am obliged to depart from Cairo, I am resolved
never to see it more. If you choose to accompany me, we will trade
together as equal partners, and divide the profit.

I thanked the young man, said the Christian merchant, for the
present he had made me; and as to the proposal of travelling with
him, I willingly embraced it, assuring him, that his interest should
always be as dear to me as my own.

We fixed a day for our departure, and accordingly entered upon our
travels. We passed through Syria and Mesopotamia, travelled all over
Persia, and after stopping at several cities, came at last, sir, to
your capital. Some time after our arrival in this place, the young
man having formed a design of returning to Persia, and settling
there, we balanced our accounts and parted very good friends. He
went from hence, and I, sir, continue here in your majesty’s
service. This is the story I had to tell you: does not your majesty
find it more surprising than that of the crooked buffoon?

The sultan of Casgar fell into a passion against the Christian
merchant. You are very bold, said he, to tell me a story so little
worth my hearing, and then to compare it to that of my jester. Can
you flatter yourself so far as to believe that the trifling
adventures of a young debauchee can make such an impression upon me
as those of my jester? I will hang you all four, to revenge his
death.

Hearing this, the purveyor fell down frighted at the sultan’s
feet. Sir, said he, I humbly beseech your majesty to suspend your
just wrath, and hear my story; and if it appears to your majesty to
be prettier than that of your jester, to pardon us all four. The
sultan having granted this request, the purveyor began thus:




The Story told by the Sultan of Casgar’s Purveyor.


Sir, --A person of quality invited me yesterday to his daughter’s
wedding: I went to his house in the evening, at the hour appointed,
and found there a large company of doctors, ministers of justice,
and others of the best quality in the city. After the ceremony was
over, we had a splendid feast; and among other things set upon the
table, there was a course with garlic sauce, which indeed was very
delicious, and coveted by every body; we observed, however, that one
of the guests did not offer to touch it, though it stood just before
him, and we invited him to do as we did. But he conjured us not to
press him upon that head. I will take care, said he, not to touch
any dish that has garlic in it; I remember too well what the tasting
of such an one cost me once before. We entreated him to tell us what
was the occasion of his strong aversion to garlic; but before he had
time to make answer, Is it thus, said the master of the house, that
you honour my table? This ragout is excellent, do not you pretend to
be excused from eating of it; you must do me that favour as well as
the rest. --Sir, said the gentleman, who was a Bagdad merchant, I
hope you do not think I refuse to eat it out of a mistaken nicety;
if you will have me eat of it, I will do it; but still upon this
condition, that after eating of it, I may wash my hands, with your
good leave, forty times with alcali, [70] forty times more with the
ashes of the same plant, and forty times again with soap. I hope you
will not take it ill that I stipulate this condition, in pursuance
of an oath I have made never to taste garlic without observing it.

The master of the house would not dispense with the merchant from
eating of the ragout with garlic, and therefore ordered his servant
to get ready a basin with water, together with alcali, the ashes of
the same plant, and soap, that the merchant might wash as often as
he pleased. When every thing was got ready, Now, said he to the
merchant, I hope you will do as we do.

The merchant, displeased with the violence that was offered him,
reached out his hand, and took up a bit, which he put to his mouth
trembling, and eat with a reluctance that surprised us all. But what
surprised us most of all was, that he had only four fingers and no
thumb, which none of us observed before, though he had eat of other
dishes. You have lost your thumb, said the master of the house; by
what accident? It must have been occasioned by some extraordinary
accident, a relation of which will be agreeable to the company.
--Sir, replied the merchant, I have no thumb on the right nor on the
left hand. In speaking this, he put out his left hand, and showed
that what he said was true. But this is not all, continued he: if
you will believe me, I have no great toe on either of my feet: I was
maimed in this manner by an unheard of adventure, which I am willing
to relate to you, if you will have the patience to hear me. The
relation will equally raise your astonishment and pity. Only suffer
me to wash my hands first. With this he rose from the table, and
after washing his hands a hundred and twenty times, took his place
again, and recounted his story as follows:

You must know, gentlemen, that in the reign of the caliph Haroun
Alraschid, my father lived in Bagdad, the place of my nativity, and
was reputed one of the richest merchants in the city. But being a
man addicted to his pleasures, and neglecting his private affairs,
instead of leaving me a plentiful fortune at his death, he left me
in such a situation, that all my economy was scarcely sufficient to
clear off his debts. However, with difficulty, I paid them all, and
through my industry and care, my little fortune began to wear a
smiling aspect.

One morning, as I opened my shop, a lady, mounted upon a mule, and
attended by an eunuch and two slaves, stopped near my shop door, and
with the assistance of the eunuch’s hand, alighted. Madam, said
the eunuch, I told you you would be too soon; you see there is
nobody yet in the bezestein; if you had taken my advice, you might
have saved yourself the trouble of waiting here. The lady looked all
round her, and finding there was no shop open but mine, addressed
herself to me, asking leave to sit in my shop till the rest of the
merchants came. I could do no less than return a civil answer, and
invite the lady into my shop.

The lady sat down in my shop, and observing there was nobody in the
whole bezestein but the eunuch and myself uncovered her face to take
the air; and I must say I never saw so beautiful a person. I no
sooner had a sight of her face, than I conceived a passion for her.
I fixed my eyes upon her, and perceived that she was not displeased
with my ogling, for she gave me a full opportunity to look on her,
and did not cover her face but when she was afraid of being taken
notice of.

After she had pulled down her veil again, she told me she wanted
several sorts of the richest and finest stuffs, and asked me if I
had them. Alas! madam, said I, I am but a young man, and just
beginning the world, I have not stock enough for such great
concerns, and it is a mortification to me that I have nothing to
show you that will suit you: but to save you the trouble of going
from shop to shop, as soon as the merchants come, I will go, if you
please, and fetch from them what you want, with the lowest prices,
and so you may do your business without going any farther. She
complied with my proposal, and entered into discourse with me, which
continued so much the longer, as I made her believe the merchants
that could furnish what she wanted were not yet come.

I was no less charmed with her wit than I had been before with the
beauty of her face; but there was a necessity of denying myself the
pleasure of her conversation. I ran out to see for the stuffs she
wanted; and after she had pitched upon what she liked, we agreed for
five thousand drachms of coined silver. I wrapped up the stuffs in a
small bundle, and gave it to the eunuch, who put it under his arm.
This done, she rose and took leave. I followed her with my eyes till
she had reached the bezestein gate, and even after she had mounted
her mule again.

The lady had no sooner disappeared, than I perceived that love had
caused me to commit a great neglect. It had so engrossed my
thoughts, that I did not reflect that she went away without paying
the money, neither had I the thought to ask who she was or where she
dwelt. However, I considered I was accountable for a large sum to
the merchants, who, perhaps, would not have the patience to stay for
their money; and so I went to them, and made the best excuse I
could, pretending that I knew the lady; and then came home again,
equally affected with love, and with the burden of such a heavy debt.

I had desired my creditors to stay eight days for their money; and
when eight days were passed, they did not fail to dun me. --Then I
entreated them to give me eight days more, which they agreed to; and
the very next day I saw the lady come to the bezestein, mounted on
her mule, with the same attendants as before, and exactly at the
same hour of the day.

She came straight to my shop. I have made you stay some time, said
she, but here is your money at last; carry it to the banker, and see
it is all good and right. The eunuch, who brought me the money, went
along with me to the banker, and we found it very right. I returned,
and had the happiness of conversing with the lady till all the shops
of the bezestein were open. Though we talked but of ordinary things,
she gave them such a turn, that they appeared new and uncommon; and
convinced me that I was not mistaken in admiring her wit at our
first interview.

As soon as the merchants had arrived and opened their shops, I
carried to the respective owners the money due for their stuffs, and
was readily entrusted with more, which the lady had desired to see.
She chose some from these to the value of one thousand pieces of
gold, and carried them away as before without paying: nay, without
speaking a word, or informing me who she was. What distressed me was
the consideration that while at this rate she risked nothing, she
left me without any security against being made answerable for the
goods in case she did not return. She has paid me, thought I, a
considerable sum; but she leaves me responsible for a greater.
Surely she cannot be a cheat: it is not possible she can have any
such design as to inveigle me to my ruin. The merchants do not know
her; they will all come upon me. In short, my love was not so
powerful as to stifle the uneasiness I felt, when I reflected upon
all the circumstances in which I was placed. A whole month passed
before I heard any thing of the lady again; and during that time my
alarm increased. The merchants, were impatient for their money, and
to satisfy them, I was going to sell off all I had, when one morning
the lady returned with the same equipage as before.

Take your weights, said she, and weigh the gold I have brought you.
These words dispelled my fear, and inflamed my love. Before we
counted the money, she asked me several questions, and particularly
if I was married. I answered I never had been. Then reaching out the
gold to the eunuch, let us have your interposition, said she, to
accommodate our matters. Upon which the eunuch fell a laughing, and
calling me aside, made me weigh the gold. While I was thus occupied,
the eunuch whispered in my ear --I know by your eyes you love this
lady, and am surprised you have not the courage to disclose your
passion. She loves you more ardently than you do her. Do not imagine
that she has any real occasion for your stuffs. She only makes this
her pretence to come here, because you have inspired her with a
violent passion. It was for this reason she asked you if you were
married. It will be your own fault, if you do not marry her. It is
true. I replied, I have had a passion for her from the first moment
that I cast my eyes upon her; but I durst not aspire to the
happiness of thinking my attachment could meet her approbation. I am
entirely hers, and shall not fail to retain a grateful sense of your
good offices in this affair.

I finished weighing the gold, and while I was putting it into the
bag, the eunuch turned to the lady, and told her I was satisfied;
that being the word they had agreed upon between themselves.
Presently after, the lady rose and took her leave; telling me she
would send her eunuch to me, and that I had only to obey the
directions he might give me in her name.

I carried each of the merchants their money, and waited some days
with impatience for the eunuch. At last he came.

I received him very kindly, and inquired after his mistress’s
health. You are, said he, the happiest lover in the world; she is
quite sick of love for you, and is impatient to see you; and were
she mistress of her own conduct, would not fail to come to you
herself, and willingly pass in your society all the days of her
life. Her noble mien and graceful carriage, I replied, convinced me
that she was a lady beyond the common rank. You have not erred in
your judgment on that head, said the eunuch: she is the favourite of
Zobeide, the caliph’s wife, who is the more affectionately
attached to her from having brought her up from her infancy, and
intrusts her with all her affairs. Having a wish to marry, she has
declared to her mistress that she has fixed her affections upon you,
and has desired her consent.

Zobeide told her, she would not withhold her consent; but that she
would see you first, in order to judge if she had made a good
choice; in which case she meant herself to defray the expenses of
the wedding. Thus you see your felicity is certain; since you have
pleased the favourite, you will be equally agreeable to the
mistress, who seeks only to oblige her, and would by no means thwart
her inclination. All you have to do is to come to the palace. I am
sent hither to invite you as soon as you determine to go.

My resolution is already formed, said I, and I am ready to follow
you whithersoever you please to conduct me.

Very well, said the eunuch; but you know men are not allowed to
enter the ladies’ apartments in the palace, and you must be
introduced with great secrecy. The favourite lady has contrived the
matter well. On your side you must act your part discreetly; for if
you do not, your life is at stake.

I gave him repeated assurances punctually to perform whatever he
might require. Then, said he, in the evening, you must be at the
mosque built by the caliph’s lady on the bank of the Tigris, and
wait there till somebody comes to conduct you. To this I agreed; and
after passing the day in great impatience, went in the evening to
the prayer that is said an hour and a half after sunset in the
mosque, and remained there after all the people had departed.

Soon after I saw a boat making up to the mosque, the rowers of which
were all eunuchs, who came on shore and put several large trunks
into the mosque, and then retired; only one of them staid behind,
whom I perceived to be the same eunuch that had all along
accompanied the lady, and had been with me that morning. I saw the
lady also enter the mosque; and making up to her, told her I was
ready to obey her orders. We have no time to lose, said she; and
opening one of the trunks, bid me get into it, that being necessary
both for your safety and mine. Fear nothing, added she; leave the
management of all to me. I considered with myself, I had gone too
far to recede, and so obeyed her orders; and she immediately locked
the trunk. This done, the eunuch her confidant called the other
eunuchs who had brought in the trunks, and ordered them to carry
them on board again. The lady and eunuch re-embarked, and the
boatmen rowed to Zobeide’s apartment.

In the mean time I reflected very seriously upon the danger to which
I had exposed myself, and made vows and prayers, though it was then
too late.

The boat stopped at the palace gate, and the trunks were carried
into the apartment of the officer of the eunuchs, who keeps the key
of the ladies apartments, and suffers nothing to enter without a
narrow inspection. The officer was then in bed, and there was a
necessity of calling him up.

The officer of the eunuchs was angry that they should break his
rest, and chid the favourite lady severely for coming home so late.
You shall not come off so easily as you think for, said he: not one
of these trunks shall pass till I have opened them every one. At the
same time he commanded the eunuch to bring them before him, and open
them one by one. The first they began with was that wherein I lay,
which put me into inexpressible fear.

The favourite lady, who had the key of that trunk, protested it
should not be opened. You know very well, said she, I bring nothing
hither but what is for the use of Zobeide, your mistress and mine.
This trunk, continued she, is filled with rich goods that I had from
some merchants lately arrived, besides a number of bottles of Zemzem
water sent from Mecca; [71] and if any of these should happen to
break, the goods will be spoiled, and then you must answer for them;
depend on it, Zobeide will resent your insolence. She insisted upon
this in so peremptory terms, that the officer did not dare to take
upon him to open any of the trunks. Let them go, said he angrily;
you may carry them off. Upon that the women’s apartment was
opened, and all the trunks were carried in.

They were scarcely got in, when all on a sudden I heard the people
cry, Here is the caliph! here comes the caliph! This put me in such
a fright, that I wonder I did not die upon the spot, for it really
was the caliph. What hast thou got in these trunks? said he to the
favourite. --Some stuffs, said she, lately arrived, which your
majesty’s lady had a mind to see. --Open them, cried he, and let
me see them. She pretended to excuse herself, alleging the stuffs
were only proper for ladies, and that by opening them his lady would
be deprived of the pleasure of seeing them first. I say, open them,
cried the caliph; I have a mind to see them, and I will see them.
She still represented that her mistress would be angry with her if
she opened them. No, no, said he; I will engage she shall not say a
word to you for so doing: come, come, open them, and do not keep me
waiting here.

There was a necessity of obeying, which gave me such alarm, that I
tremble every time I think on it. The caliph sat down; and the
favourite ordered all the trunks to be brought before him one after
another. Then she opened them; and to lengthen out the time, showed
all the beauties of each particular stuff, thinking thereby to tire
out his patience; but her stratagem did not succeed. Being as
unwilling as myself to have the trunk where I lay opened, she left
that to the last. So when all the rest were viewed, Come, said the
caliph, make an end; let us see what is in that. I am at a loss to
tell you whether I was dead or alive that moment; for I little
thought of escaping so great a danger.

When Zobeide’s favourite saw that the caliph would needs have the
trunk open where I lay, As for this trunk, said she, your majesty
will please to dispense with the opening of it: there are some
things in it which I cannot show you without your lady be by. Well,
well, said the caliph, since it is so, I am satisfied; order the
trunks to be carried away. The word was no sooner spoken than the
trunks were moved into her chamber, where I began to revive again.

As soon as the eunuchs who had brought them were gone, she presently
opened the trunk where I was prisoner. Come out, said she, go up
these stairs that lead to an upper room, and stay there till I come.
The door which led to the stairs she locked after I was in; and that
was no sooner done, than the caliph came and sat down on the very
trunk where I had been confined. The occasion of this visit was a
motive of curiosity that did not respect me. He had a mind to
question the lady about what she had seen or heard in the city. So
they discoursed together some while, and then he left her and
retired to his apartment.

When she found the coast clear, she came to the chamber where I was,
and made many apologies for the alarms she had given me. My
uneasiness, said she, was no less than yours; you cannot well doubt
of that, since I have run the same risk out of love to you: perhaps,
another person in my situation would not have had the presence of
mind to manage matters so dexterously upon so delicate an occasion,
where so much courage and presence of mind were requisite; nothing
less than the love I had for you could have inspired me with courage
to do it. But come, take heart, now the danger is over. After much
tender discourse between us, she told me it was time to go to rest,
and that she would not fail to introduce me to Zobeide, her
mistress, some hour to morrow, which will be very easy; For the
caliph never sees her, added she, but at night. Encouraged by these
words, I slept very well; or if my sleep was interrupted it was by
agreeable disquietudes, caused by the hopes of enjoying a lady,
blest with so much wit and beauty.

The next day, before I was introduced to Zobeide, her favourite
instructed me how to behave, mentioning what questions she would put
to me, and dictating the answers I was to give. This done, she
carried me into a very magnificent and richly furnished hall. I was
no sooner entered, than twenty women slaves, advanced in age,
dressed in rich and uniform habits, came out of Zobeide’s
apartment, and placed themselves very modestly before the throne in
two equal rows; they were followed by twenty other younger ladies
clothed after the same manner, only their habits appeared somewhat
gayer. In the middle of these appeared Zobeide, with a majestic air,
and so laden with jewels that she could scarce walk. She went and
sat down on the throne, and the favourite lady, who had accompanied
her, stood just by her on her right hand; the other ladies, who were
slaves, being placed at some distance on each side of the throne.

As soon as the caliph’s lady was set down, the slaves that came in
first made a sign for me to approach. I advanced between the two
rows they had formed, and prostrated myself upon the carpet that was
under the princess’s feet. She ordered me to rise, and did me the
honour to ask my name, my family, and the state of my fortune; upon
all which I gave her satisfactory answers, as I perceived not only
by her countenance, but by her words. I am glad, said she, that my
daughter, (so she used to call the favourite lady,) for I look upon
her as such, after the care I have taken of her education, I am very
glad she has made a choice that pleases me; I approve of it, and
give consent to your marriage. I will myself give orders for
solemnizing it; but I want to have my daughter stay ten days with me
before the solemnity; and in that time I will speak to the caliph,
and obtain his consent: meanwhile, do you stay here; you shall be
taken care of.

Pursuant to the caliph’s lady’s orders, I staid ten days in the
women’s apartments, and during that time was deprived of the
pleasure of seeing the favourite lady; but was so well used by her
orders, that I had no reason to be dissatisfied.

Zobeide told the caliph her resolution of marrying the favourite
lady; and the caliph leaving to her the liberty of doing upon that
head what she pleased, granted the favourite a considerable sum by
way of settlement. When the ten days were expired, Zobeide ordered
the contract of marriage to be drawn up and brought to her, and the
necessary preparations being mane for the solemnity, the musicians
and the dancers (both men and women) were called in, and there were
great rejoicings in the palace for nine days. The tenth day being
appointed for the last ceremony of the marriage, the favourite lady
was conducted to a bath, and I to another. At night, I sat down to
table, and had all manner of dishes served up to me, and among
others, a ragout with garlic, such as you have now forced me to eat
of. This ragout I liked so well, that I scarce touched any of the
other dishes; but such was my unhappiness, that when I arose from
the table, I only wiped my hands, instead of washing them well; a
piece of negligence I had never been guilty of before.

Though it was then night, the whole apartment of the ladies was as
light as day, by means of many illuminations. Nothing was to be
heard all over the palace but musical instruments, dances, and
acclamations of joy. My bride and I were introduced into a great
hall, where we were placed upon two thrones. The women that attended
her made her shift herself several times, and painted her face with
different sorts of colours, according to the usual custom on wedding
days; and every time she changed her habit they showed her to me.

All these ceremonies being over, we were conducted to the nuptial
room: as soon as the company retired, I approached to embrace my
wife; but instead of returning my transports, she pushed me away,
and cried out most fearfully; upon which, all the ladies of the
apartment came running into the chamber to know what she cried for:
and for my own part, I was so thunder-struck, that I stood like a
post, without the power of even asking what she meant by it. Dear
sister, said they to her, what has happened since we left you so
lately? Let us know, that we may try to relieve you. --Take, said
she, Take out of my sight that vile fellow. Why, madam? said I;
wherein have I deserved your displeasure? --You are a villain, said
she, in a furious passion, to eat garlic, and not wash your hands!
Do you think I would suffer such a filthy fellow to poison me? Down
with him, down with him upon the ground, continued she, addressing
herself to the ladies, and bring me a good bull’s pizzle. In
short, I was thrown upon the ground, and while some held my hands,
and others my feet, my wife, who was presently furnished with a
weapon, laid on me as long as she could stand over me. Then she said
to the ladies, Take him, send him to the judge, and let the hand be
cut off with which he fed upon the garlic ragout.

Good God, cried I, must I be beat and bruised unmercifully, and to
complete my affliction, have my hand cut off, for eating of a ragout
with garlic, and forgetting to wash my hands? What proportion is
there between the punishment and the crime? Curse on the ragout, and
on the cook that dressed it, and on him that served it up.

All the ladies that were by, and had witnessed my receiving the
thousand strokes, took pity of me when they heard the cutting off of
my hand spoken of. Dear madam, dear sister, said they to the
favourite lady, you carry your resentment too far. We own he is a
man quite ignorant of the world, of your quality, and the respect
due to you; but we beseech you to overlook and pardon the fault he
has committed. I have not received suitable satisfaction, said she;
I will teach him to know the world; I will make him bear sensible
marks of his impertinence, and be cautious hereafter how he tastes a
garlic ragout without washing his hands. Afterwards, they continued
their solicitations, and fell down at her feet, and kissing her fair
hands, Good madam, said they, in the name of God, moderate your
wrath, and grant the favour we request. She answered not a word, but
got up, and after uttering a thousand reproaches against me, walked
out of the chamber, and all the ladies followed her, leaving me in
inconceivable affliction.

I continued there ten days, without seeing any body but an old woman
slave that brought me victuals. I asked her what was become of the
favourite lady. She is sick, said the old woman; she is sick of the
poisoned smell you infected her with. Why did you not take care to
wash your hands after eating of that cursed ragout? Is it possible,
thought I to myself, that these ladies can be so nice and so
vindictive for so small a fault! I loved my wife, notwithstanding
all her cruelty, and could not help pitying her. One day the old
woman told me my spouse was recovered, and gone to bathe, and would
come to see me the next day. So, said she, I would have you call up
your patience, and endeavour to accommodate yourself to her humour:
for she is otherwise a woman of good sense and discretion, and
beloved by all the ladies about the court of Zobeide, our
respectable mistress.

In effect, my wife came next night, and accosted me thus: You see I
am too good in seeing you again after the affront you have offered
me; but still I cannot be reconciled to you till I have punished you
according to your demerit, in not washing your hands after eating
the garlic ragout. This said, she called the ladies, who, by her
order, threw me upon the ground; and after binding me fast, she had
the barbarity to cut off my thumbs and great toes herself with a
razor. One of the ladies applied a certain root to stanch the blood;
but by bleeding and by the pain, I swooned away.

When I came to myself, they gave me wine to drink, to recruit my
strength. Ah! madam, said I to my wife, if ever I eat of a garlic
ragout again, I solemnly swear to wash my hands a hundred and twenty
times with the herb alkali, with the ashes of the same plant, and
with soap. Well, replied my wife, upon that condition I am willing
to forget what is past, and live with you as my husband.

This, continued the Bagdad merchant, addressing himself to the
company, this is the reason why I refused to eat of the garlic
ragout that is now upon the table.

The ladies applied to my wounds not only the root I mentioned to
you, but likewise some balsam of Mecca, which they were well assured
was not adulterated, because they had it out of the caliph’s own
dispensatory. By virtue of that admirable balsam was I perfectly
cured in a few days, and my wife and I lived together as agreeably
as if I had never eat of the garlic ragout. But having been all my
lifetime used to enjoy my liberty, I grew weary of being confined to
the caliph’s palace; yet I said nothing of it to my wife, for fear
of displeasing her. However, she suspected it, and wanted nothing
more herself than to get out; for it was gratitude alone that made
her continue with Zobeide. Being a very witty woman, she represented
in such lively terms to her mistress the constraint I was under, in
not living in the city with people of my own rank, as I had always
done, that the good princess chose rather to deprive herself of the
pleasure of having her favourite about her, than not to grant what
we both equally desired.

A month after our marriage, my wife came into the room with several
eunuchs, carrying each a bag of silver. When the eunuchs were gone,
You never told me, said she, that you were uneasy in being confined
to court; but I perceived it, and have happily found means to make
you contented. My mistress, Zobeide, gives us leave to go out of the
palace, and here are fifty thousand sequins of which she has made us
a present, in order to enable us to live comfortably in the city.
Take ten thousand of them, and go and buy us a house.

I quickly found a house for the money, and after furnishing it
richly, we went and lived in it; and kept a great many slaves of
both sexes, and made a good figure. In short, we began to live a
very agreeable life, but it did not last long. At a year’s end, my
wife fell sick and died.

I might have married again, and lived honourably at Bagdad; but
curiosity to see the world put me upon another course. I sold my
house, and after purchasing several sorts of goods, I went with a
caravan to Persia; from Persia, I travelled to Samarcande, and from
thence hither.

This, said the purveyor to the sultan of Casgar, this is the story
that the Bagdad merchant told in company where I was yesterday. This
story, said the sultan, has something in it extraordinary; but it
does not come near that of my little Hunchback. Then the Jewish
physician prostrated himself before the sultan’s throne, and
rising again, addressed himself to that prince in the following
manner: Sir, if you will be so good as to hear me, I flatter myself
you will be pleased with a story I have to tell you. Well spoken,
said the sultan; but if it is not more surprising than that of
little Hunch-back, you must not expect to live.




The Story told by the Jewish Physician.


Sir, when I was studying physic at Damascus, and was just beginning
to practise that noble profession with some reputation, a man slave
called me to see a patient in the governor of the city’s family.
Accordingly, I went, and was conducted into a room, where I found a
very handsome young man, much dejected by his disorder: I saluted
him, and sat down by him; but he made no return to my compliments,
only a sign with his eyes that he heard me, and thanked me. Pray,
sir, said I, give me your hand, that I may feel your pulse. But
instead of stretching out his right, he gave me his left hand, at
which I was extremely surprised. This, said I to myself, is a gross
piece of ignorance, that he does not know that people present their
right hand, and not their left, to a physician. However, I felt his
pulse, wrote him a prescription, and took my leave.

I continued my visits for nine days, and every time I felt his
pulse, he still gave me his left hand. On the tenth day he seemed to
be pretty well, and so I prescribed nothing for him but bathing. The
governor of Damascus, who was by, in testimony of his being well
satisfied with my service, invested me with a rich robe, saying he
made me a physician of the city hospital, and physician in ordinary
to his house, where I might freely eat at his table when I pleased.

The young man likewise showed me many civilities, and asked me to
accompany him to the bath. Accordingly, we went together, and when
his attendants had undressed him, I perceived he wanted the right
hand, and that it had not long been cut off, which had been the
occasion of his disorder, though concealed from me; for while the
people about him were applying proper medicines externally, they had
called me to prevent the ill consequence of the fever which was on
him. I was very much surprised and concerned on seeing his
misfortune, which he observed by my countenance. Doctor, cried he,
do not be astonished to see that my hand is cut off; some day or
other, I will tell you the occasion of it; and in that relation you
will be entertained with very surprising adventures.

After we had done bathing, we sat down to table; and after some
other discourse together, he asked me if it would be any prejudice
to his health if he went and took a walk out of town in the
governor’s garden? I made answer, so far from it, that the air
would benefit his health. Since it is so, said he, if you will give
me your company, I will tell you the history of my adventures. I
replied, I was at his command for all that day. Upon which he
presently called his servants to bring something for a collation,
and we went to the governor’s garden. There we took two or three
turns, and then sat down upon a carpet that his servants had spread
under a tree, which gave a very pleasant shade. After we were
seated, the young man gave me his history in the following terms:

I was born, said he, at Moussoul, of one of the most considerable
families in the city. My father was the eldest of ten brothers, who
were all alive and married when my grandfather died. All the
brothers were childless, but my father; and he has no child but me.
He took particular care of my education, and made me learn every
thing proper for a child of my rank.

When I was grown up, and began to keep company with the world, I
happened one Friday to be at noon-prayers with my father and my
uncles in the great mosque of Moussoul. And after prayers were over,
the rest of the company going away, my father and my uncles
continued sitting upon the best carpet in the mosque; and I sat down
by them. They discoursed of several things, but the conversation
fell insensibly, I know not how, upon the subject of voyages. They
extolled the beauties and peculiar rarities of some kingdoms, and of
their principal cities. But one of my uncles said, that according to
the uniform report of an infinite number of voyagers, there was not
in the world a pleasanter country than Egypt and the Nile; and the
account he gave of them infused into me such a charming idea of
them, that from that very moment I had a desire to travel thither.
Whatever my other uncles said, by way of preference to Bagdad and
the Tigris, in calling Bagdad the true residence of the Mussulman
religion, and the metropolis of all the cities of the earth, made no
impression upon me. My father joined in opinion with those of his
brothers who had spoken in favour of Egypt; which filled me with
joy. Say what you will, said he, the man that has not seen Egypt,
has not seen the greatest rarity in the world. All the land there is
golden; I mean, it is so fertile that it enriches its inhabitants.
All the women of that country charm you by their beauty and their
agreeable carriage. If you speak of the Nile, where is there a more
wonderful river? What water was ever lighter or more delicious? The
very slime it carries along in its overflowing fattens the fields,
which produce a thousand times more than other countries that are
cultivated with the greatest labour. Observe what a poet said of the
Egyptians, when he was obliged to depart from Egypt: Your Nile loads
you with blessings every day; it is for you only that it runs from
such a distance. Alas! in removing from you, my tears will flow as
abundantly as its waters: you are to continue in the enjoyment of
its sweetnesses, while I am condemned to deprive myself of them
against my will.

If you look, added my father, towards the island that is formed by
the two greatest branches of the Nile, what variety of verdure! What
enamel of all sorts of flowers! What a prodigious number of cities,
villages, canals, and a thousand other agreeable objects! If you
turn your eyes on the other side, up towards Ethiopia, now many
other subjects of admiration! I cannot compare the verdure of so
many plains, watered with the different canals of the island, better
than to brilliant emeralds set in silver. Is not Grand Cairo the
largest, the most populous, and the richest city in the universe?
What a number of magnificent edifices, both public and private! If
you view the pyramids, you will be filled with astonishment: you
will stiffen at the sight of these masses of stone of an enormous
thickness, which rear their heads to the skies! You will be obliged
to confess, that the Pharaohs, who employed such riches, and so many
men in building them, must have surpassed in magnificence and
invention all the monarchs that have appeared since, not only in
Egypt, but in all the world, for having left monuments so worthy of
their memory: monuments so ancient, that the learned cannot agree
upon the time of their erection; yet such as stand to this day, and
will last to the end of time. I pass over in silence the maritime
cities of the kingdom of Egypt, such as Damietta, Rosetta,
Alexandria, where innumerable nations come for various sorts of
grain, cloth, and an infinite number of other things calculated for
the accommodation and delight of men, I speak of what I know; for I
spent there some years in my youth, which, as long as I live, I
shall always reckon the most agreeable part of my life.

My uncles had no answer to give my father, continued the young man
of Moussoul, and assented to all he had said of the Nile, of Cairo,
and of the whole kingdom of Egypt: my imagination was so full of it,
that I had not a wink of sleep that night. Soon after, my uncles
declared how much they were struck with my father’s discourse.
They made a proposal to him, that they should travel all together
into Egypt. He accepted of the proposal; and being rich merchants,
they resolved to carry with them such goods as would sell there. I
found that they were making preparations for their departure; and
thereupon went to my father, and begged of him, with tears in my
eyes, that he would suffer me to go along with him, and allow me
some stock of goods to trade with on my own account. You are too
young, said my father, to travel into Egypt; the fatigue is too
great for you; and besides, I am sure you will come off a loser in
your traffic. These words, however, did not cure the eager desire I
had to travel. I made use of my uncles’ interest with my father,
who at last granted me leave to go as far as Damascus, where they
were to leave me, till they travelled through Egypt. The city of
Damascus, said my father, may likewise glory in its beauties, and my
son must be content with leave to go so far. Though my curiosity to
see Egypt was very pressing, I considered he was my father, and
submitted to his will.

I set out from Moussoul with him and my uncles. We travelled through
Mesopotamia, passed the Euphrates, and arrived at Aleppo, where we
staid some days. From thence we went to Damascus, the first sight of
which agreeably surprised me. We lodged all together in one khan;
and I had the view of a city that was large, populous, full of
handsome people, and well fortified. We employed some days in
walking up and down the delicious gardens that surrounded it; and we
all agreed, that Damascus was justly said to be seated in a
paradise. At last my uncles thought of pursuing their journey; but
took care, before they went, to sell my goods so advantageously for
me, that I got five hundred per cent. This sale fetched me so
considerable a sum, that I was transported to see myself possessed
of it.

My father and my uncles left me in Damascus, and pursued their
journey. After their departure, I used great caution not to lay out
my money idly. But at the same time I took a stately house, all of
marble, adorned with paintings of gold, silver foliage, and a garden
with fine water-works. I furnished it, not so richly indeed as the
magnificence of the place deserved, but at least handsomely enough
for a young man of my rank. It had formerly belonged to one of the
principal lords of the city, whose name was Modoun Aldalraham; but
then was the property of a rich jewel merchant, to whom I paid for
it only two sherifs [72] a month. I had a number of domestics, and
lived honourably; sometimes I gave entertainments to such people as
I had made an acquaintance with, and sometimes I went and was
treated by them. Thus did I spend my time at Damascus, waiting for
my father’s return; no passion disturbed my repose, and my only
employment was conversation with people of credit.

One day, as I sat taking the cool air at my gate, a very handsome
well dressed lady came to me, and asked me, if I did not sell
stuffs? She no sooner spoke the words than she went into my house.

When I saw that the lady was gone into the house, I rose, and having
shut the gate, conducted her into a hall, and prayed her to sit
down. Madam, said I, I have had stuffs that are fit to be shown to
you, but I have them not now, for which I am very sorry. She took
off the veil that covered her face, and discovered a beautiful
person, which affected me with such emotions, as I had never felt
before. I have no occasion for stuffs, said she; I only come to see
you, and pass the evening with you, if you please: all I ask of you
is a light collation.

Transported with such good luck, I ordered the servants to bring us
several sorts of fruits, and some bottles of wine. They served us
with despatch, and we ate, drank and made merry till midnight. In
short, I had not before passed a night so agreeably as this. Next
morning, I would have put ten sherifs in the lady’s hands, but she
drew back instantly. I am not come to see you, said she, with an
interested design; you affront me; far from receiving money of you,
I desire you to take money of me, or else I will see you no more. In
speaking this, she put her hand into her purse, took out ten
sherifs, and forced me to take them, saying, You may expect me three
days hence after sunset. Then she took leave of me, and I felt that
when she went she carried my heart along with her.

She did not fail to return at the appointed hour three days after,
and I did not fail to receive her with all the joy of a person who
waited impatiently for her arrival. The evening and the night we
spent as before; and next day, at parting, she promised to return
the third day after. However, she did not go without forcing me to
take ten sherifs more.

She returned a third time; and at that interview, when we were both
warm with wine, she spoke thus: My dear heart, what do you think of
me? Am I not handsome and agreeable? Madam, said I, I think this an
unnecessary question; all the expressions of love which I show you,
ought to persuade you that I love you; I am charmed to see you and
possess you. You are my queen, my sultaness; in you lies all the
felicity of my life. Ah! replied she, I am sure you would speak
otherwise if you saw a certain lady of my acquaintance, that is
younger and handsomer than I. She is of such a pleasant, lively
temper, that she would make the most melancholy people merry: I must
bring her hither; I spoke of you to her, and from the account which
I have given of you, she is dying with desire to see you. She
entreated me to procure her that pleasure, but I did not dare to
humour her without speaking to you beforehand. Madam, said I, do
what you please; but whatever you may say of your friend, I defy all
her charms to tear my heart from you, to whom it is so inviolably
attached that nothing can disengage it. Be not too positive, said
she, I now tell you I am about to put your heart to a strange trial.

We staid together all night, and next morning, at parting, instead
of ten sherifs, she gave me fifteen, which I was forced to accept.
Remember, said she, that in two days’ time, you are to have a new
guest; pray take care to give her a good reception; we will come at
the usual hour, after sunset. I took care to have my hall in great
order, and a handsome collation prepared against they came.

I waited for the two ladies with impatience, and at last they
arrived at the beginning of the night. They both unveiled
themselves, and as I had been surprised with the beauty of the
first, I had reason to be much more so when I saw her friend. She
had regular features, a complete person, and such sparkling eyes,
that I could hardly bear their splendour. I thanked her for the
honour she did me, and entreated her to excuse me if I did not give
her the reception she deserved. No compliments, said she; it should
be my part to make them to you, for allowing my friend to bring me
hither. But since you are pleased to suffer it, let us lay aside all
ceremony, and think only of amusing ourselves.

I had given orders, as soon as the ladies arrived, to have the
collation served up, and we soon sat down to supper. I sat opposite
to the strange lady, and she never ceased looking upon me with a
smile. I could not resist her conquering eyes, and she possessed
herself so powerfully of my heart, that I could offer no opposition.
But while she inspired me with a flame, she caught the flame
herself, and so far from showing any constraint in her carriage, she
held to me very lively language.

The other lady, who observed us, did nothing at first but laugh at
us. I told you, said she, addressing herself to me, you would find
my friend full of charms; and I perceive you have already violated
the oath you made me of being faithful to me. Madam, said I,
laughing as well as she, you would have reason to complain of me if
I were wanting in civility to a lady whom you brought hither, and
who is a favourite with you; both of you might then upbraid me, for
not knowing how to do the honours of my house.

We continued to drink; but as the wine warmed us, the strange lady
and I ogled one another with so little reserve, that her friend grew
jealous, and quickly gave us a dismal proof of her jealousy. She
rose from the table and went out, saying she would be with us
presently again; but a few moments after, the lady that staid with
me changed countenance, fell into violent convulsions, and, in
short, expired in my arms, while I was calling for assistance to
relieve her. I went out immediately, and asked for the other lady,
and my people told me, she had opened the street door, and was gone.
Then I suspected what was but too true, that she had been the cause
of her friend’s death. She had the dexterity and the malice to put
some very strong poison into the last glass, which she gave her with
her own hand.

I was afflicted to the last degree with the accident. What shall I
do? thought I, what will become of me? I considered there was no
time to lose, and it being then moonlight, I made my servants
quietly take up one of the great pieces of marble with which the
court of my house was paved; under that I made them presently dig a
hole, and there inter the corpse of the young lady. After replacing
the stone, I put on a travelling suit, and took what money I had,
and having locked up every thing, affixed my own seal on the door of
my house. This done, I went to see for the jewel merchant my
landlord; paid him what rent I owed, with a year’s rent in
advance; and giving him the key, prayed him to keep it for me. A
very urgent affair, said I, obliges me to be absent for some time; I
am under the necessity of going to find out my uncles at Cairo. I
took my leave of him, immediately mounted my horse, and set off with
my attendants.

I had a good journey, and arrived at Cairo without any accident.
There I met with my uncles, who were very much surprised to see me.
To excuse myself, I pretended I was tired of staying for them; and
hearing nothing of them, was so uneasy, that I could not be
satisfied without coming to Cairo. They received me very kindly, and
promised my father should not be angry with me for leaving Damascus
without his permission. I lodged in the same khan with them, and saw
all the curiosities of Cairo.

Having finished their traffic, they began to talk of returning to
Moussoul, and to make preparations for their departure; but I having
a mind to see something in Egypt that I had not yet seen, left my
uncles, and went to lodge in another quarter, at a distance from the
khan, and did not appear any more till they were gone. They sought
for me all over the city; but not finding me, they supposed remorse
for having come to Egypt, without my father’s consent, had put me
on returning to Damascus, without saying any thing to them. So they
began their journey, expecting to find me at Damascus, and there to
take me up.

I continued at Cairo after their departure three years, more
completely to indulge my curiosity after all the wonders of Egypt.
During that time, I took care to send money to the jewel merchant,
ordering him to keep my house for me; for I designed to return to
Damascus, and stay there some years more. I had no adventure at
Cairo worth relating; but, doubtless, you will be very much
surprised at that I met with after my return to Damascus.

Arriving at this city, I went to the jewel-merchant’s house, who
received me joyfully, and would needs go along with me to my house,
to show me that nobody had entered it while I was absent. The seal
was still entire upon the lock; and when I went in, I found every
thing in the same order in which I had left it.

In sweeping and cleaning out my hall where I had used to eat with
the ladies, one of my servants found a gold chain necklace, with ten
very large and very perfect pearls placed upon it at certain
distances. He brought it to me, and I knew it to be the same I had
seen upon the lady’s neck that was poisoned, and concluded it had
broken off and fallen, when I did not perceive it. I could not look
upon it without shedding tears, when I called to mind the lovely
creature I had seen die in such a shocking manner. I wrapt it up and
put it in my bosom.

I passed some days to recover from the fatigues of my voyage; after
which, I began to visit my former acquaintance. I abandoned myself
to all manner of pleasure, and insensibly squandered away all my
money. Being thus reduced, instead of selling my furniture, I
resolved to part with my necklace; but I had so little skill in
pearls, that I took my measures very ill, as you shall hear.

I went to the bezestein, where I called a crier aside, and showing
him the necklace, told him I had a mind to sell it, and desired him
to show it to the principal jewellers. The crier was surprised to
see such a trinket. What a pretty thing it is! cried he, staring
upon it a long while with admiration; never did our merchants see
any thing so rich. I am sure I shall oblige them highly in showing
it to them; and you need not doubt they will set a high price upon
it, in emulation of each other. He carried me to a shop, which
proved to be my landlord’s. Stay here, said the crier, I will
return presently, and bring you an answer.

While he was running about to show the necklace with much caution, I
sat with the jeweller, who was glad to see me, and we conversed on
different subjects. The crier returned, and calling me aside,
instead of telling me the necklace was valued at two thousand
sherifs, he assured me nobody would give me more than fifty. The
reason is, added he, the pearls are false: consider, see if you will
part with it at that price. I took him at his word, and wanting
money, Go, said I, I take your word, and that of those who know
better than myself; deliver it to them, and bring me the money
immediately.

The crier had been ordered to offer me fifty sherifs by one of the
richest jewellers in town, who had only made that offer to sound me,
and try if I was well acquainted with the value of the goods I
exposed to sale. He had no sooner received my answer than he carried
the crier to the judge, and showing him the necklace, Sir, said he,
here is a necklace that was stolen from me, and the thief, under the
character of a merchant, has had the impudence to offer it for sale;
and is at this minute in the bezestein. He is willing to take fifty
sherifs for a necklace that is worth two thousand, which is a plain
argument that it is stolen.

The judge sent immediately to seize me; and when I came before him,
he asked me, if the necklace he had in his hand was not the same
that I had exposed to sale in the bezestein. I told him it was. Is
it true, said he, that you are willing to deliver it for fifty
sherifs? I answered I was. Well, said he, in a scoffing way to me,
give him the bastinado; he will quickly tell us, with all his fine
merchant’s clothes, that he is only a downright thief; let him be
beat till he confesses. The violence of the blows made me tell a
lie: I confessed, though it was not true, that I had stolen the
necklace: and presently the judge ordered my hand to be cut off.

This made a great noise in the bezestein; and I was scarce returned
to my house when my landlord came. My son, said he, you seem to be a
young man well educated, and of good sense; how is it possible you
could be guilty of such an unworthy action as that I hear talk of?
You gave me an account of your property yourself, and I do not doubt
but the account is just. Why did not you ask money of me, and I
would have lent it you? However, after what has happened, I cannot
allow you to lodge longer in my house; you must go and seek for
other lodgings. I was extremely troubled at this; and entreated the
jeweller, with tears in my eyes, to let me stay three days longer in
his house, which he granted.

Alas! said I to myself, this misfortune and affront is unsufferable:
how shall I dare to return to Moussoul? Nothing I can say to my
father will persuade him that I am innocent.

Three hours after this fatal accident my house was assaulted by the
judge’s officers, accompanied with my landlord, and the merchant
that had falsely accused me of having stolen the necklace. I asked
them what brought them there. But instead of giving me any answer,
they bound and gagged me, calling me a thousand rogues, and telling
me, the necklace belonged to the governor of Damascus, who had lost
it above three years ago, and that one of his daughters had not been
heard of since that time. Judge my sensations when I heard this
news. However, I summoned all my resolution: I will tell, thought I,
I will tell the governor the truth; and so it will rest with him
either to put me to death, or to pardon me.

When I was brought before him, I observed he looked upon me with an
eye of compassion, from whence I augured well. He ordered me to be
untied; and addressing himself to the jeweller who accused me, and
to my landlord, Is this the man, said he, that sold the pearl
necklace? They had no sooner answered yes, than he said, I am sure
he did not steal the necklace, and I am much astonished at the
injustice that has been done him. These words giving me courage,
Sir, said I, I do assure you I am perfectly innocent. I am likewise
fully persuaded the necklace did never belong to my accuser, whom I
never saw, and whose horrible perfidy is the cause of my unjust
treatment. It is true, I made a confession as if I had stolen it;
but this I did contrary to my conscience through the force of
torture, and for another reason that I am ready to tell you, if you
will be so good as to hear me. I know enough of it already, replied
the governor, to do you one part of the justice that is due to you.
Take from hence continued he, take the false accuser; let him
undergo the same punishment he caused to be inflicted on this young
man whose innocence is known to me.

The governor’s orders were immediately put in execution: the
jeweller was punished as he deserved. Then the governor, having
ordered all the company to withdraw, said to me, My son, tell me
without fear how this necklace fell into your hands --conceal
nothing from me. Then I told him plainly all that had passed, and
declared I had chosen rather to pass for a thief than to reveal that
tragical adventure. Good God! said the governor, thy judgments are
incomprehensible, and we ought to submit to them without murmuring.
I receive, with an entire submission, the stroke thou hast been
pleased to inflict upon me. Then, directing his discourse to me, My
son, said he, having now heard the cause of your disgrace, for which
I am very much concerned, I will give you an account of the disgrace
that befell me. Know, then, that I am the father of those two young
ladies you were speaking of but now. The first lady, who had the
impudence to come to your house, was my eldest daughter. I had given
her in marriage, at Cairo, to one of her cousins, my brother’s
son. Her husband died, and she returned home, corrupted with all
manner of wickedness which she had learned in Egypt. Before I took
her home, her youngest sister, who died in that deplorable manner in
your arms, was a very prudent young woman, and had never given me
any occasion to complain of her conduct. But after that, the eldest
sister grew very intimate with her, and insensibly made her as
wicked as herself.

The day after the death of the youngest, not finding her at table, I
asked her eldest sister what was become of her; but she, instead of
answering, fell to crying bitterly, from whence I formed a fatal
presage. I pressed her to inform me of what I asked her. Father,
said she, sobbing, I can tell you no more than that my sister put on
her best clothes yesterday, and her fine pearl necklace, and went
out, and has not been heard of since. I made search for my daughter
all over the town, but could learn nothing of her unhappy fate. In
the mean time the eldest, who doubtless repented of her jealous
fury, took on very much, and incessantly bewailed the death of her
sister; she denied herself all manner of food, and so put an end to
her deplorable days.

Such, continued the governor, such is the condition of mankind!
--such are the unlucky accidents to which they are exposed! However,
my son, added he, since we are both of us equally unfortunate, let
us unite our sorrow, and not abandon one another. I give you in
marriage a third daughter I have still left; she is younger than her
sisters, and in no respect imitates their conduct; besides, she is
handsomer than they were, and I assure you is of a disposition
calculated to make you happy. You shall have no other house but
mine; and after my death, you and she shall be heirs to all my
property.

Sir, said I, I am ashamed of all your favours, and shall never be
able to make a sufficient acknowledgment. Enough, said he,
interrupting me; let us not waste time in idle words. This said, he
called for witnesses, ordered the contract of marriage to be drawn,
and I married his daughter without farther ceremony.

He was not satisfied with punishing the jeweller who had falsely
accused me, but confiscated for my use all his property, which was
very considerable. As for the rest, since you have been called to
the governor’s house, you may have seen what respect they pay me
there. I must tell you further, that a man who has been sent by my
uncles to Egypt, on purpose to inquire for me there, passing through
this city, found me out, and came last night and delivered me a
letter from them. They inform me of my father’s death, and invite
me to come and take possession of his estate at Moussoul; but as the
alliance and friendship of the governor have fixed me with him, and
will not suffer me to leave him, I have sent back the express with a
power, which will secure to me my property. After what you have
heard, I hope you will pardon my incivility during the course of my
illness, in giving you my left instead of my right hand.

This, said the Jewish physician, this is the story I heard from the
young man of Moussoul. I continued at Damascus as long as the
governor lived: after his death, being in the flower of my age, I
had the curiosity to travel. Accordingly, I went through Persia to
the Indies, and came at last to settle in this your capital, where I
practise physic with reputation.

The sultan of Casgar was well pleased with this last story. I must
say, said he to the Jew, the story you have told me is very
singular; but I declare freely, that of the little hump-back is yet
more extraordinary, and much more comical, so you are not to expect
that I will give you your life, any more than the rest. I will hang
you all four. Pray, sir, stay a minute, said the tailor, advancing
forwards, and prostrating himself at the sultan’s feet; since your
majesty loves pleasant stories, I have one to tell you that will not
displease you. Well, I will hear thee too, said the sultan; but do
not flatter thyself that I will suffer thee to live, unless thou
tellest me some adventure that is yet more diverting than that of
the hump-backed man. Upon this the tailor, as if he had been sure of
his scheme, spoke boldly to the following purpose:--




The Story told by the Tailor.


A citizen of this city did me the honour, two days ago, to invite me
to a treat which he was to give to his friends yesterday morning.
Accordingly I went early, and found there about twenty persons.

The master of the house was gone out upon some business, but in a
very little time he came home, and brought with him a young man, a
stranger, very well dressed, and very handsome, but lame. When he
came in, we all rose up, and, out of respect to the master of the
house, invited the young man to sit down with us upon the sofa. He
was going to do so, but, all on a sudden, spying a barber in our
company, he flew backwards, and made towards the door. The master of
the house, surprised at his behaviour, stopped him. Where are you
going? said he. I brought you along with me to do me the honour of
being my guest among the rest of my friends, and you are no sooner
got into my house, but you are for running away again. Sir, said the
young man, for God’s sake do not stop me --let me go: I cannot
without horror look upon that abominable barber, who, though he was
born in a country where all the natives are white, resembles an
Ethiopian, and his soul is yet blacker and more horrible than his
face.

We were all surprised to hear the young man speak so, and we began
to have a very bad opinion of the barber, without knowing what
ground the young man had for what he said. Nay, we protested we
would not suffer any one to remain in our company who bore so horrid
a character. The master of the house entreated the stranger to tell
us what reason he had for hating the barber. Gentlemen, said the
young man, you must know this cursed barber is the cause of my being
lame, and falling under the cruellest accident that any one can
imagine. For this reason I have sworn to avoid all the places where
he is, and even not to stay in the cities where he dwells. It was
for this reason that I left Bagdad, where he then was, and travelled
so far to settle in this city, in the heart of Great Tartary, a
place where I flattered myself I should never see him; and now,
after all, contrary to my expectation, I find him here. This obliges
me, gentlemen, against my will, to deprive myself of the honour of
being merry with you. This very day I take leave of your town, and
will go, if I can, to hide my head where he shall not come. This
said, he would have left us, but the master of the house kept him,
and entreated him to stay, and tell us the cause of his aversion for
the barber, who all this while looked down, and said not a word.
--We joined with the master of the house in requesting him to stay;
and, at last, the young man, yielding to our importunities, sat down
upon the sofa; and, after turning his back to the barber, that he
might not see him, gave us the following account:--

My father’s quality might have entitled him to the highest posts
in the city of Bagdad; but he always preferred a quiet life to all
the honours he might deserve. I was his only child, and when he died
I was already educated, and of age to dispose of the plentiful
fortune he had left me; which I did not squander away foolishly, but
applied it to such uses that every body respected me.

I had not been yet disturbed with any passion; I was so far from
being sensible of love, that I acknowledge, perhaps to my shame,
that I cautiously avoided the conversation of women. One day,
walking in the streets, I saw a great company of ladies before me,
and that I might not meet them, I turned down a narrow lane just by,
and sat down upon a bench by a door. I sat over against a window
where there stood a pot with very pretty flowers, and I had my eyes
fixed upon it, when on a sudden the window opened, and a young lady
appeared, whose beauty struck me. Immediately she cast her eyes upon
me; and in watering the flower-pot with a hand whiter than
alabaster, looked upon me with a smile that inspired me with as much
love for her, as I had formerly aversion for all women. After having
watered her flowers, and darted upon me a glance full of charms that
pierced my heart, she shut the window again, and left me in
inconceivable perplexity, from which I should not have recovered, if
a noise in the street had not brought me to myself. I lifted up my
head, and turning saw the first cadi of the city, mounted on a mule,
and attended by five or six servants: he alighted at the door of the
house where the young lady had opened the window, and went in; from
whence I concluded he was the young lady’s father.

I went home in a different state of mind; tossed with a passion the
more violent, as I had never felt its assaults before: I went to bed
in a violent fever, at which all the family was much concerned. My
relations, who had a great affection for me, were so alarmed with
the sudden disorder, that they importuned me to tell the cause;
which I took care not to discover. My silence created an uneasiness
that the physicians could not dispel, because they knew nothing of
my distemper, and by their medicines they rather inflamed than
checked it.

My relations began to despair of my life, when an old lady of our
acquaintance hearing I was ill, came to see me. She considered me
with great attention, and after having examined me, penetrated, I
know not how, the real cause of my illness. She took my relations
aside, and desired all my people would retire out of the room, and
leave her alone with me.

When the room was clear, she sat down on the side of my bed. My son,
said she, you have obstinately concealed the cause of your illness;
but you have no occasion to reveal it to me. I have experience
enough to penetrate into a secret; you will not deny it, when I tell
you it is love that makes you sick. I can find a way to cure you, if
you will but let me know who that happy lady is that could move a
heart so insensible as yours; for you have the character of a
woman-hater, and I was not the last that perceived that such was
your disposition; but what I foresaw has come to pass, and I am now
glad of the opportunity to employ my talents in relieving your pain.

The old lady, having talked to me thus, paused, expecting my answer;
but though what she had said had made a strong impression upon me, I
durst not lay open to her the bottom of my heart: I only turned to
her, and fetched a deep sigh, without saying any thing. Is it
bashfulness, said she, that keeps you from speaking? or is it want
of confidence in me? Do you doubt the effect of my promise? I could
mention to you a number of young men of your acquaintance that have
been in the same condition with you, and have received relief from
me.

The good lady told me so many more circumstances, that I broke
silence, declared to her my complaint, pointed out to her the place
where I had seen the object which occasioned it, and unravelled all
the circumstances of my adventure. If you succeed, said I, and
procure me the happiness of seeing that charming beauty, and
revealing to her the passion with which I burn for her, you may
depend upon it I will be grateful. --My son, said the old woman, I
know the lady you speak of; she is, as you rightly judge, the
daughter of the first cadi of this city. I am not surprised that you
are in love with her: she is the handsomest and most lovely lady in
Bagdad; but what I most hesitate about is, that she is very proud,
and of difficult access. You know now strict our judges are in
enjoining the punctual observance of the severe laws that confine
women in such a strict constraint; and they are yet more strict in
the observation of them in their own families: the cadi you saw is
more rigid in that point than all the other magistrates together.
They are always preaching to their daughters what a heinous crime it
is to shew themselves to men; and the girls themselves are so
prepossessed with the notion, that they make no other use of their
own eyes but to conduct them along the street, when necessity
obliges them to go abroad. I do not say absolutely that the first
cadi’s daughter is of that humour; but that does not hinder my
fearing to meet with as great obstacles on her side as on her
father’s. Would to God you had loved any other! then I should not
have had so many difficulties to surmount. However, I shall employ
all my wits to compass the matter; but it requires time. In the mean
time, take courage, and trust in me.

The old woman took leave of me; and as I weighed within myself all
the obstacles she had been talking of, the fear of her not
succeeding in her undertaking inflamed my disorder. Next day she
came again, and I read in her countenance that she had no favourable
news to impart. She spoke thus; My son, I was not mistaken; I have
somewhat else to conquer besides the vigilance of a father: you love
an insensible object, who takes pleasure in making every one burn
with love who suffer themselves to be charmed by her; but she will
not deign them the least comfort. She heard me with pleasure, when I
spoke of nothing but the torment she made you undergo; but I no
sooner opened my mouth to engage her to allow you to see her, and
converse with her, but casting at me a terrible look, You are very
bold, said she, to make such a proposal to me; I charge you never to
see me again with such language.

Do not let this cast you down, continued she; I am not easily
disheartened; and if your patience does but hold out, I am hopeful I
shall compass my end. To shorten my story, said the young man, this
good go-between made several fruitless attacks in my behalf on the
proud enemy of my rest. The vexation I suffered inflamed my
distemper to that degree, that my physicians gave me over. I was
considered as a dead man, when the old woman came to recall me to
life.

That nobody might hear what was said, she whispered in my ear,
--Remember the present you owe for the good news I bring you. These
words produced a marvellous effect; I raised myself up in the bed,
and with transport made answer. You shall not go without a present;
but what is the news you bring me? --Dear sir, said she, you shall
not die; I shall speedily have the pleasure to see you in perfect
health, and very well satisfied with me. Yesterday, being Monday, I
went to see the lady you love, and found her in a very good humour.
As soon as I came in, I put on a sad countenance, and fetched many
deep sighs, and began to squeeze out some tears: My good mother,
said she, what is the matter with you? why are you so cast down?
--Alas, my dear and honourable lady, said I, I have been just now
with the young gentleman I spoke to you of the other day; his
business is done; he is giving up his life for love of you; it is a
pity, I assure you, and you have been very cruel. --I am at a loss
to know, replied she, how you charge me to be the cause of his
death. How can I have contributed to it? --How, replied I, did not
you tell me the other day, that he sat down before your window, when
you opened it to water your flower-pot? He then saw that prodigy of
beauty, those charms that your mirror represents to you every day.
From that moment he languished, and his disorder is risen to such a
height, that he is reduced to the deplorable condition I have
mentioned.

You remember well, added I, how rigorously you treated me the last
time I was here, when I was offering to speak to you of his illness,
and to propose a means to rescue him from the danger he was in: when
I took leave of you, I went straight to his house, and he, knew no
sooner by my countenance that I had brought no favourable answer,
than his distemper increased. From that time, madam, he has been
ready to die, and I do not know whether you can save his life now,
though you should take pity on him. This is just what I said to her,
continued the old woman. The fear of your death alarmed her, and I
saw her face change colour. Is what you say true? said she. Has he
actually no other disorder but what was occasioned by the love of
me? --Ah! madam, said I, it is too true; would to God it were false!
--Do you believe, said she, that the hopes of seeing me would at all
contribute to rescue him from the danger he is in? --Perhaps it may,
said I; and if you will give me orders, I will try the remedy.
--Well, said she, sighing, give him hopes of seeing me; but he must
pretend to no other favour from me, unless he aspires to marry me,
and my father gives his consent to it. --Madam, replied I, your
goodness overcomes me: I will go and seek the young gentleman, and
tell him he is to have the pleasure of an interview with you. --The
properest time I can think of, said she, for granting him that
favour, is next Friday, at the time of noon prayers. Let him take
care to observe when my father goes out, and then come and plant
himself over-against the house, if his health permits him to come
abroad. When he comes, I shall see him through my window, and shall
come down and open the door to him: we shall then converse together
during prayer-time, and he must be gone before my father returns.

It is now Tuesday, continued the old lady; you have from this time
to Friday to recover your strength, and make the necessary
dispositions for the interview. While the good old lady was
speaking, I felt my illness decrease; or rather, by the time she had
done. I found myself perfectly well. Here, take this, said I,
reaching out to her my purse, which was full; it is to you alone
that I owe my cure. I reckon this money better employed than all
that I gave to the physicians, who have only tormented me during the
whole course of my illness.

When the lady was gone, I found I had strength enough to get up; and
my relations finding me so well, complimented me upon it, and went
home.

Friday morning the old woman came, just when I was dressing myself,
and choosing out the finest clothes in my wardrobe. I do not ask
you, said she, how you do: what you are about is intimation enough
of your health: but will not you bathe before you go to the first
cadi’s house? --That will take up too much time, said I; I will
content myself with sending for a barber to shave my head and beard.
Immediately I ordered one of my slaves to call a barber that could
do his business cleverly and expeditiously.

The slave brought me this wretch you see here; who came, and after
saluting me, Sir, said he, you look as if you were not well. I told
him I was just recovered from a fit of sickness. I wish, said he,
God may deliver you from all mischance; may his grace always go
along with you. --I hope, said I, he will grant your wish, for which
I am very much obliged to you. --Since you are recovering of a fit
of sickness, said he, I pray God preserve your health; but now pray
let me know what I am to do; I have brought my razors and my
lancets; do you desire to be shaved or to be bled? I replied, I am
just recovered of a fit of sickness, I told you, and so you may
readily judge I only want to be shaved. Come, make haste, do not
lose time in prattling; for I am in haste, and precisely at noon I
am to be at a place.

The barber spent much time in opening his case and preparing his
razors; instead of putting water into the basin, he took a very
handsome astrolabe out of his case, and went very gravely out of my
room to the middle of the yard to take the height of the sun, then
he returned with the same grave pace, and entering my room, Sir,
said he, you will be pleased to know this day is Friday, the 18th of
the moon Safar, in the year 653 [73] from the retreat of our great
prophet from Mecca to Medina, and in the year 7320 [74] of the
epocha of the great Iskender with two horns; and that the
conjunction of Mars and Mercury signifies you cannot choose a better
time than this very day and hour for being shaved. But on the other
hand, the same conjunction is a bad presage to you. I learn from
thence, that this day you run a great risk, not indeed of losing
your life, but of an inconvenience which will attend you while you
live. You are obliged to me for the advice I now give you, to take
care to avoid it; I should be sorry if it befell you.

You may guess, gentlemen, how vexed I was at having fallen into the
hands of such a prattling, impertinent barber; what an unseasonable
adventure it was for a lover preparing for an interview! I was quite
angry. I care not, said I, in anger, for your advice and
predictions; I did not call you to consult your astrology; you came
hither to shave me; shave me, or begone. I will call another barber.
--Sir, said he, with a phlegm that put me out of all patience, what
reason have you to be angry with me? You do not know that all
barbers are not like me; and that you would scarce find such
another, if you made it your business to search. You only sent for a
barber; but here in my person, you have the best barber in Bagdad,
an experienced physician, a very profound chemist, an infallible
astrologer, a finished grammarian, a complete orator, a subtle
logician, a mathematician perfectly well versed in geometry,
arithmetic, astronomy, and all the refinements of algebra; an
historian fully master of the histories of all the kingdoms of the
universe. Besides, I know all parts of philosophy. I have all our
law traditions at my fingers’ ends. I am a poet; I am an
architect; and what is it I am not? There is nothing in nature
hidden from me. Your deceased father, to whose memory I pay a
tribute of tears every time I think of him, was fully convinced of
my merit; he was fond of me, and spoke of me in all companies as the
first man in the world. Out of gratitude and friendship for him, I
am willing to attach myself to you, to take you into my protection,
and guard you from all the evils that your stars may threaten.

When I heard all this stuff I could not forbear laughing,
notwithstanding my anger. You impertinent prattler! said I, will you
have done, and begin to shave me?

Sir, replied the barber to me, you affront me in calling me a
prattler; on the contrary, all the world gives me the honourable
title of Silent. I had six brothers that you might justly have
called prattlers; and that you may know them the better, the name of
the first was Bacbouk, of the second, Bakbarah, of the third,
Bacbac, of the fourth, Alcouz, of the fifth, Alnascar, and of the
sixth, Schacabac. These, indeed, were impertinent chatterers; but
for me, who am a younger brother, I am grave and concise in my
discourse.

For God’s sake, gentlemen, do but suppose you had been in my
place. What could I say, when I saw myself so cruelly situated? Give
him three pieces of gold, said I to the slave that was my
house-keeper, and send him away, that he may disturb me no more; I
will not be shaved this day. --Sir, said the barber, pray what do
you mean by that? I did not come to seek for you, it was you sent
for me; and since it is so, I swear by the faith of a Mussulman, I
will not stir out of these doors till I have shaved you. If you do
not know my value, it is not my fault. Your deceased father did me
more justice. Every time he sent for me to let him blood, he made me
sit down by him, and he was charmed with hearing what fine things I
said to him. I kept him in a continual strain of admiration; I
elevated him; and when I had finished my discourse, My God, cried
he, you are an inexhaustible source of science; no man can reach the
depth of your knowledge. My dear sir, said I again, you do me more
honour than I deserve. If I say any thing that is fine, it is owing
to the favourable audience you vouchsafe me; it is your liberality
that inspires me with the sublime thoughts that have the happiness
to please you. One day, when he was charmed with an admirable
discourse I had made him, Give him, said he, a hundred pieces of
gold, and invest him with one of my richest robes. I received the
present upon the spot, and presently I drew his horoscope, and found
it the happiest in the world. Nay, I carried my gratitude farther; I
let him blood with cunning-glasses.

This was not all; he spun out another harangue that was a full half
hour long. Tired with hearing him, and fretted at the loss of time,
which was almost spent before I was half ready, I did not know what
to say. It is impossible, said I, there should be such another man
in the world, who takes pleasure, as you do, in making people mad.

I thought that I should succeed better, if I dealt mildly with my
barber. In the name of God, said I, leave off all your fine talking,
and despatch me presently; business of the last importance calls me,
as I have told you already. At this, he fell a laughing; it would be
a laudable thing, said he, if our minds were always in the same
state; if we were always wise and prudent; however, I am willing to
believe, that if you are angry with me, it is your distemper has
caused that change in your humour; and for that reason you stand in
need of some instructions, and you cannot do better than to follow
the example of your father and grandfather. They came and consulted
me upon all occasions, and I can say, without vanity, that they
always prized my advice highly. Pray, observe, sir, men never
succeed in their undertakings, without the advice of men of
understanding. A man cannot, says the proverb, be wise, without
receiving advice from the wise. I am entirely at your service, and
you have only to command me.

What! cannot I prevail with you then? said I, interrupting him, to
leave off these long speeches, that tend to nothing but to split my
head in pieces, and to detain me from my business? Shave me, I say,
or begone! With that, I started up in anger, stamping my foot
against the ground.

When he saw I was angry in earnest, Sir, said he, do not be angry;
we are going to begin. He lathered my head, and fell to shaving me;
but he had not given me four strokes of his razor when he stopped,
saying, Sir, you are hasty; you should avoid these transports, that
only come from the devil. I am entitled to some consideration on
account of my age, my knowledge, and my great virtues.

Go on, and shave me, said I, interrupting him again, and talk no
more. That is to say, replied he, you have some urgent business to
go about; I will lay you a wager, I guess right. Why, I told you so
these two hours, said I: you ought to have shaved me before.
Moderate your passion, replied he, perhaps you have not maturely
weighed what you are going about: when things are done
precipitately, they are generally repented of. I wish you would tell
me what mighty business this is you are so earnest upon; I would
tell you my opinion of it; besides, you have time enough, since your
appointment is not till noon, and it wants three hours of that yet.
I do not mind that, said I, persons of honour and of their word are
rather before their time than after. But I forget, that in amusing
myself with reasoning with you, I give into the faults of you
prattling barbers: have done, have done; shave me.

The more haste I was in, the less haste he made. He laid down the
razor, and took up his astrolabe; then laid down his astrolabe, and
took up his razor again.

The barber quitted his razor again and took up his astrolabe a
second time; and so left me half shaved, to go and see precisely
what o’clock it was. Back he came, and then, Sir, said he, I knew
I was not mistaken; it wants three hours of noon. I am sure of it;
or else, all the rules of astronomy are false. Just heaven! cried I,
my patience is at an end. I can bear it no longer. You cursed
barber! you barber of mischief! I can scarce help falling upon you
and strangling you. Softly, sir, said he, very calmly, without being
moved by my passion: You are not afraid of a relapse; be not in a
passion; I am going to shave you this minute. In speaking these
words, he clapped his astrolabe in his case, and took up his razor,
and passing it over the strap which was fixed to his belt, fell to
shaving me again; but all the while he shaved, the dog could not
forbear prattling. If you please, sir, said he, to tell me what is
the business you are going about at noon, I could give you some
advice that may be of use to you. To satisfy the fellow, I told him
I was going to meet some friends at an entertainment at noon, to
make merry with me upon the recovery of my health.

When the barber heard me talk of regaling, God bless you this day,
as well as all other days, cried he: You put me in mind that
yesterday I invited four or five friends to come and eat with me as
this day; indeed I had forgot it, and I have as yet made no
preparation for them. Do not let that trouble you, said I; though I
dine abroad, my larder is always well furnished. I make you a
present of all that it contains; and besides, I will order you as
much wine as you have occasion for, for I have excellent wine in my
cellar; only you must dispatch shaving me: and pray remember it;
whereas my father made you presents to encourage you to speak, I
give you mine to make you hold your tongue.

He was not satisfied with my promise: God reward you, sir, said he,
for your kindness; but pray show me these provisions now, that I may
see if there will be enough to entertain my friends: I would have
them satisfied with the good fare I make them. --I have, said I, a
lamb, six capons, a dozen chickens, and enough to make four courses.
I ordered a slave to bring all before him, with four great pitchers
of wine. It is very well, said the barber; but we shall want fruit,
and sauce for the meat. That I ordered likewise; but then he gave
over shaving, to look over every thing, one after another; and this
survey lasted almost half an hour. I raged and stormed like a
madman, but it signified nothing; the wretch made not the more
haste. However, he took up his razor again, and shaved me for some
minutes; then stopping all on a sudden, I could not have believed,
sir, that you would have been so liberal; I begin to perceive that
your deceased father lives again in you. Most certainly, I do not
deserve the favours with which you have loaded me; and I assure you
I shall have them in perpetual remembrance; for, sir, to let you
know it, I have nothing but what comes from the generosity of such
gentleman as you: in which respect, I am like to Zantout, who rubs
the people in the baths; to Sali, who cries boiled peas in the
streets; to Salout, who sells beans; to Akerscha, who sells greens;
to Aboumecarez, who sprinkles the streets to lay the dust; and to
Cassem, the caliph’s life-guard man. Of all these persons, not one
is apt to be melancholy; they are neither impertinent nor
quarrelsome; they are more contented with their lot than the caliph
in the midst of his court; they are always gay, ready to sing and
dance, and have each of them their peculiar song and dance, with
which they divert the city of Bagdad; but what I esteem most in them
is, that they are no great talkers, no more than your slave, that
has now the honour to speak to you. Here, sir, is the song and dance
of Zantout, who rubs the people in the baths; mind me, pray, and see
if I do not imitate it exactly.

The barber sung the song, and danced the dance of Zantout, and let
me say what I could to oblige him to make an end of his
buffooneries, he did not give over till he imitated, in like manner,
the songs and dances of the other people he had named. After that,
addressing himself to me, I am going, said he, to invite all these
honest men to my house: if you will take my advice, you will join
us, and disappoint your friends yonder, who perhaps are great
talkers, that will only tease you to death with their impertinent
discourse, and make you relapse into a distemper worse than that you
are so lately recovered of; whereas at my house you shall have
nothing but pleasure.

Notwithstanding my anger, I could not forbear laughing at the
fellow’s impertinence. I wish I had no business upon my hands,
said I; I would accept of the proposal you make me; I would go with
all my heart to be merry with you: but I beg to be excused; I am too
much engaged this day; another day I shall be more at leisure, and
then we shall make up that company. Come, finish shaving me, and
make haste home; perhaps your friends are already come to your
house. --Sir, said he, do not refuse me the favour I ask of you;
come and be merry with the good company I am to have: if you were
but once in our company, you would be so pleased with it, you would
forsake your friends to come to us. Let us talk no more of that,
said I; I cannot be your guest.

I found I gained no ground by mild terms. Since you will not come to
my house, replied the barber, you must allow me to go along with
you: I will go and carry these things to my house, where my friends
may eat of them, if they like them, and I will return immediately: I
would not be so uncivil as to leave you alone. You deserve this
piece of complaisance at my hands. --Heavens! cried I, then I shall
not get clear of this troublesome fellow to-day. In the name of the
living God, said I, leave off your unreasonable jargon; go to your
friends, drink, eat, and be merry with them, and leave me at liberty
to go to mine. I have a mind to go alone: I have no occasion for
company: besides, I must needs tell you, the place to which I go is
not a place where you can be received; nobody must come there but I.
--You jest, sir, said he: if your friends have invited you to a
feast, what should prevent you from allowing me to accompany you?
You will please them, I am sure, by carrying thither a man that can
talk comically like me, and knows how to divert company. But say
what you will, I am determined I will go along with you, in spite of
you.

These words, gentlemen, perplexed me much. How shall I get rid of
this cursed barber? thought I to myself. If I persist in
contradicting him, we shall never have done.

Besides, I heard then the first call to noon prayers, and it was
time for me to go. In fine, I resolved to say nothing at all, and to
make as if I consented to his accompanying me. He then made an end
of shaving me, and I said to him, Take some of my servants to carry
these provisions along with you, and return hither; I will stay for
you and shall not go without you.

At last he went, and I dressed myself quickly. I heard the last call
to prayers, and made haste to set out: but the malicious barber, who
guessed my intention, went with my servants only within sight of the
house, and stood there till he saw them enter his house; having hid
himself at the corner of the street, with an intent to observe and
follow me. In fine, when I arrived at the cadi’s door, I looked
back and saw him at the head of the street, which fretted me to the
last degree.

The cadi’s door was half open, and as I went in I saw an old woman
waiting for me, who after she had shut the door, conducted me to the
chamber of the young lady I was in love with; but we had scarce
began our interview, when we heard a noise in the streets. The young
lady put her head to the window, and saw through the gate, that it
was the cadi her father returning already from prayers. At the same
time I looked through the window, and saw the barber sitting
over-against the house, in the same place where I had seen the young
lady before.

I had then two things to fear, the arrival of the cadi, and the
presence of the barber. The young lady mitigated my fear of the
first, by assuring me, the cadi came but very seldom to her chamber,
and as she had foreseen that this misadventure might happen, she had
contrived a way to convey me out safe: but the indiscretion of the
accursed barber made me very uneasy; and you shall hear that this my
uneasiness was not without ground.

As soon as the cadi was come in, he caned one of his slaves that had
deserved it. This slave made a horrid noise, which was heard in the
streets: the barber thought it was I that cried out, and was
maltreated. Prepossessed with this thought, he roared out aloud,
rent his clothes, threw dust upon his head, and called the
neighbourhood to his assistance. The neighbourhood came, and asked
what assistance he wanted. Alas! cried he, they are assassinating my
master, my dear patron; and without saying any thing more, he ran
all the way to my house, with the very same cry in his mouth. From
thence he returned, followed by all my domestics armed with sticks.
They knocked with inconceivable fury at the cadi’s door, and the
cadi sent a slave to see what was the matter; but the slave being
frightened, returned to his master, crying, Sir, above ten thousand
men are going to break into your house by force.

Immediately the cadi himself ran, opened the door, and asked what
they wanted. His venerable presence could not inspire them with
respect. They insolently said to him, You cursed cadi, you dog of a
cadi, what reason have you to assassinate our master? What has he
done to you? --Good people, replied the cadi, for what should I
assassinate your master, whom I do not know, and who has done me no
harm? My house is open to you; come, see and search. --You
bastinadoed him, said the barber; I heard his cries not a minute
ago. --But once more, replied the cadi, what harm could your master
do to me, to oblige me to abuse him after that rate? Is he in my
house? If he is, how came he in, or who could have introduced him?
--Ah! wretched cadi, cried the barber, you and your long beard shall
never make me believe what you say. I know what I say; your daughter
is in love with our master, and appointed him a meeting during the
time of noon prayer: you without doubt have had notice of it; you
returned home, and surprised him, and made your slaves bastinado
him: but this your wicked action shall not pass with impunity; the
caliph shall be acquainted with it, and he will give true and brief
justice. Let him come out; deliver him to us immediately; or if you
do not, we will go and take him out to your shame. --There is no
occasion for so many words, replied the cadi, nor to make so great a
noise: if what you say is true, go and find him out; I give you free
liberty. Thereupon the barber and my domestics rushed into the house
like furies, and looked for me all about.

As I heard all that the barber said to the cadi, I sought for a
place to hide myself, and could find nothing but a great empty
trunk, in which I lay down, and shut it upon me. The barber, after
he had searched every where, came into the chamber where I was, and
opening the trunk, as soon as he saw me, he took it upon his head
and carried it away. He came down a high staircase into a court,
which he crossed hastily, and got to the street door. While he
carried me, the trunk unhappily flew open, and I, not being able to
endure the shame of being exposed to the view and shouts of the mob
that followed us, leaped out into the street with so much haste that
I hurt my leg so, that I have been lame ever since. I was not
sensible how bad it was at first, and therefore got up quickly to
get away from the people, who laughed at me; nay, I threw handfulls
of gold and silver among them, and whilst they were gathering it up,
I made my escape by cross streets and alleys. But the cursed barber,
availing himself of the stratagem that I had made use of to get away
from the mob, followed me close, crying, Stay, sir; why do you run
so fast? If you knew how much I am afflicted at the ill treatment
you received from the cadi, --you, who are so generous, and to whom
I and my friends are so much obliged! Did I not tell you truly, that
you would expose your life by your obstinate refusal to let me go
with you? See what has happened to you, by your own fault; and if I
had not resolutely followed you, to see whither you went, what would
have become of you? Whither do you go, sir? Stay for me.

Thus the wretched barber cried aloud in the streets; it was not
enough for him to have occasioned so great a scandal in the quarter
where the cadi lived, but he would have it known through the whole
town. I was in such a rage, that I had a great mind to have staid
and cut his throat; but considering that that would have perplexed
me farther, I chose another course; for, perceiving that his calling
after me exposed me to vast numbers of people, who crowded to the
doors or windows, or stopped in the street to gaze on me, I entered
into a khan or inn, [75] the chamberlain of which knew me; and
finding him at the gate, whither the noise had brought him, I prayed
him, for the sake of heaven, to hinder that madman from coming in
after me. He promised to do so, and was as good as his word, but not
without a great deal of trouble, for the obstinate barber would go
in, in spite of him, and did not retire without calling him a
thousand names; and after the chamberlain shut the gate, the barber
continued telling all he met what great service he had done me. Thus
I rid myself of that troublesome fellow. After that, the chamberlain
prayed me to tell him my adventure, which I did, and then desired
him to let me have an apartment until I was cured. But, sir, said
he, will it not be more convenient for you to go home? I will not
return thither, said I; for the detestable barber will continue
plaguing me there, and I shall die of vexation to be continually
teased with him. Besides, after what has befallen me to-day, I
cannot think of staying any longer in this town; I must go whither
my ill-fortune leads me; and actually, when I was cured, I took all
the money I thought necessary for my travels, and gave the rest of
my estate among my kindred.

Thus, gentlemen, I left Bagdad, and came hither. I had ground to
hope that I should not meet this pernicious barber in a country so
far from my own, and yet I find him amongst you. Be not surprised
then at my haste to be gone; you may easily judge how unpleasant to
me is the sight of a man, who was the occasion of my lameness, and
of my being reduced to the melancholy necessity of living so far
from my kindred, friends, and country. When he had spoken these
words, the lame young man rose up and went out. The master of the
house conducted him to the gate, and told him he was sorry that he
had given him, though innocently, so great a subject of
mortification.

When the young man was gone, continued the tailor, we were all
astonished at the story, and, turning to the barber, told him he was
very much to blame, if what we had just heard were true. Gentlemen,
answered he, raising up his head, which till then he had held down,
my silence during the young man’s discourse is sufficient to
testify that he advanced nothing that was not true: but for all that
he has said to you, I maintain that I ought to have done what I did;
I leave you to be judges of it. Did not he throw himself into
danger, and could he have come off so well without my assistance? He
may think himself happy to get off with the lame leg. Did not I
expose myself to greater danger to get him out of a house, where I
thought he was ill-treated? Has he any reason to complain of me, and
abuse me so? This is what one gets by serving unthankful people. He
accuses me of being a prattling fellow, which is a mere slander: of
seven brothers, I speak least, and have most wit to my share; and to
convince you of it, gentlemen, I need only to tell my own story and
theirs. Honour me, I beseech you, with your attention.




The Story of the Barber.


In the reign of the caliph Monstanser Bilah, [76] continued he, a
prince so famous for his vast liberality towards the poor, ten
highwaymen infested the roads about Bagdad, and for a long time
committed unheard-of robberies and cruelties. The caliph, having
notice of this, sent for the judge of the police, some days before
the feast of Bairam, and ordered him, on pain of death, to bring all
the ten to him.

The judge of the police used so much diligence, and sent so many
people in pursuit of the ten robbers, that they were taken on the
very day of Bairam. I was walking then on the banks of the Tigris,
and saw ten men richly apparelled go into a boat. I might have known
they were robbers, had I observed the guards that were with them;
but I looked only to them, and thinking they were people that had a
mind to spend the festival-day in jollity, I entered the boat with
them, without saying one word, in hopes they would allow me to be
one of the company. We went down the Tigris, and landed before the
caliph’s palace: I had time then to consider with myself, and to
find my mistake. When we came out of the boat, we were surrounded by
a new troop of the judge of the police’s guard, who bound us all,
and carried us before the caliph. I suffered myself to be bound as
well as the rest, without speaking one word: for to what purpose
should I have spoken, or made any resistance? That had been the way
to have got myself ill-treated by the guards, who would not have
listened to me; for they are brutish fellows, who will hear no
reason: I was with the robbers, and that was enough to make them
believe me to be one of them.

When we came before the caliph, he ordered the ten highwaymen’s
heads to be cut off immediately. The executioner drew us up in a
file within reach of his arm, and by good fortune I was the last. He
cut off the heads of the ten highwaymen, beginning at the first; and
when he came to me, he stopt. The caliph perceiving that he did not
strike me, grew angry: Did not I command thee, said he, to cut off
the heads of ten highwaymen, and why hast thou cut off but nine?
--Commander of the faithful, said he, Heaven preserve me from
disobeying your majesty’s orders: here are ten corpses upon the
ground, and as many heads which I cut off; your majesty may count
them. When the caliph saw that what the executioner said was true,
he looked upon me with amazement, and perceiving that I had not the
face of a highwayman, said to me, Good old man, how came you to be
among those wretches, who have deserved a thousand deaths? I
answered, Commander of the faithful, I shall make a true confession.
This morning I saw those ten persons, whose punishment is a proof of
your majesty’s justice, take boat: I embarked with them, thinking
they were men going to celebrate this day, which is the most
distinguished in our religion.

The caliph could not forbear laughing at my adventure; and instead
of treating me as a prattling fellow, as this lame young man did, he
admired my discretion and steady silence. Commander of the faithful,
said I, your majesty need not wonder at my keeping silence on such
an occasion as would have made another apt to speak: I make it a
particular profession of holding my peace, and upon that account I
have acquired the glorious title of Silent; by which I am
distinguished from my six brothers. This is the effect of my
philosophy; and, in a word, in this virtue consists my glory and
happiness. I am very glad, said the caliph, smiling, that they gave
you a title that you know how to make such good use of. But tell me,
what sort of men were your brothers: were they like you? By no
means, said I; they were all of them more given to prating one than
another. And as to their persons, there was still a greater
difference betwixt them and me. The first was hump-backed; the
second had rotten teeth; the third had but one eye; the fourth was
blind; the fifth had his ears cut off, and the sixth had hare-lips.
They have met with such adventures as would enable you to judge of
their characters, had I the honour to tell them to your majesty; and
since the caliph seemed desirous to hear their several stories, I
went on without waiting his commands.




The Story of the Barber’s eldest Brother.


Sir, said I, my eldest brother whose name was Bacbouc the Hump-back,
was a tailor by trade: when he came out of his apprenticeship, he
hired a shop over against a mill, and having but very little
business, he could scarcely maintain himself. The miller, on the
contrary, was very wealthy, and had a very handsome wife. One day,
as my brother was at work in his shop, he lifted up his head and saw
the miller’s wife looking out of the window, and was charmed with
her beauty. The woman took no notice of him, but shut her window,
and came no more to it all that day. The poor tailor did nothing but
lift up his eyes towards the mill all day long. He pricked his
finger oftener than once, and his work that day was not very
regular. At night, when he was to shut his shop, he could scarce
tell how to do it, because he still hoped the miller’s wife would
come to the window once more; but at last he was forced to shut up,
and go home to his little house, where he passed but a very
uncomfortable night. He got up betimes in the morning, and ran to
his shop, in hopes to see his mistress again; but he was no happier
than the day before, for the miller’s wife did not appear at the
window above a minute in the whole day, but that minute made the
tailor the most amorous man that ever lived. The third day he had
some more ground of satisfaction, for the miller’s wife cast her
eyes upon him by chance, and surprised him as he was gazing at her,
which convinced her what passed in his mind.

No sooner did the miller’s wife perceive my brother’s
inclination, than instead of being vexed at it, she resolved to
divert herself with it. She looked upon him with a smiling
countenance, and my brother looked upon her in the same manner, but
after such an odd sort, that the miller’s wife presently shut her
window, lest her loud laughter should have made him sensible that
she only ridiculed him. Poor Bacbouc interpreted her carriage to his
own advantage, and flattered himself that she looked upon him with
pleasure.

The miller’s wife resolved to make sport with my brother: she had
a piece of very fine stuff, with which she had a long time designed
to make her a suit; she wrapt it up in a fine embroidered silk
handkerchief, and sent it him by a young slave whom she kept; who
being taught her lesson, comes to the tailor’s shop, and tells
him, My mistress gives you her service, and prays you to make her a
suit of this stuff according to this pattern; she changes her
clothes often, so that her custom will be profitable to you. My
brother doubted not that the miller’s wife loved him, and thought
that she sent him work so soon after what had passed betwixt them,
only to signify that she knew his mind, and to convince him that he
had obtained her favour. My brother being of this opinion, charged
the slave to tell her mistress, that he would lay aside all work for
her’s, and that the suit should be ready next morning. He worked
at it with so much diligence, that he finished it the same day. Next
morning, the young slave came to see if the suit was ready. Bacbouc
gave it to her neatly folded up, telling her, I am too much
concerned to please your mistress to neglect her suit; I would
engage her by my diligence to employ no other but myself for the
time to come. The young slave went some steps as if she had intended
to go away, and then coming back, whispered to my brother, I had
forgot part of my commission; my mistress charged me to make her
compliments to you, and to ask, how you passed the night; as for
her, poor woman, she loves you so, that she could not sleep. --Tell
her, answered my silly brother, I have so strong a passion for her,
that for these four nights I have not slept one wink. --After such a
compliment from the miller’s wife, my brother thought she would
not let him languish long in the expectation of her favours.

About a quarter of an hour after, the slave returned to my brother
with a piece of satin: My mistress, said she, is very well pleased
with her suit; nothing in the world can fit her better; and as it
was very handsome, she would not wear it without a new petticoat;
she prays you to make her one, as soon as you can, of this piece of
satin. --Enough, said Bacbouc; I will do it before I leave my shop;
you shall have it in the evening. The miller’s wife showed herself
often at her window, and was very prodigal of her charms, to
encourage my brother. You would have laughed to have seen him work.
The petticoat was soon made, and the slave came for it, but brought
the tailor no money, neither for the trimming he had bought for the
suit, nor for the making. In the mean time, this unfortunate lover,
whom they only amused, though he could not see it, had eat nothing
all that day, and was forced to borrow money at night to buy his
supper. Next morning, as soon as he arrived at his shop, the young
slave came to tell him, that the miller wanted to speak to him. My
mistress, said she, has told him so much in your praise, when she
showed him your work, that he has a mind you should work also for
him; she does it on purpose, that the connexion she wished to form
betwixt you and him may crown your mutual wishes with success. My
brother was easily persuaded, and went to the mill with the slave.
The miller received him very kindly, and showed him a piece of
cloth, told him he wanted shirts, bid him make it into twenty, and
give him again what was left.

My brother had work enough for five or six days to make twenty
shirts for the miller, who afterwards gave him another piece of
cloth to make him as many pair of drawers. When they were finished,
Bacbouc carried them to the miller, who asked him what he must have
for his pains. My brother answered, he would be content with twenty
drachms of silver. The miller immediately called the young slave,
and bid her bring him his weights, to see if his money was right.
The slave, who had her lesson, looked at my brother with an angry
countenance, to signify to him that he would spoil all if he took
any money. He knew her meaning, and refused to take any, though he
wanted it so much, that he was forced to borrow money to buy the
thread that sewed the shirts and drawers. When he left the miller,
he came to me to borrow money to live on, and told me they did not
pay him. I gave him some copper money I had in my purse, and upon
that he subsisted for some days: it is true, indeed, he lived upon
nothing but broth, nor had he his fill of that.

One day he went to the miller, who was busy at his work, and
thinking my brother came for money, he offered him some; but the
young slave being present, made him another sign not to take it,
which he complied with, and told the miller he did not come for his
money, but only to know how he did. The miller thanked him, and gave
him an upper garment to make. Bacbouc carried it him next day. When
the miller drew out his purse, the young slave gave my brother the
usual sign; on which he said to the miller, Neighbour, there is no
haste; we will reckon another time: so that the poor ninny went to
his shop again, with three terrible distempers upon him, love,
hunger, and want of money. The miller’s wife was not only
avaricious, but ill-natured; for, not content to cheat my brother of
his due, she provoked her husband to revenge himself upon him for
making love to her, which they accomplished thus. The miller invited
Bacbouc one night to supper, and after giving him a very sorry
treat, said to him, Brother, it is too late for you to go home; you
had better stay here all night; and then he carried him to a place
in the mill, where there was a bed: there he left him, and went to
bed with his wife. About the middle of the night, the miller went to
my brother, and said, Neighbour, are you asleep? My mule is ill, and
I have a quantity of corn to grind; you will do me a great kindness
if you will turn the mill in her stead. Bacbouc, to shew his
good-nature, told him he was ready to do him that piece of service,
if he would show him how. Then the miller tied him by the middle to
the mule’s place, and whipping him soundly over the back, said to
him, Go, neighbour. --Ho! said my brother, why do you beat me? --It
is to make you brisk, said the miller; for without a whip my mule
will not go. Bacbouc was amazed at this sort of treatment, but durst
not complain. When he had gone five or six rounds, he would fain
have rested; but the miller gave him a dozen sound lashes, saying,
Courage, neighbour! do not stop, pray; you must go on without taking
breath, otherwise you will spoil my meal.

The miller obliged my brother to turn the mill thus all night. About
break of day he left him without untying him, and went to his
wife’s chamber. Bacbouc continued there for some time, and at last
the young slave came and untied him. Ah! said the treacherous
wretch, how my mistress and I pitied you! We had no hand in this
wicked trick which her husband has played you. The wretched Bacbouc
answered her not a word, he was so much fatigued with work and
blows; but crept home to his house, resolving never to think more of
the miller’s wife.

The telling of this story, said the barber, made the caliph laugh.
Go home, said he to me; I have ordered something to be given you to
make up for the loss of the good dinner you expected. --Commander of
the faithful, said I, I pray your majesty to let me stay till I have
told the story of my other brothers. The caliph having signified by
his silence that he was willing to hear me, I went on thus:

[Illustration: BAKBARAH IN THE LADY’S APARTMENT.]




The Story of the Barber’s second Brother.


My second brother, who was called Backbarah the toothless, going one
day through the city, met an old woman in a distant street: she came
up to him, and said, I want one word with you; pray stop a moment.
He did so, and asked her what she would have. If you have time to
come along with me, said she, I will bring you into a stately
palace, where you shall see a lady as fair as the day. She will
receive you with much pleasure, and give you a treat with excellent
wine. I need say no more to you. --But is what you say true? replied
my brother. --I am no lying hussy, replied the old woman: I say
nothing to you but what is true. But hark, I have something to ask
of you. You must be prudent, say but little, and be extremely
polite. Backbarah agreed to all this. The old woman went before, and
he followed after. They came to the gate of a great palace, where
there was abundance of officers and domestics. Some of them would
have stopt my brother, but no sooner did the old woman speak to
them, than they let him pass. Then turning to my brother, she said
to him, You must remember that the young lady I bring you to loves
good-nature and modesty, and cannot endure to be contradicted; if
you please her in that, you may be sure to obtain of her what you
please. Backbarah thanked her for this advice, and promised to
follow it.

She brought him into a fine apartment of a great square building,
answerable to the magnificence of the palace. There was a gallery
round it, and a very fine garden in the middle. The old woman made
him sit down upon a handsome sofa, and bid him stay a moment, till
she went to tell the young lady of his being come.

My brother, who had never been in such a stately palace before,
gazed upon the fine things that he saw; and judging of his good
fortune by the magnificence of the palace, he was scarcely able to
contain himself for joy. By and by he heard a great noise,
occasioned by a troop of merry slaves, who came towards him with
loud fits of laughter, and in the middle of them, he perceived a
young lady of extraordinary beauty, who was easily known to be their
mistress by the respect they paid her. Backbarah, who expected
private conversation with the lady, was extremely surprised when he
saw so much company with her. In the mean time the slaves put on a
grave countenance when they drew near; and when the young lady came
up to the sofa, my brother rose up and made her a low bow. She took
the upper hand, prayed him to sit down, and said to him with a
smiling countenance, I am mightily glad to see you, and wish you all
the happiness you can desire. --Madam, replied Backbarah, I cannot
desire a greater happiness than to be in your company. --You seem to
be of a pleasant humour, said she, and to be disposed to pass the
time pleasantly.

She forthwith commanded a collation to be brought; and immediately a
table was covered with several baskets of fruits and sweetmeats. The
lady sat down at the table with the slaves and my brother; and he
being placed just over-against her, when he opened his mouth to eat,
she perceived he had no teeth; and taking notice of it to her
slaves, she and they laughed at him heartily. Backbarah from time to
time lifted up his head to look at her, and perceiving her laugh,
thought it was for joy of his company, and flattered himself that
she would speedily send away her slaves, and be with him alone. She
guessed his thoughts, and pleasing herself to flatter him in his
mistake, she gave him abundance of pleasant language, and presented
him the best of every thing with her own hand. The treat being
ended, they rose from the table; ten slaves took musical
instruments, and began to play and sing, and others to dance. My
brother, to please them, danced likewise, and the lady danced with
them. After they had danced some time, they sat down to take breath,
and the young lady, calling for a glass of wine, looked upon my
brother with a smiling countenance, to signify that she was going to
drink his health. He rose up, and stood while she drank. When she
had done, instead of giving back the glass, she ordered it to be
filled, and presented it to my brother, that he might pledge her.

My brother took the glass from the young lady’s hand, which he
kissed at the same time, and stood and drank to her, in return for
the favour she had done him. Then the young lady made him sit down
by her, and began to caress him. She put her hand behind his head,
and gave him some tips from time to time with her fingers. Ravished
with those favours, he thought himself the happiest man in the
world, and had a great mind to toy also with the charming lady, but
durst not take the liberty before so many slaves, who had their eyes
upon him, and laughed at their lady’s wanton tricks. The young
lady continued to tip him with her fingers, but at last gave him
such a sound box on the ear, that he grew angry at it; the colour
came in his face, and he rose up to sit at a greater distance from
such a rude play-fellow. Then the old woman who brought him thither
gave him a look, to let him know that he was in the wrong, and that
he had forgot the advice she gave him to be very complaisant. He
owned his fault, and, in order to make amends, he went near the
young lady again, and pretended that he did not go away out of any
ill-humour. She drew him by the arm, made him sit down by her again,
and gave him a thousand malicious squeezes. Her slaves took their
part in the diversion: one gave poor Backbarah several fillips on
the nose with all her might; another pulled him by the ears, as if
she would have pulled them off; and others boxed him so, as might
show they were not in jest. My brother bore all this with admirable
patience, affecting a gay air, and looking at the old woman, said to
her with a forced smile, You told me, indeed, that I should find the
lady perfectly kind, pleasant, and charming; I am mightily obliged
to you! --All this is nothing, replied the old woman: let her go on;
you will see other things by and by. Then the young lady said to
him, Brother, you are a brave man; I am glad to find you are so good
humoured and complaisant to bear with my little caprices, and that
your humour is so conformable to mine. --Madam, replied Backbarah,
who was charmed with this discourse, I am no more myself, I am
wholly yours; you may dispose of me as you please. --How you oblige
me, said the lady, by such submission! I am very well pleased with
you, and would have you be so with me. Bring him perfume, said she,
and rose water. Upon this, two slaves went out, and returned
speedily; one with a silver casket, filled with the best of
aloes-wood, with which she perfumed him; and the other with
rose-water, which she sprinkled on his face and hands. My brother
was quite beside himself at this handsome treatment. After this
ceremony, the young lady commanded the slaves, who had already
played on their instruments and sung, to renew their concerts. They
obeyed, and in the mean time the lady called another slave, and
ordered her to carry my brother with her, and do what she knew, and
bring him back to her again. Backbarah, who heard this order, got up
quickly, and going to the old woman, who also rose up to go along
with him and the slave, prayed her to tell him what they were to do
with him. My mistress is only curious, replied the old woman,
softly; she has a mind to see how you look in a woman’s dress; and
this slave, who has orders to carry you with her, has orders to
paint your eyebrows, to cut off your whiskers, and to dress you like
a woman. --You may paint my eyebrows as much as you please, said my
brother; I agree to that, because I can wash it off again; but to
shave me, you know I must not allow. How can I appear abroad again
without mustachios? --Beware of refusing what is asked of you, said
the old woman: you will spoil your fortune, which is now in as
favourable a train as heart can wish. The lady loves you, and has a
mind to make you happy; and will you, for a nasty whisker, renounce
the most delicious favours that man can obtain? --Backbarah listened
to the old woman, and without saying a word, went to a chamber with
the slave, where they painted his eyebrows with red, cut off his
whiskers, and were going to do the like with his beard. My
brother’s patience then began to fail: Oh! said he, I will never
part with my beard. The slave told him that it was to no purpose to
have parted with his whiskers, if he would not also part with his
beard, which could never agree with a woman’s dress; and she
wondered that a man, who was upon the point to enjoy the finest lady
in Bagdad, should be concerned about his beard. The old woman
threatened him with the loss of the young lady’s favour; so that
at last he let them do what they would. When he was dressed like a
woman, they brought him before the young lady, who laughed so
heartily when she saw him, that she fell backward on the sofa where
she sat. The slaves laughed and clapped their hands, so that my
brother was quite out of countenance. The young lady got up, and
still laughing, said to him, After so much complaisance for me, I
should be very much to blame not to love you with all my heart: but
there is one thing more you must do for me, and that is, to dance as
we do. He obeyed, and the young lady and her slaves danced with him,
laughing as if they had been mad. After they had danced some time
with him, they all fell upon the poor wretch, and did so box and
kick him, that he fell down like one out of his senses. The old
woman helped him up again; and that he might not have time to think
of his ill treatment, she bid him take courage, and whispered in his
ear, that all his sufferings were at an end, and that he was just
about to receive his reward.

You have only one thing more to do, and that is but a small one. You
must know that my mistress has a custom, when she has drank a
little, as you see she has done to-day, to let nobody that she loves
come near her, except they be stripped to their shirt; and when they
have done so, she takes a little advantage of them, and begins
running before them through the gallery, and from chamber to
chamber, till they catch her. This is one more of her humours. What
advantage soever she takes of you, considering your nimbleness and
inclination, you will soon overtake her: strip yourself then to your
shirt; undress yourself without ceremony.

My silly brother, said the barber, had done too much to hesitate at
any thing now. He undressed himself; and in the mean time the young
lady was stripped to her shift and under-petticoat, that she might
run the more nimbly. When they were ready to run, the young lady
took the advantage of twenty paces, and then fell to running with
surprising swiftness: my brother followed her as fast as he could,
the slaves in the mean time laughing heartily, and clapping their
hands. The young lady, instead of losing ground, gained upon my
brother; she made him run two or three times round the gallery, and
then running into a long dark entry, got away by a passage which she
knew. Backbarah, who still followed her, having lost sight of her in
the entry, was obliged to slacken his pace, because of the darkness
of the place: at last perceiving a light he ran towards it, and went
out at a door, which was immediately shut upon him. You may imagine
how he was surprised to find himself in a street inhabited by
curriers; and they were no less surprised to see him in his shirt,
his eyes painted red, and without beard or mustachios. They began to
clap their hands and shouted at him, and some of them ran after him
and lashed his buttocks with leather straps. They then took him and
set him upon an ass which they met by chance, and carried him
through the town, exposed to the laughter of the people.

To complete his misfortune, as he went by the judge’s house, he
would needs know the cause of the tumult. The curriers told him,
that they saw him come in that condition out at the gate of the
apartment of the grand vizier’s women, which opened into the
street; upon which the judge ordered unfortunate Backbarah to have a
hundred blows with a cane on the soles of his feet, and sent him out
of the town, with orders never to return again.

Thus, commander of the faithful, said I to the caliph Monstanser
Billah, I have given an account of the adventure of my second
brother, who did not know that our greatest ladies divert themselves
sometimes by putting such tricks upon young people, who are so
foolish as to be caught in the snare.

The barber, without leaving off, told the story of his third brother
in the following manner.




The Story of the Barber’s third Brother.


Commander of the faithful, said he to the caliph, my third brother,
whose name was Backbac, was blind, and his evil destiny reduced him
to beg from door to door. He had been so long accustomed to walk
through the streets alone, that he wanted none to lead him. He had a
custom to knock at people’s doors, and not to answer till they
opened to him. One day he knocked thus at a door, and the master of
the house, who was alone, cried, Who is there? My brother gave no
answer, and knocked a second time. The master of the house asked
again and again, Who is there? but to no purpose: nobody answered.
Upon which he came down, opened the door, and asked my brother what
he wanted. Give me something for Heaven’s sake, said Backbac.
--You seem to be blind, replied the master of the house. Yes, to my
sorrow, said my brother. Give me your band, said the master of the
house. My brother did so, thinking he was going to give him alms;
but he only took him by the hand to lead him up to his chamber.
Backbac thought he had been carrying him to dine with him, as many
other people had done. When they came up to the chamber, the man let
go his hand, and sitting down, asked him again what he wanted. I
have already told you, said Backbac, that I want something for
God’s sake. --Good blind man, replied the master of the house, all
that I can do for you is to wish that God may restore you your
sight. --You might have told me that at the door, said my brother,
and not have given me the trouble to have come up stairs. --And why,
fool, said the man of the house, do not you answer at first, when
people ask you who is there? Why do you give any body the trouble to
come and open the door when they speak to you? --What will you do
with me then? said my brother. --I tell you again, said the man of
the house, I have nothing to give you. --Help me down the stairs
then, replied Backbac, as you helped me up. --The stairs are before
you, said the man of the house, and you may go down by yourself if
you will. My brother attempted to go down, but missing a step about
the middle of the stairs, he fell to the bottom, and hurt his head
and his back: he got up again with a great deal of difficulty, and
went out cursing the master of the house, who laughed at his fall.

As my brother went out of the house, two blind men, his companions,
were going by, knew him by his voice, and asked him what was the
matter. He told them what had happened to him, and afterwards said,
I have eat nothing to day: I conjure you to go along with me to my
house, that I may take some of the money that we three have in
common to buy me something for supper. The two blind men agreed to
it, and they went home with him.

You must know that the master of the house where my brother was so
ill used was a highwayman, and of a cunning and malicious
disposition. He heard at his window what Backbac had said to his
companions, and therefore came down and followed them to my
brother’s house. The blind men being sat down, Backbac said to
them, Brothers, we must shut the door, and take care there be no
stranger with us. At this the highwayman was much perplexed; but
perceiving by chance a rope hanging down from a beam, he caught hold
of it, and hung by it, while the blind men shut the door, and felt
about the room with their sticks. When they had done this, and sat
down again in their places, the highwayman left his rope, and sat
down softly by my brother; who thinking himself alone with his blind
comrades, said to them, Brothers, since you have trusted me with the
money which we all three have been gathering a long time, I will
show you that I am not unworthy of the trust that you repose in me.
The last time we reckoned, you know we had ten thousand drachms, and
that we put them into ten bags; I will show you that I have not
touched one of them; and having said so, he put his hand among some
old clothes, and taking out the bags one after another, gave them to
his comrades, saying, There they are; you may judge by their weight
that they are whole, or you may tell them if you please. His
comrades answered there was no need, they did not mistrust him; so
he opened one of the bags, and took out ten drachms, and each of the
other blind men did the like.

My brother put the bags into their place again: after which, one of
the blind men said to him, There is no need to lay out any thing for
supper, for I have got as much victuals from good people as will
serve us all three. At the same time he took out of his bag bread
and cheese, and some fruit, and, putting all upon the table, they
began to eat. --The highwayman, who sat at my brother’s right
hand, picked out the best, and eat with them; but, whatever care he
took to make no noise, Backbac heard his chaps going, and cried out
immediately, We are undone; there is a stranger among us: and having
said so, he stretched out his hand, and caught hold of the
highwayman by the arm, cried out, Thieves, fell upon him, and boxed
him. The other blind men fell upon him in like manner, and the
highwayman defended himself as well as he could; and being young and
vigorous, and having the advantage of his eyes, he gave furious
blows, sometimes to one, sometimes to another, as he could come at
them, and cried out, Thieves, louder than they did. The neighbours
came running at the noise, broke open the door, and had much ado to
separate the combatants; but having at last succeeded, they asked
the cause of their quarrel. My brother, who still had hold of the
highwayman, cried out. Gentlemen, this man I have hold on is a
thief, and stole in with us on purpose to rob us of the little money
we have. The thief, who shut his eyes as soon as the neighbours
came, feigned himself blind, and cried out, Gentlemen, he is a liar.
I swear to you by Heaven, and by the life of the caliph, that I am
their companion, and they refuse to give me my just share. They have
all three fallen upon me, and I demand justice. The neighbours would
not interfere in their quarrel, but carried them all before the
judge.

When they came before the magistrate, the highwayman, without
staying to be examined, cried out, still feigning himself blind,
Sir, since you are deputed to administer justice by the caliph, whom
God prosper, I declare to you that we are equally criminal, my three
comrades and I; but we have all engaged, upon oath, to confess
nothing except we be bastinadoed; so that if you would know our
crime, you need only order us to be bastinadoed, and begin with me.
My brother would have spoken, but was not allowed to do so; and the
highwayman was put under the bastinado.

The robber being under the bastinado, had the courage to bear twenty
or thirty blows; when, pretending to be overcome with pain, he first
opened one eye, and then the other, and crying out for mercy, begged
the judge would put a stop to the blows. --The judge perceiving that
he looked upon him with his eyes open, was much surprised at it, and
said to him, Rogue, what is the meaning of this miracle? Sir,
replied the highwayman, I will discover to you an important secret,
if you pardon me, and give me, as a pledge that you will keep your
word, the seal-ring which you have on your finger: I am ready to
declare the whole mystery. The judge consented, gave him his ring,
and promised him pardon. Under this promise, said the highwayman, I
must confess to you, sir, that I and my three comrades do all of us
see very well. We feigned ourselves to be blind, that we might
freely enter people’s houses, and into women’s apartments, where
we abuse their weakness. I must further confess to you, that by this
trick we have gained together ten thousand drachms. This day I
demanded of my partners two thousand five hundred that belonged to
me as my share; but they refused because I told them I would leave
them, and they were afraid I should accuse them. Upon my pressing
still to have my share, they all three fell upon me; for which I
appeal to those people who brought us before you. I expect from your
justice, sir, that you will make them deliver me the two thousand
five hundred drachms which is my due; and if you have a mind that my
comrades should confess the truth, you must order them three times
as many blows as I have had, and you will find they will open their
eyes as well as I did.

My brother and the other two blind men would have cleared themselves
of this horrid cheat, but the judge would not hear them: Villains,
said he, do you feign yourselves blind then, and, under that pretext
of moving their compassion, cheat people, and commit such crimes? He
is a cheat, cried my brother, and we take God to witness that none
of us can see.

All that my brother could say was in vain, his comrades and he
received each of them two hundred blows. The judge looked when they
should have opened their eyes and ascribed to their obstinacy what
really they could not do. All the while, the highwayman said to the
blind men, Poor fools that you are, open your eyes, and do not
suffer yourselves to be beat to death. Then addressing himself to
the judge, said, I perceive, sir, that they will be maliciously
obstinate to the last, and will never open their eyes. They have a
mind certainly to avoid the shame of reading their own condemnation
in the face of every one that looks upon them; it were better, if
you think fit, to pardon them, and to send some person along with me
for the ten thousand drachms they have hid.

The judge did so, gave the highwayman two thousand five hundred
drachms, and kept the rest himself; and as for my brother and his
two companions, he thought he showed them a great deal of pity by
sentencing them only to be banished. As soon as I heard what befell
my brother, I ran after him; he told me his misfortune, and I
brought him back secretly to the town. I could easily have justified
him to the judge, and have got the highwayman punished as he
deserved, but durst not attempt it, for fear of bringing myself into
trouble. Thus I finished the sad adventure of my honest blind
brother. The caliph laughed at it as much as at those he had heard
before, and ordered again, that something should be given me; but
without staying for it, I began the story of my fourth brother.




The story of the Barber’s fourth Brother.


Alcouz was the name of the fourth brother, who lost one of his eyes
upon an occasion that I shall have the honour to relate to your
majesty. He was a butcher by profession, and had a particular way of
teaching rams to fight, by which he gained the acquaintance and
friendship of the chief lords of the country, who loved that sport,
and for that end kept rams at their houses; he had, beside, a very
good trade, and had his shop always full of the best meat, because
he was very rich, and spared no cost for the best of every sort. One
day, when he was in his shop, an old man, with a long white beard,
came and bought six pounds of meat of him, gave him money for it,
and went his way. My brother thought the money so fine, so white,
and so well coined, that he put it apart by itself. The same old man
came every day for five months together, bought a like quantity of
meat, and paid for it in the same sort of money, which my brother
continued to lay apart by itself.

At the end of five months, Alcouz having a mind to buy a parcel of
sheep, and to pay for them in this fine money, opened his chest; but
instead of finding his money, was extremely surprised to see nothing
in the place where he had laid it but a parcel of leaves clipped
round: he beat his head and cried out aloud, which presently brought
the neighbours about him, who were as much surprised as he, when he
told them the story. Oh! cried my brother, weeping, that this
treacherous old fellow would come now with his hypocritical looks!
He had scarce done speaking when he saw him coming at a distance,
ran to him, and laid hands on him: Mussulmen! cried he, as load as
he could, help! hear what a cheat this wicked fellow has put upon
me, and, at the some time, told a great crowd of people who came
about him, what he had formerly told his neighbours. When he had
done, the old man said to him very gravely and calmly, You had
better let me go, and by that means make amends for the affront you
have put upon me before so many people, for fear I should put a
greater affront upon you, which I should be sorry to do. How, said
my brother, what have you to say against me? I am an honest man in
my business, and fear not you, nor any body. You would have me speak
out then, said the old man, in the same tone; and turning to the
people, said to them, Know, good people, that this fellow, instead
of selling mutton, as he ought to do, sells man’s flesh. You are a
cheat, said my brother. No, no, said the old man; good people, this
very minute that I am speaking to him, there is a man with his
throat cut hung up in the shop like a sheep; do any of you go
thither, and see if what I say be not true.

Just before my brother had opened his chest he had killed a sheep,
dressed it, and exposed it in the shop, according to custom. He
protested that what the old man said was false; but notwithstanding
all his protestations, the credulous mob, prejudiced against a man
accused of such a heinous crime, would go to see whether the matter
was true. They obliged my brother to quit the old man, laid hold of
him, and ran like madmen into his shop, where they saw a man hung up
with his throat cut, as the old man had told them; for he was a
magician and deceived the eyes of all people, as he did my brother,
when he made him take leaves instead of money. At this sight, one of
those who held Alcouz, gave him a great blow with his fist, and said
to him, Thou wicked villain! Dost thou make us eat men’s flesh
instead of mutton? And at the same time, the old man gave him
another blow, which beat out one of his eyes, and every body that
could get near him beat him; and not content with that, they carried
him before a judge, with the pretended carcass of the man to be
evidence against him. Sir, said the old magician to the judge, we
have brought you a man, who is so barbarous as to murder people, and
to sell their flesh instead of mutton; the public expects that you
shall punish him in an exemplary manner. The judge heard my brother
with patience, but would believe nothing of the story of the money
changed into leaves, called my brother a cheat, told him he would
believe his own eyes, and ordered him to receive five hundred blows.
He afterwards made him tell where his money was, took it all from
him, and banished him for ever, after having made him ride three
days through the city upon a camel, exposed to the insults of the
people.

I was not at Bagdad when this tragical adventure befell my fourth
brother. He retired into a remote place, where he lay concealed till
he was cured of the blows with which his back was terribly mauled.
When he was able to walk, he went by night to a certain town where
nobody knew him; and there he took a lodging, from whence he seldom
went out. But being weary of this confined life, he went to walk in
one of the suburbs, where all of a sudden he heard a great noise of
horsemen coming behind him. He was then by chance near the gate of a
great house; and fearing, after what had befallen him, that these
horsemen were pursuing him, he opened the gate, in order to hide
himself; and after he shut it, came into a great court, where
immediately two servants came, and collaring him, said, Heaven be
praised, that you have come of your own accord to surrender yourself
to us! You have frightened us so much these three last nights, that
we could not sleep nor would you have spared our lives, if we had
not prevented you. You may very well imagine my brother was much
surprised at this compliment. Good people, said he, I know not what
you mean; you certainly take me for some body else. No, no, replied
they: we know that you and your comrades are great robbers: you were
not contented to rob our master of all that he had, and to reduce
him to beggary, but you had a mind to take his life. Let us see a
little if you have not a knife about you, which you had in your hand
when you pursued us last night; and having said this, they searched
him, and found he had a knife. Ho! ho! cried they, laying hold of
him, and dare you say that you are not a robber? Why, said my
brother, cannot a man carry a knife about him without being a
highwayman? If you will hearken to my story, continued he, instead
of having so bad an opinion of me, you will be touched with
compassion at my misfortunes. But far from hearkening to him, they
fell upon him, trod upon him, took away his clothes, and tore his
shirt. Then seeing the scars on his back, O dog! said they,
redoubling their blows, would you have us believe you are an honest
man when your back shows us the contrary? --Alas! said my brother,
my crimes must be very great, since after having been abused already
so unjustly, I am abused again a second time without being more
culpable!

The two servants, no way moved with this complaint, carried him
before the judge, who asked him, how he durst be so bold as to go
into their house, and pursue them with a drawn knife? Sir, replied
poor Alcouz, I am the most innocent man in the world, and am undone,
if you will not be pleased to hear me patiently; nobody deserves
more compassion. Sir, replied one of the domestics, will you listen
to a robber, who enters people’s houses to plunder and murder
them? If you will not believe us, only look upon his back. And when
he said so, he uncovered my brother’s back, and showed it to the
judge; who, without any other information, commanded immediately to
give him a hundred lashes with a bull’s pizzle over the shoulders,
and made him afterwards be carried through the town on a camel, with
one crying before him, ‘Thus are such men punished as enter
people’s houses by force.’ After haring treated him thus, they
banished him the town, and forbid him ever to return to it again.
Some people who met him after the second misfortune, brought me word
where he was, and I went and fetched him to Bagdad privately, and
gave him all the assistance I could. The caliph, continued the
barber, did not laugh so much at this story as at the other. He was
pleased to pity the unfortunate Alcouz, and ordered something to be
given me. But, without giving his servants time to obey his orders,
I continued my discourse, and said to him, My sovereign lord and
master, you see that I do not talk much; and since your majesty has
been pleased to do me the favour to listen to me so far, I beg you
would likewise hear the adventures of my two other brothers. I hope
they will be as diverting as those of the former. You may make a
complete history of them, that will not be unworthy of your library.
I shall do myself the honour then to acquaint you, that the fifth
brother was called Alnaschar.




The Story of the Barber’s fifth Brother.


Alnaschar, as long as our father lived, was very lazy; instead of
working for his hiving, he used to go begging in the evening, and to
live next day upon what he got. Our father died in a very old age,
and left among us seven hundred drachms of silver: we divided it
equally, so that each of us had a hundred for our share. Alnaschar,
who had never so much money before in his lifetime, was very much
perplexed to know what he should do with it. He consulted a long
time with himself, and at last resolved to lay it out in glasses,
bottles, and other glass-ware, which he bought of a wholesale
dealer. He put all in an open basket, and chose a very little shop,
where he sat with the basket before him, and his back against the
wall, expecting while somebody should come and buy his ware. In this
posture he sat, with his eyes fixed on his basket, and began to
meditate; during which he spoke as follows, loud enough to be heard
by a neighbouring tailor: This basket, said he, cost me a hundred
drachms, which is all I have in the world; I shall make two hundred
of it by retailing my glass, and of these two hundred drachms, which
I will again lay out in glass-ware, I shall make four hundred; --and
going on thus, I shall at last make four thousand drachms; of four
thousand I shall easily make eight thousand, and when I come to ten
thousand, I will leave off selling glass, and turn jeweller. I will
trade in diamonds, pearls, and all sorts of precious stones. Then,
when I am rich as I can wish, I will buy a fine house, a great
estate, slaves, eunuchs, and horses. I will keep a good house, and
make a great figure in the world; I will send for all the musicians
and dancers of both sexes in town. --Nor will I stop here: I will,
by the favour of heaven, go on till I get a hundred thousand
drachms; and when I have got so much, I will think myself as great
as a prince, and send to demand the grand vizier’s daughter in
marriage; and represent to that minister that I have heard much of
the wonderful beauty, understanding, wit, and all the other
qualities of his daughter. In a word, that I will give him a
thousand pieces of gold the first night after we are married; and if
the vizier be so uncivil as to refuse his daughter, which cannot be
supposed, I will go and carry her off before his face, and take her
to my house, whether he will or no. --As soon as I have married the
grand vizier’s daughter, I will buy her ten young black eunuchs,
the handsomest that can be had. I will clothe myself like a prince,
and, mounted upon a fine horse, with a saddle of fine gold, and
housings of cloth of gold, finely embroidered with diamonds and
pearls, I will ride through the city, attended by slaves before and
behind; and I will go to the vizier’s palace, in view of all the
people, great and small, who will show me the most profound respect.
When I alight at the foot of the vizier’s staircase, I will go up
the same through my own people, ranged in files on the right and
left; and the grand vizier, receiving me as his son-in-law, shall
give me the right hand, and set me above him, to do me the more
honour. If this comes to pass, as I hope it will, two of my people
shall each of them have a purse with a thousand pieces of gold,
which they shall carry with them. I will take one, and presenting it
to the grand vizier, will tell him, There is the thousand pieces of
gold that I promised the first night of marriage; and I will offer
him the other, and say to him, There is as much more, to shew you
that I am a man of my word, and even better than my promise. After
such an action as this, all the world will talk of my generosity. I
will return to my own house in the same pomp. My wife will send some
officer to compliment me, on account of my visit to the vizier, her
father; I will honour the officer with a fine robe, and send him
back with a rich present. If she thinks to send me one, I will not
accept it, but dismiss the bearer. I will not suffer her to go out
of her apartment on any account whatever, without giving me notice;
and when I have a mind to come to her apartment, it shall be in such
a manner as to make her respect me. In short, no house shall be
better ordered than mine. I will be always richly clad. When I
retire with my wife in the evening, I will sit on the upper hand; I
will affect a grave air, without turning my head to one side or
other. I will speak little; and whilst my wife, beautiful as the
full moon, stands before me in all her charms, I will make as if I
did not see her. Her women about her will say to me, Our dear lord
and master, here is your spouse, your humble servant, before you,
ready to receive your caresses, and much mortified that you do not
vouchsafe to look upon her; she is wearied with standing so long;
bid her, at least, sit down. I will give no answer to this
discourse, which will increase their surprise and grief. They will
prostrate themselves at my feet; and after they have for a
considerable time entreated me to relent, I will at last lift up my
head, and give her a careless look, and resume my former posture:
they will suppose that my wife is not well enough, nor handsomely
enough dressed, and will carry her to her closet to change her
apparel. At the same time I will get up, and put on a more
magnificent suit than before: they will return, and hold the same
discourse with me as before, and I will have the pleasure not so
much as to look upon my wife, till they have prayed and entreated as
long as they did at first. Thus I will begin on the first day of
marriage to teach her what she is to expect during the rest of her
life.

After the ceremonies of the marriage, said Alnaschar, I will take
from one of my servants, who shall be about me, a purse of five
hundred pieces of gold, which I will give to the tire-women, that
they may leave me alone with my spouse. When they are gone, my wife
shall go to bed first; then I will lie down by her, with my back
towards her, and will not say one word to her all night. The next
morning she will certainly complain of my contempt to her, and of my
pride, to her mother, the grand vizier’s wife, which will rejoice
my heart. Her mother will come to wait upon me, respectfully kiss my
hands, and say to me, Sir, (for she will not dare to call me
son-in-law, for fear of provoking me by such a familiar style,) I
entreat you not to disdain to look upon my daughter, and refuse to
come near her: I assure you that her chief delight is to please you,
and that she loves you with all her soul. But, in spite of all my
mother-in-law can say, I will not answer her one word, but keep an
obstinate gravity. Then she will throw herself at my feet, kiss them
repeatedly, and say to me, Sir, is it possible that you can suspect
my daughter’s good sense? I assure you I never let her go out of
my sight. You are the first man that ever saw her face: do not
mortify her so much; do her the favour to look upon her, to speak to
her, and confirm her in her good intentions to satisfy you in every
thing. But nothing of this shall prevail with me. Upon which my
mother-in-law will take a glass of wine, and, putting it in the hand
of her daughter, my wife, will say, Go, present him this glass of
wine yourself; perhaps he will not be so cruel as to refuse it from
so fair a hand. My wife will come with the glass, and stand
trembling before me; and when she finds that I do not look towards
her, but that I continue to disdain her, she will say to me, with
tears in her eyes, My heart, my dear soul, my amiable lord, I
conjure you, by the favours which heaven heaps upon you, to receive
this glass of wine from the hand of your most humble servant; but I
will not look upon her still, nor answer her. My charming spouse,
will she say, redoubling her tears, and putting the glass to my
mouth, I will never leave off till I prevail with you to drink;
then, wearied with her entreaties, I will dart a terrible look at
her, give her a good box on the cheek, and such a push with my foot,
as will throw her to a distance from the sofa.

My brother was so full of these chimerical visions, that he acted
with his foot as if she had been really before him, and by
misfortune he gave such a push to his basket and glasses, that they
were thrown down in the street, and broken in a thousand pieces.

The tailor, his neighbour, who heard his extravagant talk, burst
into a great fit of laughter when he saw the basket fall. O, what an
unworthy fellow art thou! said he to my brother: ought you not be
ashamed to abuse thus a young spouse, who gave you no cause to
complain. You must be a very brutish fellow to despise the tears and
charms of such a beautiful lady. Were I the vizier, your
father-in-law, I would order you a hundred lashes with a bull’s
pizzle, and send you through the town with your character written on
your forehead. My brother, on this fatal accident, came to himself,
and perceiving that he had brought this misfortune upon himself by
his insupportable pride, he beat his face, tore his clothes, and
cried so loud, that the neighbours came about him; and the people,
who were going to their noon-prayers, stopt to know what was the
matter. Being on a Friday, more people went to prayers than usual:
some of them took pity on Alnaschar, and others only laughed at him
for his extravagance. In the mean time, his vanity being dispersed
with his property, he bitterly bewailed his loss; and a lady of rank
passing by upon a mule richly caparisoned, my brother’s situation
moved her compassion. She asked him who he was, and what he cried
for? They told her, that he was a poor man, who had laid out the
little money he was worth in the purchase of a basket of glass ware,
and that the basket had fallen over, and all his glasses were
broken. The lady immediately turned to an eunuch who attended her,
and said to him, Give the poor man what you have about you. The
eunuch obeyed, and put into my brother’s hands a purse, with five
hundred pieces of gold. Alnaschar was ready to die with joy when he
received it. He gave a thousand blessings to the lady, and shutting
up his shop, where he had no more occasion to sit, he went to his
house.

While he was making deep reflections upon his good luck, he heard
somebody knock at his door: before he opened, he asked who it was;
and knowing by the voice that it was a woman, he let her in. My son,
said she, I have a favour to beg of you: the hour of prayer is come;
pray let me wash myself, that I may be fit to say my prayers. Pray
let me come into your house, and give me a basin of water. My
brother looked at her, and saw that she was a woman well advanced in
years: though he knew her not, he granted her request, and sat down
again, still full of his new adventure. He put his gold in a long
strait purse, proper to carry at his girdle. The old woman in the
mean time said her prayers, and when she had done, came to my
brother, and bowed twice to the ground so low, that she touched it
with her forehead, as if she had been going to say her prayers: then
rising up, she wished my brother all happiness.

Being meanly clad, and very humble, he thought she asked alms, upon
which he offered her two pieces of gold. The old woman stept back in
a sort of surprise, as if my brother had affronted her. Good God!
said she, what is the meaning of this? Is it possible, sir, that you
took me for one of those impudent beggars who push into people’s
houses to ask alms? Take back your money; I need it not, thank
heaven. I belong to a young lady of this city, who is a charming
beauty, and very rich; she lets me want for nothing.

[Illustration: THE VISION OF ALNASCHAR.]

My brother was not cunning enough to perceive the craft of the old
woman, who only refused the two pieces of gold, that she might catch
more. He asked her if she could not procure him the honour of seeing
that lady. With all my heart, replied she; she will be very glad to
marry you, and to put you in possession of her fortune, by making
you master of her person. Take up your money and follow me. My
brother being ravished with his good luck of finding so great a sum
of money, and almost at the same time a beautiful and rich wife,
shut his eyes to all other considerations; so that he took his five
hundred pieces of gold, and followed the old woman. She walked
before him, and he followed at a distance, to the gate of a great
house, where she knocked. He came up to her just as a young Greek
slave opened the gate. The old woman made him enter first, crossed a
well-paved court, and introduced him into a hall, the furniture of
which confirmed him in the good opinion he had conceived of the
mistress of the house. While the old woman went to acquaint the
lady, he sat down, and the weather being hot, put off his turban,
and laid it by him. He speedily saw the young lady come in, whose
beauty and rich apparel perfectly surprised him; he got up as soon
as he saw her. The lady, with a smiling countenance, prayed him to
sit down again, and placed herself by him: she told him she was very
glad to see him; and after having spoken some engaging words to him,
said, We do not sit here at our ease. Come, give me your hand. At
these words she presented him hers, and carried him into an inner
chamber, where she conversed with him for some time: then she left
him, bidding him stay, --she would be with him in a moment. He
waited for her; but instead of a lady came in a great black slave,
with a scimitar in his hand, and looking upon my brother, with a
terrible aspect, said to him fiercely, What have you to do here?
Alnaschar was so frightened at the sight of the slave, that he had
no power to answer. The black stripped him, carried on his gold, and
gave him several flesh wounds with his scimitar. My unhappy brother
fell to the ground, where he lay without motion, though he had still
the use of his senses. The black thinking him to be dead, asked for
salt: the Greek slave brought him a basin full: they rubbed my
brother’s wounds with it, who had so much command of himself,
notwithstanding the intolerable pain it put him to, that he lay
still, without giving any sign of life. The black and the Greek
slave being retired, the old woman, who drew my brother into the
snare, came and dragged him by the feet to a trap-door, which she
opened, and threw him into a place under ground, among the corpses
of several other people that had been murdered. He perceived this as
soon as he came to himself, for the violence of the fall had taken
away his senses. The salt rubbed into his wounds preserved his life,
and he recovered strength by degrees, so as he was able to walk.
After two days he opened the trap-door in the night, and finding in
the court a place proper to hide himself in, continued there till
break of day, when he saw the cursed old woman open the gate to the
street, and go out to seek another prey. He staid in the place some
time after she went out, that she might not see him, and then came
to me for shelter, when he told me of his adventures.

In a month’s time he was perfectly cured of his wounds by
medicines that I gave him; and resolved to avenge himself of the old
woman, who had put such a barbarous cheat upon him. To this end he
took a bag, large enough to contain five hundred pieces of gold, and
filled it with pieces of glass.

My brother fastened the bag of glass about him, disguised himself
like an old woman, and took a scimitar under his gown. One morning
he met the old woman walking through the town to seek her prey; he
came up to her, and counterfeiting a woman’s voice, said to her,
Cannot you lend me a pair of scales? I am a woman newly come from
Persia, have brought five hundred pieces of gold with me, and would
know if they are weight. --Good woman, answered the old hag, you
could not have applied to a properer person: follow me; I will bring
you to my son, who changes money, and will weigh them himself, to
save you the trouble. Let us make haste, for fear he go to his shop.
My brother followed her to the house where she carried him the first
time, and the Greek slave opened the door.

The old woman carried my brother to the hall, where she bid him stay
a moment till she called her son. The pretended son came, and proved
to be the villanous black slave. Come, old woman, said he to my
brother, rise and follow me: having spoke thus, he went before to
bring him to the place where he designed to murder him. Alnaschar
got up, followed him, and drawing his scimitar, gave him such a
dexterous blow behind on the neck, that he cut off his head, which
he took in one hand, and, dragging the corpse with the other, threw
them both into the place under ground before mentioned. The Greek
slave, who was accustomed to the trade, came presently with a basin
of salt; but when she saw Alnaschar with his scimitar in his hand,
and without his veil, she laid down the basin, and fled. But my
brother overtaking her, cut off her head also. The wicked old woman
came running at the noise, and my brother seizing her, said to her,
Treacherous wretch! do not you know me? Alas, sir! answered she,
trembling, who are you? I do not remember that I ever saw you. --I
am, said he, the person to whose house you came the other day to
wash and say your prayers. Hypocritical hag! said he, do not you
remember it? Then she fell on her knees to beg his pardon, but he
cut her in four pieces.

There remained only the lady, who knew nothing of what had passed:
he sought her out, and found her in a chamber, where she was ready
to sink when she saw him: she begged her life, which he generously
granted. Madam, said he, how could you live with such wicked people,
as I have so justly revenged myself upon now? I was, said she, wife
to an honest merchant; and the cursed old woman, whose wickedness I
did not know, used sometimes to come to see me. Madam, said she to
me one day, we have a very fine wedding at our house, which you will
be pleased to see, if you give us the honour of your company: I was
persuaded by her, put on my best apparel, and took with me a hundred
pieces of gold. I followed her; she brought me to this house, where
the black has since kept me by force, and I have been three years
here, to my very great sorrow. By the trade which that cursed black
followed, replied my brother, he must have gathered together a vast
deal of riches. There is so much, said she, that you will be made
for ever, if you carry them off: follow me, and you shall see them.
Alnaschar followed her to a chamber, where she showed him several
coffers full of gold, which he beheld with admiration. Go, said she,
fetch people enough to carry it all off. My brother needed not be
bid twice: he went out, and staid only till he got ten men together,
and brought them with him, and was much surprised to find the gate
open, but more when he found the lady and coffers all gone; for she
being more diligent than he, carried them all off and disappeared.
However, being resolved not to return empty-handed, he carried off
all the furniture he could find in the house, which was a great deal
more than enough to make up the five hundred pieces of gold he was
robbed of; but when he went out of the house, he forgot to shut the
gate. The neighbours, who saw my brother and the porters come and
go, went and acquainted the magistrate with it, for they looked upon
my brother’s conduct as suspicious. Alnaschar slept well enough
all night; but the next morning, when he came out of his house, he
found twenty of the magistrate’s men, who seized him. Come along
with us, said they; our master would sneak with you. My brother
prayed them to have patience for a moment, and offered them a sum of
money to let him escape; but instead of listening to him, they bound
him, and forced him to go along with them. They met in the street an
old acquaintance of my brother’s, who stopped them awhile, and
asked them why they siezed my brother, and offered them a
considerable sum to let him escape, and tell the magistrate they
could not find him. But this would not do; so he was carried before
the magistrate.

When the officers brought him before the magistrate, he asked him
where he had the goods which he carried home last night? Sir,
replied Alnaschar, I am ready to tell you all the truth; but allow
me first to have recourse to your clemency, and to beg your promise,
that nothing shall be done to me. I give it you, said the
magistrate. Then my brother told him the whole story without
disguise, from the time the old woman came into the house to say her
prayers, to the time the lady made her escape, after he had killed
the black, the Greek slave, and the old woman: and as for what he
had carried to his house, he prayed the judge to leave him part of
it, for the five hundred pieces of gold that he was robbed of.

The judge, without promising any thing, sent his officers to bring
off all, and having put the goods into his own wardrobe, commanded
my brother to quit the town immediately, and never to return, for he
was afraid, if my brother had staid in the city, he would have found
some way to represent this injustice to the caliph. In the mean
time, Alnaschar obeyed without murmuring, and left that town to go
to another: by the way he met with highwaymen, who stript him naked;
and when the ill news was brought to me, I carried him a suit, and
brought him secretly again into the town, where I took the like care
of him as I did of his other brothers.




The Story of the Barber’s sixth Brother.


I have now only to tell you the story of my sixth brother, called
Schacabac, with the hare-lips. At first he was industrious enough to
improve the hundred drachms of silver which fell to his share, and
went on very well; but a reverse of fortune brought him to beg his
bread, which he did with a great deal of dexterity. He studied
chiefly to get into great men’s houses, by means of their servants
and officers, that he might have access to their masters, and obtain
their charity. One day, as he passed by a magnificent house, whose
high gate showed him a very spacious court, where there was a
multitude of servants, he went to one of them, and asked him to whom
that house belonged. Good man, replied the servant, whence do you
come, that you ask me such a question? Does not all that you see
make you understand that it is the palace of a Barmecide? [77] My
brother, who very well knew the liberality and generosity of the
Barmecides, addressed himself to one of his porters, (for he had
more than one,) and prayed him to give him an alms. Go in, said he,
nobody hinders you, and address yourself to the master of the house;
he will send you back satisfied.

My brother, who expected no such civility, thanked the porters, and
with their permission entered the palace, which was so large, that
it took him a considerable time to reach the Barmecide’s
apartment; at last he came to a fine square building of an excellent
architecture, and entered by a porch, through which he saw one of
the finest gardens with gravel walks of several colours, extremely
pleasant to the eye: the lower apartments round this square were
most of them open, and were shut only with great curtains to keep
out the sun, which were opened again when the heat was over, to let
in the fresh air.

Such an agreeable place would have struck my brother with
admiration, even if his mind had been more at ease than it was. He
went on till he came into a hall richly furnished, and adorned with
painting of gold and azure foliage, where he saw a venerable man
with a long white beard, sitting at the upper end on a sofa, whence
he concluded him to be the master of the house; and in fact it was
the Barmecide himself, who said to my brother in a very civil
manner, that he was welcome; and asked him what he wanted. My lord,
answered my brother, in a begging tone, I am a poor man who stands
in need of the help of such rich and generous persons as yourself.
He could not have addressed himself to a fitter person than this
lord, who had a thousand good qualities.

The Barmecide seemed to be astonished at my brother’s answer, and
putting both his hands to his stomach, as if he would rend his
clothes for grief, Is it possible, cried he, that I am at Bagdad,
and that such a man as you is so poor as you say? This is what must
never be. My brother, fancying that he was going to give him some
singular mark of his bounty, blessed him a thousand times, and
wished him all sorts of happiness. It shall not be said, replied the
Barmecide, that I will abandon you, nor will I have you leave me.
--Sir, replied my brother, I swear to you I have not eaten one bit
to-day. --Is that true, replied the Barmecide, that you are fasting
till now? Alas, poor man! he is ready to die for hunger: Ho, boy,
cried he, with a loud voice, bring a basin and water presently, that
we may wash our hands. Though no boy appeared, and my brother saw
neither water nor basin, the Barmecide fell to rubbing his hands, as
if one had poured water upon them, and bid my brother come and wash
with him. Schacabac judged by that, that the Barmecide lord loved to
be merry; and he himself understanding raillery, and knowing that
the poor must be complaisant to the rich, if they would have any
thing from them, he came forward, and did as he did.

Come on, said the Barmecide; bring us something to eat, and do not
let us stay for it. When he had said so, though nothing was brought,
he began to cut as if something had been brought him upon a plate,
and putting his hand to his mouth began to chew, and said to my
brother, Come, friend, eat as freely as if you were at home; come,
eat; you said you were like to die of hunger, but you eat as if you
had no stomach. --Pardon me, my lord, said Schacabac, who perfectly
imitated what he did, you see I lose no time, and that I play my
part well enough. --How like you this bread? said the Barmecide: do
not you find it very good? --O! my lord, said my brother, who saw
neither bread nor meat, I never ate any thing so white and so fine.
--Eat your fill, said the Barmecide; I assure you, the woman who
bakes me this good bread cost me five hundred pieces of gold to
purchase her.

The Barmecide, after having boasted so much of his bread, which my
brother eat only in idea, cried. Boy, bring us another dish: and
though no boy appeared, Come, my good friend, said he to my brother,
taste this new dish; and tell me if ever you eat better mutton and
barley-broth than this. --It is admirably good, replied my brother,
and therefore you see I eat heartily. --You oblige me highly,
replied the Barmecide; I conjure you then, by the satisfaction I
have to see you eat so heartily, that you eat all up, since you like
it so well. A little while after he called for a goose, and sweet
sauce, made up of vinegar, honey, dry raisins, gray peas, and dry
figs, which were brought just in the same manner as the other was.
The goose is very fat, said the Barmecide, eat only a leg and a
wing; we must save our stomachs, for we have abundance of other
dishes to come. He actually called for several other dishes, of
which my brother, who was ready to die of hunger, pretended to eat;
but what he boasted of more than all the rest was a lamb fed with
pistachio nuts, which he ordered to be brought up in the same manner
that the rest were. And here is a dish, said the Barmecide, that you
will see at nobody’s table but my own; I would have you eat your
belly-full of it. Having spoken thus, he stretched out his hand as
if he had a piece of lamb in it, and putting it to my brother’s
mouth, There, said he, swallow that, and you will judge whether I
had not reason to boast of this dish. My brother thrust out his
head, opened his mouth, and made as if he took the piece of lamb,
and eat it with extreme pleasure. I knew you would like it, said the
Barmecide. There is nothing in the world finer, replied my brother;
your table is most delicious. --Come, bring the ragout presently; I
fancy you will like that as well as you did the lamb. --Well, how do
you relish it? said the Barmecide. O! it is wonderful, replied
Schacabac; for here we taste all at once, amber, cloves, nutmeg,
ginger, pepper, and the most odoriferous herbs; and all these
delicacies are so well mixed, that one does not prevent our tasting
the other. How pleasant! --Honour this ragout, said the Barmecide,
by eating heartily of it. Ho, boy, cried he, bring us a new ragout.
--No, my lord, if it please you, replied my brother, for indeed I
can eat no more.

Come, take away then, said the Barmecide, and bring the fruit. He
staid a moment, as if it were to give time for his servants to carry
away; after which, he said to my brother, Taste these almonds; they
are good and fresh gathered. Both of them made as if they had peeled
the almonds, and eaten them: after this, the Barmecide invited my
brother to eat something else. Look you, said he, there are all
sorts of fruits, cakes, dry sweetmeats, and conserves; take what you
like; then stretching out his hand, as if he had reached my brother
something, Look ye, said he, there is a lozenge, very good for
digestion. Schacabac made as if he eat it, and said, My lord, there
is no want of musk here. --These lozenges, said the Barmecide, are
made at my own house, where there is nothing wanting to make every
thing good. He still bid my brother eat, and said to him, Methinks
you do not eat as if you had been so hungry, as you said when you
came in. --My lord, replied Shacabac, whose jaws ached with moving
and having nothing to eat, I assure you I am so full that I cannot
eat one bit more.

Well then, friend, replied the Barmecide, we must drink now, after
we have eat so well. [78] --You may drink wine, my lord, replied my
brother; but I will drink none, if you please, because I am
forbidden it. --You are too scrupulous, replied the Barmecide; do as
I do. --I will drink then out of complaisance, said Shacabac, for I
see you will have nothing wanting to make your treat complete: but
since I am not accustomed to drink wine, I am afraid I shall commit
some error in point of good breeding, and contrary to the respect
that is due to you, and therefore I pray you, once more, to excuse
me from drinking any wine; I will be content with water. --No, no,
said the Barmecide, you shall drink wine: and at the same time he
commanded some to be brought, in the same manner as the meat and
fruit had been brought before. He made as if he poured out wine, and
drank first himself, and then pouring out for my brother, presented
him the glass: Drink my health, said he, and let us know if you
think this wine good. My brother made as if he took the glass, and
looked if the colour was good, and put it to his nose to try if it
had a good flavour: then he made a low bow to the Barmecide, to
signify that he took the liberty to drink his health; and, lastly,
he appeared to drink with all the signs of a man that drinks with
pleasure. --My lord, said he, this is very excellent wine, but I
think it is not strong enough. --If you would have stronger, said
the Barmecide, you need only speak, for I have several sorts in my
cellar. --Try how you like this. Upon which he made as if he poured
out another glass to himself, and then to my brother; and did this
so often, that Schacabac, feigning to be intoxicated with the wine,
and acting a drunken man, lifted up his hand, and gave the Barmecide
such a box on the ear, as made him fall down: he was going to give
him another blow, but the Barmecide holding up his hand to ward it
off, cried out, Are you mad? Then my brother, making as if he had
come to himself again, said, My lord, you have been so good as to
admit your slave into your house, and give him a great treat; you
should have been satisfied with making me eat, and not have obliged
me to drink wine? for I told you beforehand, that it might occasion
me to fail in my respect for you. I am very sorry for it, and beg
you a thousand pardons.

Scarce had he finished these words, when the Barmecide, instead of
being in a passion, fell a laughing with all his might. It is a long
time, said he, that I have been seeking a man of your character.

The Barmecide caressed Schacabac mightily, and told him, I not only
forgive the blow you have given me, but I desire henceforward we
should be friends, and that you take my house for your home: you
have had the complaisance to accommodate yourself to my humour, and
the patience to keep the jest up to the last; we will now eat in
good earnest. When he had finished these words, he clapped his
hands, and commanded his servants, who then appeared, to cover the
table; which was speedily done, and my brother was treated with all
those dishes in reality, which he ate of before in fancy. At last
they cleared the table, and brought in the wine, and at the same
time a number of handsome slaves, richly apparelled, came in and
sung some agreeable airs to their musical instruments. In a word,
Schacabac had all the reason in the world to be satisfied with the
Barmecide’s civility and bounty; for he treated him as his
familiar friend, and ordered him a suit out of his wardrobe.

The Barmecide found my brother to be a man of so much wit and
understanding, that in a few days after, he entrusted him with his
household and all his affairs. My brother acquitted himself very
well in that employment for twenty years; at the end of which the
generous Barmecide died, and leaving no heirs, all his property was
confiscated to the use of the prince, and my brother lost all he had
acquired: and, being reduced to his first condition, he joined a
caravan of pilgrims going to Mecca, designing to accomplish that
pilgrimage by their charity: but unfortunately the caravan was
attacked and plundered by a number of Bedouins, [79] superior to
that of the pilgrims. My brother was then taken as a slave by one of
the Bedouins, who put him under the bastinado for several days, to
oblige him to ransom himself. Schacabac protested to him, that it
was all in vain. I am your slave, said he; you may dispose of me as
you please; but I declare to you, that I am extremely poor, and not
able to redeem myself. In a word, my brother discovered to him all
his misfortunes, and endeavoured to soften him with tears; but the
Bedouin was not to be moved, and being vexed to find himself
disappointed of a considerable sum which he reckoned himself sure
of, he took his knife, and slit my brother’s lips, to avenge
himself by this inhumanity for the loss that he thought he had
sustained.

The Bedouin had a handsome wife, and frequently when he went on his
excursions, he left my brother alone with her, and then she used all
her endeavours to comfort my brother under the rigour of his
slavery: she gave him tokens enough that she loved him, out he durst
not return her passion, for fear he should repent it; and therefore
he avoided being alone with her, as much as she sought the
opportunity to be alone with him. She had so great a custom of
toying and playing with the miserable Schacabac, whenever she saw
him, that one day she happened to do it in presence of her husband.
My brother, without taking notice that he observed them (so his sins
would have it) played likewise with her. The Bedouin immediately
supposing that they lived together in a criminal manner, fell upon
my brother in a rage, and after he had mutilated him in a barbarous
manner, he carried him on a camel to the top of a desert mountain,
where he left him. The mountain was on the road to Bagdad, so that
the passengers who saw him there informed me where he was. I went
thither speedily, and found unfortunate Schacabac in a deplorable
condition: I gave him what help he stood in need of, and brought him
back to the city.

This is what I told the caliph Monstanser Billah, added the barber;
that prince applauded me with new fits of laughter. Now, said he, I
cannot doubt but they justly gave you the surname of Silent. Nobody
can say the contrary; for certain reasons, however, I command you to
depart this town immediately, and let me hear no more of you. I
yielded to necessity, and travelled for several years in distant
countries. Understanding at last that the caliph was dead, I
returned to Bagdad, where I found not one of my brothers alive. It
was on my return to this city, that I did the lame young man the
important service which you have heard. You are, however, witness of
his ingratitude, and of the injurious manner in which he treated me:
instead of testifying his obligation, he rather chose to fly from
me, and to leave his own country. When I understood that he was not
at Bagdad, though nobody could tell me truly whither he was gone, I
did not forbear to go and seek him. I travelled from province to
province a long time; and when I least expected, I met him this day;
but I little thought to find him so incensed against me.

The tailor thus made an end of telling the sultan of Casgar the
history of the lame young man and the barber of Bagdad. When the
barber, continued he, had finished his story, we found that the
young man was not to blame for calling him a great chatterer.
However, we wished him to stay with us, and partake of the treat
which the master of the house had prepared for us. We sat down to
table, and were merry together till afternoon prayers; then all the
company parted, and I went to my shop till it was time for me to
return home.

It was during this interval, that Hump-back came half drunk before
my shop, where he sung and played on his tabor. I thought that by
carrying him home with me, I should divert my wife, therefore I
brought him in. My wife gave us a dish of fish, and I presented
Hump-back with some, which he ate without taking notice of a bone.
He fell down dead before us; and after having in vain essayed to
help him, in the trouble and fear occasioned by such an unlucky
accident we carried the corpse out, and dexterously lodged him with
the Jewish doctor. The Jewish doctor put him into the chamber of the
purveyor, and the purveyor carried him out into the street, where it
was believed the merchant had killed him. This, sir, added the
tailor, is what I had to say to satisfy your majesty, who must
pronounce, whether we be worthy of mercy or wrath, life or death.

The sultan of Casgar showed a satisfaction in his countenance, which
restored the tailor and his comrades to life. I cannot but
acknowledge, said he, that I am more struck with the history of the
young cripple, with that of the barber, and with the adventures of
his brothers, than with the story of my jester: but before I send
you all four away, and before we bury Humpback, I should like to see
the barber who is the cause that I have pardoned you; since he is in
my capital, it is easy to satisfy my curiosity. At the same time he
sent an officer with the tailor to find him.

The officer and the tailor went immediately, and brought the barber,
whom they presented to the sultan. The barber was an old man, about
ninety years old; his eyebrows and beard were white as snow, his
ears hanging down, and his nose very long. The sultan could not
forbear laughing when he saw him. Silent man, said he to him, I
understand that you know wonderful stories; will you tell me some of
them? --Sir, answered the barber, let us forbear the stories, if you
please at present. I most humbly beg your majesty to permit me to
ask what that Christian, that Jew, that Mussulman, and that dead
Humpback, who lies on the ground, do here before your majesty? The
sultan smiled at the barber’s freedom, and replied, Why do you
ask? --Sir, replied the barber, it concerns me to ask, that your
majesty may know I am not so great a talker as some pretend, but a
man justly called Silent.

The sultan of Casgar had the complaisance to satisfy the barber’s
curiosity. He commanded them to tell him the story of the Humpback,
which he seemed earnestly to wish for. When the barber heard it, he
shook his head, as if he would say, there was something under this
which he did not understand. Truly, cried he, this is a surprising
story; but I wish to examine Humpback a little nearer. He drew near
him, sat down on the ground, took his head between his knees, and
after he had looked upon him stedfastly, he fell into so great a fit
of laughter, and had so little command of himself, that he fell
backwards on the ground, without considering that he was before the
sultan of Casgar. As soon as he came to himself, It is said, cried
he, and not without reason, that no man dies without a cause. If
ever any history deserved to be written in letters of gold, it is
that of this Humpback.

At this, all the people looked upon the barber as a buffoon, or an
old dotard. Silent man, said the sultan, speak to me: why do you
laugh so much? Sir, answered the barber, I swear by your majesty’s
benevolence, that Humpback is not dead; he is yet alive, and I shall
be content to pass for a madman if I do not let you see it this
minute. So saying, he took a box wherein he had several medicines
that he carried about him to make use of on occasion, and he took
out a little phial of balsam, with which he rubbed Humpback’s neck
a long time; then he took out of his case a neat iron instrument,
which he put between his teeth; and after he had opened his mouth,
he thrust down his throat a pair of small pincers, with which he
took out a bit of fish and bone, which he showed to all the people.
Immediately Humpback sneezed, stretched forth his arms and feet,
opened his eyes, and allowed several other signs of life.

The sultan of Casgar, and all those who were witnesses of this
operation, were less surprised to see Humpback revive, after he had
passed a whole night and great part of a day without giving any sign
of life, than at the merit and capacity of the barber, who performed
this, and notwithstanding all his faults, began to look upon him as
a great person. The sultan, transported with joy and admiration,
ordered the story of Humpback to be written down, with that of the
barber, that the memory of it might, as it deserved, be preserved
for ever. Nor did he stop here; but that the tailor, Jewish doctor,
purveyor, and Christian merchant, might remember the adventure which
the accident of Humpback had occasioned to them with pleasure, he
did not send them away till he had given each of them a very rich
robe, with which he caused them to be clothed in his presence. As
for the barber, he honoured him with a great pension, and kept him
near his person.




The History of Aboulhassen Ali Ebn Becar, and Schemselnihar,
favourite of the Caliph Haroun Alraschid.


In the reign of the caliph Haroun Alraschid, there was at Bagdad a
druggist, called Alboussan Ebn Thaher, a very rich, handsome man. He
had more wit and politeness than people of his profession ordinarily
have: his integrity, sincerity, and jovial humour, made him beloved
and sought after by all sorts of people. The caliph, who knew his
merit, had an entire confidence in him. He had so great an esteem
for him, that he intrusted him with the care to provide his
favourite ladies with all the things they stood in need of: he chose
for them their clothes, furniture, and jewels, with admirable taste.

His good qualities, and the favour of the caliph, made the sons of
emirs, and other officers of the first rank, be always about him:
his house was the rendezvous of all the nobility of the court. But
among the young lords that went daily to visit him, there was one
whom he took more notice of than the rest, and with whom he
contracted a particular friendship, called Aboulhassen Ali Ebn
Becar, originally of an ancient royal family of Persia. This family
continued at Bagdad ever since the Mussulmen made a conquest of that
kingdom. Nature seemed to have taken pleasure to endow this young
prince with the rarest qualities of body and mind: his face was so
very beautiful, his shape so fine, his air so easy, and his
physiognomy so engaging, that it was impossible to see him without
immediately loving him. When he spoke, he expressed himself always
in terms proper and well chosen, with a new and agreeable turn, and
his voice charmed all that heard him; with this he had so much wit
and judgment, that he thought and spoke of all subjects with
admirable exactness. He was so reserved and modest, that he advanced
nothing till after he had taken all possible care to avoid giving
any ground of suspicion that he preferred his own opinion to that of
others.

Being such a person as I have represented him, we need not wonder
that Ebn Thaher distinguished him from all the other young noblemen
of the court, most of whom had the vices contrary to his virtues.
One day, when the prince was with Ebn Thaher, there came a lady
mounted on a pie-bald mule, in the midst often female slaves who
accompanied her on foot, all very handsome, as far as could be
judged by their air, and through their veils which covered their
faces. The lady had a girdle of a rose-colour, four inches broad,
embroidered with pearls and diamonds of an extraordinary bigness;
and for beauty, it was easy to perceive that she surpassed all her
women, as far as the full moon does that of two days old. She came
to buy something; and as she wanted to speak to Ebn Thaher, she
entered his shop, which was very neat and spacious, and he received
her with all the marks of the most profound respect, entreating her
to sit down, and showing her with his hand the most honourable place.

In the mean time, the prince of Persia, unwilling to let slip such
an opportunity of showing his good breeding and gallantry, beat up
the cushion of cloth of gold for the lady to lean on; after which he
retired speedily, that she might sit down; and having saluted her by
kissing the carpet under her feet, he rose and stood before her at
the lower end of the sofa. It being her custom to be free with Ebn
Thaher, she lifted up her veil, and then discovered to the prince of
Persia such an extraordinary beauty, that he was struck with it to
the heart. On the other hand, the lady could not contain herself
from looking upon the prince, the sight of whom had made the same
impressions upon her. My lord, said she to him, with an obliging
air, pray sit down. The prince of Persia obeyed, and sat down upon
the edge of the sofa. He had his eyes constantly fixed upon her, and
swallowed down large draughts of the sweet poison of love. She
quickly perceived what passed in his heart, and this discovery
served to inflame her the more towards him. She rose up, went to Ebn
Thaher, and after she had whispered to him the cause of her coming,
she asked the name and country of the prince. Madam, answered Ebn
Thaher, this young nobleman’s name is Aboulhassen Ali Ebn Becar,
and he is prince of the blood royal.

The lady was transported at hearing that the person she already
loved so passionately was of so high a rank. You mean certainly,
said she, that he is descended from the kings of Persia? --Yes,
madam, replied Ebn Thaher, the last kings of Persia were his
ancestors; and since the conquest of that kingdom, the princes of
his family have always made themselves very acceptable at the court
of our caliphs. --You will oblige me much, she added, by making me
acquainted with this young nobleman. When I send this woman, said
she, pointing to one of her slaves, to give you notice to come and
see me, pray bring him with you; I shall be very glad that he should
see the magnificence of my house, that he may have it in his power
to say, that avarice does not reign at Bagdad among persons of
quality. You know what I mean? Do not fail, otherwise I will be very
angry with you, and never come hither again while I live.

Ebn Thaher was a man of too much penetration not to perceive the
lady’s mind by these words. My princess, my queen, replied he, God
preserve me from giving you any occasion of anger against me: I
shall always make it a law to obey your commands. At this answer the
lady bowed to Ebn Thaher, and took her leave; and after she had
given a favourable look to the prince of Persia, she remounted her
mule, and went away.

The prince of Persia was so deeply in love with the lady, that he
looked after her as far as he could see her; and long after she was
out of sight, he directed his eyes that way. Ebn Thaher told him,
that he remarked several persons observed him, and began to laugh to
see him in this posture. Alas! said the prince to him, the world and
you would pity me, if you knew that the beautiful lady, who is just
now gone from you, has carried with her the best part of me, and
that the remaining part seeks for an opportunity to go after her.
Tell me, I conjure you, added he, what cruel lady is this, who
forces people to love her, without giving them time to reflect? --My
lord, answered Ebn Thaher, this is the celebrated Schemselnihar,
[80] the principal favourite of the caliph our master. --She is
justly so called, added the prince, since she is more beautiful than
the sun at noon-day. --True, replied Ebn Thaher; therefore the
commander of the faithful loves or rather adores her: he gave me
express orders to furnish her with all that she asked of me, and to
prevent her wishes, as far as lies in my power.

He spoke thus to hinder him from engaging in a passion which could
not but prove unfortunate to him; but this served only to inflame it
the more. I feared, charming Schemselnihar, cried he, I should not
be allowed so much as to think of you; I perceive, however, that
without hopes of being loved by you, I cannot forbear loving you: I
will love you then, and bless my lot that I am the slave of an
object fairer than the meridian sun.

While the prince of Persia thus consecrated his heart to the fair
Schemselnihar, this lady, as she went home, contrived how she might
see and have free converse with him. She no sooner entered her
palace, but she sent to Ebn Thaher the woman she had shown him, and
in whom she had placed all her confidence, to tell him to come and
see her without delay, and bring the prince of Persia with him. The
slave came to Ebn Thaher’s shop while he was speaking to the
prince, and endeavouring to dissuade him by very strong arguments,
from loving the caliph’s favourite. When she saw them together,
Gentlemen, said she to them, my honourable mistress, Schemselnihar,
the chief favourite of the commander of the faithful, entreats you
to come to her palace, where she waits for you. Ebn Thaher, to
testify his obedience, rose up immediately, without answering the
slave, and followed her, not without some reluctance. As for the
prince, he followed her, without reflecting on the danger there
might be in such a visit. --The presence of Ebn Thaher, who had
liberty to go to the favourite when he pleased, made the prince very
easy. They followed the slave, who went a little before them, and
entered after her into the caliph’s palace, and joined her at the
gate of Schemselnihar’s little palace, which was ready open. She
introduced them into a great hall, where she prayed them to sit down.

The prince of Persia thought himself in one of those delicious
palaces that are promised us in the other world: he had never seen
any thing that came near the magnificence of the place he was in.
The carpets, cushions, and other appendages of the sofa, the
furniture, ornaments, and architecture, were surprisingly rich and
beautiful. A little time after Ebn Thaher and he had sat down, a
very handsome black slave brought in a table covered with several
delicacies, the admirable smell of which shewed how deliciously they
were seasoned. While they were eating, the slave who brought them in
waited upon them; she took particular care to invite them to eat of
what she knew to be the greatest dainties. The other slaves brought
them excellent wine after they had eaten. When they had done, there
was presented to each of them a fine gold basin full of water to
wash their hands; after which they brought them a golden pot full of
the perfume of aloes, with which they perfumed their beards and
clothes. Odoriferous water was not forgotten, but served in a golden
vessel, enriched with diamonds and rubies, made on purpose, and it
was thrown upon their beards and faces, according to custom. Then
they resumed their places; but they had scarce sat down, when the
slave entreated them to arise and follow her. She opened a door of
the hall where they were, and they entered into a large saloon of
wonderful structure. It was a dome of the most agreeable form,
supported by a hundred pillars of marble, white as alabaster. The
bases and chapiters of the pillars were adorned with four-footed
beasts, and birds of various sorts, gilded. The carpet of this noble
saloon consisted of one piece of cloth of gold, embroidered with
bunches of roses in red and white silk; and the dome, painted in the
same manner, after the Arabian fashion, presented to the mind one of
the most charming objects. Betwixt each column was a little sofa
adorned in the same manner, and great vessels of china, crystal,
jasper, jet, porphyry, agate, and other precious materials,
garnished with gold and jewels; --the spaces betwixt the columns
were so many large windows, with seats projecting breast high,
fitted up as the sofas, and looking out into the most delicious
garden; the walks were of little pebbles of different colours, of
the same pattern as the carpet of the saloon; so that, looking upon
the carpet within and without, it seemed as if the dome and the
garden, with all its ornaments, had been upon the same carpet. The
prospect round was, at the end of the walks, terminated by two
canals of clear water, of the same circular figure as the dome, one
of which being higher than the other, emptied its water into the
lowermost, in form of a sheet; and curious pots of gilt brass, with
flowers and shrubs, were set upon the banks of the canals at equal
distances. Those walks lav betwixt great plots of ground planted
with straight and bushy trees, where a thousand birds formed a
melodious concert, and diverted the eye by flying about, and playing
together, or fighting in the air.

The prince of Persia and Ebn Thaher were a long time engaged in
viewing the magnificence of the place, and expressed their surprise
at every thing they saw, especially the prince, who had never beheld
any thing like it. Ebn Thaher, though he had been several times in
that delicious place, could not but observe many new beauties. In a
word, they never grew weary in admiring so many singularities, and
were thus agreeably employed, when they perceived a company of
ladies, richly apparelled, sitting without, at some distance from
the dome, each of them upon a seat of Indian plane wood, inlaid with
silver filigree in compartments, with instruments of music in their
hands, waiting for orders to play. They both went forward, and had a
full view of the ladies; and on the right they saw a great court,
with a stair up from the garden, encompassed with beautiful
apartments. The slave had left them, and being alone, they conversed
together. For you, who are a wise man, said the prince of Persia, I
doubt not but you look with a great deal of satisfaction upon all
these marks of grandeur and power; for my part, I do not think there
is any thing in the world more surprising. But when I consider that
this is the glorious habitation of the lovely Schemselnihar, and
that the greatest monarch of the earth keeps her here, I confess to
you, that I look upon myself to be the most unfortunate of all
mankind, and that no destiny can be more cruel than mine, to love an
object possessed by my rival, and that too in a place where he is so
potent, that I cannot think myself sure of my life one moment.

Ebn Thaher, hearing the prince of Persia speak thus, said to him,
Sir, I wish you could give me as good assurance of the happy success
of your passion, as I can give you of the safety of your life.
Though this stately palace belongs to the caliph, who built it on
purpose for Schemselnihar, and called it the _Palace of Eternal
Pleasures_, and though it makes part of his own palace, yet you must
know that this lady lives here at absolute liberty. She is not beset
by eunuchs to be spies upon her; this is her private house,
absolutely at her disposal. She goes into the city when she pleases,
and returns again, without asking leave of any body; and the caliph
never comes to see her, but he sends Mesrour, the chief of his
eunuchs, to give her notice, that she may be prepared to receive
him. Therefore you may be easy, and give full attention to the
concert of music which I perceive Schemselnihar is preparing for you.

Just as Ebn Thaher had spoke these words, the prince of Persia and
he saw the favourite’s trusty slave come and give orders to the
ladies to begin to sing, and play with the instruments. They all
began immediately to play together, as a prelude; and, after they
had played some time, one of them began to sing alone, and played at
the same time admirably upon her lute, being informed beforehand
upon what subject she was to sing. The words were so agreeable to
the prince of Persia’s sentiments, that he could not forbear to
applaud her at the end of the couplet. Is it possible, cried he,
that you have the gift of knowing people’s hearts, and that the
knowledge of what is in my mind has occasioned you to give us a
taste of your charming voice by those words? I should not express
myself otherwise were I to choose. The lady replied nothing, but
went on and sung several other staves, with which the prince was so
affected, that he repeated some of them with tears in his eyes;
which discovered plainly enough that he applied them to himself.
When she had made an end, she and her companions rose up and sung
all together; signifying by their words, that ‘the full moon was
going to rise in all her splendour, and that they should speedily
see her approach the sun;’ intimating that Schemselnihar was
coming, and that the prince of Persia would soon have the pleasure
to see her.

In fact, as they looked towards the court, they saw
Schemselnihar’s confidant coming towards them, followed by ten
black women, who with much difficulty carried a throne of massy
silver, curiously wrought, which they set down before them at a
certain distance; after which the black slaves retired behind the
trees, to the entrance of a walk. After this came twenty handsome
ladies, richly apparelled, in uniform dress; they advanced in two
rows, each singing, and playing upon instruments which they held in
their hands, and placed themselves on each side of the throne.

All these things kept the prince of Persia and Ebn Thaher in so much
the greater expectation, that they were curious to know how they
would end. They then saw come out at the same gate from whence the
ten black women came, ten other ladies, equally handsome and
well-dressed, who halted there a few moments, expecting the
favourite, who came out last, and placed herself in the midst of
them.

Schemselnihar was easily distinguished from the rest by her fine
shape and majestic air, as well as by a sort of mantle, of a very
fine stuff of gold and sky-blue, fastened to her shoulders, over her
other apparel, which was the most handsome, most magnificent, and
best contrived, that could be imagined.

The pearls, rubies, and diamonds, which adorned her, were well
disposed; not many in number, but well chosen, and of inestimable
value. She came forward, with a majesty resembling the sun in its
course amidst the clouds, which receive his splendour without hiding
his lustre, and sat down upon the silver throne that had been
brought for her.

As soon as the prince of Persia saw Schemselnihar, he could not take
his eyes off her. We cease inquiring, said he to Ebn Thaher, after
what we seek, when once we see it; and there is no doubt left, when
once the truth appears. Do you see this charming beauty? She is the
cause of all my sufferings, which I bless, and will never forbear to
bless, however severe and lasting. At the sight of this object I am
not my own master; my soul is disturbed, and rebels, and seems
disposed to leave me. Go then, my soul, I allow thee; but let it be
for the welfare and preservation of this weak body. It is you, cruel
Ebn Thaher, who are the cause of this disorder. You thought to do me
a great pleasure in bringing me hither, and I perceive I am only
come to complete my ruin. Pardon me, said he, interrupting himself;
I am mistaken: I would come, and can blame nobody but myself; --and
at these words he burst into tears. I am glad, said Ebn Thaher, that
you do me justice. When I told you at first that Schemselnihar was
the caliph’s chief favourite, I did it on purpose to prevent that
fatal passion which you please yourself with entertaining in your
breast. All that you see here ought to disengage you, and you are to
think of nothing but of acknowledging the honour which Schemselnihar
has done you, by ordering me to bring you with me. Recall then your
wandering reason, and prepare to appear before her as good breeding
requires. See, there she comes. Were we to begin again, I would take
other measures; but since the thing is done, I pray God we may not
have cause to repent it. All I have now to say to you is, that love
is a traitor, who may involve you in difficulties from which you
will never be able to extricate yourself.

Ebn Thaher had no time to say more, because Schemselnihar came; and
sitting down upon her throne, saluted them both by bowing her head;
but she fixed her eyes on the prince of Persia, and they spoke to
one another in a silent language, intermixed with sighs, by which,
in a few moments, they spoke more than they could have done by words
in a great deal of time. The more Schemselnihar looked upon the
prince, the more she found by his looks to confirm her in the
opinion that he was in love with her; and being thus persuaded of
his passion, thought herself the happiest woman in the world. At
last, she turned her eyes from him to command the women, who began
to sing first, to come near; they rose, and as they advanced, the
black woman, who came out of the walk into which they had retired,
brought their seats, and set them near the window, in the front of
the dome, where Ebn Thaher and the prince of Persia stood, and their
seats were so disposed, that with the favourite’s throne, and the
women on each side of her, they formed a semicircle before them.

The women, who were sitting before she came, resumed their places,
with the permission of Schemselnihar, who ordered them by a sign.
That charming favourite chose one of those women to sing; who, after
she had spent some moments in tuning her lute, sung a song, the
meaning whereof was, that when two lovers entirely loved one another
with boundless affection, their hearts though in two bodies were
united; and when any thing opposed their desires, could say, with
tears in their eyes, If we love, because we find one another
amiable, ought we to be blamed for this? Let destiny bear the blame.

Schemselnihar discovered so well by her eyes and gestures that those
words were applicable to herself and the prince of Persia, that he
could not contain himself, he arose, and advancing to a balustrade,
which he leaned upon, obliged one of the companions of the woman who
had just done singing to observe him. As she was near him, Attend to
me, said he to her, and do me the favour to accompany with your lute
a song which you shall hear forthwith. Then he sung with an air so
tender and passionate, as perfectly expressed the violence of his
love. As soon as he had done, Schemselnihar following his example,
said to one of the women, Attend to me likewise, and accompany my
voice. At the same time she sung after such a manner, as did farther
pierce the heart of the prince of Persia, who answered by a new air,
more passionate than the former.

Those two lovers having declared their mutual affection by their
songs, Schemselnihar yielded to the force of hers; she arose from
her throne in transport, and advanced towards the door of the hall.
The prince, who perceived her design, rose up immediately, and went
to meet her in all haste. They met at the door, where they took one
another by the hand, and embraced with so much passion, that they
fainted and would have fallen, if the women who followed
Schemselnihar had not hindered them. They supported them, and
carried them to a sofa, where they were brought to themselves again
by throwing odoriferous water upon their faces, and by giving them
something to smell to.

When they came to themselves, the first thing that Schemselnihar did
was to look about, and not seeing Ebn Thaher, she asked, with
eagerness, where he was. He had withdrawn out of respect, whilst her
women were engaged in recovering her, and dreaded, not without
reason, that some disagreeable consequence might follow what he had
seen; but as soon as he heard Schemselnihar ask for him, he came
forward and presented himself before her.

Schemselnihar was very well pleased to see Ebn Thaher, and expressed
her joy in these obliging terms: Ebn Thaher, I know not how to
return the great obligations you have put upon me; without you, I
should never have seen the prince of Persia, nor have loved the most
amiable person in the world; assure yourself I shall not be
ungrateful, and that my gratitude, if possible, shall be equal to
the obligation. Ebn Thaher answered this compliment by a low bow,
and wished the favourite the accomplishment of all her desires.

Schemselnihar, turning towards the prince of Persia, who sat by her,
and looking upon him with some sort of confusion after what had
passed betwixt them, said to him, Sir, I am very well assured you
love me; and how great soever your love may be to me, you need not
doubt but mine is as great towards you. But let us not flatter
ourselves; for, notwithstanding this conformity of our sentiments, I
see nothing for you and me but trouble, impatience, and tormenting
grief. There is no other remedy for our evils but to love one
another constantly, to refer ourselves to the disposal of heaven,
and to wait its determination of our destiny. Madam, replied the
prince of Persia, you will do me the greatest injustice, if you
doubt for a moment the continuance of my love. It is so united to my
soul, that I can justly say it makes the best part of it, and that I
shall persevere in it after death. Pains, torments, obstacles,
nothing shall be capable of hindering my loving you. Speaking these
words, he shed tears in abundance, and Schemselnihar was not able to
restrain hers.

Ebn Thaher took this opportunity to speak to the favourite: Madam,
said he, allow me to represent to you, that, instead of melting into
tears, you ought to rejoice that you are now together. I understand
not this grief. What will it be when you are obliged to part? But
why do I talk of that? We have been a long while here, and you know,
madam, it is time for us to be going. Ah! how cruel are you! replied
Schemselnihar. You, who know the cause of my tears, have you no pity
for my unfortunate condition? Oh! sad fatality! what have I done, to
be subject to the severe law, of not being able to enjoy the only
person I love?

Persuaded as she was, that Ebn Thaher spoke to her only out of
friendship, she did not take amiss what he said to her, but made a
proper use of it. She made a sign to the slave, her confidant, who
immediately went out, and in a little time brought a collation of
fruits upon a small silver table, which she set down betwixt her
mistress and the prince of Persia. Schemselnihar took some of the
best, and presented to the prince, praying him to eat it for her
sake; he took it, and put to his mouth that part which she touched;
and then he presented some to her, which she took, and ate in the
same manner. She did not forget to invite Ebn Thaher to eat with
them; but he, thinking himself not safe in that place, and wishing
himself at home, ate only out of complaisance. After the collation
was taken away, they brought a silver basin, with water in a vessel
of gold, and washed together; they afterwards returned to their
places, and three of the ten black women brought each a cup of rock
crystal full of exquisite wine, upon a golden salver, which they set
down before Schemselnihar, the prince of Persia, and Ebn Thaher.
That they might be more private, Schemselnihar kept with her only
ten black women, with ten others, who began to sing and play upon
instruments; and after she had sent away all the rest, she took up
one of the cups, and holding it in her hand, sung some tender words,
which one of her women accompanied with her lute. When she had done,
she drank, and afterwards took up one of the other cups, and
presented it to the prince, praying him to drink for love of her, as
she had drank for love of him. He received the cup with a transport
of love and joy; but before he drank, he sung also a song, which
another woman accompanied with an instrument; and as he sang, the
tears fell from his eyes in such abundance, that he could not
forbear expressing in his song, that he knew not whether he was
going to drink the wine she had presented to him, or his own tears.
Schemselnihar, at last, presented the third cup to Ebn Thaher, who
thanked her for her kindness, and for the honour she did him.

After this, she took a lute from one of her women, and sung to it in
such a passionate manner, that she seemed to be transported out of
herself, and the prince of Persia stood with his eyes fixed upon
her, as if he had been enchanted. As these things passed, her trusty
slave came in a great fright, and addressing herself to her
mistress, said, Madam Mesrour, and two other officers, with several
eunuchs that attend them, are at the gate, and want to speak with
you from the caliph. When the prince of Persia and Ebn Thaher heard
these words, they changed colour, and began to tremble, as if they
had been undone; but Schemselnihar, who perceived it, recovered
their courage by a sigh.

After Schemselnihar had quieted the fears of the prince of Persia
and Ebn Thaher, she ordered the slave, her confidant, to go and
converse with Mesrour, and the two other officers, till she had put
herself in a condition to receive them, and could send her to
introduce them. Immediately, she ordered all the windows of the
saloon to be shut, and the painted cloth on the side of the garden
to be let down; and after having assured the prince and Ebn Thaher,
that they might continue there without any fear, she went out at the
great gate leading to the garden, and shut it upon them; but
whatever assurance she had given them of their being safe, they were
desperately afraid all the while they were there.

As soon as Schemselnihar was in the garden with the woman that had
followed her, she ordered all the seats, which served the women who
played on the instruments, to be set near the window, where the
prince of Persia, and Ebn Thaher heard them; and having got things
in order, she sat down upon her silver throne; then she sent notice
to the slave, her confidant, to bring in the chief of the eunuchs,
and his two subaltern officers with him.

They appeared, followed by twenty black eunuchs, all handsomely
clothed, with scimitars by their sides, and gold belts of four
inches broad. As soon as they perceived the favourite Schemselnihar
at a distance, they made her a profound reverence, which she
returned them from her throne. When they came near, she got up and
went to meet Mesrour, who came first; she asked what news he
brought. He answered, Madam, the commander of the faithful has sent
me to signify, that he cannot live longer without seeing you; he
designs to come and see you to-night, and I come beforehand to give
you notice, that you may be ready to receive him. He hopes, madam,
that you will receive him with as much pleasure as he feels
impatience to see you.

Upon this discourse of Mesrour, the favourite Schemselnihar
prostrated herself to the ground, as a mark of that submission with
which she received the caliph’s order. When she rose up again, she
said, Pray tell the commander of the faithful, that I shall always
reckon it my glory to execute his majesty’s commands, and that his
slave will do her utmost to receive him with all the respect that is
due to him. At the same time she ordered the slave, her confidant,
to tell the black women appointed for that service to get the palace
ready to receive the caliph; and dismissing the chief of the
eunuchs, said to him, You see it requires some time to get all
things ready; therefore I entreat you to curb his majesty’s
impatience, that, when he arrives, he may not find things out of
order.

The chief of the eunuchs and his retinue being gone, Schemselnihar
returned to the saloon, extremely concerned at the necessity she was
under of sending back the prince of Persia sooner than she thought
to have done. She came up to him again with tears in her eyes, which
heightened Ebn Thaher’s fear, who thought it no good omen. Madam,
said the prince to her, I perceive you are come to tell me that we
must part: if there be nothing more to dread, I hope heaven will
give me the patience which is necessary to support your absence.
Alas! my dear heart, my dear soul, replied the too tender
Schemselnihar, how happy do I think you, and how unhappy do I think
myself, when I compare your lot with my sad destiny! No doubt you
will suffer by my absence, but that is all, and you may comfort
yourself with hopes of seeing me again; but as for me, just heaven!
what a terrible trial am I brought to! I must not only be deprived
of the sight of the only person whom I love, but I must be tormented
with the sight of one whom you have made hateful to me. --Will not
the arrival of the caliph put me in mind of your departure? And how
can I, when I am taken up with thinking on your dear image, express
to that prince the joy which he always observed in my eyes, whenever
he came to see me? I shall have my mind perplexed when I speak to
him, and the least complaisance which I show to his love will stab
me to the heart like a dagger. Can I relish his kind words and
caresses? --Think, prince, to what torments I shall be exposed when
I can see you no more! Her tears and sighs hindered her from going
on, and the prince of Persia would have replied to her, but his own
grief, and that of his mistress, deprived him of the power of speech.

Ebn Thaher, who only wished to get out of the palace, was obliged to
comfort them, and to exhort them to have patience; but the trusty
slave interrupted them: Madam, said she to Schemselnihar, you have
no time to lose; the eunuchs begin to arrive, and you know the
caliph will be here immediately. O Heaven! how cruel is this
separation! cried the favourite: Make haste, said she, to the
confidant, carry them both to the gallery which looks into the
garden on the one side, and to the Tigris on the other: and when the
night grows dark, let them out by the back gate, that they may
retire with safety. Having spoken thus, she tenderly embraced the
prince of Persia, without being able to say one word more, and went
to meet the caliph in such disorder as cannot well be imagined.

In the mean time the trusty slave carried the prince and Ebn Thaher
to the gallery, as Schemselnihar had appointed: and having brought
them in, left them there, and shut the door upon them, after having
assured them that they had nothing to fear, and that she would come
for them when it was time.

When Schemselnihar’s trusty slave left the prince of Persia and
Ebn Thaher, they forgot she had assured them that they needed not to
be afraid: they examined the gallery, and were seized with extreme
fear, because they knew no means of escape if the caliph or any of
his officers should happen to come there.

A great light, which came all of a sudden from the side of the
garden through the lattices, caused them to approach them to see
from whence it came. It was occasioned by a hundred flambeaux of
white wax, carried by as many young eunuchs; these were followed by
more than a hundred others, who guarded the ladies of the caliph’s
palace, clothed and armed with scimitars, in the same manner as
those I spoke of before; and the caliph came after them, betwixt
Mesrour their captain on his right, and Vassif their second officer
on his left hand.

Schemselnihar waited for the caliph at the entry of a walk,
accompanied with twenty women, all of surprising beauty, adorned
with necklaces and ear-rings of large diamonds, and others which
covered their heads entirely: they sung and played on their
instruments, and formed a charming concert. The favourite no sooner
saw the prince appear, but she advanced, and prostrated herself at
his feet; and while she was doing this, Prince of Persia, said she
within herself, if your sad eyes witness what I do, judge of my hard
lot; if I was humbling myself so before you, my heart would feel no
reluctance.

The caliph was delighted to see Schemselnihar. Rise, madam, said he
to her: come near: I am angry with myself that I should have
deprived myself so long of the pleasure of seeing you. As he spoke
thus, he took her by the hand, and, with many tender expressions,
went and sat down upon the silver throne which Schemselnihar caused
to be brought for him, and she sat down upon a seat before him; and
the twenty women made a circle round them upon other seats, while
the young eunuchs, who carried flambeaux, dispersed themselves at a
certain distance from one another, that the caliph might enjoy the
cool of the evening the better.

When the caliph sat down, he looked round him, and beheld with great
satisfaction the garden illuminated with a great many other lights,
besides those flambeaux which the young eunuchs held: but taking
notice that the saloon was shut, was astonished thereat, and
demanded the reason. It was done on purpose to surprise him; for he
had no sooner spoken, but all the windows flew open at once, he saw
it illuminated within and without, in a much better manner than ever
he had seen it before. Charming Schemselnihar, cried he, at this
sight, I understand you: you would have me to know there are as fine
nights as days. After what I have seen, I cannot deny it.

Let us return to the prince of Persia and Ebn Thaher, whom we left
in the gallery. Ebn Thaher could not enough admire all that he saw:
I am not very young, said he, and I have seen great entertainments
in my time; but I do not think any thing can be seen so surprising
and magnificent. All that is said of enchanted palaces does not come
up to the prodigious spectacles we now see. What riches and
magnificence united!

The prince of Persia was not at all moved with those objects which
so delighted Ebn Thaher; he could look on nothing but Schemselnihar,
and the presence of the caliph threw him into an inconceivable
grief. Dear Ebn Thaher, said he, would to God I had my mind as much
at liberty to attend to those objects of admiration as you! But,
alas! I am in quite a different situation; all those objects serve
only to increase my torment. Can I see the caliph familiar with the
object of my love, and not die of grief? Must such a passionate love
as mine be disturbed with so potent a rival? O heavens! How cruel
and strange is my destiny! It is but a moment since I esteemed
myself the most fortunate lover in the world, and at this instant I
feel a death-stroke to my heart. I cannot resist it, my dear Ebn
Thaher; my patience is exhausted, my disorder overwhelms me, and my
courage fails. While he was speaking those words, he saw something
pass in the garden, which obliged him to keep silence, and to turn
all his attention that way.

The caliph had ordered one of the women who was near him, to play
upon her lute and she began to sing; the words that she sung were
very passionate, and the caliph, persuaded that she sung thus by
order of Schemselnihar, who had frequently entertained him with the
like testimonies of her affections, interpreted them in his own
favour. But this was not now Schemselnihar’s meaning; she applied
it to her dear Ali Ebn Becar, and was so sensibly touched with
grief, to have before her an object whose presence she could no
longer enjoy, that she fainted and fell backwards upon her seat,
which having no arms to support her, she must have fallen down, had
not some of the women given her timely assistance, taken her up, and
carried her into the saloon.

Ebn Thaher, who was in the gallery, being surprised at this
accident, turned towards the prince of Persia; but, instead of
seeing him stand and look through the window as before, he was
extremely amazed to see him lying at his feet motionless. This
convinced him of the violence of that prince’s passion for
Schemselnihar, and he admired that strange effect of sympathy, which
put him into a mortal fear, because of the place they were in. He
did all he could to recover the prince, but in vain. Ebn Thaher was
in this perplexity, when Schemselnihar’s confidant opened the
gallery door, and came in out of breath, as one who knew not where
she was. Come speedily, cried she, that I may let you out: all is in
confusion here, and I fear this will be the last of our days. --Ah!
how would you have us go? replied Ebn Thaher, with a mournful voice;
come near, I pray you, and see what a condition the prince of Persia
is in. When the slave saw him in a swoon, she ran in all haste for
water, and returned in an instant.

At last the prince of Persia, after they had thrown water on his
face, recovered his spirits. Prince, said Ebn Thaher to him, we run
the risk of perishing, if we stay here any longer: exert yourself,
therefore; let us endeavour to save our lives. He was so feeble,
that he could not rise alone; Ebn Thaher and the confidant lent him
their hands, and supported him on each side. They came to a little
iron gate which opens towards the Tigris, went out at it, and came
to the side of a little canal which has a communication with the
river. The confidant clapped her hands, and immediately a little
boat appeared, and came towards them with one rower. Ali Ebn Becar
and his comrade went aboard, and the confidant staid at the side of
the canal. As soon as the prince sat down in the boat, he stretched
out one hand towards the palace, and laying the other upon his
heart, Dear object of my soul, cried he, with a feeble voice,
receive my faith with this hand, while I assure you with the other,
that my heart shall for ever preserve the fire with which it burns
for you.

In the mean time the boatman rowed with all his might, and
Schemselnihar’s confidant accompanied the prince of Persia and Ebn
Thaher, walking along the side of the canal, until they came to the
Tigris, and when she could go no further, she took leave of them,
and returned.

The prince of Persia continued very feeble: Ebn Thaher comforted
him, and exhorted him to take courage. Consider, said he to him,
that when we are landed, we have a great way to go before we reach
my house; and I would not advise you to go to your lodging, which is
a great deal farther than mine, at this hour, and in this condition.
At last they went out of the boat, but the prince had so little
strength, that he could not walk, which put Ebn Thaher into great
perplexity. He recollected he had a friend in the neighbourhood, and
carried the prince thither with great difficulty. His friend
received him very cheerfully, and when he made them sit down, he
asked them where they had been so late. Ebn Thaher answered him, I
heard this evening that a man who owed me a considerable sum of
money was setting out on a long voyage. I lost no time to find him,
and by the way I met with this young nobleman whom you see, and to
whom I am under a thousand obligations; for, knowing my debtor, he
did me the favour to go along with me. We had a great deal of
trouble to bring the man to reason. We have at length succeeded, and
this is the cause of our being so late. In our return home, this
good lord, to whom I am for ever bound to show all possible respect,
was attacked by a sudden illness, which made me take the liberty to
knock at your door, flattering myself that you would be pleased to
lodge us this night.

Ebn Thaher’s friend took all this for truth, told them they were
welcome, and offered the prince of Persia, whom he knew not, all the
assistance he could desire; but Ebn Thaher spoke for the prince, and
said, that his distemper was of that nature as required nothing but
rest. His friend understood by this that they desired to go to bed.
Upon which he conducted them to an apartment, where he left them.

Though the prince of Persia slept, he was interrupted by troublesome
dreams, which represented Schemselnihar in a swoon at the caliph’s
feet, and increased his affliction. Ebn Thaher was very impatient to
be at home, and doubted not but his family was under great
apprehension, because he never used to sleep out. He arose and
departed early in the morning, after he had taken leave of his
friend, who rose at break of day to prayers. At last he came home,
and the first thing the prince of Persia did, who had walked so far
with much trouble, was to lie down upon a sofa, as weary as if he
had gone a long journey. Being not in a condition to go to his own
house, Ebn Thaher ordered a chamber to be made ready for him, and
sent to acquaint his friends with his condition and where he was. In
the mean time he begged him to compose himself, to command in his
house, and to dispose of all things as he pleased. I thank you
heartily for those obliging offers, said the prince of Persia; but
that I may not be any way troublesome to you, I conjure you to deal
with me as if I were not at your house. I would not stay one moment,
if I thought my presence would incommode you in the least.

As soon as Ebn Thaher had time to recollect himself, he told his
family all that had passed at Schemselnihar’s palace, and
concluded by thanking God, who had delivered him from the danger he
was in. The prince of Persia’s principal domestics came to receive
his orders at Ebn Thaher’s house, and in a little time there
arrived several of his friends who had notice of his indisposition.
Those friends passed the greatest part of the day with him; and
though their conversation could not extinguish those sad ideas which
were the cause of his trouble, yet it gave him some relief. He would
have taken his leave of Ebn Thaher towards the evening; but this
faithful friend found him still so weak, that he obliged him to stay
till next day, and in the mean time, to divert him, he gave him a
concert of vocal and instrumental music in the evening; but this
concert served only to put him in mind of the preceding night, and
renewed his trouble, instead of assuaging it; so that next day his
distemper seemed to increase. Upon this Ebn Thaher did not oppose
his going home, but took care to accompany him thither; and when he
was with him alone in his chamber, he represented to him all those
arguments which might influence him to a generous effort to overcome
that passion which in the end would neither prove lucky to himself
nor to the favourite. Ah! dear Ebn Thaher, cried the prince, how
easy is it for you to give this advice, but how hard is it for me to
follow it! I am sensible of its importance, but am not able to
profit by it. I have said already, that I shall carry to the grave
with me the love that I bear to Schemselnihar. When Ebn Thaher saw
that he could gain nothing upon the prince, he took his leave of
him, and would have retired.

The prince of Persia stopt him, and said, Kind Ebn Thaher, since I
have declared to you that it is not in my power to follow your wise
counsels, I beg you would not charge it on me as a crime, nor
forbear to give me the usual testimonies of your friendship; you
cannot do me a greater favour than to inform me of the destiny of my
dear Schemselnihar, when you hear any news of her: the uncertainty I
am in concerning her fate, and the mortal apprehensions her fainting
has occasioned in me, keep me in this languishing condition you
reproach me with. --My lord, answered Ebn Thaher, you have reason to
hope that her fainting was not attended with any bad consequences;
her confidant will quickly come and inform me of the issue; and as
soon as I know the particulars, I will not fail to impart them.

Ebn Thaher left the prince in this hope, and returned home, where he
expected Schemselnihar’s confidant all the rest of the day, but in
vain; nor did she come next day. His uneasiness to know the state of
the prince of Persia’s health would not suffer him to stay any
longer without seeing him; he went to his lodging to exhort him to
patience, and found him lying on his bed as ill as ever, surrounded
by a great many of his friends, and several physicians, who made use
of all their art to discover the cause of his distemper. As soon as
he saw Ebn Thaher, he looked upon him smiling, to signify that he
had two things to tell him; the one, that he was glad to see him;
the other, how much the physicians, who could not discover the cause
of his distemper, were out in their reasonings.

His friends and physicians retired one after another, so that Ebn
Thaher being alone with him, came near his bed to ask him how he did
since he saw him. I must tell you, answered the prince, that my
passion, which continually gathers new strength, and the uncertainty
of the lovely Schemselnihar’s destiny, augment my distemper every
moment, and cast me into such a state, as afflicts my kindred and
friends, and breaks the measures of my physicians, who do not
understand it. You cannot think, added he, how much I suffer by
seeing so many people about me, who importune me, and whom I cannot
in civility put away. Your company alone relieves me; but I conjure
you not to dissemble with me: What news do you bring me of
Schemselnihar? Have you seen her confidant? What said she to you?
--Ebn Thaher answered, that he had not seen her yet; and no sooner
had he told the prince of Persia this sad news, but the tears came
into his eyes; he could not answer one word, his heart was so
oppressed. Prince, added Ebn Thaher, suffer me to tell you, that you
are too ingenious in tormenting yourself. In the name of God, wipe
away your tears: if any of your people should come in, they would
discover you by this, notwithstanding the care you ought to take to
conceal your thoughts. Whatever this judicious confidant could say,
it was not possible for the prince to refrain from weeping. Wise Ebn
Thaher, said he, when he had recovered his speech, I may indeed
hinder my tongue from revealing the secrets of my heart, but I have
no power over my tears, upon such an alarming subject as
Schemselnihar’s danger. If that adorable and only object of my
desires be no longer in the world, I shall not survive her a moment.
--Reject so afflicting a thought, replied Ebn Thaher; Schemselnihar
is yet alive, you need not doubt of it; if you have heard no news of
her, it is because she could find no opportunity to send to you, and
I hope you will hear from her to-day. To this he added several other
consoling arguments, and then withdrew.

Ebn Thaher was scarce at his own house when Schemselnihar’s
confidant arrived with a melancholy countenance, which he reckoned a
bad omen. He asked news of her mistress: Tell me yours first, said
the confidant, for I was in great trouble to see the prince of
Persia go away in that condition. Ebn Thaher told her all that she
wished to know, and when he had done, the slave began thus:-- If the
prince of Persia, said she, has suffered, and does still suffer, for
my mistress, she suffers no less for him. After I departed from you,
continued she. I returned to the saloon, where I found Schemselnihar
not yet recovered from her swoon, notwithstanding all the help they
endeavoured to give her. The caliph was sitting near her with all
the signs of real grief; he asked all the women, and me in
particular, if we knew the cause of her distemper; but we kept all
secret, and told him we were altogether ignorant of it. In the mean
time, we all wept to see her suffer so long, and forgot nothing that
might any way help her. In a word, it was almost midnight before she
came to herself. The caliph, who had the patience to wait the event,
was rejoiced at her recovery, and asked Schemselnihar the cause of
her distemper. As soon as she heard him speak, she endeavoured to
recover her seat; and after she had kissed his feet, before he could
hinder her, Sir, said she, I have reason to complain of heaven, that
it did not allow me to expire at your majesty’s feet, to testify
thereby how sensible I am of your favours.

I am persuaded you love me, said the caliph to her, and I command
you to preserve yourself for my sake. You have probably exceeded in
something to-day, which has occasioned this indisposition: take
care, I entreat you; abstain from it for the future. I am very glad
to see you better, and I advise you to stay here to-night, and not
to return to your chamber, for fear the motion affect you. He then
commanded a little wine to be brought her, in order to strengthen
her; and taking leave of her, returned to his apartment.

As soon as the caliph was gone, my mistress gave me a sign to come
near her. She asked me earnestly concerning you; I assured her that
you had been gone a long time, which made her easy on that head: I
took care not to speak of the prince of Persia’s fainting, lest it
should make her fall into the same state, from which we had so much
trouble to recover her; but my precautions were in vain, as you
shall hear. Prince, said she, I henceforth renounce all pleasure us
long as I am deprived of the sight of you. If I have understood your
heart right, I only follow your example. You will not cease to weep
until you see me again; it is but just that I weep and mourn until I
see you. At these words, which she uttered in a manner expressive of
the violence of her passion, she fainted a second time in my arms.

Schemselnihar’s confidant continued to tell Ebn Thaher all that
had happened to her mistress after the first fainting. My companions
and I, said she, were a long time recovering her; at last, she came
to herself; and then I said to her, Madam, are you resolved to kill
yourself, and to make us also die with you? I entreat you, in the
name of the prince of Persia, who is so deeply interested in your
life, to preserve it, as you love yourself; be persuaded to this
effort, as you love the prince, and for our fidelity to you. I am
very much obliged to you, replied she, for your care, your zeal, and
your advice; but, alas! they are useless to me: you are not to
flatter us with any hopes, for we can expect no end of our torment
but in the grave.

One of my companions would have diverted these sad thought by
playing on the lute, but she commanded her to be silent, and ordered
all of them to retire except me, whom she kept all night with her. O
heavens! what a night it was! she passed it in tears and groans, and
incessantly naming the prince of Persia. She lamented her lot, that
had destined her to the caliph, whom she could not love, and not for
him whom she loved so dearly.

Next morning, because she was not commodiously lodged in the saloon,
I helped her to her chamber, where she no sooner arrived than all
the physicians of the palace came to see her by order of the caliph,
who was not long in coming himself. The medicines which the
physicians prescribed to Schemselnihar were ineffectual, because
they were ignorant of the cause of her distemper; and the presence
of the caliph augmented it. She got a little rest, however, this
night, and as soon as she awoke, she charged me to come to you, to
hear news of the prince of Persia. I have already informed you of
his case, said Ebn Thaher; so return to your mistress, and assure
her, that the prince of Persia waits for news from her with the like
impatience that she does from him; above all, exhort her to
moderation, and to overcome herself, for fear she drop before the
caliph some word which may prove fatal to us all. As for me, replied
the confidant, I confess I dread her transports; I have taken the
liberty to tell her my mind, and am persuaded that she will not take
it ill that I tell her again this from you.

Ebn Thaher, who had but just come from the prince of Persia’s
lodgings, thought it not convenient to return so soon, and neglect
his own important affairs, and therefore went not till the evening;
the prince was alone, and no better than in the morning; Ebn Thaher
said he to him, as soon as he saw him, you have doubtless many
friends, but they do not know your worth, which you discover to me
by your zeal, your care, and the trouble you give yourself to oblige
me. I am confounded with all that you do for me with so great
affection, and I know not how I shall be able to express my
gratitude. Prince, answered Ebn Thaher, do not speak so, I entreat
you; I am ready, not only to give one of my eyes, to save one of
yours, but to sacrifice my life for you. But this is not the present
business; I come to tell you that Schemselnihar sent her confidant
to ask me about you, and at the same time, to inform me of her
condition. You may assure yourself, that I said nothing but what
might confirm the excess of your passion for her mistress, and the
constancy with which you love her. Then Ebn Thaher gave him a
particular account of all that had passed betwixt the trusty slave
and him.

The prince listened with all the different emotions of fear,
jealousy, affection, and compassion, which this conversation could
inspire him with, making upon every thing which he heard, all the
afflicting or comforting reflections that so passionate a lover was
capable of.

Their conversation continued so long, that the night was far
advanced, so that the prince of Persia obliged Ebn Thaher to stay
with him. The next morning, as his trusty friend returned home,
there came to him a woman, whom he knew to be Schemselnihar’s
confidant, and immediately she spoke to him thus: My mistress
salutes you, and I am come to entreat you in her name to deliver
this letter to the prince of Persia. The zealous Ebn Thaher took the
letter, and returned to the prince, accompanied by the confidant
slave.

When Ebn Thaher entered the prince of Persia’s house, with
Schemselnihar’s confidant, he prayed her to stay, and wait for him
a moment in the drawing room. As soon as the prince of Persia saw
him, he asked earnestly what news he had to tell him? The best you
can expect, answered Ebn Thaher. You are as dearly beloved as you
love; Schemselnihar’s confidant is in your drawing room; she has
brought you a letter from her mistress, and waits for your orders to
come in. Let her come in, cried the prince, with a transport of joy;
and so saying, he sat up to receive her.

The prince’s attendants went from him as soon as they saw Ebn
Thaher, and left him alone with their master. Ebn Thaher went and
opened the door himself, and brought in the confidant. The prince
knew her, and received her with great politeness. My lord, said she
to him, I am sensible of the affliction you have endured since I had
the honour to conduct you to the boat which waited to bring you
back; but I hope the letter I have brought will contribute to your
cure. So saying, she presented him the letter. He took it, and after
he had kissed it several times, he opened and read it as follows:




A Letter from Schemselnihar to Ali Ebn Becar, Prince of Persia.


‘The person who brings you this letter will give you a better
account concerning me than I can do, for I have not been myself
since I saw you; being deprived of your presence, I sought to
deceive myself by conversing with you by these ill-written lines,
with the same pleasure as if I had the good fortune to speak to you.

‘It is said, that patience is a cure for all evils, but it
heightens my sufferings, instead of relieving them. Although your
picture be deeply engraven in my heart, my eyes, desire speedily
once more to see the original, and they will lose all their light if
they be any considerable time deprived of it. May I flatter myself
that yours have the same impatience to see me? Yes, I can; their
tender glances have sufficiently discovered it to me. How happy,
prince, should you and Schemselnihar both be, if our united desires
were not thwarted by invincible obstacles, which afflict me the more
sensibly as they have that effect on you.

‘Those thoughts which my fingers write, and which I express with
incredible pleasure, repeating them again and again, proceed from
the bottom of my heart, and from the incurable wound which you have
made in it, a wound which I bless a thousand times, notwithstanding
the cruel torments I endure for your absence. I would reckon all
that opposes our love nothing, were I only allowed to see you
sometimes with freedom; I should then enjoy you, and what could I
desire more?

‘Do not imagine that I say more than I think. Alas! whatever
expressions I make use of, I feel that I think more than I can tell
you. My eyes, which are continually watching and weeping for your
return; my afflicted heart, which desires you alone; the sighs that
escape me as often as I think on you, that is every moment; my
imagination, which represents no other object to me than my dear
prince; the complaints that I make to heaven for the rigour of my
destiny; in a word, my grief, my distress, my torments, which give
me no ease ever since I lost sight of you, will vouch for what I
write.

‘Am I not unhappy to be born to love, without hope of enjoying him
whom I love? This afflicting thought oppresses me so that I should
die were I not persuaded that you love me: but this sweet comfort
balances my despair, and preserves my life. Tell me that you love me
always; I will keep your letter carefully, and read it a thousand
times a day; I should endure my afflictions with less impatience: I
pray heaven may cease to be angry at us, and grant us an opportunity
to say, that we love one another without fear; and that we shall
never cease to love one another. Adieu. I salute Ebn Thaher, to whom
we are so much obliged.’

The prince of Persia was not satisfied with reading the letter once;
he thought he had read it with too little attention, and therefore
read it again with more leisure; and as he read, sometimes he
uttered deep sighs, sometimes he shed tears, and sometimes he broke
out into transports of joy and tenderness, as he was affected with
what he read. In short, he could not keep his eyes off those
characters drawn by so beloved a hand, and was beginning to read it
a third time, when Ebn Thaher observed to him, that the confidant
had no time to lose, and that he ought to think of giving an answer.
Alas! cried the prince, how would you have me answer so kind a
letter? In what terms shall I express myself in the disturbed state
I am in? My mind is tossed with a thousand tormenting thoughts,
which are lost the same moment they are conceived, to make way for
others. So long as my body is influenced by the impressions of my
mind, how shall I be able to hold the paper, or guide my reed to
write? [81]

So saying, he took out of a little desk which was near him, paper, a
cane ready cut, and an inkhorn.

The prince of Persia, before he began to write, gave
Schemselnihar’s letter to Ebn Thaher, and prayed him to hold it
open while he wrote, that by casting his eyes upon it, he might the
better see what to answer. He began to write; but the tears that
fell from his eyes upon the paper, obliged him several times to
stop, that they might fall the more freely. At last, he finished his
letter, and giving it to Ebn Thaher, Read it, I pray, said he to
him, and do me the favour to see if the disorder of my mind has
allowed me to give a favourable answer. Ebn Thaher took it, and read
as follows:




The Prince of Persia’s answer to Schemselnihar’s Letter.


‘I was plunged in the deepest grief when I received your letter,
at the sight of which, I was transported with unspeakable joy; and
at sight of the characters written by your lovely hand, my eyes were
enlightened by a stronger light than they lost, when yours were
closed on a sudden at the feet of my rival. These words contained in
your kind letter are so many rays of light, which have dispelled the
darkness wherewith my soul was obscured; they show me how much you
suffer for love of me, and that you are not ignorant of what I
endure for you, and thereby comfort me in my afflictions. On the one
hand, they make me shed tears in abundance; and on the other, they
inflame my heart with a fire which supports it, and prevents my
dying of grief. I have not had one moment’s rest since our cruel
separation. Your letter alone gave me some ease. I kept a mournful
silence till the moment I received it, and then it restored my
speech. I was buried in profound melancholy, but it inspired me with
joy, which immediately appeared in my eyes and countenance. But my
surprise at receiving a favour which I had not yet deserved was so
great, that I knew not how to begin to testify my thankfulness for
it. In a word, after having kissed it several times as a precious
pledge of your goodness, I read it over and over, and was confounded
at the excess of my good fortune. You would have me signify to you,
that I always love you. Ah! though I did not love you so perfectly
as I do, I could not forbear adoring you, after all the marks you
have given me of a love so uncommon; yes, I love you my dear soul,
and shall account it my glory to burn all my days with that sweet
fire you have kindled in my heart. I will never complain of that
ardour with which I feel it consumes me: and how rigorous soever the
evils be which I suffer, I will bear them with fortitude, in hopes
to see you some time or other. Would to heaven it were to-day, and
that, instead of sending you my letter, I might be allowed to come
and assure you, that I die for love of you! My tears hinder me from
saying any more. Adieu.’

Ebn Thaher could not read those last lines without weeping. He
returned the letter to the prince of Persia, and assured him it
wanted no correction. The prince closed it, and when he had sealed
it, he desired the trusty slave to come near, and said to her, This
is my answer to your dear mistress’s letter. I conjure you to
carry it to her, and to salute her in my name. The slave took the
letter, and retired with Ebn Thaher.

After Ebn Thaher had walked some way with the slave, he left her,
and went to his house, and began to think in earnest upon the
amorous intrigue into which he found himself unhappily engaged. He
considered, that the prince of Persia and Schemselnihar,
notwithstanding their interest to conceal their correspondence,
conducted themselves with so little discretion, that it could not be
long a secret. He drew all the consequences from it, which a man of
good sense ought to do. Were Schemselnihar, said he to himself, a
lady of common rank, I would contribute all in my power to make her
and her lover happy; but she is the caliph’s favourite, and no man
can without danger attempt to engage the affections of the object of
his choice. His anger would fall in the first instance on
Schemselnihar; it will next cost the prince of Persia his life, and
I shall be involved in his misfortune. --In the mean time, I have my
honour, my quiet, my family, and my estate to preserve. I must,
while I can, extricate myself out of such a risk.

These thoughts occupied his mind all that day; next morning, he went
to the prince of Persia, with a design to make one more effort to
oblige him to conquer his passion. He represented to him what he had
before represented in vain; that it would be much better for him to
call up all his resolution, to overcome his inclination for
Schemselnihar, than to suffer himself to be hurried away by it; and
that his passion was so much the more dangerous, as his rival was
powerful. In short, sir, added he, if you will hearken to me, you
ought to think of nothing but to triumph over your love; otherwise,
you run the risk of destroying yourself with Schemselnihar, whose
life ought to be dearer to you than your own. I give you this advice
as a friend, for which you will some time or other thank me.

The prince heard Ebn Thaher with great impatience, but suffered him
to speak his mind, and then replied to him thus: Ebn Thaher, said
he, do you think I can cease to love Schemselnihar, who loves me so
tenderly? She is not afraid to expose her life for me, and would you
have me regard mine? No; whatever misfortunes befall me, I will love
Schemselnihar to my last breath.

Ebn Thaher, shocked at the obstinacy of the prince of Persia, left
him hastily, and going to his own house, recalled to his mind his
former reflections, and began to think seriously what he should do.
In the mean time, a jeweller, one of his intimate friends, came to
see him. The jeweller had perceived that Schemselnihar’s confidant
came oftener to Ebn Thaher than usual, and that he was constantly
with the prince of Persia, whose sickness was known to every one,
though not the cause of it. This had awakened the jeweller’s
suspicions, and finding Ebn Thaher very pensive, he presently judged
that he was perplexed with some important affair, and fancying that
he knew the cause, he asked, what Schemselnihar’s confidant wanted
with him? Ebn Thaher being struck with this question, would have
dissembled, and told him, that it was for a trifle she came so
frequently to him. You do not tell me the truth, said the jeweller,
and you think to persuade me, by your dissimulation, that this
trifle is a more important affair than at first I thought it to be.
Ebn Thaher perceiving that his friend pressed him so much, said to
him, it is true, that it is an affair of the greatest consequence! I
had resolved to keep it secret, but since I know how much you are my
friend, I choose rather to make you my confidant, than to suffer you
to be under a mistake about it. --I do not recommend to you secrecy,
for you will easily judge by what I am going to tell you, how
important it is to keep it. After this preamble, he told him the
amour between Schemselnihar, and the prince of Persia. You know,
continued he, in what esteem I am at court, in the city, and with
lords and ladies of the greatest quality; what a disgrace it would
be for me, should this rash amour come to be discovered? But what do
I say; should not I and my family be completely ruined? That is what
perplexes my mind; but I have just formed my resolution: I will go
immediately and satisfy my creditors, and recover my debts, and when
I have secured my property, will retire to Balsora, and stay till
the storm that I foresee is blown over. My friendship for
Schemselnihar and the prince of Persia makes me very sensible to
what dangers they are exposed. I pray heaven to convince them of it,
and to preserve them; but if their evil destiny should bring their
amours to the knowledge of the caliph, I shall, at least, be out of
the reach of his resentment; for I do not think them so wicked as to
design to involve me in their misfortunes. It would be the height of
ingratitude, and a bad reward for the service I have done them, and
the good advice I have given them, particularly to the prince of
Persia, who may save both himself and his mistress from this
precipice, if he pleases: he may as easily leave Bagdad as I; and
absence will insensibly disengage him from a passion, which will
only increase whilst he continues in this place.

The jeweller was extremely surprised at what Ebn Thaher told him.
What you say to me, says he, is of so great importance, that I
cannot understand how Schemselnihar and the prince could have
abandoned themselves to such a violent passion; what inclination
soever they may have for one another, instead of yielding to it,
they ought to resist it, and make a better use of their reason. Is
it possible they can be insensible of the dangerous consequence of
their correspondence? How deplorable is their blindness! I perceive
all the consequences of it as well as you; but you are wise and
prudent, and I approve your resolution; the only way to deliver
yourself from the fatal events which you have reason to fear. After
this conversation, the jeweller rose up, and took his leave of Ebn
Thaher.

Before the jeweller retired, Ebn Thaher conjured him by the
friendship betwixt them, to say nothing of this to any body. Fear
not, said the jeweller; I will keep this secret on peril of my life.

Two days after, the jeweller went to Ebn Thaher’s shop, and seeing
it shut, he doubted not but he had executed the design he spoke of;
but, to be more sure, he asked a neighbour, if he knew why it was
shut? The neighbour answered that he knew not, unless Ebn Thaher was
gone a journey. There was no need of his inquiring farther, and he
immediately thought of the prince of Persia: Unhappy prince, said he
to himself, what will be your grief when you hear this news? How
will you now carry on your correspondence with Schemselnihar? I fear
you will die of despair. I pity you, and must make up your loss of a
too timid confidant.

The business that obliged him to come abroad was of no consequence,
so that he neglected it: and though he had no knowledge of the
prince of Persia, but only by having sold him some jewels, he went
to his house; he addressed himself to one of his servants, and
prayed him to tell his master, that he desired to speak with him
about business of very great importance. The servant returned
immediately to the jeweller, and introduced him to the prince’s
chamber, who was leaning on a sofa, with his head upon a cushion. As
soon as the prince saw him, he rose up to receive and welcome him,
and intreated him to sit down; asked if he could serve him in any
thing, or if he came to tell him any thing interesting concerning
himself. Prince, answered the jeweller, though I have not the honour
to be particularly acquainted with you, yet the desire of testifying
my zeal has made me take the liberty to come to your house, to
impart to you a piece of news that concerns you. I hope you will
pardon my boldness for my good intention.

After this introduction, the jeweller entered upon the matter, and
continued thus: Prince, I shall have the honour to tell you, that it
is a long time since the conformity of disposition, and some
business we have had together, united Ebn Thaher and me in strict
friendship. I know you are acquainted with him, and that he has
employed himself in obliging you to his utmost; I have learnt this
from himself for he keeps nothing secret from me, nor I from him. I
went just now to his shop, and was surprised to find it shut: I
addressed myself to one of his neighbours, to ask the reason; he
answered me, that two days ago Ebn Thaher took leave of him, and
other neighbours, offering them his service at Balsora, whither he
is gone, said he, about an affair of great importance. Not being
satisfied with this answer, my concern for his welfare determined me
to come and ask if you knew any thing particularly concerning this
his sudden departure.

At this discourse, which the jeweller accommodated to the subject,
the better to compass his design, the prince of Persia changed
colour, and looked at the jeweller in a manner which convinced him
how much he was disconcerted with the news. I am surprised at what
you inform me, said he; a greater misfortune could not befal me. Ah!
said he, with tears in his eyes, if what you tell me be true, I am
undone! Has Ebn Thaher, who was all my comfort, in whom I put all my
confidence, left me? I cannot think of living after so cruel a blow.

The jeweller needed no more to convince him fully of the prince of
Persia’s violent passion, which Ebn Thaher told him of: mere
friendship would not make him speak so; nothing but love could
produce such lively sensations.

The prince continued some moments absorbed in those melancholy
thoughts; at last he lifted up his head, and calling one of his
servants, Go, said he, to Ebn Thaher’s house, and ask some of his
domestics if he be gone to Balsora: run, and come back quickly, and
tell me what you hear. While the servant was gone, the jeweller
endeavoured to entertain the prince of Persia with indifferent
subjects; but the prince gave little heed to him: he was a prey to
fatal grief. Sometimes he could not persuade himself that Ebn Thaher
was gone, and at other times he did not doubt of it, when he
reflected upon the conversation he had with him the last time he saw
him, and the abrupt manner in which he left him.

At last the prince’s servant returned, and reported that he had
spoken with one of Ebn Thaher’s servants, who assured him that he
had been gone two days to Balsora. As I came from Ebn Thaher’s
house, added the servant, a slave well dressed met me; and after she
had asked me if I had the honour to belong to you, she told me she
wanted to speak with you, and begged at the same time that she might
come along with me: she is in the outer room, and I believe she has
a letter to give you from some person of consequence. The prince
commanded her to be immediately introduced, not doubting but it was
Schemselnihar’s confidant slave, as indeed it was. The jeweller
knew who she was, having seen her several times at Ebn Thaher’s
house. She could not have come in a better time to save the prince
from despair. She saluted him.

The prince of Persia returned the salute of Schemselnihar’s
confidant. The jeweller arose as soon as he saw her appear, and
retired, to leave them at liberty to converse together. The
confidant, after she had conversed some time with the prince, took
her leave and departed. She left him quite another person from what
he was before; his eyes appeared brighter, and his countenance more
gay; which satisfied the jeweller that the good slave came to tell
him something favourable to his amour.

The jeweller having taken his place again near the prince, said to
him, smiling, I see, prince, you have business of importance at the
caliph’s palace. The prince of Persia, astonished and alarmed at
this discourse, answered the jeweller, What leads you to suppose
that I have business at the caliph’s palace? --I judge so, replied
the jeweller, by the slave that is gone forth. And to whom, think
you, belongs this slave? replied the prince. --To Schemselnihar, the
caliph’s favourite, answered the jeweller. I know, continued he,
both the slave and her mistress, who has several times done me the
honour to come to my house and buy jewels. Besides, I know that
Schemselnihar keeps nothing secret from this slave; and I have seen
her go and come for several days along the streets, as I thought,
very much troubled: I imagined that it was for some affair of
consequence concerning her mistress.

The jeweller’s words did much trouble the prince of Persia. He
would not say so, said he to himself, if he did not suspect, or
rather was not acquainted with my secret. He remained silent for
some time, not knowing what course to take. At last he began, and
said to the jeweller, You have told me things which make me believe
that you know yet more than you have acquainted me with; it concerns
my repose, that I be perfectly informed; I conjure you, therefore,
not to conceal any thing from me.

Then the jeweller, who desired nothing more, gave him a particular
account of what had passed betwixt Ebn Thaher and himself: he let
him know that he was informed of his correspondence with
Schemselnihar, and forgot not to tell him that Ebn Thaher, alarmed
at the danger of being his confidant in the matter, had communicated
to him his intention of retiring to Balsora, to stay there until the
storm which he dreaded should be blown over. This he has executed,
added the jeweller; and I am surprised how he could determine
himself to abandon you, in the condition he informed me you was in.
As for me, prince, I confess I am moved with compassion towards
you, and am come to offer you my service; and if you do me the
favour to accept of it, I engage myself to be as faithful to you as
Ebn Thaher; besides, I promise to be more resolute. I am ready to
sacrifice my honour and life for you; and, that you may not doubt of
my sincerity, I swear by all that is sacred in our religion, to keep
your secret inviolable. Be persuaded then, prince, that you will
find in me the friend whom you have lost. This discourse encouraged
the prince, and comforted him under Ebn Thaher’s absence. I am
very glad, said he to the jeweller, to find in you a reparation of
my loss: I want words to express the obligations I am under to you.
I pray God to recompense your generosity, and I accept your obliging
offer with all my heart. Believe me, continued he, Schemselnihar’s
confidant came to speak to me concerning you: she told me that it
was you who advised Ebn Thaher to go from Bagdad: these were the
last words she spoke to me when she went away, and she seemed
persuaded of what she said; but they do not do you justice. I doubt
not, after what you have told me, she is deceived. Prince, replied
the jeweller, I have had the honour to give you a faithful account
of my conversation with Ebn Thaher. It is true, when he told me he
meant to retire to Balsora, I did not oppose his design, but said he
was a wise and prudent man; but let not this prevent your putting
confidence in me. I am ready to serve you with all imaginable zeal.
If you do not make any use of my service, this shall not hinder me
from keeping your secret religiously, according to my oath. --I have
already told you, replied the prince, that I did not believe what
the confidant said: it is her zeal which inspired her with this
groundless suspicion, and you ought to excuse it, as I do.

They continued their conversation for some time, and consulted
together about the most convenient means to keep up the prince’s
correspondence with Schemselnihar. They agreed to begin by
undeceiving the confidant, who was so unjustly prepossessed against
the jeweller. The prince engaged to remove her mistake the first
time he saw her again, and to entreat her to address herself to the
jeweller whenever she might bring letters, or any other information,
from her mistress to him. In short, they agreed that she ought not
to come so frequently to the prince’s house, because thereby she
might lead to the discovery of what it was of so great importance to
conceal. At last the jeweller arose, and after having again
entreated the prince of Persia to place an unreserved confidence in
him, he withdrew.

The jeweller returning to his house, perceived before him a letter,
which somebody had dropped in the street. He took it up, and as it
was not sealed, he opened it, and found it conceived in these terms:




A Letter from Schemselnihar to the Prince of Persia.


‘I learn from my confidant a piece of news, which gives me no less
concern than it must give you. By losing Ebn Thaher, we have indeed
suffered a great loss; but let not this hinder you, dear prince,
from thinking to preserve yourself. If our confidant has abandoned
us through a panic fear, let us consider that it is a misfortune
which we could not avoid. I confess Ebn Thaher has left us at a time
when we most needed his assistance; but let us fortify ourselves by
patience against the unexpected stroke, and let us not forbear to
love one another constantly. Fortify your heart against this
misfortune. The object of our wishes is not to be obtained without
trouble. Let us not be discouraged, but hope that heaven will favour
us: and that, after so many afflictions, we shall see a happy
accomplishment of our desires. Adieu.’

While the jeweller was conversing with the prince of Persia, the
confidant had time to return to the palace, and communicate to her
mistress the ill news of Ebn Thaher’s departure. Schemselnihar
immediately wrote this letter, and sent back her confidant with it
to the prince of Persia, but she negligently dropped it.

The jeweller was glad to find it, for it furnished him with an
opportunity of justifying himself to the confidant, and bringing her
to the point he desired. When he had read it, he perceived the slave
seeking for it with the greatest anxiety, and looking about every
where. He closed it again quickly, and put it into his bosom; but
the slave observed him, and running to him, --Sir, said she, I have
dropped a letter, which you had just now in your hand; I beseech you
to restore it. The jeweller, taking no notice that he heard her,
continued his way till he came to his house. He did not shut the
door after him, that the confidant, who followed him, might come in.
She did so; and when she came to his chamber, Sir, said she to him,
you can make no use of that letter you have found; and you would not
hesitate to return it to me, if you knew from whom it came, and to
whom it is directed. Besides, allow me to tell you, you cannot
honestly keep it.

Before the jeweller answered the confidant, he made her sit down,
and then he said to her, Is not this letter from Schemselnihar, and
is it not directed to the prince of Persia? The slave, who expected
no such question, blushed. The question embarrasses you, replied he;
but I assure you I do not put it rashly. I could have given you the
letter in the street, but I wished you to follow me, on purpose that
I might come to some explanation with you. Is it just, tell me, to
impute an unhappy accident to people who no ways contributed towards
it? Yet this you have done, in telling the prince of Persia that it
was I who advised Ebn Thaher to leave Bagdad for his own safety. I
do not intend to lose time in justifying myself to you; it is enough
that the prince of Persia is fully persuaded of my innocence in this
matter: I will only tell you, that instead of contributing to Ebn
Thaher’s departure, I have been extremely afflicted at it; not so
much from my friendship to him, as out of compassion for the
condition he left the prince of Persia in, whose correspondence with
Schemselnihar he has discovered to me. As soon as I knew certainly
that Ebn Thaher was gone from Bagdad, I went and presented myself to
the prince, in whose house you found me, to inform him of this news,
and to offer him the same service which he did him; and provided you
put the same confidence in me that you did in Ebn Thaher, it will be
your own fault if you do not make my assistance of use to you.
Inform your mistress of what I have told you; and assure her that
though I should die for engaging in so dangerous an intrigue, I
should not repent of having sacrificed myself for two lovers so
worthy of one another.

The confidant, after having heard the jeweller with great
satisfaction, begged him to pardon the ill opinion she had conceived
of him, for the zeal she had for her mistress’s interest. I am
beyond measure glad, added she, that Schemselnihar and the prince
have found in you a person so fit to supply Ebn Thaher’s place. I
will not fail to convince my mistress of the good will you bear her.

After the confidant had testified to the jeweller her joy to see him
so well disposed to serve Schemselnihar and the prince of Persia,
the jeweller took the letter out of his bosom, and restored it to
her, saying, Go, carry it quickly to the prince of Persia, and come
back this way, that I may see the answer. Forget not to give him an
account of our conversation.

The confidant took the letter and carried it to the prince, who
answered it immediately. She returned to the jeweller’s house to
show him the answer, which was in these words:




The Prince of Persia’s Answer to Schemselnihar.


‘Your precious letter had a great effect upon me, but not so great
as I could have wished. You endeavour to comfort me for the loss of
Ebn Thaher; alas! however sensible I am of this, it is but the least
of my troubles. You know these troubles, and you know also that your
presence alone can cure me. When will the time come that I shall
enjoy it without fear of being deprived of it? how long does it seem
to me! or shall we flatter ourselves that we may ever see it? You
command me to preserve myself; I will obey you, since I have
renounced my own will to follow only yours. Adieu.’

After the jeweller had read this letter, he gave it again to the
confidant; who said, as she was going away, I will desire my
mistress to put the same confidence in you that she did in Ebn
Thaher: you shall hear of me to-morrow. Accordingly next day she
returned with a pleasant countenance. Your very looks, said he to
her, inform me that you have brought Schemselnihar to the point you
wished for. It is true, said the confidant, and you shall hear how I
effected it. I found yesterday, continued she, Schemselnihar
expecting me with impatience; I gave her the prince of Persia’s
letter, and she read it with tears in her eyes; and when she had
done, I saw that she had abandoned herself to her usual sorrow.
Madam, said I to her, it is doubtless Ebn Thaher’s removal that
troubles you; but suffer me to conjure you, in the name of God, to
alarm yourself no farther on that head. We have found another who
offers himself to oblige you with equal zeal, and, what is yet more
important, with greater courage. Then I spoke to her of you,
continued the slave, and acquainted her with the motive which led
you to the prince of Persia’s house: in short, I assured her that
you would inviolably keep the secret betwixt her and the prince of
Persia, and that you was resolved to favour their amour with all
your might. She seemed to be much relieved by my discourse. Ah! what
obligations, said she, are the prince of Persia and I under to that
honest man you speak of! I must be acquainted with him and see him,
that I may hear from his own mouth what you tell me, and thank him
for such an unheard-of piece of generosity towards persons that he
is no way obliged to concern himself with. The sight of him will
give me pleasure, and I shall omit nothing to confirm him in those
good sentiments. Fail not to bring him to me to-morrow. Therefore,
sir, be so good as to go with me to the palace.

The confidant’s discourse perplexed the jeweller. Your mistress,
replied he, must allow me to say, that she has not duly considered
what she requires of me. Ebn Thaher’s access to the caliph gave
him admission every where, and the officers who knew him, allowed
him free access to Schemselnihar’s palace; but as for me, how dare
I enter? You see clearly that it is impossible. I entreat you to
represent to Schemselnihar the reasons which prevent me from giving
her that satisfaction, and acquaint her with all the ill
consequences that would attend it. If she considers it ever so
little, she would find that it would expose me needlessly to very
great danger.

The confidant endeavoured to encourage the jeweller: Can you
believe, said she, that Schemselnihar is so unreasonable as by
bringing you to her, to expose you to the least danger, from which
she expects so important services? Consider with yourself that there
is not the least appearance of risk for you; my mistress and I are
too much interested in this affair to involve you in any danger. You
may depend upon me, and leave yourself to my conduct. After the
thing is over, you will be the first to confess that your fear was
groundless.

The jeweller yielded to the confidant’s discourse, and rose up to
follow her; but notwithstanding his boasted courage, he was seized
with such terror, that his whole body trembled. In your present
state, said she, I perceive it will be better for you to stay at
home, and that Schemselnihar should take other measures to see you.
It is not to be doubted, but that to satisfy her desire, she will
come hither herself; the case being so, sir, I would not have you
go. I am persuaded it will not be long ere you see her come to you.
The confidant foresaw this; for she no sooner informed Schemselnihar
of the jeweller’s fear, but she prepared to go to his house.

He received her with all the expressions of profound respect. When
she sat down, being a little fatigued with coming, she unveiled
herself, and let the jeweller see such beauty, as convinced him that
the prince of Persia was excusable in giving his heart to the
caliph’s favourite. Then she saluted the jeweller with a graceful
air, and said to him, I could not hear with what zeal you have
engaged in the prince of Persia’s concerns and mine, without
immediately forming a design to express my gratitude in person. I
thank heaven for having so soon made up Ebn Thaher’s loss.

Schemselnihar said many other obliging things to the jeweller, after
which, she returned to her palace. The jeweller went immediately to
give an account of this visit to the prince of Persia, who said to
him as soon as he saw him, I have expected you impatiently. The
trusty slave has brought me a letter from her mistress, but it does
not relieve me. Whatever the lovely Schemselnihar says, I dare not
hope for any thing; my patience is at an end; I know not now what
measures to take. Ebn Thaher’s departure makes me despair: he was
my only support --I lost all by losing him; I flattered myself with
some hopes by reason of his access to Schemselnihar.

After these words, which the prince pronounced with so much
eagerness, that he gave the jeweller no time to interrupt him, he
said to the prince, No man can take more interest in your affliction
than I do; and if you will have patience to hear me, you will
perceive that I can relieve you. Upon this, the prince held his
peace, and listened to him. I see very well, said the jeweller, that
the only way to give you satisfaction is to fall upon a plan that
will afford you an opportunity to converse freely with
Schemselnihar. This I wish to procure you, and tomorrow will set
about it. You must by no means expose yourself to enter
Schemselnihar’s palace; you know by experience the danger of that
step: I know a fitter place for this interview, where you will be
safe. When the jeweller had finished speaking, the prince embraced
him with transports of joy. You revive, said he, by this charming
promise, a wretched lover, who was condemned to die. I see that you
have fully repaired the loss of Ebn Thaher: whatever you do will be
well done; I leave myself entirely to your conduct.

After the prince had thus thanked him for his zeal, the Jeweller
returned home, and next morning Schemselnihar’s confidant came to
him. He told her that he had given the prince of Persia hopes that
he should see Schemselnihar speedily. I am come on purpose, answered
she, to concert measures with you for that end. I think, continued
she, this house will be convenient enough for their interview. I
could receive them very well here, replied he; but I think they will
have more liberty in another house of mine, where nobody lives at
present; I will quickly furnish it for their reception. There
remains nothing then for me to do, replied the confidant, but to
bring Schemselnihar to consent to it. I will go and speak to her,
and return speedily with an answer.

She was as diligent as her promise; and returning to the jeweller,
told him that her mistress would not fail to keep the appointment in
the evening. In the mean time, she gave him a purse, and told him it
was to prepare a collation. He carried her immediately to the house
where the lovers were to meet, that she might know whither to bring
her mistress; and when she was gone, he went to borrow from his
friends gold and silver plate, tapestry, rich cushions, and other
furniture, with which he furnished the house very magnificently; and
when he had put all things in order, he went to the prince of Persia.

You may easily conceive the prince of Persia’s joy, when the
jeweller told him that he came to conduct him to the house he had
prepared to receive him and Schemselnihar. This news made him forget
all his former troubles. He put on a magnificent robe, and went
without his retinue along with the jeweller, who led him through
several by-streets, that nobody might observe them, and at last
brought him to the house, where they conversed together until
Schemselnihar came.

They did not stay long for this passionate lover; she came after
evening prayer with her confidant and two other slaves. It is
impossible to express the excess of joy that seized those two lovers
when they saw one another: they sat down together upon a sofa,
looking upon one another for some time, without being able to speak,
they were so much overjoyed, but when their speech returned, they
soon made up for their silence. They said to each other so many
tender things, as made the jeweller, the confidant, and the two
other slaves weep. The jeweller, however, restrained his tears, to
attend to the collation, which he brought in himself. The lovers ate
and drank little, after which they sat down again upon the sofa.
Schemselnihar asked the jeweller if he had a lute, or any other
instrument. --The jeweller, who took care to provide all that could
please her, brought her a lute; she spent some time in tuning it,
and then sung.

While Schemselnihar was charming the prince of Persia, and
expressing her passion by words composed extempore, a great noise
was heard, and immediately the slave whom the jeweller had brought
with him, came in a great fright, to tell him, that some people were
breaking in at the gate, that he asked who it was, but instead of
any answer, the blows were redoubled. The jeweller being alarmed,
left Schemselnihar and the prince to go and inform himself of the
truth of this bad news. No sooner was he got into the court, than he
saw, notwithstanding the darkness of the night, a company of men,
armed with bayonets and scimitars, who had broken the gate, and came
directly towards him. He stood close to a wall for fear of his life,
and saw ten of them pass without being perceived by them. Finding he
could give no great assistance to the prince of Persia and
Schemselnihar, he contented himself with lamenting their fate, and
fled for refuge to a neighbour’s house, who was not yet gone to
bed. He did not doubt but this unexpected violence was by the
caliph’s order, who, he thought, had been informed of his
favourite’s meeting the prince of Persia there. He heard a great
noise in his own house, which continued till midnight; and when all
was quiet, as he thought, he desired his neighbour to lend him a
scimitar; and being thus armed, went on till he came to the gate of
his own house. He entered the court full of fear, and perceived a
man, who asked him who he was; he knew by his voice, that it was his
own slave. How did you manage, said he, to avoid being taken by the
watch? Sir, answered the slave, I hid myself in a corner of the
court, and I went out so soon as I heard the noise. But it was not
the watch who broke into your house; they were robbers, who, within
these few days, robbed another house in the neighbourhood; they,
doubtless, had notice of the rich furniture you brought hither, and
had that in view.

The jeweller thought his slave’s conjecture probable enough; he
visited the house, and saw that the robbers had taken all the
furniture out of the chamber where he received Schemselnihar and her
lover; that they had also carried off the gold and silver plate,
and, in a word, had left nothing. --Being in this condition, O
heaven! cried he, I am irrecoverably undone! What will my friends
say, and what excuse can I make, when I shall tell them that the
robbers have broken into my house, and robbed me of all they had
generously lent me? I shall never be able to make up their loss.
Besides, what is become of Schemselnihar and the prince of Persia?
This business will be so public, that it will be impossible but it
must reach the caliph’s ears. He will get notice of this meeting,
and I shall fall a sacrifice to his fury! The slave, who was very
much attached to him, endeavoured to comfort him. As to
Schemselnihar, said he, the robbers probably would content
themselves with stripping her, and you have reason to think, that
she is retired to her palace with her slaves. The prince of Persia
is probably in the same condition; so that you have reason to hope
the caliph will never know this adventure. As for the loss your
friends have sustained, that is a misfortune that you could not
avoid. They know very well the robbers are numerous, that they have
not only pillaged the house I have already spoken of, but many other
houses of the principal noblemen of the court; and they are not
ignorant, that notwithstanding the orders given to apprehend them,
nobody has been yet able to seize any of them. You will be acquitted
by restoring your friends the value of the things that are stolen,
and blessed be God, you will have enough left.

Waiting till day, the jeweller ordered the slave to mend the street
door, which was broken, as well as he could; after which he returned
to his usual residence with his slave, making melancholy reflections
upon what had happened. Ebn Thaher, said he to himself, has been
wiser than I: he foresaw the misfortune into which I have blindly
thrown myself; would to God I had never meddled in this intrigue,
which will, perhaps, cost me my life!

It was scarce day when the report of the robbery spread through the
city, and a great many of his friends and neighbours came to his
house to express their concern for his misfortune, but were curious
to know the particulars. He thanked them for their affection, and
had at least the consolation, that he heard nobody mention
Schemselnihar or the prince of Persia, which made him believe they
were at their houses, or in some secure place.

When the jeweller was alone, his servants brought him something to
eat, but he could not eat a bit. About noon one of his slaves came
to tell him there was a man at the gate, whom he knew not, that
desired to speak with him. The jeweller, not choosing to receive a
stranger into his house, rose up, and went to speak with him. Though
you do not know me, said the man, yet I know you, and I am come to
talk to you about an important affair. The jeweller desired him to
come in. No, answered the stranger; if you please, rather take the
trouble to go with me to your other house. How know you, replied the
jeweller, that I have another house? I know very well, answered the
stranger; follow me, and do not fear any thing: I have something to
communicate to you which will please you. The jeweller went
immediately with him; and after he had considered by the way how the
house they were going to was robbed, he said to him, that it was not
fit to receive him.

When they were before the house, and the stranger saw the gate half
broken down, said he to the jeweller, I see you have told me the
truth; I will carry you to a place where we shall be better
accommodated. --When he had said this, he went on, and walked all
the rest of the day without stopping. The jeweller being weary with
walking, vexed to see night approach, and that the stranger went on
without telling him where he was going, began to lose his patience,
when they came to a path which led to the Tigris; and as soon as
they came to the river, they embarked in a little boat, and went
over. The stranger led the jeweller through a long street, where he
had never been before in his life: and after he had brought him
through I know not how many by-streets, he stopped at a gate, which
he opened. He caused the jeweller to go in: then he shut and bolted
the gate with a huge iron bolt, and conducted him to a chamber,
where there were ten other men, all of them as great strangers to
the jeweller as he that brought him hither.

These ten men received the jeweller without any compliments. They
bade him sit down, of which he had great need: for he was not only
out of breath with walking so far, but the fear he was in, to find
himself with people whom he thought he had reason to be afraid of,
would have disabled him from standing. They waited for their leader
to go to supper, and as soon as he came it was served up. They
washed their hands, obliged the jeweller to do the like, and to sit
at table with them. After supper, the men asked him if he knew whom
he spoke to? He answered, No, and that he knew not the place he was
in. Tell us your last night’s adventure, said they to him, and
conceal nothing from us. The jeweller, being astonished at this
discourse, answered, Gentlemen, it is probable you know it already.
That is true, replied they; the young man and the young lady, who
were at your house yester-night, told it us; but we would know it
from your own mouth. The jeweller needed no more to inform him that
he spoke to the robbers who had broken into and plundered his house.
Gentlemen, said he, I am much troubled for that young man and lady;
can you give me any tidings of them?

Upon the jeweller’s inquiry of the thieves, if they knew any thing
of the young man and the young lady, they answered, Be not concerned
for them --they are safe and well. So saying, they showed him two
closets, where they assured him they were separately shut up. They
added, We are informed you alone know what relates to them, which we
no sooner came to understand, but we showed them all imaginable
respect, and were so far from doing them any injury, that we treated
them with all possible kindness on your account. We answer for the
same, proceeded they, for your own person; you may put unlimited
confidence in us.

The jeweller being encouraged at this, and overjoyed to hear that
the prince of Persia and Schemselnihar were safe, resolved to engage
the robbers yet farther in their interest. He commended them,
flattered them, and gave them a thousand benedictions. --Gentlemen,
said he, I must confess I have not the honour to know you, yet it is
no small happiness to me that I am not wholly unknown to you; and I
can never be sufficiently grateful for the favours which that
knowledge has procured me at your hands. Not to mention your great
humanity, I am fully persuaded now that persons of your character
are capable of keeping a secret faithfully; and none are so fit to
undertake a great enterprise, which you can best bring to a good
issue by your zeal, courage, and intrepidity. Confiding in these
qualities, which are so much your due, I hesitate not to tell you my
whole history, with that of those two persons you found in my house,
with all the fidelity you desire me.

After the jeweller had thus secured, as he thought, the confidence
of the robbers, he made no scruple to relate to them the whole amour
of the prince of Persia and Schemselnihar, from the beginning of it
to the time he received them into his house.

The robbers were greatly astonished at all the particulars they
heard, and could not forbear crying out, How! is it possible that
the young man should be the illustrious Ali Ebn Becar, prince of
Persia, and the young lady the fair and celebrated beauty
Schemselnihar? The jeweller assured them nothing was more certain,
and that they needed not to think it strange, that persons of so
distinguished a character should wish not to be known.

Upon this assurance of their quality, the robbers went immediately,
one after another, and threw themselves at their feet, imploring
their pardon, and protesting that nothing of the kind would have
happened to them, had they been informed of the quality of their
persons before they broke into the house; and that they would by
their future conduct endeavour to make amends for the crime they had
thus ignorantly committed. Then turning to the jeweller, they told
him, they were heartily sorry they could not restore to him all that
had been taken from him, part of it being no longer in their
possession; but as for what remained, if he would content himself
with his plate, it should be forthwith put into his hand.

The jeweller was overjoyed at the favour done him, and after the
robbers had delivered to him the plate, they required of the prince,
Schemselnihar, and him, to promise them upon oath, that they would
not betray them, and they would carry them to a place whence they
might easily go to their respective homes. The prince,
Schemselnihar, and the jeweller, replied, that they might rely on
their words; but, since they desired an oath of them, they solemnly
swore not to discover them. The thieves, satisfied with this,
immediately went out with them.

By the way, the jeweller, uneasy at not seeing the confidant and the
two slaves, came up to Schemselnihar, and begged her to inform him
what was become of them. She answered, she knew nothing of them, and
that all she could tell him was, that she was carried away from his
house, ferried over the river, and brought to the place from whence
they were just now come.

Schemselnihar and the jeweller had no farther discourse: they let
the robbers conduct them with the prince to the river’s side, when
the robbers immediately took boat, and carried them over to the
other side.

While the prince, Schemselnihar, and the jeweller, were landing,
they heard the noise of the horse-patrol coming towards them, just
as the boat arrived, and had conveyed the robbers back by dint of
rowing.

The commander of the brigade demanded of the prince, Schemselnihar,
and the jeweller, who they were, and whence they came so late.
Frightened as they were, and apprehensive of saying any thing that
might prejudice them, they could not speak; but at length it was
necessary they should: the jeweller found his tongue, his mind being
freer, and said, Sir, I can assure you, we are very honest people of
the city, and that those people who have just landed us, and are got
back to the other side of the water, are thieves, who having last
night broken open the house where we were, pillaged it, and
afterwards carried us to their quarters, where, by fair words, we
prevailed on them to let us have our liberty; and they brought us
hither. They have restored us part of the booty they had taken from
us. At which words he showed the parcel of plate he had recovered.

The commander, not satisfied with what the jeweller had told him,
came up to him and the prince of Persia, and looking stedfastly at
them, said, Tell me truly, who is this lady? How came you to know
her? and whereabouts do you live?

This question embarrassed them so much, that neither of them could
answer; till at length Schemselnihar extricated them from their
difficulty, and taking the commander aside, told him who she was;
which he no sooner knew, but he alighted with great expressions of
respect and politeness, and ordered his men to bring two boats.

When the boats were come, he put Schemselnihar into one, and the
prince of Persia and the jeweller into the other, with two of his
people in each boat; with orders to accompany each of them
whithersoever they were bound. The two boats took different routes;
but we shall at present speak only of that wherein was the prince
and jeweller.

The prince, to save his guides trouble, bid them land the jeweller
at his house, naming the place. The guide, by this direction,
stopped just before the caliph’s palace, which put both him and
the jeweller into a mortal fright, though he durst not show it:
although they had heard the commander’s orders to his men, they
could not help imagining they were to be delivered up to the guard,
to be brought before the caliph next morning.

This, nevertheless, was not the intention of the guides; for after
they had landed them, they, by their master’s command, recommended
them to an officer of the caliph’s guard, who assigned them two
soldiers to conduct them by land to the prince’s house, which was
at some distance from the river. They arrived there, but so tired
and weary that they could hardly move.

The prince being come home, with the fatigue of his journey, and
this misadventure to himself and Schemselnihar, which deprived him
of all hope of ever seeing her more, fell into a swoon on his sofa.
While the greatest part of his servants were endeavouring to recover
him, the rest gathered about the jeweller, and begged him to tell
them what had happened to the prince their lord, whose absence had
occasioned them such inexpressible uneasiness.

Whilst the greatest part of the prince’s domestics were
endeavouring to recover him from his swoon, others of them were got
about the jeweller, desiring to know what had happened to their
lord. The jeweller, who took care to discover nothing to them that
was not proper for them to know, told them it was an extraordinary
case, but that it was not a time to relate it, and that they would
do better to go and assist the prince. By good fortune the prince
came to himself that moment, and those that had but just before
required his history with so much earnestness, began to keep a
respectful distance, and pay that respect which was due from them.

Although the prince had in some measure recovered his senses, he
continued so weak, that he could not open his mouth to speak. He
answered only by signs, even to his nearest relations, when they
spoke to him. He remained in the same condition till next morning,
when the jeweller came to take leave of him. His answer was only
with a wink, and holding forth his right hand; but when he saw he
was laden with the bundle of plate which the thieves had returned to
him, he made a sign to his servants that they should take it and
carry it to his house.

The jeweller had been expected with great impatience by his family
the day he went forth with a man who came to ask for him, and whom
he did not know; but now he was quite given over, and it was no
longer doubted but some disaster had befallen him. His wife,
children, and servants, were in the greatest alarm, and were
lamenting him. When he arrived, their joy was very great; yet they
were troubled to see that he was so much altered in the short
interval, that he was hardly to be known. This was occasioned by the
great fatigue of the preceding day, and the fears he had undergone
all night, which would not let him sleep. Finding himself much
disordered, he continued at home two days, and would admit only one
of his intimate friends to visit him.

The third day, finding himself something better, he thought he might
recover strength by going abroad to take the air; and therefore went
to the shop of a rich merchant his acquaintance, with whom he
continued long in discourse. As he was rising to take leave of his
friend and go home, he observed a woman making a sign to him, whom
he presently knew to be the confidant of Schemselnihar. Between fear
and joy, he made what haste he could away, without looking at her;
but she followed him, as he feared she would, the place they were in
being by no means proper to hold a conversation. As he walked a
little faster than ordinary, she not being able to overtake him,
every now and then she called out to him to stay.

He heard her; but after what had happened, he did not think fit to
speak to her in public, for fear of giving cause to suspect that he
was connected with Schemselnihar. It was known to every body in
Bagdad that this woman belonged to her, and executed all her little
commissions. He continued the same pace, and at length came to a
mosque, where he knew but few people came. He entered it, and she
followed him, and they had a long conversation together, without any
body overhearing them.

Both the jeweller and confidant expressed mutual joy at seeing each
other, after the strange adventure of the robbers, and their
reciprocal apprehension for each other, without regarding their own
particular persons.

The jeweller wished her to relate to him how she escaped with the
two slaves, and what she knew of Schemselnihar from the time he lost
sight of her; but so great was her eagerness to know what had
happened to him from the time of their unexpected separation, that
he found himself obliged to satisfy her. Having given you the detail
you desired, said he, oblige me in your turn, which she did in the
following manner:

When I first saw the robbers, said she, I hastily imagined that they
were soldiers of the caliph’s guard, and that the caliph being
informed of Schemselnihar’s going out, had sent them to take away
her life, the life of the prince, and of us all. Under this
impression I immediately got up to the leads of your house, when the
thieves entered the chamber where the prince and Schemselnihar were,
and I was soon after followed by that lady’s two slaves. From
leads to leads, we came at last to a house of very honest people,
who received us with much civility, and with whom we lodged that
night.

Next morning, after thanking the master of the house for our good
usage, we returned to Schemselnihar’s palace, where we entered in
great disorder and distress, because we could not learn the fate of
the two unfortunate lovers. The other women of Schemselnihar were
astonished to see me return without their lady. We told them we had
left her at the house of one of her female friends, and that she
would send for us when she had a mind to come home; with which
excuse they seemed well satisfied.

For my part, I spent the day in great uneasiness, and when night
came, opening a small private gate, I espied a little boat on the
canal which seemed driven by the stream. I called to the waterman
and desired him to row up each side of the river, and look if he
could see a lady; if he found her, to bring her along with him. The
two slaves and I waited impatiently for his return, and at length
about midnight, we saw the boat coming down with two men in it and a
woman lying along in the stern. When the boat was come up, the two
men helped the woman to rise, and then it was I knew her to be
Schemselnihar. I cannot express my joy at seeing her.

I gave my hand to Schemselnihar to help her out of the boat; she had
great need of my assistance, for she could hardly stand. When she
was landed, she whispered to me in a tone expressive of her
affliction, and bid me go and take a purse of a thousand pieces of
gold and give to the two soldiers that had accompanied her. I
committed her to the two slaves to support her, and having ordered
the two soldiers to wait for me a moment, I took the purse, and
returned instantly: I gave it to the soldiers, and having paid the
waterman, shut the door.

I then followed my lady, and overtook her before she was got up to
her chamber. We immediately undressed her, and put her to bed, where
she had not long been, before she seemed ready to give up the ghost
all the rest of the night. The day following, her other women
expressed a great desire to see her; but I told them she had been
greatly fatigued, and wanted rest to restore her strength. The other
two women and I gave her all the assistance in our power, and that
she could expect from our attention. She persisted in taking nothing
that we offered her: and we should have despaired of her life, if I
had not at last perceived that the wine which we gave her every now
and then had a sensible effect in restoring her strength. By
importunity we overcame her obstinacy, and at length prevailed with
her to eat.

When she came to the use of her speech, for she had hitherto only
wept, groaned, and sighed, I begged of her to tell me how she had
escaped out of the hands of the robbers. Why would you require of
me, said she, with a profound sigh, to renew my grief? Would to God
the robbers had taken away my life, rather than preserved it; my
misfortunes would then have had an end, whereas I live but to
increase my sufferings.

Madam, replied I, I beg you would not refuse me this favour. You
cannot but know that the wretched feel a consolation in relating
their greatest misfortunes; what I ask would alleviate yours, if you
will have the goodness to gratify me.

Hear then, said she, the most afflicting adventure that could
possibly have happened to one so deeply in love as myself, who
considered myself as at the utmost point of my wishes. You must
know, when I first saw the robbers enter, sword in hand, I
considered it as the last moment of our lives; but death was not an
object of regret, since I thought I was to die with the prince of
Persia. However, instead of murdering us, as I expected, two of the
robbers were ordered to take care of us, whilst their companions
were busied in packing up the goods they found in the house. When
they had done, and got their bundles upon their backs, they went
out, and carried us along with them.

As we went along, one of those that had charge of us demanded of me
who I was. I answered, I was a dancer. He put the same question to
the prince, who replied, he was a citizen.

When we were come to the place whither they were going, a new alarm
seized us. They gathered about us, and after having considered my
dress, and the rich jewels I was adorned with, they seemed to doubt
that I disguised my quality. Dancers, said they, do not use to be
dressed as you are. Tell us truly who you are.

When they saw I answered nothing, they asked the prince once more
who he was, for they told him they plainly perceived he was not the
person he pretended to be. He did not satisfy them much more than I
had done: he only told them he came to see the jeweller, naming him
who was the owner of that house where they found them. I know this
jeweller, replied one of the rogues, who seemed to have some
authority over the rest: I have some obligations to him, which he
knows nothing of, and I take upon me to bring him hither to-morrow
morning, from another house he has: but you must not expect,
continued he, to be released till he comes and tells us who you are:
in the mean time, I promise you there shall be no injury offered to
you.

The jeweller was brought next morning, who thinking to oblige us, as
he really did, declared to the robbers the whole truth. They
immediately came and asked my pardon, and I believe did the like to
the prince, who was shut up in another room. They protested to me
they would not have broken open the house where we were, had they
known it was the jeweller’s. They soon after took us, (the prince,
the jeweller, and myself,) carried us to the river side, put us
aboard the boat, and rowed us across the water: but we were no
sooner landed, than a party of horse patrol came up to us.

The robbers fled: I took the commander aside, and told him my name,
and that the night before I had been seized by robbers, who forced
me along with them; but having been told who I was, released me, and
the two persons he saw with me, on my account. He alighted out of
respect to me, and, expressing great joy for being able to oblige
me, he caused two boats to be brought, putting me and two of his
soldiers, whom you have seen, into one, escorted me hither, and the
prince and jeweller, with two others, in another, to conduct them
home in safety. My guides have conducted me hither; but what is
become of the prince and his friend I cannot tell.

I trust, added she, melting into tears, no harm has happened to them
since our separation; and I do not doubt, but the prince’s concern
for me is equal to mine for him. The jeweller, to whom we have been
so much obliged, ought to be recompensed for the loss he has
sustained on our account. Fail not, therefore, to take two purses of
a thousand pieces of gold in each, and carry them to him to-morrow
morning in my name, and be sure to inquire after the prince’s
welfare.

When my good mistress had done speaking, I endeavoured, as to the
last article of inquiring into the prince’s welfare, to persuade
her to endeavour to triumph over her passion, after the danger she
had so lately escaped almost by miracle. --Make no answer to me,
said she, but do what I command you.

I was obliged to be silent, and am come hither to obey her commands.
I have been at your house, and not finding you at home, and
uncertain as I was of finding where you were said to be, was about
going to the prince of Persia; but not daring to attempt the
journey, I have left the two purses with a particular friend of
mine, and if you will wait here, I will go and fetch them
immediately.

The confidant returned quickly to the jeweller in the mosque, where
she had left him, and giving him the two purses, bid him out of them
satisfy his friends. They are much more than is necessary, said the
jeweller, but I dare not refuse the present from so good and
generous a lady to her very humble servant; but I beseech you to
assure her from me, that I shall preserve an eternal remembrance of
her goodness. He then agreed with the confidant, that she should
find him at the house where she had first seen him, whenever she had
occasion to impart any thing from Schemselnihar, or to hear any
tidings of the prince of Persia: and so they parted.

The jeweller returned home very well satisfied, not only that he had
got wherewithal so fully to satisfy his friends, but also to think
that no person in Bagdad could possibly know that the prince and
Schemselnihar had been in his house when it was robbed. It is true,
he had acquainted the thieves with it, but their secresy he thought
he might very well depend on: they, he imagined, had not sufficient
communication with the world to fear any danger from their divulging
it. Next morning he visited the friends who had obliged him, and
found no difficulty in satisfying them. He had money in hand to
furnish his other house, in which he placed servants. Thus he forgot
all his past danger, and the next evening waited on the prince of
Persia.

The prince’s domestics told the jeweller, that he came in very
luckily, for that the prince ever since he saw him was reduced to
such a state that his life was in danger, and they had not been able
to get a word out of him. They introduced him softly into his
chamber, and he found him in a condition that excited his pity. He
was lying upon his bed, with his eyes shut; but when the jeweller
saluted him, and exhorted him to take courage, he recollected him,
and opened his eyes, and gave him a look that sufficiently declared
the greatness of his affliction, infinitely beyond what he felt
after he first saw Schemselnihar. He took and grasped him by the
hand, to testify his friendship, and told him in a feeble voice,
that he was extremely obliged to him, for coming so far to seek one
so unhappy and wretched.

Prince, replied the jeweller, mention not, I beseech you, any
obligations you have to me: I wish the good offices I have
endeavoured to do you had had a better effect: but at present, let
us talk only of your health; which, in the state I see you, I fear
you greatly injure, by unreasonably abstaining from proper
nourishment.

The prince’s servants took this opportunity to tell him, it was
with the greatest difficulty they had prevailed on their master to
take the smallest refreshment, and that for some time he had taken
nothing at all. This obliged the jeweller to entreat the prince to
let his servants bring him something to eat; which he obtained after
much importunity.

After the prince had eaten more than he had hitherto done, through
the persuasion of the jeweller, he commanded the servants to leave
him alone with his friend. When the room was clear, he said, Besides
my misfortune that distracts me, I have been exceedingly concerned
to think what a loss you have suffered on my account; and it is but
just I should make you some recompense; but before I do this, after
begging your pardon a thousand times, I conjure you to tell me
whether you have learnt any thing of Schemselnihar, since I had the
misfortune to be parted from her.

Here the jeweller, instructed by the confidant, related to him all
that he knew of Schemselnihar’s arrival at her palace, her state
of health from that time till she recovered, and how she had sent
her confidant to him to inquire after his welfare.

To all this the prince replied only by sighs and tears; he made an
effort to get up, and calling his servants, went himself to his
wardrobe, and having caused several bundles of rich furniture and
plate to be packed up, he ordered them to be carried to the
jeweller’s house.

The jeweller would fain have declined this kind offer: but although
he represented that Schemselnihar had already made him more than
sufficient amends for what he had lost, the prince would be obeyed.
The jeweller was therefore obliged to make all possible
acknowledgments, and protested how much he was confounded at his
highness’s liberality. He would then have taken his leave, but the
prince desired him to stay, and so they passed a good part of the
night in talking together.

Next morning, the jeweller waited again on the prince, who made him
sit down by him. You know, said he, there is an end proposed in all
things: the end the lover proposes, is, to enjoy the beloved object
in spite of all opposition. If once he loses that hope, he must not
think to live. Such is my hard case; for when I had been twice at
the very point of fulfilling my desires, I was on a sudden torn from
her I loved in the most cruel manner imaginable. It remains for me
only to think of death, and I had sought it, but that our holy
religion forbids suicide; but I need not anticipate it; I need not
wait long. Here he stopped, and vented his passion in groans, signs,
sobs, and tears, which flowed plentifully.

The jeweller, who knew no better way of diverting him from his
despair than by bringing Schemselnihar into his mind, and giving him
some shadow of hope, told him, he feared the confidant might be come
from her lady, and therefore it would not be proper to stay any
longer from home. I will let you go, said the prince, but conjure
you that if you see her, you recommend to her, to assure
Schemselnihar, that if I die, as I expect to do shortly, I shall
love her to the last moment, even in the grave.

The jeweller returned home, and waited in expectation of seeing the
confidant, who came some hours after, but all in tears, and in great
affliction. The jeweller, alarmed, asked her what was the matter.
She answered, that Schemselnihar, the prince, herself and he were
all ruined. Hear the sad news, said she, as it was told me just upon
my entering the palace after I had left you.

Schemselnihar had for some fault chastised one of the slaves you saw
with her when we met in your other house; the slave enraged at the
ill treatment, ran presently away, and finding the gate open, went
forth; so that we have just reason to believe, she has discovered
all to an eunuch of the guard who has given her protection.

But this is not all; the other slave, her companion, is fled too,
and has taken refuge in the caliph’s palace; so that we may well
fear she has borne her part in this discovery: for just as I came
away, the caliph had sent twenty of his eunuchs for Schemselnihar,
and they carried her to the palace. I just found means to come and
tell you this. I know not what has passed, yet I fear no good; but,
above all, I recommend it to you as a secret.

The confidant added to what she had said before to the jeweller,
that it was proper he should go immediately and acquaint the prince
with the whole affair, that he might be prepared for every event,
and keep faithful to the common cause. She went away in haste,
without staying for any answer.

What answer could the jeweller have made in the condition he was in?
He stood motionless as if thunderstruck. He found, however, that
there was no time to be lost, and immediately went to give the
prince an account. He addressed himself to him with an air that
sufficiently showed the bad news he brought him. Prince, said he,
arm yourself with courage and patience, and prepare to receive the
most terrible shock that ever you had to encounter.

Tell me in a few words, said the prince, what is the matter, without
keeping me in suspense: I am prepared to die if necessary. Then the
jeweller told him all that he had learnt from the confidant. You
see, continued he, your destruction is inevitable. Up, rise, save
yourself by flight, for the time is precious. You, of all men, must
not expose yourself to the anger of the caliph, and should much less
confess any thing in the midst of torments.

At these words, the prince was almost ready to expire through grief,
affliction, and fear; however, he recovered himself, and asked the
jeweller, what resolution he would advise him to take in this
conjuncture, every moment of which was to be made use of. The
jeweller told him, he thought nothing remained but that he should
immediately take horse, and haste away towards Anbar, [82] that he
might get thither before day. Take what servants and swift horses
you think necessary, continued he, and suffer me to escape with you.

The prince, seeing nothing more to be done, immediately gave orders
to prepare such an equipage as would be least troublesome, took
money and jewels, and having taken leave of his mother, he departed
with the jeweller, and such servants as he had chosen.

They travelled all that day and the night following without
stopping; till at length, about two or three hours before daybreak,
both their horses and themselves being spent with so long a journey,
they stopt to rest themselves.

They had hardly sat down before they found themselves surrounded and
assaulted by a great band of robbers. They defended their lives for
some time courageously; but, at length, the prince’s servants
being all killed, both he and the jeweller were obliged to yield at
discretion. The robbers, however, spared their lives; but after they
had seized on the horses and baggage, they took away their clothes,
and left them naked on the spot.

When the thieves were gone from them, the prince said to the
jeweller, What think you of our adventure and condition? Had I not
better have tarried in Bagdad, and awaited my death? Prince, replied
the jeweller, it is the decree of heaven that we should thus suffer.
It has pleased God to add affliction to affliction, and we must not
murmur at it, but receive his chastisements with submission. Let us
stay no longer here, but seek for some retreat where we may perhaps
be relieved.

Let me die, said the prince; for what signifies it whether I die
here or elsewhere? perhaps, while we are talking, Schemselnihar is
no more; and why should I endeavour to live after she is dead? The
jeweller by his entreaty at length prevailed on him, and they had
not gone far before they came to a mosque, which was open; they
entered it, and passed there the remainder of the night.

At daybreak a man came into the mosque. When he had ended his
prayer, as he turned about to go away, he perceived the prince and
jeweller, who were sitting in a corner. He came up to them, and
after having saluted them with a great deal of civility, said, I
perceive you are strangers.

The jeweller answered, You are not deceived; we have been robbed
to-night in coming from Bagdad, as you may see, and are retired
hither for shelter, but we know not whom to apply to. If you think
fit to come along with me to my house, answered the man, I will give
you all the assistance in my power.

Upon this obliging offer, the jeweller turned to the prince, and
whispered him, This man, as you perceive, sir, does not know us; and
we have reason to fear, that somebody else may come who may know us.
We cannot, I think, refuse his offer. Do as you please, said the
prince; I am willing to be guided by your discretion.

The man observing the prince and jeweller consulting together, and
thinking they made some difficulty to accept his offer, asked them
if they were resolved what to do. The jeweller answered, We are
ready to follow you; all that we make a difficulty about is, that we
are ashamed to appear thus naked.

Fortunately the man had it in his power to cover them sufficiently
till they could get to his house; and they were no sooner got to the
house, but he brought forth a very handsome suit for each of them.
As he thought they must be hungry, and wish to be alone, he had
several dishes brought to them by a slave; but they ate little,
especially the prince, who was so dejected and dispirited, that he
gave the jeweller cause to fear he would die. Their host visited
them several times in the day, and in the evening, as he knew they
wanted rest, he left them early; but he was no sooner in bed, than
the jeweller was forced to call him again to assist at the death of
the prince of Persia. He found him breathe short, and with
difficulty, which gave him just reason to fear he had but few
minutes to live. Coming near him, the prince said, It is all over,
and I am glad you are witness of my last words. I quit life with a
great deal of satisfaction; I need not tell you the reason, for you
know it already. All my concern is, that I cannot die in the arms of
my dear mother, who has always loved me tenderly, and for whom I had
a reciprocal affection. She will undoubtedly not be a little grieved
that she could not close my eyes, and bury me with her own hands.
Let her know how much I was concerned at this, and pray her in my
name to have my body transported to Bagdad, that she may have an
opportunity to bedew my tomb with her tears, and assist my departed
soul with her prayers. He then took notice of the master of the
house, and thanked him for his kindness in taking him in; and after
desiring him to let his body rest with him till it should be
conveyed to Bagdad, he expired.

The day after the prince’s death, the jeweller took the
opportunity of a numerous caravan that was going to Bagdad, and
arrived there soon after in safety. He first went home to change his
clothes, and then hastened to the prince’s palace, where every
body was alarmed at not seeing the prince with him. He desired them
to acquaint the prince’s mother, that he wished to speak with her,
and it was not long before he was introduced to her in a hall, with
several of her women about her. Madam, said he to her, with an air
that sufficiently denoted the ill news he brought, God preserve you,
and shower down the choicest of his blessings upon you. You cannot
be ignorant that he alone disposes of us at his pleasure.

The princess would not give him leave to go on, but cried out, Alas!
you bring me the news of my son’s death. She and her women, at the
same time, set up such a hideous cry as brought fresh tears into the
jeweller’s eyes. She tormented and grieved herself a long while,
before she would suffer him to resume his story. At length, she
checked her sighs and groans, and begged of him to continue, without
concealing from her the least circumstance of such a melancholy
separation. He satisfied her, and when he had done, she farther
demanded of him, if her son, the prince, had not given him in charge
something more particular in his last moments. He assured her his
last words were, that it was the greatest concern to him, that he
must die so far distant from his dear mother; and that the only
thing he wished was, that she would be pleased to have his corpse
transported to Bagdad. Accordingly, early next morning the princess
set out with her women, and great part of her slaves, to bring her
son’s body to her own palace.

When the jeweller, whom she kept with her, saw she was gone, he
returned home very sad and melancholy, at the reflection that so
accomplished and amiable a prince was thus cut off in the flower of
his age.

As he walked towards his house, dejected and musing, he saw a woman
in mourning, drowned in tears, standing before him: on lifting up
his eyes, he presently knew her to be Schemselnihar’s confidant.
At the sight of her his tears began to flow afresh, but he said
nothing to her; and going into his own house, she followed him.

They sat down; when the jeweller beginning the conversation, asked
the confidant, with a deep sigh, if she had heard of the death of
the prince of Persia, and if it was on his account that she grieved.
Alas! answered she, what, is that charming prince then dead? He has
not lived long after his dear Schemselnihar. Beauteous souls!
continued she, in whatsoever place ye now are, ye must be happy that
your loves will no more be interrupted. Your bodies were an obstacle
to your wishes, but heaven has delivered you from them; ye may now
form the closest union.

The jeweller, who had heard nothing of Schemselnihar’s death, and
had not observed the confidant was in mourning, suffered fresh grief
at hearing this news. Is Schemselnihar then dead? cried he. She is
dead, replied the confidant, weeping afresh; and it is for her I
wear these weeds. The circumstances of her death were extraordinary,
continued she, and deserve to be known to you; but before I give you
an account of them, I beg you to let me know those of the prince of
Persia, whom, with my dearest friend and mistress, I shall lament as
long as I live.

The jeweller then gave the confidant that satisfaction she desired;
and after he had told her all, even to the departure of the
prince’s mother, to bring her son’s body to Bagdad, she began
and said, You have not forgot that I told you the caliph had sent
for Schemselnihar to his palace; and it is true, as we had all the
reason in the world to believe, he had been informed of the amour
betwixt her and the prince, by the two slaves, whom he had examined
apart. You will imagine, he would be exceedingly enraged at
Schemselnihar, and express great tokens of jealousy and revenge
against the prince: but this was by no means the case. He pitied
Schemselnihar, and in some measure blamed himself for what had
happened, in giving her so much freedom to walk about the city
without being attended by his eunuchs. This is the only conclusion
that could be drawn from his extraordinary behaviour towards her, as
you will hear.

He received her with an open countenance; and when he observed that
the melancholy which oppressed her did not lessen her beauty, (for
she appeared thus before him without surprise or fear,) with a
goodness worthy himself, he said, Schemselnihar, I cannot bear your
appearing before me thus, with an air which gives me infinite pain.
You must needs be sensible how much I have always loved you, and be
convinced of the sincerity of my passion by the continued
demonstrations I have given you of it. I can never change my mind,
for I love you more than ever. You have enemies, Schemselnihar,
proceeded he, and those enemies have insinuated things against your
conduct; but all they have said against you has not made the least
impression upon me. Shake off then this melancholy, and prepare to
entertain me with some diverting and amusing conversation this
night, after your accustomed manner. He said many other obliging
things to hen and then desired her to step into a magnificent
apartment near her own, and wait for him.

The afflicted Schemselnihar was very sensible of the kindness the
caliph had for her; but the more she thought herself obliged to him,
the more she was concerned that she was so far removed, perhaps for
ever, from her prince, without whom she could not live.

This interview between the caliph and Schemselnihar, continued the
confidant, was whilst I was come to speak with you, and I learned
the particulars of it from my companions who were present. But I had
no sooner left you, proceeded she, than I went to my dear mistress
again, and was eye-witness to what happened in the evening. I found
her in the apartment I told you of; and as she thought I came from
you, she came up to me, and, whispering me in the ear, said, I am
much obliged to you for the service you have done me, but feel it
will be the last. She said no more; but I was not in a place proper
to offer any thing to comfort her.

The caliph was introduced at night with the sound of instruments,
which her women played upon, and the collation was immediately
served up. He took his mistress by the hand, and made her sit down
with him on the sofa. She put such a force upon herself to please
him, that she expired a few minutes after. In short, she was hardly
set down, but she fell backwards: the caliph believed she had only
fainted, and so we all thought; but she never recovered, and in this
manner we lost her.

The caliph did her the honour to weep over her, not being able to
refrain from tears; and before he left the room, ordered all the
musical instruments to be broken, which was immediately executed. I
stayed with her corpse all night, and next morning washed and
dressed her for her funeral, bathing her with my tears. The caliph
had her interred next morning in a magnificent tomb he had erected
for her in her lifetime, in a place she had desired to be buried in.
Now, since you tell me, said she, the prince of Persia’s body is
to be brought to Bagdad, I will use my best endeavours that he shall
be interred in the same tomb.

The jeweller was much surprised at this resolution of the confidant,
and said, Certainly you do not consider that the caliph will never
suffer this. You think the thing impossible, replied she; it is not:
you will alter your opinion when I tell you that the caliph has
given liberty to all her slaves, with a pension to each for their
maintenance, and has committed to me the care and keeping of my
mistress’s tomb, and allotted me an annual income for that
purpose, and for my maintenance. Besides, the caliph, who was not
ignorant of the amour between Schemselnihar and the prince, as I
have already told you, without being offended at it, will not be
sorry if after her death he be buried with her. To all this the
jeweller had not a word to say, yet earnestly entreated the
confidant to conduct him to her mistress’s tomb, that he might say
his prayers over her. When he came in sight of it, he was not a
little surprised to find a vast concourse of people of both sexes,
that were come thither from all parts of Bagdad. As he could not
come near the tomb, he said his prayers at a distance; and then
going to the confidant, who was waiting hard by, he said to her, Now
I am so far from thinking that what you properly proposed cannot be
put in execution, that you and I need only publish abroad what we
know of the amour of this unfortunate couple, and how the prince
died much about the same time with his mistress. Before his corpse
arrives, all Bagdad will concur to desire that two such faithful
lovers should not be separated when dead, whom nothing could divide
in affection whilst they lived. As he said, so it came to pass; for
as soon as it came to be known that the corpse was within a day’s
journey of the city, an infinite number of people went out to meet
it above twenty miles off, and afterwards walked before it till it
came to the city gate; where the confidant, waiting for that
purpose, presented herself before the prince’s mother, and begged
of her, in the name of the whole city, who earnestly desired it,
that she would be pleased to consent that the bodies of the two
lovers, who had but one heart whilst they lived, from the time their
mutual passion commenced, might be buried in the same tomb now they
were dead. The princess immediately consented; and the corpse of the
prince, instead of being deposited in his own burying-place, was
laid by Schemselnihar’s side, after it had been carried along in
procession at the head of an infinite number of people of all ranks.
From that time all the inhabitants of Bagdad, and even strangers
from all parts of the world where the Mahometan religion prevails,
cease not to hold in the highest veneration that tomb, and pay their
devotion at it.




The Story of the Amours of Carmaralzaman, Prince of the Isles of the
Children of Khaledan, and of Badoura, Princess of China.


About twenty days’ sail on the coast of Persia, there are islands
in the main ocean called the Islands of the Children of Khaledan.
These islands are divided into four great provinces, which have all
of them very flourishing and populous cities, forming together a
powerful kingdom. It was formerly governed by a king named
Schahzaman, [83] who had four lawful wives, all daughters of kings,
and sixty concubines.

Schahzaman thought himself the most happy monarch of the world, on
account of his peaceful and prosperous reign. One thing only
disturbed his happiness; which was, that he was advanced in years,
and had no children, though he had so many wives. He knew not to
what to attribute this barrenness; and what increased his affliction
was, that he was likely to leave his kingdom without a successor. He
dissembled his discontent a long while; and this dissimulation only
heightened his uneasiness. At length he broke silence; and one day,
after he had complained bitterly of his misfortunes to his grand
vizier, he asked him if he knew any remedy for it.

That wise minister replied, If what your majesty requires of me had
depended on the ordinary rules of human wisdom, you had soon had an
answer to your satisfaction; but my experience and knowledge fall
far short of your question. The Divine Power alone, who, in the
midst of our prosperities, which often tempt us to forget him, is
pleased to mortify us in some instance, that we may address our
thoughts to him, acknowledge his omnipotence, and ask of him what we
can expect from him alone. Your majesty has subjects, proceeded he,
who make a profession of honouring and serving God, and suffering
great hardships for his sake; to them I would advise you to have
recourse, and engage them, by alms, to join their prayers with
yours: it may be, some one among them may be so pure and pleasing to
God as to obtain a hearing from your prayers.

King Schahzaman approved this advice, and thanked his vizier for it.
He immediately caused rich alms to be given to every community of
these holy men in his dominions; and having sent for the superiors,
and treated them with a frugal feast, declared to them his
intention, and desired them to acquaint their devout men with it.

The king obtained of heaven what he requested; for in nine months’
time he had a son by one of his wives. To express his gratitude to
heaven, he sent new alms to the communities of devout Mussulmen, and
the prince’s birth-day was celebrated not only in his capital, but
throughout his dominions for a whole week. The prince was brought to
him as soon as born, and he found him so beautiful, that he gave him
the name of Camaralzaman, or Moon of the Age.

He was brought up with all imaginable care; and when he came to a
proper age, his father appointed him an experienced governor, and
able preceptors. These persons, distinguished by their capacity,
found in him a ready wit, capable of receiving all the instructions
that were proper to be given him, as well in relation to morals as
other knowledge which a prince ought to possess. As he grew up, he
learned all his exercises, and acquitted himself with such grace and
wonderful address, as charmed all that saw him, and particularly the
sultan his father.

Having attained the age of fifteen years, the sultan, who loved him
so tenderly, and gave him every day new marks of his affection, had
thoughts of giving him a still greater, by resigning his throne to
him, and acquainted his grand vizier with his intentions. I fear,
said he, lest my son should lose in the inactivity of youth those
advantages which nature and my education have given him: therefore,
since I am advanced in age, and ought to think of retirement, I have
thoughts of resigning the government to him, and passing the
remainder of my days in the satisfaction of seeing him reign. I have
undergone the fatigue of a crown a long while, and think it now
proper for me to retire.

The grand vizier declined offering all the reasons he could have
alleged to dissuade the sultan from such a proceeding; on the
contrary, he agreed with him in opinion. Sir, replied he, the prince
is yet but young, and it would not be, in my humble opinion,
advisable to burthen him with the weight of a crown so soon. Your
majesty fears, with great reason, his youth may be corrupted in
indolence; but to remedy that, do not you think it would be proper
to marry him? Marriage forms attachment, and prevents dissipation.
Your majesty might then admit him of your council, where he would
learn by degrees the art of reigning, and so be qualified to receive
your authority, whenever, by your own experience, you shall think
him qualified.

Schahzaman found this advice of his prime minister’s highly
reasonable, therefore summoned the prince to appear before him at
the same time that he dismissed the grand vizier.

The prince, who had been accustomed to see his father only at
certain times, without being sent for, was a little startled at this
summons; when, therefore, he came before him, he saluted him with
great respect, and stood with his eyes fixed on the ground.

The sultan perceiving his constraint, said to him in a mild way, Do
you know, son, for what reason I have sent for you? The prince
modestly replied, God alone knows the heart; I shall hear it from
your majesty with pleasure. I sent for you, said the sultan, to
inform you I have an intention of providing a proper marriage for
you; what do you think of it?

Prince Camaralzaman heard this with great uneasiness; it so
surprised him, that he paused and knew not what answer to make.
After a few moments’ silence, he replied, Sir, I beseech you to
pardon me, if I seem surprised at the declaration you have made to
me. I did not expect such proposals to one so young as I am; and I
know not whether I could ever prevail on myself to marry, on account
of the trouble incident to a married life, and the many treacheries
of women, which I have read of. I may not be always of the same
mind; yet I perceive it requires time to determine on what your
majesty requires of me.

Prince Camaralzaman’s answer extremely afflicted his father. He
was not a little grieved to see what an aversion he had to marriage;
yet would not charge him with disobedience, nor exert his paternal
authority. He contented himself with telling him he would not force
his inclinations, but give him time to consider of the proposal, and
reflect, that a prince like him, destined to govern a great kingdom,
ought to take some care to leave a successor; and that, in giving
himself that satisfaction, he communicated it to his father, who
would be glad to see himself revive in his son and his issue.

Schahzaman said no more to the prince: he admitted him into his
council, and gave him every reason to be satisfied. At the end of
the year, he took him aside, and said to him, My son, have you
thoroughly considered of what I proposed to you about marrying last
year? Will you still refuse me that pleasure I expect from your
obedience, and suffer me to die without giving me that satisfaction?

The prince seemed less disconcerted than before, and was not long
answering his father to this effect: Sir, I have not neglected to
consider of your proposal; but after the maturest reflection, find
myself more confirmed in my resolution to continue as I am without
engaging in marriage. In short, the infinite mischief I have read in
histories caused in the world by women, and the continual mischiefs
I still hear done by them, are powerful motives for me to have
nothing to do with them: so that I hope your majesty will pardon me
if I presume to tell you it will be in vain to solicit me any
farther about marriage. He stopt here, and went out, without staying
to hear what the sultan would answer.

Any monarch but Schahzaman would have been very angry at such
freedom in a son, and would have made him repent it; but he loved
him, and preferred gentle methods before he proceeded to compulsion.
He communicated this new cause of discontent to his prime minister.
I have followed your advice, said he, but Camaralzaman is farther
than ever from complying with my desires. He delivered his
resolution in such free terms, that it required all my reason and
moderation to keep my temper. Fathers, who so earnestly desire
children as I did this son, are fools who seek to deprive themselves
of that rest which it is in their own power to enjoy without
control. Tell me, I beseech you, how I shall reclaim a disposition
so rebellious to my will.

Sir, answered the grand vizier, patience brings many things about
that before seemed impracticable; but it may be this affair is of a
nature not likely to succeed that way. Your majesty will have no
cause to reproach yourself for precipitation, if you would give the
prince another year to consider of the matter. If in this interval,
he return to his duty, you will have the greater satisfaction, as
you will have employed only paternal love to induce him; and if he
still continue averse to your proposal when this is expired, your
majesty may propose it to him in full council, that it is highly
necessary for the good of the state that he should marry; and it is
not likely he will refuse to comply with you before so grave an
assembly, which you honour with your presence.

The sultan, who so passionately desired to see his son married,
thought this long delay an age; however, though with much
difficulty, he yielded to his grand vizier’s reasons, which he
could not disapprove.

After the grand vizier was gone, sultan Schahzaman went to the
apartment of the mother of prince Camaralzaman, to whom he had often
expressed his desire to see the prince married. When he had told
her, with grief, how his son had refused to comply with his wishes a
second time, and the indulgence, which by the advice of his grand
vizier, he was inclined to show him, he said, Madam, I know he has
more confidence in, and will hearken more to you than me; therefore,
I desire you would take an opportunity to talk to him seriously
about it, and convince him, that if he persists in his obstinacy, he
will oblige me to have recourse to extremities, which I should be
sorry for, and which may give him cause to repent having disobeyed
me.

Fatima, for so was the lady called, acquainted the prince the first
time she saw him, that she had been informed of his second refusal
to marry, and how much chagrin he had occasioned his father on that
account. Madam, said the prince, I beseech you not to renew my grief
upon that head. I fear, in my present uneasiness, something may
escape me, which may not altogether correspond with the respect I
owe you. Fatima knew by this answer that this was not a proper time
to speak to him, and therefore deferred what she had to say to
another opportunity.

Some considerable time after, Fatima thought she had found a more
favourable opportunity, which gave her hopes of being heard upon
that subject. Son, said she, I beg of you, if it be not
disagreeable, to tell me what reason you have for your so great
aversion to marriage? If it be only the wickedness of some women,
nothing can be more unreasonable and weak. I will not undertake the
defence of those that are bad; there are a great number of them
undoubtedly; but it would be the height of injustice to condemn all
the sex for their sakes. --Alas! my son, you have in your books met
with many bad women, who have occasioned great mischief, and I will
not excuse them; but you do not consider how many monarchs, sultans,
and other princes, there have been in the world, whose tyrannies,
barbarities, and cruelties astonished those that read of them, as
well as myself. Now, for one wicked woman, you will meet with a
thousand tyrants and barbarians; and what torment do you think a
good woman must undergo, who is matched with any of these wretches?

Madam, replied Camaralzaman, I doubt not there are a great number of
wise, virtuous, good, affable, and well-behaved women in the world:
would to God they all resembled you! But what deters me is the
doubtful choice a man is obliged to make; and oftentimes one has not
the liberty of following his inclination.

Let us suppose then, madam, continued he, that I had a mind to
marry, as the sultan my father so earnestly desires, what wife,
think you, would he be likely to provide for me? Probably a princess
whom he would demand of some neighbouring prince, and who would
think it an honour done him to send him her. Handsome or ugly, she
must be taken; nay, suppose no other princess excelled her in
beauty, who can be certain that her temper would be good; that she
would be affable, complaisant, easy, obliging, and the like? That
her conversation would generally turn on solid subjects, and not on
dress, fashions, ornaments, and a thousand such fooleries, which
would disgust any man of sense? In a word, that she would not be
haughty, proud, arrogant, impertinent, scornful, and waste an estate
in frivolous expenses, such as gay clothes, jewels, toys, and
foolish, mistaken magnificence?

You see, madam, continued he, by one single article, how many
reasons a man may have to be disgusted at marriage. Let this
princess be never so perfect, accomplished, and irreproachable in
her conduct, I have yet a great many more reasons not to alter my
opinion and resolution.

What, son, replied Fatima, have you then more reasons after those
you have already alleged? I do not doubt of being able to answer
them, and stop your mouth with a word. You may proceed, madam,
replied the prince, and perhaps I may find a reply to your answer.

I mean, son, said Fatima, that it is easy for a prince who has had
the misfortune to marry such a wife as you describe, to get rid of
her, and take care that she may not ruin the state. Ah, madam,
replied the prince, but you do not consider what a mortification it
would be to a person of so great quality, to be obliged to come to
such an extremity. Would it not have been more for his honour and
quiet, that he had never run such a risk?

But, son, said Fatima once more, as you take the case, I apprehend
you have a mind to be the last king of your race, who have reigned
so long and gloriously over the isles of the children of Khaledan.

Madam, replied the prince, for myself I do not desire to survive the
king, my father; and if I should die before him, it would be no
great matter of wonder, since so many children have died before
their parents. But it is always glorious to a race of kings, that it
should end with a prince worthy to be so, as I should endeavour to
make myself like my predecessors, and like the first of our race.

From that time Fatima had frequent conferences with her son the
prince on the same subject; and she omitted no opportunity or
argument to endeavour to root out his aversion to the fair sex; but
he eluded all her reasonings by such arguments as she could not well
answer, and continued in the same mind.

The year expired, and, to the great regret of the sultan, prince
Camaralzaman gave not the least sign of having changed his
sentiments. One day, therefore, when there was a great council held,
the prime vizier, the other viziers, the principal officers of the
crown, and the generals of the army being present, the sultan began
to speak thus to the prince: My son, it is now a long while since I
have expressed to you my earnest desire to see you married; and I
imagined you would have had more complaisance for a father, who
required nothing unreasonable of you, than to oppose him so long.
But after so long resistance on your part, which has almost worn out
my patience, I have thought fit to propose the same thing once more
to you in the presence of my council. I would have you consider that
you ought not to have refused this, if merely to oblige a parent;
the well-being of my dominions requires it; and the assembly here
present join with me to require it of you. Declare yourself, then;
that according to your answer, I may take the proper measures.

The prince answered with so little reserve, or rather with so much
warmth, that the sultan, enraged to see himself thwarted by him in
full council, cried out, How, unnatural son! have you the insolence
to talk thus to your father and sultan? He ordered the guards to
take him away, and carry him to an old tower that had been
unoccupied for a long while, where he was shut up, with only a bed,
a little furniture, some books, and one slave to attend him.

Camaralzaman, thus deprived of liberty, was nevertheless pleased he
had the freedom to converse with his books, and that made him look
on his confinement with indifference. In the evening he bathed and
said his prayers; and after having read some chapters in the Koran,
with the same tranquillity of mind as if he had been in the
sultan’s palace, he undressed himself and went to bed, leaving his
lamp burning by him all the while he slept.

In this tower was a well, which served in the daytime for a retreat
to a certain fairy, named Maimoune, daughter of Damriat, king or
head of a legion of genies. It was about midnight when Maimoune
sprang lightly to the mouth of the well, to wander about the world
after her wonted custom, where her curiosity led her. She was
surprised to see a light in prince Camaralzaman’s chamber. She
entered, and without stopping at the slave who lay at the door,
approached the bed, whose magnificence attracted her; but she was
still more surprised at seeing any body in it.

Prince Camaralzaman had but half-covered his face with the
bed-clothes, which Maimoune lifted up, and perceived the finest
young man she had seen in all her rambles through the world. What
beauty, or rather what prodigy of beauty, said she within herself,
must this youth appear, when the eyes, concealed by so well-formed
eyelids, shall be open! What crime can he have committed, that a man
of his high rank can deserve to be treated thus rigorously? for she
had already heard his story, and could hardly believe it.

She could not forbear admiring the prince, till, at length, having
kissed him gently on both cheeks, and in the middle of the forehead,
without waking him, she laid the bed-clothes in the order they were
in before, and took her flight into the air. As she mounted high to
the middle region, she heard a great flapping of wings, which made
her fly that way; and when she approached, she knew it was a genie
who made the noise, but it was one of those that are rebellious
against God. As for Maimoune, she belonged to that class whom the
great Solomon compelled to acknowledge him.

This genie, whose name was Danhasch, and son of Schamhourasch, knew
Maimoune, and was seized with fear, being sensible how much power
she had over him by her submission to the Almighty. He would fain
have avoided her, but she was so near him, he must either fight or
yield. He therefore broke silence first.

Brave Maimoune, said he, in the tone of a suppliant, swear to me in
the name of the great God that you will not hurt me, and I swear
also on my part not to do you any harm.

Cursed genie, replied Maimoune, what hurt canst thou do me? I fear
thee not; but I will grant thee this favour --I will swear not to do
thee any harm. Tell me then, wandering spirit, whence thou comest,
what thou hast seen, and what thou hast done this night. Fair lady,
answered Danhasch, you meet me in a good time to hear something very
wonderful.




The History of the Princess of China.


Danhasch, the genie rebellious against God, proceeded, and said to
Maimoune, Since you desire it, I will tell you. I come from the
utmost limits of China, which look on the last islands of this
hemisphere. --But, charming Maimoune, said Danhasch, who trembled
with fear at the sight of this fairy, so that he could hardly speak,
promise me at least you will forgive me, and let me go on after I
have satisfied your demands.

Go on, go on, cursed spirit, replied Maimoune; go on, and fear
nothing. Dost thou think I am as perfidious an elf as thyself, and
capable of breaking the solemn oath I have made? Be sure you tell
nothing but what is true, or I shall clip thy wings, and treat thee
as thou deservest.

Danhasch, a little heartened at the words of Maimoune, said, My dear
lady, I will tell you nothing but what is strictly true, if you will
but have the goodness to hear me. The country of China, from whence
I come, is one of the largest and most powerful kingdoms of the
earth, on which depend the utmost islands of this hemisphere, as I
have already told you. The king of this country is at present
Gaiour, who has an only daughter, the finest woman that ever was
seen in the world, since it was a world. Neither you nor I, nor your
class nor mine, nor all our respective genies, have expressions
strong enough, nor eloquence sufficient, to draw any resemblance of
this brilliant lady. Her hair is brown, and of so great a length,
that it reaches far below her feet, and so thick, that it may be
fitly compared to one of those fine clusters of grapes, whose fruit
is so very large, when she has fastened it in buckles on her head.
Her forehead is as smooth as the best polished mirror, and admirably
formed; her eyes, level with her head, are black, sparkling, and
full of fire; her nose is neither too long nor too short, and her
mouth small, and of a vermilion colour; her teeth are like two rows
of pearls, and surpass the finest in whiteness. When she moves her
tongue to speak, she utters a sweet and most agreeable voice, and
expresses herself in such terms, as sufficiently indicate the
vivacity of her wit. The whitest alabaster is not fairer than her
neck. In a word, by this imperfect sketch, you may guess there is no
beauty likely to exceed her in the world.

Any one that did not know the king, father of this incomparable
princess, would be apt to imagine, from the great respect and
kindness he shows her, that he was enamoured with her. Never did a
lover more for the most beloved mistress than he has been seen to do
for her. The most violent jealousy never suggested such measures as
his care to keep her from every one but the man who is to marry her,
has put him upon inventing and executing; and that the retreat which
he has resolved to place her in may not seem irksome to her, he has
built for her seven palaces, the most extraordinary and magnificent
that ever were known.

The first palace is of rock crystal; the second of brass; the third
of fine steel; the fourth of another sort of brass more valuable
than the foregoing, or than steel; the fifth of touchstone; the
sixth of silver; and the seventh of massy gold. He has furnished
these palaces most sumptuously, each in a manner proportionable to
the materials that it is built of. He has filled the gardens with
parterres of grass and flowers, intermixed with pieces of water,
waterworks, jets d’eau, canals, cascades, and several great groves
of trees, where the eye is lost in prospect, and where the sun never
enters, all of which are differently arranged. King Gaiour, in a
word, has shown, that his paternal love has led him to spare no
expense.

Upon the fame of this incomparable princess’s beauty, the most
powerful neighbouring kings sent ambassadors to request her in
marriage. The king of China received them all in the same obliging
manner; but as he resolved not to marry his daughter without her
consent, and she did not like any of the parties, the ambassadors
were forced to return as they came, as to the subject of their
embassy; but they were perfectly satisfied with the great honours
and civilities they had received.

Sir, said the princess to the king, her father, you have an
inclination to see me married, and think to oblige me by it; but
where shall I find such stately palaces and delicious gardens as I
have with your majesty? Through your good pleasure, I am under no
constraint, and have the same honours shown to me, as are paid to
yourself. These are advantages I cannot expect to find any where
else, to whatsoever husband I should give my hand; men love ever to
be masters, and I do not care to be commanded.

After divers more embassies on the same occasion, there came one
from the most rich and potent king of all that had hitherto sent.
This prince the king of China recommended to his daughter as a
husband, urging many powerful arguments to show how much it would be
to her advantage to accept him; but she entreated her father to
dispense with her accepting him, for the same reason as before. He
pressed her; but instead of complying, she lost all the respect due
to the king, her father: Sir, said she, in anger, talk to me no more
of this, or any other match, unless you would have me plunge this
poniard in my bosom, to deliver myself from your importunities.

The king, greatly enraged, said, Daughter, you are mad, and I must
treat you as such. In a word, he had her shut up in a single
apartment of one of his palaces, and allowed her only ten old women
to wait upon her, and keep her company, the chief whereof had been
her nurse; and that the kings, his neighbours, who had sent
embassies to him on this account, might not think any more of her,
he despatched envoys to them severally, to let them know how averse
his daughter was to marriage; and as he did not doubt but she was
really mad, he charged them to make known in every court, that if
there was any physician that would undertake to come and cure her,
he should, if he succeeded, have her for his pains.

Fair Maimoune, continued Danhasch, all that I have told you is true:
and I have not failed to go every day regularly to contemplate this
incomparable beauty, to whom I would be very sorry to do the least
harm, notwithstanding my natural inclination to mischief. Come and
see her, I conjure you: it would be well worth your while, when you
find by your own view I am no liar. I am ready to wait on you as a
guide, and you have only to command me. I doubt not but you would
think yourself obliged to me for the sight of a princess unequalled
for beauty.

Instead of answering Danhasch, Maimoune burst out into violent
laughter, which lasted for some time; and Danhasch, not knowing what
might be the occasion of it, was astonished beyond measure. When she
had laughed her fill, she cried, Good, good, very good! you would
have me then believe all you have told me! I thought you designed to
tell me something surprising and extraordinary, and you have been
talking all this while of a mad woman. Fie, fie! --what would you
say, cursed genie, if you had seen the beautiful prince that I am
just come from seeing, and whom I love as he deserves? I am
confident you would soon give up the contest, and not pretend to
compare your choice with mine.

Agreeable Maimoune, replied Danhasch, may I presume to ask you who
is this prince you speak of? Know, answered Maimoune, the same thing
has happened to him as to your princess. The king, his father, would
have married him against his will; but after much importunity, he
frankly told him, he would have nothing to do with a wife. For this
reason, he is at this moment imprisoned in an old tower, where I
make my residence, and whence I came but just now from admiring him.

I will not absolutely contradict you, replied Danhasch; but my
pretty lady, you must give me leave to be of opinion, till I have
seen your prince, that no mortal upon earth can come up to the
beauty of my princess. Hold thy tongue, cursed sprite, replied
Maimoune. I tell thee once more that can never be. I will not
contend with you, said Danhasch: but the way to be convinced whether
what I say is true or false, is to accept of the proposal I made you
to go and see my princess, and after that I will go with you to your
prince.

There is no need I should take so much pains, replied Maimoune;
there is another way to satisfy us both, and that is, for you to
bring your princess, and place her at my prince’s bed-side; by
this means, it will be easy for us to compare them together and
determine the dispute.

Danhasch consented to what Maimoune had proposed, and determined to
set out immediately for China, upon that errand. But Maimoune drew
him aside, and told him she must first show him the tower whither he
was to bring the princess. They flew together to the tower; and when
Maimoune had shown it to Danhasch, she cried, Go, fetch your
princess, and do it quickly, for you shall find me here; but hear
me; I mean you should at least pay the wager, if my prince is more
beautiful than your princess, and I will pay it if your princess is
more beautiful than my prince.

Danhasch left Maimoune, and flew towards China, whence he soon
returned with incredible speed, bringing the fair princess along
with him asleep. Maimoune received him, and introduced him into the
chamber of prince Camaralzaman, where they placed the princess by
the prince’s side.

When the prince and princess were thus laid together, there arose a
great contest between the genie and the fairy about the preference
of their beauty. They were some time admiring and comparing them
without speaking. At length Danhasch broke silence, and said to
Maimoune, You see, and I have already told you, my princess was
handsomer than your prince; now, I hope, you are convinced of it.

How! convinced of it! replied Maimoune; I am not convinced of it,
and you must be blind, if you cannot see that my prince has the
better in the comparison. The princess is fair, I do not deny; but
if you compare them together without prejudice, you will quickly see
the difference.

Though I should compare them never so often, said Danhasch, I could
never change my opinion. I saw at first sight what I see now, and
time will not make me see differently: however, this shall not
hinder my yielding to you, charming Maimoune, if you desire it. I
would not have you yield to me as a favour! I scorn it, said
Maimoune: I would not receive a favour at the hand of such a wicked
genie. I refer the matter to an umpire, and if you will not consent,
I shall win by your refusal.

Danhasch, who was ready to have shown a different kind of
complaisance for Maimoune, no sooner gave his consent, but Maimoune
stamping with her foot, the earth opened, and out came a hideous,
hump-backed, squinting, and lame genie, with six horns on his head,
and claws on his hands and feet. As soon as he was come out, and the
earth had closed up, he, perceiving Maimoune, cast himself at her
feet; and then, rising up on one knee, asked her what she would
please to have with him.

Rise, Caschcasch, said Maimoune; I brought you hither to determine a
difference between me and this cursed Danhasch. --Look on that bed,
and tell me, without partiality, which is the handsomest of those
two that lie there asleep, the young man or the young lady.

Caschcasch looked on the prince and princess with great attention,
admiration, and surprise; and after he had considered them a good
while, without being able to determine which was the handsomer, he
turned to Maimoune, and said, Madam, I must confess I should deceive
you, and betray myself, if I pretended to say one was a whit
handsomer than the other: the more I examine them, the more it seems
to me each possesses, in a sovereign degree, the beauty which is
betwixt them; and one has not the least detect by which to say it
yields to the other. But if there be any difference, the best way to
determine it is, to awaken them one after the other, and to agree
that the person who shall express most love for the other by ardour,
eagerness, and passion, shall be deemed to have less beauty in some
respect.

This proposal of Caschcasch’s pleased equally both Maimoune and
Danhasch. Maimoune then changed herself into a flea, and, leaping on
the prince’s neck, stung him so smartly, that he awoke, and put up
his hand to the place; but Maimoune skipped away, and resumed her
pristine form, which, like those of the two genies, was invisible,
the better to observe what he would do.

In drawing back his hand, the prince chanced to let it fall on that
of the princess of China. He opened his eyes, and was exceedingly
surprised to find a lady lying by him, a lady of the greatest
beauty. He raised his head, and leaned on his elbow, the better to
consider her. Her blooming youth and incomparable beauty fired him
in a moment with a flame of which he had never yet been sensible,
and from which he had hitherto guarded himself with the greatest
attention.

Love seized on his heart in the most lively manner, insomuch that he
could not help crying out, What beauty! what charms! my heart! my
soul! In saying which, he kissed her forehead, both her cheeks, and
her mouth, with so little caution, that she had certainly been
awaked by it, had not she slept sounder than ordinary, through the
enchantment of Danhasch.

How! my pretty lady, said the prince, do you not awake at these
testimonies of love given you by prince Camaralzaman? Whosoever you
are, he is not unworthy of your affection. He was going to awake her
at that instant, but suddenly restrained himself. Is not this she,
said he, that the sultan my father would have had me marry? He was
in the wrong not to let me see her sooner; I should not have
offended him by my disobedience and passionate language to him in
public, and he would have spared himself the confusion which I have
occasioned him.

The prince began to repent sincerely of the fault he had committed
and was once more upon the point of awaking the princess of China.
It may be, said he, recollecting himself, the sultan my father has a
mind to surprise me, and has sent this young lady to try if I had
really that aversion to marriage which I pretended. Who knows but he
has brought her himself, and is hid behind the hangings, to discover
himself and make me ashamed of my dissimulation? This second fault
would be greater than the first. At all events, I will content
myself with this ring, as a remembrance of her.

He then gently drew off a fine ring which the princess had on her
finger, and immediately put on one of his own in the place. After
this he turned his back, and was not long before he fell into a more
profound sleep than before, through the enchantment of the genies.

As soon as prince Camaralzaman was in a sound sleep, Danhasch
transformed himself into a flea in his turn, and went and bit the
princess so rudely on the lip, that she forthwith awoke, started up,
and opening her eyes, was not a little surprised to see a man lying
by her side. From surprise she proceeded to admiration, and from
admiration to a transport of joy, at seeing so beautiful and lovely
a young man.

What! cried she, is it you the king my father has designed me for a
husband? I am indeed most unfortunate for not knowing it before, for
then I should not have made him so angry with me, nor been so long
deprived of a husband, whom I cannot forbear loving with all my
heart. Wake then, wake! proceeded she, for it does not become a
husband to sleep so soundly the first night of his nuptials.

So saying, she took prince Camaralzaman by the arm, and shook him so
violently, that he would have awaked, had not Maimoune increased his
sleep, and augmented his enchantment. She shook him several times,
and finding that he did not awake, she cried, What is come to thee?
what jealous rival, envying thy happiness and mine, has had recourse
to magic to throw thee into this unsurmountable drowsiness when thou
shouldst be most awake? Then she seized his hand, and kissing it
eagerly, perceived he had a ring upon his finger which greatly
resembled hers, and which she was convinced was her own, by seeing
she had another on her finger instead of it. She could not
comprehend how this exchange could be made; yet she did not doubt
but it was a certain token of their marriage. Tired with her
fruitless endeavours to awake the prince, and assured, as she
thought, he could not escape her; Since, said she, I find it is not
in my power to awake thee, I will no longer try to disturb thy
repose, but wait our next meeting. After having given him a hearty
kiss on the cheek, she lay down again and soon fell asleep.

When Maimoune saw that she could now speak without fear of awaking
the princess, she cried to Danhasch, Ah, cursed genie, dost thou not
now see what thy contest is come to? Art thou not now convinced how
much thy princess is inferior to my prince in charms? But I pardon
thee thy wager. Another time believe me when I assert any thing.
Then turning to Caschcasch, As for you, said she, I thank you for
your trouble: take the princess, in conjunction with Danhasch, and
convey her back again to her bed, from whence he has taken her.
Danhasch and Caschcasch did as they were commanded, and Maimoune
returned to her well.

Prince Camaralzaman waking next morning, looked to see if the lady
whom he had seen the night before were by him. When he found she was
gone, he cried out, I thought indeed this was a trick the king, my
father, designed to play me. I am glad I was aware of it. Then he
waked the slave, who was still asleep, and bid him come and dress
him, without saying any thing to him. The slave brought a basin and
water, and after he had washed and said his prayers, he took a book
and read some time.

After those usual exercises, he called the slave, and said to him,
Come hither, and look you do not tell me a lie. How came the lady
hither who lay with me to-night, and who brought her?

My lord, answered the slave, with great astonishment, I know not
what lady your highness speaks of. I speak, said the prince, of her
that came, or rather that was brought hither, and lay with me
to-night. My lord, replied the slave, I swear I know of no such
lady; and how should she come in without my knowledge, since I lay
at the door?

You are a lying rascal, replied the prince, and in the plot to vex
and provoke me the more. So saying, he gave him a box on the ear,
which knocked him down; and after having stamped upon him for some
time, at length tying the well-rope under his arms, he plunged him
several times into the water. I will drown thee, cried he, if thou
dost not tell me speedily who this lady was, and who brought her.

The slave, perplexed and half dead, said within himself, the prince
must have lost his senses through grief, and I shall not escape if I
do not tell him a lie. My lord, then cried he, in a suppliant tone,
I beseech your highness to spare my life, and I will tell you the
truth.

The prince drew the slave up, and pressed him to tell him. As soon
as he was out of the well, my lord, said he trembling, your highness
must perceive it is impossible for me to satisfy you in my present
condition; I beg you to give me leave to go and change my clothes
first. I permit you, but do it quickly, said the prince; and be sure
you conceal nothing.

The slave went out, and having locked the door upon the prince, ran
to the palace just as he was. The king was at that time in discourse
with his prime vizier, to whom he had just related the grief in
which he had passed the night on account of his son’s
disobedience, and opposition to his will.

The minister endeavoured to comfort his master, by telling him, the
prince himself had given him opportunity to reduce him. Sir, said
he, your majesty need not repent of having treated your son after
this sort. Have but patience to let him continue awhile in prison,
and assure yourself his heat of youth will abate, and he will submit
to all you require.

The grand vizier had just made an end of speaking, when the slave
came in, and cast himself at king Schahzaman’s feet. My lord, said
he, I am very sorry to be the messenger of ill news to your majesty,
which I know must create you fresh affliction. The prince is
distracted, my lord; what he talks of a lady having lain with him
all night, and his treatment to me, as you may see, too plainly
proves it. Then he proceeded to tell all the particulars of what
prince Camaralzaman had said to him, and the violence with which he
had been treated, in terms that made his story credible.

The king, who did not expect to hear any thing of this afflictive
kind, said to the prime minister, This is a very melancholy turn,
very different from the hopes you gave me just now: go immediately,
without loss of time, see what is the matter, and come and give me
an account.

The grand vizier obeyed instantly; and coming into the prince’s
chamber, he found him sitting on his bed in good temper, and with a
book in his hand, which he was reading.

After mutual salutations, the vizier sat down by him, and said, My
lord, I wish that a slave of yours was punished for coming to
frighten the king, your father, by news that he has brought him.

What news is that, replied the prince, that could give my father so
great alarm? I have much greater cause to complain of that slave.

Prince, answered the vizier, God forbid that the news which he has
told your father concerning you should be true; indeed, I myself
find it to be false, by the good temper I observe you in, and which
I pray God to continue. It may be, replied the prince, he did not
make himself well understood; but since you are come, who ought to
know something of the matter, give me leave to ask you, who was that
lady that lay with me last night?

The grand vizier was thunderstruck at this question: however, he
recovered himself, and said, My lord, be not surprised at my
astonishment at your question. Is it possible, that a lady, or any
other person in the world, should penetrate by night into this
place, without entering at the door, and walking over the body of
your slave? I beseech you recollect yourself, and you will find it
is only a dream which has made this impression on you.

I give no ear to what you say, said the prince, raising his voice; I
must know of you absolutely what is become of the lady; and if you
scruple to obey me, I am in a place where I shall soon be able to
force you to obey me.

At these stern words, the grand vizier began to be under greater
confusion than before, and was thinking how to extricate himself. He
endeavoured to pacify the prince by good words, and begged of him,
in the most humble and guarded manner, to tell him if he had seen
this lady.

Yes, yes, answered the prince, I have seen her, and am very well
satisfied you sent her to tempt me. She played the part you had
given her admirably well, for I could not get a word out of her. She
pretended to be asleep, but I was no sooner got into a slumber; than
she arose and left me. You know all this: for I doubt not she has
been to make her report to you.

My lord, replied the vizier, I swear to you nothing of this has been
acted, which you seem to reproach me with; neither your father nor I
have sent this lady you speak of; permit me, therefore, to remind
your highness once more, you have only seen this lady in a dream.

Do you come to affront and contradict me, said the prince in a great
rage, and to tell me to my face, that what I have told you is a
dream? At the same time, he took him by the beard, and loaded him
with blows, as long as he could stand.

The poor grand vizier endured with respectful patience all the
violence of his lord’s indignation, and could not help saying
within himself, Now am I in as bad a condition as the slave, and
shall think myself happy if I can, like him, escape from farther
danger. In the midst of repeated blows, he cried out for a
moment’s audience, which the prince, after he had nearly tired
himself with beating him, consented to give him.

I own, my prince, said the grand vizier, dissembling, there is
something in what your highness suspects: but you cannot be ignorant
of the necessity a minister is under to obey his royal master’s
orders; yet if you will but be pleased to set me at liberty, I will
go and tell him any thing on your part that you shall think fit to
command me. Go, then, said the prince, and tell him from me, if he
pleases, I will marry the lady he sent me, or rather that was
brought to me last night Do this quickly, and bring me a speedy
answer. The grand vizier made a profound reverence, and went away,
not thinking himself altogether safe till he had got out of the
tower, and shut the door upon the prince.

He came and presented himself before king Schahzaman, with a
countenance that sufficiently showed he had been ill used, and which
the king could not behold without concern. Well, said the king, in
what condition did you find my son? Sir, answered the vizier, what
the slave reported to your majesty is but too true. He then began to
relate his interview with Camaralzaman, how he flew into a passion
upon his endeavouring to persuade him it was impossible the lady he
spoke of should have got in to him; the ill-treatment he had
received from him; how he had used him, and by what means he made
his escape.

Schahzaman, so much the more concerned as he loved the prince with
excessive tenderness, resolved to find out the truth of this matter,
and therefore proposed himself, to go and see his son in the tower,
accompanied with the grand vizier.

Prince Camaralzaman received the king, his father, in the tower
where he was confined, with great respect. The king sat down, and
after he had made his son the prince sit down by him, put several
questions to him, which he answered with great good sense. The king
every now and then looked on the grand vizier, as intimating he did
not find his son had lost his wits, but rather thought he had lost
his.

The king at length spoke of the lady to the prince. My son, said he,
I desire you to tell me what lady it was that lay with you the other
night, as I have been told.

Sir, answered Camaralzaman, I beg your majesty not to give me more
vexation on that head, but rather to oblige me by letting me have
her in marriage: whatever aversion I may hitherto have discovered
for women, this young lady has charmed me to that degree, that I
cannot help confessing my weakness. I am ready to receive her at
your majesty’s hands, with the deepest gratitude.

King Schahzaman was surprised at this answer of the prince, so
remote, as he thought, from the good sense he had shown before. My
son, said he to him, you fill me with the greatest astonishment
imaginable by what you now say to me; I swear to you by my crown,
that is to devolve upon you after me, I know not one word of the
lady you mention; and if any such has come to you, it was altogether
without my knowledge or privity. But how could she get into this
tower without my consent? For whatever my grand vizier told you, it
was only to appease you: it must therefore be a mere dream; and I
beg of you not to believe otherwise, but recover your senses.

Sir, replied the prince, I should be for ever unworthy of your
majesty’s favour, if I did not give entire credit to what you are
pleased to say; but I humbly beseech you at the same time to give a
patient hearing to what I shall say to you, and then to judge
whether what I have the honour to tell you be a dream or not.

Then prince Camaralzaman related to the king his father after what
manner he had been awaked, exaggerating the beauty and charms of the
lady he found by his side, the instantaneous love he conceived for
her, and the pains he took to awaken her without effect. He did not
conceal what had obliged him to awake and fall asleep again, after
he had made the exchange of his ring with that of the lady: showing
the king the ring, he added, Sir, your majesty must needs know my
ring very well, you have seen it so often. After this I hope you
will be convinced that I have not lost my senses, as you have been
almost made to believe.

King Schahzaman was so perfectly convinced of the truth of what his
son had been telling him, that he had not a word to say, remaining
astonished for some time, and not being able to utter a syllable.

The prince took advantage of this opportunity, and said farther,
Sir, the passion I have conceived for this charming lady, whose
precious image I bear continually in my mind, is so very great, that
I cannot resist it. I entreat you therefore to have compassion on
me, and procure me the happiness of enjoying her.

Son, replied the king, after what I have just heard, and what I see
by the ring on your finger, I cannot doubt but that your passion is
real, and that you have seen this lady, who is the object of it.
Would to God I knew who she was, and I would make you happy from
this moment, and I should be the happiest father in the world! But
what means have I to come at the knowledge of her? Where shall I
find her, and how seek for her? How could she get in here, and by
what conveyance, without my consent? Why did she come to sleep with
you only to show you her beauty, to kindle a flame of love while she
slept, and then leave you while you were in a slumber? These things,
I must confess, are past my finding out; and if Heaven is not so
favourable to us as to give some light into them, we, I fear, must
both go down to the grave together. So saying, and taking the prince
by the hand, Come then, my son, let us go and afflict ourselves in
conjunction; you with hopeless love, and I with seeing you grieve,
and not being able to remedy your affliction.

King Schahzaman then led his son out of the tower, and conveyed him
to the palace, where he was no sooner arrived, than in despair for
loving an unknown object he fell sick, and took to his bed; the king
shut himself up with him, and spent many a day in weeping, without
attending to the affairs of his kingdom.

The prime minister, who was the only person that had admittance to
him, came one day and told him, the whole court, and even the
people, began to murmur at not seeing him, and that he did not
administer justice every day as he was wont to do; adding, he knew
not what disorder it might occasion. I humbly beg your majesty,
therefore, proceeded he, to pay some attention, I am sensible your
majesty’s company is a great comfort to the prince, and that his
company is a mutual relief to your grief; but then you must not run
the risk of letting all be lost. Permit me to propose to your
majesty, to remove with the prince to the castle on a little island
near the port, where you may give audience to your subjects twice a
week only; during these absences the prince will be so agreeably
amused with the beauty, prospect, and good air of the place, that he
will bear them with the less uneasiness.

King Schahzaman approved this proposal; and after the castle, where
he had not resided for some time, had been furnished, he removed
thither with the prince; and, excepting the time that he gave
audience, as aforesaid, he never left him, but passed all his time
on his son’s pillow, endeavouring to comfort him in sharing his
grief.

While matters passed thus in the capital of king Schahzaman, the two
genies, Danhasch and Caschcasch, had carried the princess of China
back to the palace where the king had shut her up, and laid her in
her bed as before.

When she awaked next morning, and found by looking to the right and
to the left, that prince Camaralzaman was not by her, she cried out
with such a voice to her women as soon brought them to her bed. Her
nurse, who presented herself first, desired to be informed what she
would please to have, and if any thing disagreeable had happened to
her.

Tell me, said the princess, what is become of the young man that has
passed the night with me, and whom I love with all my soul? Madam,
replied the nurse, we cannot understand your highness, unless you
will be pleased to explain yourself.

A young man, the best made and most amiable, said the princess,
slept with me last night, whom, with all my caresses, I could not
awake; I ask you where he is?

Madam, answered the nurse, your highness asks us these questions to
jest with us. I beseech you to rise. I am in earnest, said the
princess, and I must know where this young man is. Madam, insisted
the nurse, you were alone when you went to bed last night; and how
any man could come to you without our knowledge, we cannot imagine,
for we all lay about the door of your chamber, which was locked, and
I had the key in my pocket.

At this the princess lost all patience, and catching her nurse by
the hair of her head, and giving her two or three sound cuffs, she
cried, You shall tell me where this young man is, old sorceress, or
I will beat your brains out.

The nurse struggled to get from her, and at last succeeded; when she
went immediately, with tears in her eyes, and her face all bloody,
to complain to the queen her mother, who was not a little surprised
to see her in this condition, and asked who had done this.

Madam, began the nurse, you see how the princess has treated me; she
had certainly murdered me, if I had not had the good fortune to
escape out of her hands. She then began to tell what had been the
cause of all that violent passion in the princess. The queen was
surprised to hear it, and could not guess how she came to be so
infatuated, as to take that for a reality which could be no other
than a dream. Your majesty must conclude from all this, madam,
continued the nurse, that the princess is out of her senses. You
will think so yourself, if you will go and see her.

The queen’s affection for the princess was too deeply interested
in what she heard; she ordered the nurse to follow her; and they
went together to the princess’s palace that very moment.

The queen of China sat down by her daughter’s bed-side,
immediately upon her arrival in her apartment; and after she had
informed herself about her health, began to ask her what had made
her so angry with her nurse, as to treat her in the manner she had
done. Daughter, said she, this is not right; and a great princess
like you should not suffer herself to be so transported with passion.

Madam, replied the princess, I plainly perceive your majesty is come
to mock me; but I declare I will never let you rest till you consent
I shall marry the young man that lay with me last night. You must
know where he is, and therefore I beg of your majesty to let him
come in to me again.

Daughter, answered the queen, you surprise me; I know nothing of
what you talk of. Then the princess lost all respect for the queen.
Madam, replied she, the king my father and you have persecuted me
about marrying, when I had no inclination; I now have an
inclination, and I will have this young man I told you of, for my
husband, or I will kill myself.

Here the queen endeavoured to calm the princess by soft words.
Daughter, said she, you know well you are alone in this apartment;
how then could any man come to you? But instead of hearing her, the
princess interrupted her, and flew out into such extravagancies as
obliged the queen to leave her, and retire in great affliction, to
inform the king of all that had passed.

The king hearing it, had a mind likewise to be satisfied in person;
and coming to his daughter’s apartment, asked her if what he had
just heard was true. Sir, replied the princess, let us talk no more
of that; I only beseech your majesty to grant me the favour that I
may marry the young man I lay with last night.

What! daughter, said the king, has any one lain with you last night?
How, sir, replied the princess, without giving him time to go on, do
you ask me if any one lay with me last night? your majesty knows
that but too well. He was the finest and best made youth the sun
ever saw. I desire him of you for my husband: I entreat you do not
refuse me. But that your majesty may not longer doubt whether I have
seen this young man, whether he has lain with me, whether I have
caressed him, or whether I did not do my utmost to awake him,
without succeeding, see, if you please, this ring. She then reached
forth her hand, and showed the king a man’s ring on her finger.
The king did not know what to make of all this; but as he had
confined her as mad, he began to think her more mad than ever:
therefore, without saying any thing more to her, for fear she might
do violence to herself or somebody about her, he had her chained,
and shut up more close than ever, allowing her only the nurse to
wait on her, with a good guard at the door.

The king, exceedingly concerned at this indisposition of his
daughter, sought all possible means to get her cured. He assembled
his council, and after having acquainted them with the condition she
was in, If any of you, said he, is capable of undertaking her cure,
and succeeds, I will give her to him in marriage, and make him heir
to my dominions and crown after my decease.

The desire of enjoying a handsome young princess, and the hopes of
one day governing so powerful a kingdom as that of China, had a
strange effect on an emir, already advanced in age, who was present
at this council. As he was well skilled in magic, he offered the
king to cure his daughter, and flattered himself with success. I
consent, said the king; but I forgot to tell you one thing, and that
is, that if you do not succeed, you shall lose your head. It would
not be reasonable you should have so great a reward, and yet run no
risk on your part: and what I say to you, continued the king, I say
to all others that shall come after you, that they may consider
beforehand what they undertake.

The emir, however, accepted the condition, and the king conducted
him where the princess was. She covered her face as soon as she saw
them come in, and cried out, Your majesty surprises me, in bringing
with you a man I do not know, and by whom my religion forbids me to
be seen. Daughter, replied the king, you need not be scandalized, it
is only one of my emirs who is come to demand you of me in marriage.
It is not, I perceive, the person that you have already given me,
and whose faith is plighted by the ring I wear, replied the
princess: be not offended that I will never marry any other.

The emir expected the princess would have said or done some
extravagant thing, and was not a little disappointed when he heard
her talk so calmly and rationally; for then he knew her disease was
nothing but a violent and deep-rooted love-passion. He dared not
explain himself to the king, who would not have suffered the
princess to give her hand to any other than the person to whom he
wished to give her with his own hand. He therefore threw himself at
his majesty’s feet, and said, After what I have heard and
observed, sir, it will be to no purpose for me to think of curing
the princess, since I have no remedies proper for her malady; for
which reason I humbly submit my life to your majesty’s pleasure.
The king, enraged at his incapacity, and the trouble he had given
him, caused him immediately to be beheaded.

Some days after, his majesty, unwilling to have it said that he had
neglected his daughter’s cure, put forth a proclamation in his
capital, importing, that if there were any physician, astrologer, or
magician, who would undertake to restore the princess to her senses,
he need only come, and he should be employed, on condition of losing
his head if he miscarried. He had the same published in the other
principal cities and towns of his dominions, and in the courts of
the princes his neighbours.

The first that presented himself was an astrologer and magician,
whom the king caused to be conducted to the princess’s prison by a
eunuch. The astrologer drew forth, out of a bag he carried under his
arm, an astrolabe, a small sphere, a chafing-dish, several sorts of
drugs proper for fumigations, a brass pot, with many other things,
and desired he might have a fire lighted.

The princess demanded what all these preparations were for. Madam,
answered the eunuch, they are to exorcise the evil spirit that
possesses you, to shut him up in this pot, and throw him into the
sea.

Foolish astrologer, replied the princess, I have no occasion for any
of your preparations, but am in my perfect senses, and you alone are
mad. If your art can bring him I love to me, I shall be obliged to
you; otherwise you may go about your business, for I have nothing to
do with you. Madam, said the astrologer, if your case be so, I shall
desist from all endeavours, believing the king your father can only
remedy your disaster in this particular. So putting up his trinkets
again, he marched away, very much concerned that he had so easily
undertaken to cure an imaginary malady.

Coming to give an account to the king of what he had done, he would
not wait for the eunuch to speak for him, but began thus boldly:
According to what your majesty published in your proclamation, and
what you were pleased to confirm to me yourself, I thought the
princess was distracted, and depended on being able to recover her
by the secrets I have long been acquainted with; but I soon found
she had no other disease than that of love, over which my art had no
power: your majesty alone is the physician that can cure her, by
giving her in marriage to the person whom she desires.

The king was very much enraged at the astrologer, and had his head
cut off upon the spot. But his fate did not deter others from making
a similar attempt, so that in a short time, a hundred and fifty
astrologers, physicians, and magicians, who came upon this account,
all underwent the same fate; and their heads were set upon poles on
every gate of the city.




The Story of Marzavan, with the sequel of that of the Prince
Camaralzaman.


The princess of China’s nurse had a son, whose name was Marzavan,
and who had been foster-brother to the princess, and brought up with
her. Their friendship was so great during their childhood, and all
the time they had been together, that they treated each other as
brother and sister, as they grew up, even some time after their
separation.

This Marzavan, among other studies, had from his youth been much
addicted to judicial astrology, geomancy, and the like secret arts,
wherein he became exceeding skilful. Not content with what he had
learned from masters, he travelled as soon as he was able to bear
the fatigue; and there was hardly any person of note in any science
of art, but he sought him in the most remote cities, and kept
company with him long enough to obtain all the information he
desired, so great was his thirst after knowledge.

After several years absence in foreign parts on this account, he
returned to the capital city of his native country, China; where
seeing so many heads on the gate by which he entered, he was
exceedingly surprised; and coming home, demanded for what reason
they had been placed there; but more especially he informed himself
of the condition of the princess his foster-sister, whom he had not
forgotten. As he could not receive an answer to one inquiry without
the other, he heard at length the general account with much sorrow,
waiting till he could learn more from his mother, the princess’s
nurse.

Although the nurse, mother to Marzavan, was very much employed about
the princess, yet she no sooner heard her dear son was returned, but
she found time to come out, embrace him, and converse with him a
little. Having told him, with tears in her eyes, what a sad
condition the princess was in; and for what reason the king, her
father, had confined her, he desired to know of his mother, if she
could not procure him a private sight of her royal mistress, without
the king knowing it. After some pause, she told him she could say
nothing to him for the present, but if he would meet her next day at
the same hour, she would give him an answer.

The nurse knowing none could approach the princess, but herself,
without leave of the eunuch who commanded the guard at the gate,
addressed herself to him, who she knew was so lately appointed, that
he could know nothing of what had before passed at the court of
China. You know, said she to him, I have brought up and suckled the
princess, and you may likewise have heard that I had a daughter whom
I brought up along with her. This daughter has been since married;
yet the princess still does her the honour to love her, and would
fain see her, but she would do it without any body’s perceiving
her coming in or out.

The nurse would have gone on; but the eunuch cried, Say no more; I
will with pleasure do any thing to oblige the princess: go and fetch
your daughter, or send for her about midnight, and the gate shall be
open to you.

As soon as night came, the nurse went to look for her son, Marzavan,
and having found him, dressed him so artificially in women’s
clothes, that nobody could know he was a man. She carried him along
with her, and the eunuch verily believing it was her daughter,
admitted them together.

The nurse, before she presented Marzavan went to the princess, and
said, Madam, this is not a woman I have brought to you; it is my
son, Marzavan, in disguise, newly arrived from his travels, who
having a great desire to kiss your hand, I hope your highness will
admit him to that honour.

What! my brother Marzavan, said the princess, with great joy; come
hither, cried she, and take off that veil; for it is not
unreasonable sure that a brother and a sister should see each other
without covering their faces.

Marzavan saluted her with profound respect; when she, without giving
him time to speak, cried out, I am rejoiced to see you returned in
good health after so many years’ absence, and without sending the
least account all the while of your welfare, even to your good
mother.

Madam, replied Marzavan, I am infinitely obliged to your highness
for your goodness in rejoicing at my health: I hoped to have heard a
better account of yours than what, to my great affliction, I am now
witness of; nevertheless, I cannot but rejoice that I am come
seasonably enough to bring your highness that remedy which you stand
so much in need of; and though I should reap no other fruit of my
studies and long voyage, I should think myself fully recompensed.

Speaking these words, Marzavan drew forth out of his pocket a book
and other things, which he judged necessary to be used, according to
the account he had had from his mother of the princess’s
distemper. The princess seeing him make all these preparations,
cried out, What! brother, are you then one of those that believe me
mad? Undeceive yourself, and hear me.

The princess then began to relate to Marzavan all the particulars of
her story, without omitting the least circumstance, even to the ring
which was exchanged for hers, and which she showed him. I have not
concealed the least matter from you, quoth she; yet it is true,
there is something that I cannot comprehend, which has given
occasion for some persons to think me mad; but this is for want of
attending to the rest, which is literally as I tell you.

After the princess had done speaking, Marzavan, filled with wonder
and astonishment, continued for some time with his eyes fixed on the
ground, without speaking a word; but at length he lifted up his
head, and said, If it be as your highness says, and which I do not
in the least doubt, I do not despair to procure you the satisfaction
you desire; but I must first entreat your highness to arm yourself
with patience for some time longer, till I shall return; till I have
travelled over kingdoms which I have not yet visited; and when you
hear of my return, be assured the object of your wishes is not far
off. So saying, Marzavan took leave of the princess, and set out
next morning on his intended voyage.

He travelled from city to city, from province to province, and from
island to island; and in every place he passed through, he could
hear of nothing but the princess Badoura, which was the princess of
China’s name, and her history.

About four months after, our traveller arrived at Torf, a seaport
town, great and populous, where he no more heard of the princess
Badoura, but all the talk was of prince Camaralzaman, who was sick,
and whose history very much resembled hers. Marzavan was extremely
delighted to hear this, and informed himself of the place where the
prince was to be found. There were two ways to it; one by land and
sea, the other by sea only, which was the shortest way.

Marzavan chose the latter, and embarking on board a merchant ship,
he arrived safe in sight of king Schahzaman’s capital; but just
before it entered the port, the ship struck against a rock, by the
unskilfulness of the pilot, and foundered. It went down in sight of
prince Camaralzaman’s castle, where were at that time the king and
his grand vizier.

Marzavan could swim very well, and immediately upon the ship’s
sinking, cast himself into the sea, and got safe on shore under the
castle, where he was soon relieved by the grand vizier’s order.
After he had changed his clothes, and been well treated, and was
recovered, he was introduced to the grand vizier, who had sent for
him.

Marzavan being a young man of good air and address, this minister
received him very civilly; and when he heard him give such just and
pertinent answers to what was asked of him, conceived a great esteem
for him. He also gradually perceived he possessed a great deal of
knowledge; therefore said to him, From what I can understand, I
perceive you are no common man; you have travelled a great way;
would to God, you had learned any secret for curing a certain sick
person, who has greatly afflicted this court for a long while.

Marzavan replied, If he knew what malady that was, he might perhaps
find a remedy for it.

Then the grand vizier related to him the whole story of prince
Carmaralzaman, from its origin, and concealed nothing; of his birth
so earnestly desired, his education, the inclination the king, his
father, had to see him early married, his resistance, and
extraordinary aversion to marriage, his disobeying his father in
full council, his imprisonment, his pretended extravagancies in
prison, which were afterwards changed into a violent passion for a
certain unknown lady, who, he pretended, had exchanged a ring with
him, though, for his part, he verily believed there was no such
person in the world.

Marzavan gave great attention to all the grand vizier said, and was
infinitely rejoiced to find, that by means of his shipwreck, he had
so fortunately lighted on the person he was looking after. He saw no
reason to doubt that prince Camaralzaman was the man the princess of
China was so violently in love with, and that this princess was
equally the object of his passion; therefore, without explaining
himself farther to the vizier, he desired to see him, that he might
be better able to judge of his distemper and its cure. Follow me,
said the grand vizier, and you will find the king with him, who has
already desired I should introduce you to him.

The first thing that struck Marzavan on entering the prince’s
chamber, was to find him upon his bed languishing, and with his eyes
shut. Although he saw them in that condition, and although the king,
his father was sitting by him, he could not help crying out,
Heavens! was there ever a greater resemblance! He meant to the
princess of China; for it seems the princess and prince were much
alike.

The words of Marzavan excited the prince’s curiosity so far, that
he opened his eyes and looked upon him. Marzavan, who had a ready
wit, laid hold of that opportunity, and made his compliment in verse
extempore, but in such a disguised manner, that neither the king nor
grand vizier understood any thing of the matter. However, he
represented so nicely what had happened to him with the princess of
China, that the prince had no reason to doubt he knew her, and could
give him tidings of her. This made him so joyful, that the effects
of it showed themselves in his eyes and looks.

After Marzavan had finished his compliments in verse, which
surprised prince Camaralzaman so agreeably, his highness took the
liberty to make a sign to the king, his father, to go from the place
where he was, and let Marzavan sit by him.

The king, overjoyed at this alteration, which gave him hopes of his
son’s speedy recovery, quitted his place, and taking Marzavan by
the hand, led him to it, obliging him to sit in it. Then his majesty
demanded of him who he was, and whence he came; and upon
Marzavan’s answering he was a subject of China, and came from that
kingdom, the king cried out, Heaven grant you may be able to recover
my son from this profound melancholy, and I shall be eternally
obliged to you; all the world shall see now handsomely I will reward
you. --Having said thus, he left the prince to converse at full
liberty with the stranger, whilst he went and rejoiced with the
grand vizier upon this happy rencontre.

Marzavan, leaning down to the prince, spoke low in his ear thus:
Prince, said he, it is time you should cease to grieve. The lady for
whom you suffer is the princess Badoura, daughter of Gaiour, king of
China. This I can assure your highness from what she has told me of
her adventure, and what I have learned of yours. She has suffered no
less on your account, than you have on hers. Here he began to relate
all that he knew of the princess’s story, from the fatal night of
their extraordinary interview.

He omitted not to acquaint him, how the king had treated those who
had failed in their pretensions to cure the princess of her
indisposition. But your highness is the only person, added he, that
can cure her effectually, and may present yourself without fear.
However, before you undertake so great a voyage, I would have you
perfectly recovered, and then we will take such measures as are
necessary. Think then, immediately, of the recovery of your health.

This discourse had a marvellous effect on the prince: he found so
great relief by the hopes he conceived of speedily fulfilling his
desires, that he felt he had strength sufficient to rise, and begged
leave of his father to dress himself with such an air, as gave the
old king incredible pleasure.

King Schahzaman could not refrain from embracing Marzavan, without
inquiring into the means he had used to produce this wonderful
effect; and soon after went out of the prince’s chamber with the
grand vizier, to publish this agreeable news. He ordered public
rejoicings for several days together, and gave great largesses to
his officers and the people, alms to the poor, and caused the
prisoners to be set at liberty throughout his kingdom. The joy was
soon general in the capital, and in every corner of his dominions.

Prince Camaralzaman, though extremely weakened by almost continual
want of sleep, and long abstinence from almost all food, soon
recovered his health. When he found himself in a condition to
undertake the voyage, he took Marzavan aside, and said, Dear
Marzavan, it is now time to perform the promise you have made me. I
burn with impatience to see the charming princess; and if you do not
speedily give me an opportunity to put an end to her torments and my
own, by setting out on our journey immediately, I shall soon relapse
into my former condition. One thing still afflicts me, continued he,
and that is the difficulty I shall meet with in getting leave of my
father to go. This would be a cruel disappointment to me, if you do
not contrive a way to prevent it. You see he scarce ever leaves me.

At these words the prince fell to weeping; and Marzavan said, I
foresaw this difficulty; let not your highness be grieved at that,
for I will undertake to prevent it. My principal design in this
voyage was to deliver the princess of China from her malady, and
this from all the reasons of mutual affection which we have borne to
each other from our birth, besides the zeal and affection I
otherwise owe her; and I should be wanting in my duty to her, if I
did not do my best endeavour to effect her cure and yours, and exert
my utmost skill. This is then the means I have contrived to obtain
your liberty: you have not stirred abroad for some time, therefore
let the king, your father, understand you have a mind to take the
air, and ask his leave to go out on a hunting party two or three
days with me. No doubt he will grant your request; which when he has
done, order two good horses to be got ready, one to mount, the other
to change, and leave the rest to me.

Next day, prince Camaralzaman took his opportunity. He acquainted
the king, he was desirous to take the air, and if he pleased, would
go and hunt two or three days with Marzavan. The king gave his
consent, but bid him be sure not to lie out above one night, since
too much exercise at first might impair his health, and too long
absence create his majesty uneasiness. He then ordered him to choose
the best horses in his stable, and himself took particular care that
nothing should be wanting. When all was ready, his majesty embraced
the prince, and having recommended to Marzavan the care of him, he
let him go. Prince Camaralzaman and Marzavan were soon mounted;
when, to amuse the two grooms that led the fresh horses, they made
as if they would hunt, and so got as far off the city and out of the
road as was possible. When night began to approach, they alighted at
a caravansera or inn, where they supped, and slept till about
midnight, when Marzavan awaked the prince, without awaking the
grooms, and desired his highness to let him have his suit, and to
take another for himself, which was brought in his baggage. Thus
equipped, they mounted the fresh horses, and after Marzavan had
taken one of the groom’s horses by the bridle, they set out as
hard as their horses could go.

At daybreak, they were got into a forest, where, coming to the
meeting of four roads, Marzavan desired the prince to wait for him a
little, and went into the forest. He then cut the groom’s
horse’s throat, and after having torn the prince’s suit, which
he had put off, besmearing it with blood, he threw it into the
highway.

The prince demanded his reason for what he had done. He told his
highness he was sure the king, his father, would no sooner find that
he did not return, and come to know that he was departed without the
grooms, but he would suspect something, and immediately send people
in quest of them. They that come to this place, said he, and find
this bloody habit, will conclude you are devoured by wild beasts,
and that I have escaped to avoid the king’s anger. The king,
persuading himself you are dead, will stop farther pursuit, and we
may have leisure to continue our journey without fear of being
followed. I must confess, continued Marzavan, this is a violent way
of proceeding, to alarm an old father with the death of his son,
whom he loves so passionately; but his joy will be the greater when
he shall hear you are alive and happy. --Brave Marzavan, replied the
prince, I cannot but approve such an ingenious stratagem, or
sufficiently admire your conduct; I have fresh obligations to you
for it.

The prince and Marzavan, well provided with cash for their expenses,
continued their journey both by land and sea, and found no other
obstacle, but the length of the time which it necessarily took up.
They, however, arrived at length at the capital of China, where
Marzavan, instead of going to his lodging, carried the prince to a
public inn. They tarried there incognito three days, to rest
themselves after the fatigue of the voyage; during which time,
Marzavan caused an astrologer’s habit to be made for the prince.
The three days being expired, they went together to the bath, where
the prince put on his astrologer’s habit; and from thence Marzavan
conducted him in sight of the king of China’s palace, where he
left him, to go and acquaint his mother, the princess Badoura’s
nurse, of his arrival, to the end she might inform the princess.

Prince Camaralzaman, instructed by Marzavan what he was to do, and
provided with all he wanted as an astrologer, came next morning to
the gate of the king’s palace, before the guards and porters, and
cried aloud, I am an astrologer, and am come to effect a cure on the
respectable princess Badoura, daughter of the most high and mighty
monarch Gaiour, king of China, on the conditions proposed by his
majesty, to marry her if I succeed, or else to lose my life for my
fruitless and presumptuous attempt.

Besides the guards and porters at the gate, this novelty drew
together a great number of people about prince Camaralzaman. There
had no physician, astrologer, nor magician appeared for a long time
on this account, deterred by the many tragical examples of ill
success that appeared before their eyes; it was therefore thought
there were no more of these professions in the world, or that there
were none so mad as those that had gone before them.

The prince’s good mien, noble air, and blooming youth, made every
body that saw him pity him. What mean you, sir, said some that were
nearest to him, thus to expose a life of such promising expectations
to certain death? Cannot the heads you see on all the gates of this
city deter you from such an undertaking? In the name of God,
consider what you do; abandon this rash attempt, and begone.

The prince continued firm, notwithstanding all these remonstrances;
and as he saw nobody come to introduce him, he repeated the same cry
with a boldness that made every body tremble. They all then cried,
Let him alone, he is resolved to die; God have mercy upon his youth
and his soul! --He then proceeded to cry out a third time in the
same manner, when the grand vizier came in person, and introduced
him to the king of China.

As soon as the prince came into the king’s presence, he bowed and
kissed the ground. The king, who, of all that had hitherto
presumptuously exposed their lives on this occasion, had not seen
one worthy to cast his eyes upon before, felt real compassion for
prince Camaralzaman, on account of the danger he was about to
undergo. But as he saw him more deserving than ordinary, he showed
him more honour, and made him come and sit by him. Young man, said
he, I can hardly believe you, at this age, can have acquired
experience enough to dare attempt the cure of my daughter. I wish
you may succeed, and would give her to you in marriage with all my
heart, with the greatest joy, more willingly than I should have done
to others that have offered themselves before you; but I must
declare to you, at the same time, with great concern, that if you do
not succeed in your attempt, notwithstanding your noble appearance
and your youth, you must lose your head.

Sir, replied the prince, I have infinite obligations to your majesty
for the honour you design me, and the great goodness you show to a
stranger; but I desire your majesty to believe I would not have come
from so remote a country as I have done, the name of which, perhaps,
may be unknown in your dominions, if I had not been certain of the
cure I propose. What would not the world say of my fickleness, if,
after so great fatigues and dangers as I have undergone on this
account, I should abandon this generous enterprise? Even your
majesty would soon lose that esteem you have conceived for me. If I
must die, sir, I shall die with the satisfaction of not having lost
your esteem after I have merited it. I beseech your majesty,
therefore, to keep me no longer impatient to display the certainty
of my art, by the proof I am ready to give of it.

Then the king commanded the eunuch, who had the custody of the
princess, to introduce prince Camaralzaman into her apartment; but
before he would let him go, he reminded him once more that he was at
liberty to renounce his design; yet the prince paid no regard, but,
with astonishing resolution and eagerness, followed the eunuch.

When they came to a long gallery, at the end of which was the
princess’s apartment, the prince, who saw himself so near the
object of his wishes, who had occasioned him so many tears, pushed
on, and got before the eunuch.

The eunuch, redoubling his pace, with much ado got up with him.
Whither away so fast? cried he, taking him by the arm; you cannot
get in without me; and it should seem you have a great desire for
death, thus to run to it headlong. Not one of all those many
astrologers and magicians I have introduced before made such haste
as yourself to a place whither I fear you will come but too soon.

Friend, replied the prince, looking earnestly on the eunuch, and
continuing his pace, this was because none of the astrologers you
speak of were so sure of their art as I am of mine: they were
certain, indeed, they should die if they did not succeed, but they
had no certainty of their success. On this account they had reason
to tremble on approaching the place whither I go, and where I am
sure to find my happiness. He had just spoke these words as he was
at the door. The eunuch opened it, and introduced him into a great
hall, whence was an entrance into the princess’s chamber, divided
from it only by a piece of tapestry.

Prince Camaralzaman stopt before he entered, speaking more softly to
the eunuch for fear of being heard in the princess’s chamber. To
convince you, said he, there is neither presumption, nor whim, nor
youthful conceit, in my undertaking, I leave it to your own desire,
whether I should cure the princess in your presence, or where we
are, without going any farther.

The eunuch was amazed to hear the prince talk to him with such
confidence; he left off insulting him, and said seriously to him, It
is no matter whether you do it here or there, provided the business
is done: cure her how you will, you will get immortal honour by it,
not only in this court, but over all the world.

The prince replied, It will be best, then, to cure her without
seeing her, that you may be witness of my skill. Notwithstanding my
impatience to see a princess of her rank, who is to be my wife, yet,
out of respect to you, I will deprive myself of that pleasure for a
little while. He was furnished with everything proper for an
astrologer to carry about him: taking pen, ink, and paper, out of
his pocket, he wrote this billet to the princess:--




Prince Camaralzaman to the Princess of China.


‘Adorable princess!

‘The love-sick prince Camaralzaman will not trouble you with a
recital of the inexpressible pains that he has endured ever since
that fatal night in which your charms deprived him of the liberty
which he resolved to preserve as long as he lived. He only tells you
that he devoted his heart to you in your charming slumbers; those
importunate slumbers that hindered him from beholding the brightness
of your piercing eyes, in spite of all his endeavours to oblige you
to open them. He presumed to present you with his ring as a token of
his passion; and to take yours in exchange, which he sends in this
billet. If you will condescend to return it, as a reciprocal pledge
of your love, he will esteem himself the happiest of all lovers. If
not, the sentence of death, which your refusal brings him, will be
received with the more resignation, because he dies for love of you.
He waits in your ante-chamber for your answer.’

When the prince had finished his billet, he folded it up, and
enclosed in it the princess’s ring, without letting the eunuch see
what he did. When he had sealed it, he gave it to him: There,
friend, said he, carry it to your mistress; if it does not cure her
as soon as she reads it, and sees what is inclosed in it, I give you
leave to tell every body that I am the most ignorant and impudent
astrologer that ever was, is, or ever will be.

The eunuch, entering the princess of China’s chamber, gave her the
packet he received from prince Camaralzaman. Madam, said he, the
boldest astrologer that ever lived, if I am not mistaken, is arrived
here, and pretends, that on reading this letter, and seeing what is
in it, you will be cured; I wish he may prove neither a liar nor
impostor.

The princess Badoura took this billet, and opened it with a great
deal of indifference: but when she saw the ring, she had not
patience to read it through: she rose hastily, broke the chain that
held her by struggling, ran to the door, and opened it. She knew the
prince as soon as she saw him, and he knew her: they presently
embraced each other tenderly, and without being able to speak for
excess of joy: they looked on one another a long time, wondering how
they met again after their first interview. The princess’s nurse,
who ran to the door with her, made them come into her chamber, where
the princess Badoura gave the prince her ring, saying, Take it, I
cannot keep it without restoring yours, which I will never part
with; neither can it be in better hands.

The eunuch went immediately to tell the king of China what had
happened. Sir, said he, all the astrologers and doctors who have
hitherto pretended to cure the princess, were fools in comparison of
the last. He made use neither of schemes nor conjurations, of
perfumes, or any thing else, but cured her without seeing her. Then
he told the king how he did it. The monarch was agreeably surprised
at the news, and going presently to the princess’s chamber,
embraced her: he afterwards embraced the prince, and, taking his
hand, joined it to the princess’s. Happy stranger, said the king,
whoever you are, I will keep my word, and give you my daughter to
wife; though, by what I see in you, it is impossible for me to
believe you are really what you appear, and would have me believe
you to be.

Prince Camaralzaman thanked the king in the most humble expressions,
that he might the better show his gratitude. As for my person, said
he, I must own I am not an astrologer, as your majesty very
judiciously guessed; I only put on the habit of one, that I might
succeed more easily in my ambition to be allied to the most potent
monarch in the world. I was born a prince, and the son of a king and
of a queen; my name is Camaralzaman; my father is Schahzaman, who
now reigns over the islands that are well known by the name of the
Islands of the Children of Khaledan. He then told him his history,
and how wonderful was the rise of his love; that the princess’s
was altogether as marvellous; and that both were confirmed by the
exchange of the two rings.

When the prince had done speaking, the king said to him, This
history is so extraordinary, it deserves to be known to posterity; I
will take care it shall; and the original being deposited in my
royal archives, I will spread copies of it abroad, that my own
kingdom and the kingdoms around me may know it.

The marriage was solemnized the same day, and the rejoicings for it
were universal all over the empire of China. Nor was Marzavan
forgotten: the king gave him an honourable post in his court
immediately, and a promise of farther advancement.

Prince Camaralzaman and the princess Badoura enjoyed the fulness of
their wishes in the sweets of marriage; and the king kept continual
feastings for several months, to show his joy on the occasion.

In the midst of these pleasures, prince Camaralzaman dreamt one
night, that he saw his father, Schahzaman, on his deathbed, ready to
give up the ghost, and heard him speak thus to his attendants: My
son, to whom I gave birth; my son, whom I so tenderly loved; whom I
bred with so much fondness, so much care, has abandoned me, and is
himself the cause of my death. He awoke with a great sigh, which
awakened the princess, who asked him the cause of it.

Alas! my love, cried the prince, perhaps in the very moment that I
am speaking, the king, my father, is no more. He then acquainted her
with his melancholy dream, which occasioned him so much uneasiness.
The princess, who studied to please him in every thing, did not
immediately inform him she had contrived a way to do it, fearing
that the desire to see his father again would make him take less
delight in her company in a distant country. She went to her own
father that very day, and finding him alone, kissed his hand, and
thus addressed herself to him: Sir, I have a favour to beg of your
majesty, and I beseech you not to deny me; but that you may not
believe I ask it at the solicitation of the prince, my husband, I
assure you beforehand, he knows nothing of my asking it of you; it
is, that you will give leave for me to go with him and see king
Schahzaman, my father-in-law.

[Illustration: PRINCE CAMARALZAMAN & THE TALESMAN.]

Daughter, replied the king, though I shall be very sorry to part
with you for so long a time as a journey to a place so distant will
take up, yet I cannot disapprove of your resolution; it is worthy of
yourself, notwithstanding the fatigue of so long a journey; go,
child, I give you leave, but on condition that you stay no longer
than a year in king Schahzaman’s court. I hope the king will agree
to this, that we shall alternately see, he his son and his
daughter-in-law, and I my daughter and my son-in-law.

The princess communicated the king of China’s consent to prince
Camaralzaman, who was transported to hear it, and gave her thanks
for this new token of her love.

The king of China gave orders for preparations to be made for the
journey; and when all things were ready he accompanied the prince
and princess several days’ journey on their way; they parted at
length with great weeping on all sides; the king embraced them, and
having desired the prince to be kind to his daughter, and to love
her always with the same passion he now loved her, he left them to
proceed on their journey, and to divert himself, hunted all the way
as he returned to his capital city.

When prince Camaralzaman and the princess Badoura had dried up their
tears, they comforted themselves with the thought how glad king
Schahzaman would be to see them, and how they should rejoice to see
the king.

They travelled about a month, and at last came to a meadow of great
extent, planted at convenient distances with tall trees, forming an
agreeable shade. The day being unusually hot, Camaralzaman thought
it best to encamp there, and proposed it to Badoura, who, having the
same intention, the more readily consented to it. They alighted in
one of the finest spots; a tent was presently set up; the princess,
rising from the shade under which she sat down, entered it, and the
prince ordered his servants to pitch their tents also, while they
stayed there, and went himself to give directions. The princess,
weary with the fatigues of the journey, bid her women untie her
girdle, which they laid down by her; and she falling asleep, her
attendants left her by herself.

Prince Camaralzaman having seen all things in order, came to the
tent where the princess was sleeping; he entered, and sat down
without making any noise, intending to take a nap himself; but
observing the princess’s girdle lying by her, he took it up, and
looked upon the diamonds and rubies one by one. In doing it, he saw
a little purse hanging to it, sewed neatly on the stuff, and tied
fast with a riband; he felt it, and found there was something solid
in it. Desirous to know what it was, he opened the purse, and took
out a cornelian, engraven with unknown figures and characters. This
cornelian, said the prince to himself, must be something very
valuable, or my princess would not carry it with so much care. It
was Badoura’s talisman, [84] which the queen of China had given
her daughter as a charm, that would keep her, as she said, from any
harm as long as she had it about her.

The prince, the better to look at the talisman, took it out to the
light, the tent being dark; and while he was holding it up in his
hand, a bird darted down from the air and snatched it away from him.

It would be easy to conceive the concern and grief of prince
Camaralzaman, when he saw the bird fly away with the talisman. [85]
He was more troubled at it than words can express, and cursed his
unseasonable curiosity, by which means his dear princess had lost a
treasure that was so precious, and so valued by her.

The bird having got her prize, settled on the ground not far off,
with the talisman in her mouth. The prince drew near it, in hopes
she would drop it; but as he approached, the bird took wing, and
settled again on the ground farther off. Camaralzaman followed her,
and the bird having swallowed the talisman, took a farther flight;
the prince being very dexterous at a mark, thought to kill her with
a stone, and still followed her; the farther she flew, the more
eager he grew in pursuing her, keeping her always in view. Thus the
bird drew him along from hill to valley, and valley to hill, all
day, every step leading him out of the way from the field, where he
left his camp, and the princess Badoura; and instead of perching at
night on a bush, where he might probably have taken her, she roosted
on a high tree, safe from his pursuit. The prince vexed to the heart
for taking so much pains to no purpose, thought of returning to the
camp; but, said he to himself, which way shall I return? Shall I go
down the hills and valleys which I passed over? Shall I wander in
darkness? And will my strength bear me out? How durst I appear
before my princess without her talisman? Overwhelmed with such
thoughts, and tired with the pursuit, sleep came upon him, and he
lay down under a tree, where he passed the night.

He awoke the next morning before the bird had left the tree; and as
soon as he saw her on the wing, followed her again that whole day,
with no better success than he had done the last, eating nothing but
herbs and fruits all the way as he went: he did the same for ten
days together, pursuing the bird, and keeping her in his eye from
morning to night, lying always under the tree where she roosted. On
the eleventh day the bird continued flying, and Camaralzaman
observing her, he came near a great city. When the bird came to the
walls, she flew over them, and the prince saw no more of her: so he
despaired of ever recovering the princess Badoura’s talisman.

Camaralzaman, whose grief was beyond expression, went into the city,
which was built on the sea side, and had a fine port; he walked up
and down the streets without knowing where he was, or where to stop:
at last he came to the port, in as great uncertainty as ever what he
should do. Walking along the river side, he perceived the gate of a
garden open, and an old gardener at work in it; the good man looking
up, saw he was a stranger and a Mussulman; so he asked him to come
in, and shut the door after him.

Camaralzaman entered, and as the gardener bade him shut the door,
demanded of the gardener why he was so cautious. Because, replied
the old man. I see you are a stranger newly arrived and a Mussulman;
and this city is inhabited for the most part by idolaters, who have
a mortal aversion to us Mussulmen, and treat those few of us that
are here with great barbarity. I suppose you did not know this; and
it is a miracle that you have escaped as you have thus far, these
idolators being very apt to fall upon the Mussulmen that are
strangers, or to draw them into a snare, unless those strangers are
instructed how to beware of them. I bless God who has brought you
into a place of safety.

Camaralzaman thanked the honest gardener for his advice, and the
security he offered him in his house; he would have said more, but
the good man interrupted him, saying, Let us leave complimenting;
you are weary, and must want to refresh yourself. Come in, and rest
yourself. He conducted him into his little hut; and after the prince
had eaten heartily of what he set before him, with a cordiality that
charmed him, he requested him to relate how he came there.

Camaralzaman complied with his request; and when he had ended his
story, without concealing any part of it, he asked him which was the
nearest way to the king his father’s territories; for it is in
vain for me to think of finding my princess where I left her, after
wandering eleven days from the spot by so extraordinary an
adventure. Ah! continued he, how do I know she is alive? and saying
thus, he burst into tears. The gardener replied, there was no
possibility of his going thither by land, the ways were so
difficult, and the journey so long: besides, there was no
accommodation for his subsistence; or, if there were, he must
necessarily pass through the countries of so many barbarous nations,
that he would never reach his father’s. It was a year’s journey
from the city where he was to any country inhabited only by
Mussulmen; that the quickest passage for him would be to go to the
isle of Ebene, whence he might easily transport himself to the isles
of the children of Khaledan; that a ship sailed from the port every
year to Ebene, and he might take that opportunity of returning to
these islands. The ship departed, said he, but a few days ago; if
you had come a little sooner, you might have taken your passage in
it. If you will wait the year round, when it makes the voyage again,
and will stay with me and accept of my house, such as it is, you
will be as welcome to it as to your own.

Prince Camaralzaman was glad he had met with such an asylum, in a
place where he had no acquaintance nor interest. He accepted the
offer, and lived with the gardener till the time came that the ship
was to sail to the isle of Ebene. He spent his time in working all
day in the garden, and all night in sighs, tears, and complaints,
thinking of his dear princess Badoura. We must leave him in this
place, to return to the princess, whom we left asleep in her tent.




The Story of the Princess Badoura, after her separation from Prince
Camaralzaman.


The princess slept a long time, and when she awoke, wondered that
Prince Camaralzaman was not with her; she called her women, and
asked them if they knew where he was. They told her they saw him
enter the tent but did not see him go out again. While they were
talking to her, she took up her girdle, found the little purse open,
and that the talisman was gone. She did not doubt but Camaralzaman
had taken it to see what it was, and that he would bring it back
with him. She waited for him impatiently till night, and could not
imagine what made him stay away from her so long.

When it was quite dark, and she could hear nothing of him, she fell
into violent grief; she cursed the talisman, and him that made it;
and, had not she been restrained by duty, would have cursed the
queen her mother, who gave her such a fatal present. She was the
more troubled, because she could not imagine how her talisman should
have caused the prince’s separation from her: she did not however
lose her judgment and came to a courageous resolution, not common
with persons of her sex.

She only and her women knew of the prince’s being gone; for his
men were reposing or asleep in their tents. The princess, fearing
they would betray her, if they had any knowledge of it, moderated
her grief, and forbid her women to say or do any thing that might
create the least suspicion. She then laid aside her habit, and put
on one of Prince Camaralzaman’s, being so like him, that next day,
when she came abroad, his men took her for him.

She commanded them to pack up their baggage and begin their march;
and when all things were ready, she ordered one of her women to go
into her litter, she herself mounting on horseback, and riding by
her side.

They travelled several months by land and sea; the princess
continuing the journey under the name of Camaralzaman. They took the
island of Ebene in their way to the isles of the children of
Khaledan. They went to the capital of the island of Ebene, where a
king reigned whose name was Armanos. The persons who first landed,
giving out that the ship carried prince Camaralzaman, who was
returning from a long voyage, and was forced in there by a storm,
the news of his arrival was presently carried to court.

King Armanos, accompanied by most of his courtiers, went immediately
to wait on the prince, and met the princess just as she was landing,
and going to the lodging that had been taken for her. He received
her as the son of a king, who was his friend, and with whom he
always kept up a good understanding: he conducted her to the palace,
where an apartment was prepared for her and all her attendants,
though she would fain have excused herself, and have lodged in a
private house. He showed her all possible honour, and entertained
her three days together with extraordinary magnificence. At the end
of this time, King Armanos, understanding that the princess, whom he
still took for Prince Camaralzaman, talked of going abroad again to
proceed on her voyage, charmed with the air and qualities of such an
accomplished prince as he took her to be, he took an opportunity
when she was alone, and spoke to her in this manner: You see,
prince, that I am old, and cannot hope to live long; and, to my
great mortification, I have not a son to whom I may leave my crown.
Heaven has only blest me with one daughter, whose beauty cannot be
better matched than with a prince of your rank and accomplishments.
Instead of going home, stay and take her from my hand, with my
crown, which I resign in your favour, and stay with us. It is time
for me to rest, after having so long borne it; and nothing could be
a greater pleasure to me in my retirement, than to see my people
ruled by so worthy a successor to my throne.

The king of the isle of Ebene’s generous offer to bestow his only
daughter in marriage, and with her his kingdom, on the princess
Badoura, who could not accept it, because she was a woman, put her
into unexpected perplexity. She thought it would not become a
princess of her rank to undeceive the king, and to own that she was
not prince Camaralzaman, but his wife, when she assured him she was
he himself, and whose part she had hitherto acted so well. She was
also afraid to refuse the honour he offered her, lest being so much
bent upon the conclusion of the marriage, his kindness might turn to
aversion and hatred, and he might attempt something even against her
life. Besides, she was not sure whether she might not find prince
Camaralzaman in the court of king Schahzaman his father.

These considerations, added to the prospect of obtaining a kingdom
for the prince her husband, in case she found him again, determined
her to accept the proposal of king Armanos, and marry his daughter:
so after having stood silent for some minutes, she with blushes,
which the king took for a sign of modesty, answered, Sir, I am
infinitely obliged to your majesty for your good opinion of me, for
the honour you do me, and the great favour you offer me, which I
cannot pretend to merit, and dare not refuse.

But, sir, continued she, I cannot accept this great alliance on any
other condition, than that your majesty will assist me with your
counsels, and that I do nothing without having first your
approbation.

The marriage treaty being thus concluded and agreed on, the ceremony
was put off till next day. In the mean time princess Badoura gave
notice to her officers, who still took her for prince Camaralzaman,
what she was about to do, that they might not be surprised at it,
assuring them the princess Badoura consented to it. She talked also
to her women, and charged them to continue to keep the secret she
had entrusted them with.

The king of the isle of Ebene, rejoicing that he had got a
son-in-law so much to his satisfaction, next morning summoned his
council, and acquainted them with his design of marrying his
daughter to prince Camaralzaman, whom he introduced to them; and
having made him sit down by him, told them he resigned the crown to
him, and required them to acknowledge him for king, and swear fealty
to him. Having said this, he descended from his throne, and the
princess Badoura, by his order, ascended it. As soon as the council
broke up, the new king was proclaimed through the city, rejoicings
were appointed for several days, and couriers despatched over all
the kingdom to see the same ceremonies observed with the same
demonstrations of joy.

At night there were extraordinary feastings at the palace, and the
princess Haiatalnefous [86] was led to the princess Badoura, whom
every body took for a man, dressed like a royal bride. The wedding
was solemnized with the utmost splendour; they were put to bed, and
left alone. In the morning, while the princess Badoura went to
receive the compliments of the nobility in the hall of audience,
where they congratulated her on her marriage and accession to the
throne, king Armanos and his queen went to the apartment of the new
queen, their daughter, and asked her how she spent the night.
Instead of answering them, she held down her head, and by her looks
they saw plainly enough she was disappointed.

King Armanos, to comfort the princess. Haiatalnefous, bid her not be
troubled. Prince Camaralzaman, said he, when he landed here, might
think only of going to his father’s court. Though we have engaged
him to stay by arguments with which he ought to be well satisfied,
yet it is probable he grieves at being so suddenly deprived of the
hopes of seeing either his father or any of his family. You must
wait till those first emotions of filial love are over; he will then
carry himself towards you as a good husband ought to do.

The princess Badoura, under the name and character of prince
Camaralzaman, and the king of Ebene, spent the whole day in
receiving the compliments of the courtiers and the nobility of the
kingdom who were in and about the city, and in reviewing the regular
troops of her household; and entered on the administration of
affairs as king with so much dignity and judgment, as gained her the
general applause of all who were witnesses of her conduct.

It was evening before she returned to queen Haiatalnefous’
apartment, and she perceived by the reception she gave her, that the
bride was not at all pleased with the preceding night. She
endeavoured to dissipate her grief by a long conversation, in which
she employed all the wit she had (and she possessed a good share of
it) to persuade her she loved her entirely: she then gave her time
to go to bed, and while she was undressing herself, she went to her
devotions: her prayers were so long that queen Haiatalnefous was
asleep before they were ended. She then left off, and lay down
softly by the new queen, without waking her, and was as much
afflicted at her being forced to act a part which did not belong to
her, as in the loss of her dear Camaralzaman, for whom she ceased
not to sigh. She rose as soon as it was day, before Haiatalnefous
was awake; and being dressed in her royal robes as king, went to
council.

King Armanos, as he had done the day before, came early to visit the
queen his daughter, whom he found in tears: he wanted no more to be
informed of the cause of her trouble. Provoked at the contempt, as
he thought, put upon his daughter, of which he could not imagine the
reason, Daughter, said he, have patience for another night. I raised
your husband to the throne, and can pull him down again, and drive
him thence with shame, unless he gives you the satisfaction that he
ought to do. His usage of you has provoked me so much, I cannot tell
to what my resentment may transport me; the affront is as great to
me as to you.

It was late again before the princess Badoura came to queen
Haiatalnefous: she talked to her as she had done the night before,
and after the same manner went to her devotions, desiring the queen
to go to bed. But Haiatalnefous would not be so served; she held her
back, and obliged her to sit down again: What, said she, you think
to deal by me this night as you have done the two last: tell me, I
beseech you, what can you dislike in a princess of my youth and
beauty, who not only loves but adores you, and thinks herself the
happiest of all princesses of her rank in having so amiable a prince
for her husband? Any body but me would be not merely offended, but
shocked by the slight, or rather the unpardonable affront you have
put upon me, and abandon you to your evil destiny. However, though I
did not love you so well as I do, yet out of pure good-nature and
humanity, which makes me pity the misfortunes of persons for whom I
am less concerned, I could not forbear telling you, that the king my
father is enraged against you for your carriage towards me, and
to-morrow will make you feel the marks of his just anger, if you
continue to use me as you have hitherto done. Do not therefore drive
to despair a princess, who, notwithstanding all your ill usage,
cannot help loving you.

This discourse embarrassed the princess Badoura inexpressibly. She
did not doubt of the truth of what Haiatalnefous had said. King
Armanos’ coldness to her the day before had given her but too much
reason to see he was highly dissatisfied with her. The only way to
justify her conduct was, to communicate her sex to the princess
Haiatalnefous. But though she had foreseen she should be under a
necessity of making such a declaration to her, she was afraid how
she would take it: but, considering that if Camaralzaman was alive,
he must necessarily touch at the isle of Ebene in his way to king
Schahzaman his father’s kingdom, that she ought to preserve
herself for his sake; and that it was impossible to do this, if she
did not let the princess Haiatalnefous know who and what she was,
she resolved to venture the experiment.

The princess Badoura stood as one that was struck dumb, and
Haiatalnefous, being impatient to hear what she could say, was about
to speak to her again, when she stopped her by these words: Lovely
and too charming princess! I own I have been in the wrong, and I
condemn myself for it; but I hope you will pardon me, and keep the
secret I am going to reveal to you for my justification.

She then opened her bosom, and proceeded thus: See, princess, if a
princess, a woman like yourself, does not deserve to be forgiven. I
believe you will be so good, at least when you know my story, and
the afflicting disaster that forced me to act the part you see.

The princess Badoura having discovered herself entirely to the
princess of the isle of Ebene, she again prayed her to keep the
secret, and to make as if she really was a husband to her, till the
prince Camaralzaman’s arrival, which she hoped would be in a
little time.

Princess, replied Haiatalnefous, your fortune is indeed strange,
that a marriage, so happy as yours was, should be shortened by so
unaccountable an accident, after a passion so reciprocal and full of
wonders. Pray Heaven you may meet with your husband again soon, and
assure yourself I will keep religiously the secret committed to me.
It will be to me the greatest pleasure in the world to be the only
person in the great kingdom of the isle of Ebene, who knows what and
who you are, while you go on governing the people as happily as you
have begun. I only ask of you at present to be your friend. Then the
two princesses tenderly embraced each other, and after a thousand
expressions of mutual friendship, lay down to rest.

According to the custom of the country, the tokens of the
consummation of the marriage were to be produced and seen publicly.
The two princesses found out a way to get over that difficulty:
Queen Haiatalnefous’ women were deceived themselves next morning,
and deceived king Armanos, his queen, and the whole court. From this
time princess Badoura rose in king Armanos’ esteem and affection,
governing the kingdom peaceably and prosperously to his and his
people’s content.

While things passed as already mentioned in the court of the isle of
Ebene, prince Camaralzaman staid in the city of idolaters with the
gardener, who had offered his house for a retreat till the ship
sailed for that island.

One morning when the prince was up early, and as he used to do, was
preparing to work in the garden, the gardener prevented him, saying,
This day is a great festival among the idolaters, and because they
abstain from all work themselves, to spend the time in their
assemblies and public rejoicings, they will not let the Mussulmen
work, who to gain their favour, generally assist at their shows,
which are worth seeing. You will therefore have nothing to do
to-day; I leave you here. As the time approaches, in which the ship
uses to sail for the isle of Ebene, I will go to see some of my
friends, and know when it will depart and secure you a passage in
it. The gardener put on his best clothes, and went out.

When prince Camaralzaman was alone, instead of going out to take
part in the public joy of the city, the solitude he was in brought
to his mind, with more than usual violence, the loss of his dear
princess. He walked up and down the garden sighing and groaning,
till the noise which two birds made on a neighbouring tree tempted
him to lift up his head, and stop to see what was the matter.

Camaralzaman was surprised to behold a furious battle between these
two birds, fighting one another with their beaks, and that in a very
little while one of them fell down dead at the foot of a tree; the
bird that was victorious took wing again, and flew away.

In an instant, two other large birds that had seen the fight at a
distance, came from the other side of the garden, and pitched on the
ground, one at the feet and the other at the head of the dead bird;
they looked upon it some time, shaking their heads in token of
grief; after which they dug a grave with their talons and buried it.

When they had filled up the grave with the earth they had turned up
to make it, they flew away, and returned in a few minutes, bringing
with them the bird that had committed the murder, the one holding
one of its wings in its beak, and the other one of its legs; the
criminal all the while crying out in a doleful manner, and
struggling to escape. They carried it to the grave of the bird which
it had lately sacrificed to its rage, and there sacrificed it in
just revenge for the murder it had committed. They with their beaks
killed the murderer. They then opened the belly, tore out the
entrails, left the body on the spot unburied, and flew away.

Camaralzaman remained in great astonishment all the time that he
stood beholding this sight. He drew near the tree where this scene
had passed, and casting his eyes on the scattered entrails of the
bird that was last killed, he spied something red hanging out of the
stomach. He took it up, and found it was his beloved princess
Badoura’s talisman, which had cost him so much pain and sorrow,
and so many sighs since the bird snatched it out of his hand. Ah,
cruel, said he to himself, still looking on the bird, thou tookest
delight in doing mischief, so I have the less reason to complain of
that which thou didst to me; but the greater it was, the more do I
wish well to those that revenged my quarrel on thee, in punishing
thee for the murder of one of their own kind.

It is impossible to express prince Camaralzaman’s joy: Dear
princess, continued he to himself, this happy minute, which restores
to me a treasure so precious to thee, is without doubt a presage of
our meeting again, and perhaps sooner than I think of. Thank Heaven,
who sent me this good fortune, and gives me the hope of the greatest
felicity that my heart can desire.

Saying this, he kissed the talisman, wrapped it up in a riband, and
tied it carefully about his arm. Till now he had been almost every
night a stranger to rest, his trouble always keeping him awake, but
next night he slept soundly; he rose somewhat later the next morning
than he used to do, put on his working clothes, and went to the
gardener for orders. The good man bid him root up an old tree which
bore no fruit.

Camaralzaman took an axe, and began his work. In cutting off a
branch of the root, he found his axe struck against something that
resisted the blow, and made a great noise. He removed the earth, and
discovered a broad plate of brass, under which was a staircase of
ten steps. He went down, and at the bottom saw a cavity about six
yards square, with fifty brass urns placed in order around it, each
with a cover over it. He opened them all, one after another, and
there was not one of them which was not full of gold dust. He came
out of the cave rejoicing that he had found such a vast treasure: he
put the brass plate on the staircase, and rooted up the tree against
the gardener’s return.

The gardener had learned the day before that the ship which was
bound for the isle of Ebene, would sail in a few days, but the
certain time was not yet fixed. His friend promised to let him know
the day, if he called upon him on the morrow; and while Camaralzaman
was rooting up the tree, he went to have his answer. He returned
with a joyful countenance, by which the prince guessed he brought
him good news. Son, said the old man, (so he always called him, on
account of the difference of years between him and the prince,) be
joyful, and prepare to embark in three days; the ship will then
certainly set sail; I have agreed with the captain for your passage.

In my present situation, replied Camaralzaman, you could not bring
me more agreeable news; and in return, I have also tidings that will
be as welcome to you; come along with me, and you shall see what
good fortune heaven has in store for you.

The prince led the gardener to the place where he had rooted up the
tree, made him go down into the cave, and when he was there, showed
him what a treasure he had discovered, thanking Providence for
rewarding his virtue, and the pains he had been at for so many
years. What do you mean? replied the gardener: do you imagine I will
take these riches as mine? The property of them is yours. I have no
right to them. --For fourscore years since my father’s death, I
have done nothing but dig in this garden, and could not discover
this treasure, which is a sign it was destined for you, since God
has permitted you to find it. It suits a prince like you rather than
me; I have one foot in the grave, and am in no want of any thing.
Providence has bestowed it upon you just when you are returning to
that country, which will one day be your own, where you will make a
good use of it.

Prince Camaralzaman would not be outdone in generosity by the
gardener; they had a long dispute about it. At last, the prince
solemnly protested, that he would have none of it, unless the
gardener would divide it with him, and take half. The good man, to
please the prince, consented; so they parted it between them, and
each had twenty-five urns.

Having thus divided it, Son, said the gardener to the prince, it is
not enough that you have got this treasure: we must now contrive how
to carry it so privately aboard a ship, that nobody may know any
thing of the matter, otherwise you will run the risk of losing it.
There are no olives in the isle of Ebene; those that are exported
hence are a good commodity there: you know I have plenty of them;
take what you will; fill fifty pots, half with the gold dust, and
half with olives, and I will get them carried to the ship when you
embark.

Camaralzaman followed this good advice, and spent the rest of the
day in packing up the gold and the olives in the fifty pots; [87]
and fearing the talisman, which he wore on his arm, might be lost
again, he carefully put it in one of the pots, marking it with a
particular mark, to distinguish it from the other. When they were
all ready to be shipped, night coming on, the prince retired with
the gardener, and talking together, he related to him the battle of
the birds, with the circumstance of that adventure, by which he had
found the princess Badoura’s talisman again. The gardener was
equally surprised and joyful to hear it, for his sake. Whether the
old man was quite worn out with age, or had exhausted himself too
much that day, the gardener had a very bad night. He grew worse the
next day; and on the third day, when the prince was to embark, was
so ill, that it wan plain he was nigh his end. As soon as day broke,
the captain of the ship came in person, with several seamen, to the
gardener’s; they knocked at the garden-door, and Camaralzaman
opened it to them. They asked him where the passenger was that was
to go with him. --The prince answered, I am he; the gardener, who
agreed with you for my passage is sick, and cannot be spoken with.
Come in, and let your men carry those pots of olives and my baggage
aboard for me; I will only take leave of the gardener, and follow
you.

The seamen took up the pots and the baggage, and the captain bid the
prince make haste, the wind being fair, and they staid for nothing
but him.

When the captain and his men were gone, Camaralzaman went to the
gardener to take his leave of him, and thank him for all his good
offices; but he found him in the agonies of death, and had scarce
time to bid him rehearse the articles of his faith, which all good
Mussulmen do before they die. --The gardener did this, and expired
in his presence.

The prince being under the necessity of embarking immediately,
hastened to pay the last duty to the deceased. He washed his body,
buried him in his own garden, (for the Mahometans had no cemetry in
the city of the idolaters, where they were only tolerated), and,
having nobody to assist him, it was almost evening before he had put
him in the ground. As soon as he had done it, he ran to the
water-side, carrying with him the key of the garden, designing, if
he had time, to give it to the landlord; otherwise to deposit it in
some trusty person’s hand before witnesses, that he might have it
after he was gone. When he came to the port, he was told the ship
sailed several hours before he came, and was already out of sight.
It staid three hours for him, and the wind standing fair, the
captain durst not stay longer.

It is easy to imagine that prince Camaralzaman was exceedingly
grieved to be forced to stay longer in a country where he neither
had nor wished to have any acquaintance; and to think that he must
wait another twelvemonth for the opportunity he had lost. But the
greatest affliction of all was, his having let go the princess
Badoura’s talisman, which he now gave over for lost. The only
course that was left for him to take was, to return to the garden
from whence he came, to rent it of the landlord, and to continue to
cultivate it by himself, deploring his misery and misfortunes. He
hired a boy to help him to do some part of the drudgery, that he
might not lose the other half of the treasure, which came to him by
the death of the gardener, who died without heirs: he put the
gold-dust in fifty other pots, which he filled up with olives, to be
ready against the time of the ship’s return.

While prince Camaralzaman began another year of labour, sorrow, and
impatience, the ship, having a fair wind, continued her voyage to
the isle of Ebene, and happily arrived at the capital city.

The palace being by the sea-side, the new king, or rather the
princess Badoura, espying the ship as she was entering into the
port, with all her flags, asked what vessel it was; she was
answered, that it came annually from the city of the idolaters, and
generally was richly laden.

The princess, who always had prince Camaralzaman in her mind amidst
the glories which surrounded her, imagined that the prince might be
aboard, and resolved to go aboard the ship and meet him, without
discovering herself to him, (for she doubted whether he would know
her again), but to observe him, and take proper measures for their
making themselves mutually known. Under pretence of inquiring what
merchandize was aboard, and having the first sight of the goods, and
choosing the most valuable for herself, she commanded a horse to be
brought, which she mounted, and rode to the port, accompanied by
several officers in waiting at that time, and arrived at the port
just as the captain came ashore. She ordered him to be brought
before her, and asked whence he came, how long he had been on his
voyage, and what good or bad fortune he had met with in it; if he
had no stranger of quality aboard, and particularly with what his
ship was laden.

The captain gave a satisfactory answer to all her demands; and as to
passengers, assured her there were none but merchants in his ship,
who used to come every year, and bring rich stuffs from several
parts of the world to trade with, the finest linens, painted and
plain, diamonds, musk, ambergris, camphire, civet, spices, drugs,
olives, and many other articles.

The princess Badoura loved olives extremely. When she heard the
captain speak of them, Land them, said she; I will take them off
your hands. As to the other goods, tell the merchants to bring them
to me, and let me see them before they dispose of them, or show them
to any one.

The captain, taking her for the king of the isle of Ebene, replied,
Sire, there are fifty great pots of olives, but they belong to a
merchant whom I was forced to leave behind. I gave him notice myself
that I staid for him, and waited a long time, but he not coming, and
the wind offering, I was afraid of losing it, and so set sail. The
princess answered, No matter; bring them ashore; we will make a
bargain for them however.

The captain sent his boat aboard, and in a little time it returned
with the pots of olives. The princess demanded how much the fifty
pots might be worth in the isle of Ebene. Sir, said the captain, the
merchant is very poor, and your majesty will do him a singular
favour if you give him a thousand pieces of silver.

To satisfy him, replied the princess, and because you tell me he is
poor, I will order you a thousand pieces of gold for him, which do
you take care to give him. The money was accordingly paid, and the
pots carried to the palace in her presence.

Night drawing on, the princess withdrew into the inner palace, and
went to the princess Haiatalnefous’ apartment, ordering the fifty
pots of olives to be brought thither. --She opened one to let the
princess Haiatalnefous taste them, and to taste them herself, and
poured them into a dish. Great was her astonishment when she found
the olives were mingled with gold-dust. What can this mean? said
she; it is wonderful beyond comprehension. Her curiosity increasing
by so extraordinary an adventure, she ordered Haiatalnefous’ women
to open and empty all the pots in her presence; and her wonder was
still greater, when she saw that the olives in all of them were
mixed with gold-dust; but when she saw her talisman drop out of that
in which the prince had put it, she was so surprised, that she
fainted away. The princess Haiatalnefous and her women recovered the
princess Badoura, by throwing cold water in her face. When she
recovered her senses, she took the talisman, and kissed it again and
again; but not being willing that the princess Haiatalnefous’
women, who were ignorant of her disguise, should hear what she said,
and it growing late, she dismissed them. Princess, said she to
Haiatalnefous, as soon as they were gone, you, who have heard my
story, to be sure guessed it was at the sight of the talisman that I
fainted. This is that talisman, and the fatal cause of my losing my
dear husband, prince Camaralzaman; but as it was that which caused
our separation, so I foresee it will be the means of our approaching
meeting.

The next day, as soon as it was light, she sent for the captain of
the ship; and when he came, spoke to him thus: I want to know
something more of the merchant to whom the olives belong, that I
bought of you yesterday. I think you told me you left him behind you
in the city of idolaters: can you tell me what he does there.

Yes, sire, replied the captain, I can speak on my own knowledge. I
agreed for his passage with a very old gardener, who told me I
should find him in his garden, where he worked under him. He showed
me the place, and for that reason I told your majesty he was poor. I
went thither to call him. I told him what haste I was in, spoke to
him myself in the garden, and cannot be mistaken in the man.

If what you say is true, replied the princess Badoura, you must set
sail this very day for the city of idolaters, and fetch me that
gardener’s man, who is my debtor; else I will not only confiscate
all your goods and those of your merchants, but your and their lives
shall answer for his. I have ordered my seal to be put on the
warehouses where they are, which shall not be taken off till you
bring me that man: this is all I have to say to you; go, and do as I
command you.

The captain could make no reply to this order, the disobeying of
which would be a very great loss to him and his merchants. He
acquainted them with it; and they hastened him away as fast as they
could, after he had laid in a stock of provisions and fresh water
for his voyage. They were so diligent, that he set sail the same
day. He had a prosperous voyage to the city of the idolaters, where
he arrived in the night. When he was got as near the city as he
thought convenient, he would not cast anchor, but let the ship ride
off shore; and going into his boat, with six of his stoutest seamen,
he landed a little way off the port, whence he went directly to
Camaralzaman’s garden.

Though it was about midnight when he came there, the prince was not
asleep. His separation from the fair princess of China, his wife,
afflicted him as usual. He cursed the minute in which his curiosity
tempted him to touch the fatal girdle.

Thus did he pass those hours which are devoted to rest, when he
heard somebody knock at the garden-door; he ran hastily to it, half
dressed as he was; but he had no sooner opened it, than the captain
and the seamen took hold of him, and carried him by force on board
the boat, and so on ship-board, where as soon as he was safely
lodged, they set sail immediately, and made the best of their way to
the isle of Ebene.

Hitherto Camaralzaman, the captain, and his men, had not said a word
to one another; at last the prince broke silence, and asked the
captain, whom he knew again, why they had taken him away by force?
The captain, in his turn, demanded of the prince, whether he was not
a debtor of the king of Ebene? I the king of Ebene’s debtor!
replied Camaralzaman in amazement; I do not know him; I had never
any thing to do with him in my life, and never set foot in his
kingdom. The captain answered, You should know that better than I:
you will talk to him yourself in a little while; till then, stay
here, and have patience.

The captain was not long on his voyage back to the isle of Ebene.
Though it was night when he cast anchor in the port, he landed
immediately, and taking prince Camaralzaman with him, hastened to
the palace, where he demanded to be introduced to the king.

The princess Badoura was withdrawn into the inner palace: however,
as soon as she had heard of the captain’s return, and
Camaralzaman’s arrival, she came out to speak to him. As soon as
she cast her eyes on the prince, for whom she had shed so many
tears, she knew him in his gardener’s habit. As for the prince,
who trembled in the presence of a king, as he thought her, to whom
he was to answer for an imaginary debt, it could not enter into his
thoughts, that the person whom he so earnestly desired to see, stood
before him. If the princess had followed the dictates of her
inclination, she would have run to him, and by embracing, discovered
herself to him: but she put a constraint on herself, believing that
it was for the interest of both that she should act the part of a
king a little longer before she made herself known. She contented
herself for the present to put him into the hands of an officer, who
was then in waiting, charging him to take care of him, and use him
well till next day.

When the princess Badoura had provided for prince Camaralzaman, she
turned about to the captain, whom she was now to reward for the
important service he had done her. She commanded another officer to
go immediately, and take the seal off the warehouse, where his and
his merchants’ goods were, and gave him a rich diamond, worth much
more than the expense he had been at in both his voyages. She
besides bid him keep the thousand pieces of gold she had given him
for the pots of olives, telling him she would make up the account
with the merchant whom he had brought with him. This done, she
retired to the princess of the isle of Ebene’s apartment, to whom
she communicated her joy, praying her to keep the secret still. She
told her how she intended to manage the discovering of herself to
prince Camaralzaman, and giving the kingdom to him; adding, there
was so vast a difference between a gardener and a great prince, as
he is, that it maybe dangerous to raise him at once from the lowest
condition of the people to the highest degree, however justice
required it should be done. The princess of the isle of Ebene was so
far from betraying her, that she rejoiced with her, and entered into
the design, assuring her, she would with the greatest pleasure
contribute to it all that lay in her power, and that she had only to
say what she would desire of her.

The next morning, the princess of China ordered prince Camaralzaman
to be conducted early to the bath, and then apparelled in the robes
of an emir or governor of a province. She commanded him to be
introduced into the council, where his fine person and majestic air
drew all the eyes of the lords there present upon him.

The princess Badoura herself was charmed to see him again, as lovely
as she had often seen him, and that pleasure inspired her to speak
the more warmly in his praise. --When she addressed herself to the
council, having ordered the prince to take his seat among the emirs,
she spoke to them thus: My lords, Camaralzaman, whom I have advanced
to the same dignity with you, is not unworthy the place assigned
him. I have known enough of him in my travels to answer for him, and
I can assure you he will make his merit known to all of you, as well
by his valour, as by a thousand other brilliant qualities, and the
extent of his genius.

Camaralzaman was extremely amazed to hear the king of the isle of
Ebene, whom he was far from taking for a woman, much less for his
dear princess, name him, and declare that he knew him, while he
thought himself certain he had never seen him before in his life. He
was much more surprised when he heard him praise him so excessively.
Those praises, however, from the mouth of majesty, did not
disconcert him, though he received them with such modesty as showed
that he deserved them, and did not grow vain upon it. He prostrated
himself before the throne of the king, and rising again, Sire, said
he, I want words to express my gratitude to your majesty for the
honour you have done me: I shall do all in my power to render myself
worthy of your royal favour.

From the council board, the prince was conducted to a palace, which
the princess Badoura had ordered to be fitted up for him; where he
found officers and domestics ready to obey his commands, a stable
full of fine horses, and every thing suitable to the quality of an
emir. When he was in his closet, the steward of his household
brought him a strong box full of gold for his expenses.

The less he conceived whence came his great good fortune, the more
he admired it, but never once imagined that he owed it to the
princess of China.

Two or three days after, the princess Badoura, that he might be
nearer her person, and in a more distinguished post, made him high
treasurer, which office became lately vacant. He behaved himself in
his new charge with so much integrity, yet obliging every body, that
he not only gained the friendship of the great, but also the
affections of the people, by his uprightness and bounty.

Camaralzaman had been the happiest man in the world, to see himself
in so high favour with a foreign king as he conceived, and
increasing in the esteem of all his subjects, if he had had his
princess with him. --In the midst of this good fortune he never
ceased lamenting her, and grieved that he could hear no tidings of
her, especially in a country where she must necessarily have come in
her way to his father’s court, after their separation, so
afflicting to both. He had mistrusted something, had the princess
Badoura still gone by the name of Camaralzaman, which she took with
his habit; but on her accession to the throne, she changed it, and
took that of Armanos, in honour of the old king, her father-in-law.
She was known now only by the name of the young king Armanos. There
were very few courtiers who knew that she had ever been called
Camaralzaman, which name she assumed when she arrived at the court
of the isle of Ebene: nor had Camaralzaman so much acquaintance with
any of them yet, to inform himself farther of her history.

The princess, fearing he might do it in time, and desiring that he
should owe the discovery of herself to herself only, resolved to put
an end to her own torments and his; for she had observed, that as
often as she discoursed with him about the affairs of his office, he
fetched such deep sighs as could be addressed to nobody but her. She
herself lived in such a constraint that she could endure it no
longer. Add to this, the friendship of the emirs and courtiers, the
zeal and affection of the people; in a word, every thing contributed
to her putting the crown of the isle of Ebene on his head, without
any obstacle.

The princess Badoura had no sooner taken this resolution with the
princess Haiatalnefous, than she the same day took prince
Camaralzaman aside, saying, I must talk with you about an affair,
Camaralzaman, which requires much consideration, and on which I want
your advice. As I do not see how it can be done so conveniently as
in the night, come hither in the evening, and leave word at home not
to be waited for; I will take care to provide you a bed.

Camaralzaman came punctually to the palace at the hour appointed by
the princess; she took him with her into the inner apartment, and
having told the chief eunuch, who prepared to follow her, she had no
occasion for his service, and that he should only keep the door
shut, she carried him into a different apartment from that of the
princess Haiatalnefous, where she used to sleep.

When the prince and princess entered the chamber, where there was a
bed, she shut the door, and taking the talisman out of a little box,
gave it to Camaralzaman, saying, It is not long since an astrologer
presented me with this talisman; you being skilful in all things,
may perhaps tell me its use.

Camaralzaman took the talisman, and drew near a lamp to view it. As
soon as he recollected it, with an astonishment which gave the
princess great pleasure, Sire, said he to the prince, your majesty
asked me what this talisman is good for. Alas! it is only good to
kill me with grief and despair, if I do not quickly find the most
charming and lovely princess in the world, to whom it belonged; the
loss of it was the occasion to me of a strange adventure, the very
recital of which will move your majesty to pity such an unfortunate
husband and lover, if you will have patience to hear it.

You shall tell me that another time, replied the princess; I am very
glad to tell you I know something of it already; stay here a little,
and I will return to you in a moment.

At these words, she went into her closet, put off her royal turban,
and in a few minutes dressed herself like a woman: and having the
girdle round her which she had on the day of their separation, she
entered the chamber.

Prince Camaralzaman immediately knew his dear princess, ran to her,
and tenderly embraced her, crying out, How much I am obliged to the
king who has so agreeably surprised me! Do not expect to see the
king any more, replied the princess, embracing him in her turn, with
tears in her eyes; you see him in me; sit down, and I will explain
this enigma to you.

They sat down, and the princess told the prince the resolution she
came to, in the field where they encamped the last time they were
together, as soon as she perceived she waited for him to no purpose;
how she went through with it, till she arrived at the isle of Ebene,
where she had been obliged to marry the princess Haiatalnefous, and
accept of the crown which king Armanos offered her as a condition of
the marriage: how the princess, whose merit she highly extolled,
took her declaration of her sex; and how she found the talisman in
the pots of olives mingled with the gold-dust, which she bought, and
how the finding it was the cause of her sending for him from the
city of the idolaters.

When she had done telling her adventure, she obliged the prince to
tell her by what accident the talisman occasioned their separation.
He satisfied her inquiries; and when he had done, he upbraided her
in the kindest expressions for her cruelty in making him languish so
long without her; she excused herself with the reasons already
related, after which, it growing late, they went to bed.

The princess Badoura and prince Camaralzaman rose next morning as
soon as it was light, but the princess would no more put on her
royal robes as king; she dressed herself in the dress of a woman,
and then sent the chief eunuch to king Armanos, her father-in-law,
to desire he would give himself the trouble to come to her apartment.

When the king entered the chamber, he was amazed to see there a lady
that was unknown to him, and the high treasurer with her, who was
not permitted to come within the inner palace, nor any of the lords
of the court. He sat down, and asked where the king was.

The princess answered, Yesterday I was king, sir, and to-day I am
only princess of China, wife to the true prince Camaralzaman, the
true son of king Schahzaman. If your majesty will have patience to
hear both our stories, I hope you will not condemn me for putting an
innocent deceit upon you. The king bid her go on, and heard her
discourse from the beginning to the end with astonishment. The
princess finishing it, said to him, Sir, though in our religion
women do not easily comply with the liberty assumed by men to have
several wives; yet if your majesty will consent to give your
daughter the princess Haiatalnefous in marriage to prince
Camaralzaman, I will with all my heart yield up to her the rank and
quality of queen, which of right belongs to her, and content myself
with the second place. If this precedence was not her due, I would,
however, give it her, after the obligation I have to her for keeping
my secret so generously. If your majesty refers it to her consent, I
am sure of that, having already consulted her; and I will pass my
word that she will be very well satisfied.

King Armanos listened to the princess with astonishment, and when
she had done, turned about to prince Camaralzaman, saying, Since the
princess Badoura, your wife, whom I have all along thought to be my
son-in-law, through a deceit of which I cannot complain, assures me,
that she will divide your bed with my daughter, I have nothing more
to do, but to know of you if you are willing to marry her, and
accept of the crown, which the princess Badoura would deservedly
wear as long as she lived, if she did not quit it out of love to
you. Sir, replied prince Camaralzaman, though I desire nothing so
earnestly as to see the king my father, yet the obligations I have
to your majesty and the princess Haiatalnefous are so weighty, I can
refuse her nothing. Camaralzaman was proclaimed king, and married
the same day with all possible demonstrations of joy; and had every
reason to be well pleased with the princess Haiatalnefous’ beauty,
wit, and love for him.

The two queens lived together afterwards on the same friendly terms,
and in the same cordiality, as they had done before, both being
contented with king Camaralzaman’s equal carriage towards them,
and they alternately were taken to his bed.

The next year each brought him a son at the same time, and the
births of the two princes were celebrated with extraordinary
rejoicings: the first, which the princess Badoura was delivered of,
king Camaralzaman called Amgiad (most glorious); and the other,
which was born of queen Haiatalnefous, Assad (most happy).

The Story of the Princes Amgiad and Assad.

The two princes were brought up with great care; and, when they were
old enough, had the same governor and the same instructors in the
arts and sciences which king Camaralzaman would have them learn, and
the same master for each exercise. The friendship which from their
infancy they conceived for each other, occasioned an uniformity of
manners and inclinations, which increased it. When they were of an
age to have separate households, they loved one another so tenderly,
that they begged king Camaralzaman to let them live together. He
consented to it. So they had the same domestics, the same equipages,
the same apartment, and the same table. Camaralzaman had formed so
good an opinion of their capacity and integrity, that he made no
scruple of admitting them into his council at eighteen years old,
and letting them, by turns, preside there, while he himself took the
diversion of hunting, or amused himself with his queens at his
houses of pleasure.

The two princes being equally handsome and well made from their
infancy, the two queens loved them with incredible tenderness, yet
so that the princess Badoura had a greater kindness for prince
Assad, queen Haiatalnefous’ son, than for her own; and queen
Haiatalnefous loved Amgiad, the princess Badoura’s son, better
than her own son Assad.

The two queens thought at first this inclination was nothing but a
friendship which proceeded from an excess of their own friendship
for each other, which they still preserved: but as the two princes
advanced in years, that friendship turned to a violent love, when
they appeared in their eyes to possess graces that blinded their
reason. They knew how criminal their passion was, and did all they
could to resist it; but the familiar intercourse with them, and the
habit of admiring, praising and caressing them from their infancy,
which they could not leave off when they grew up, inflamed their
desires to such a height, that they could neither eat, drink, or
sleep. It was their and the princes’ ill fortune, that the latter,
being used to be so treated by them, had not the least suspicion of
their infamous passion.

The two queens had not concealed from each other this passion, but
had not the boldness to declare it verbally to each of the princes
she loved: they at last resolved to do it by a billet, and availed
themselves of king Camaralzaman’s absence to execute their wicked
design, when he was gone on a hunting party for three or four days.

Prince Amgiad presided at the council on the day of king
Camaralzaman’s departure, and administered justice till two or
three o’clock in the afternoon; when he returned to the palace
from the council chamber, an eunuch took him aside, and gave him a
billet from queen Haiatalnefous: Amgiad took it, and read it with
horror. Traitor, said he to the eunuch, as soon as he had read it
through, is this the fidelity thou owest thy master and thy king? At
these words he drew his sabre, and cut off his head.

Having done this in a transport of anger, he ran to the princess
Badoura his mother, showed her the billet, told her the contents of
it, and from whom it came. Instead of hearkening to him, she fell
into a passion herself, and said, Son, it is all a calumny and
imposture; queen Haiatalnefous is a very discreet princess, and you
are very bold to talk to me against her after this rate. The prince,
enraged at his mother, cried, You are both equally wicked, and were
it not for the respect I owe my father, this day should have been
the last of Haiatalnefous’ life.

Queen Badoura might have imagined by the example of her son Amgiad,
that prince Assad, who was not less virtuous, would not receive more
favourably a declaration of love like that which had been made to
his brother. Yet that did not hinder her persisting in so abominable
a design; she the next day wrote him a billet, which she trusted to
an old woman who had access to the palace, to convey to him.

The old woman watched her opportunity to give it him as he was
coming from the council-chamber, where he presided that day in his
turn; the prince took it, and reading it, fell into such a rage,
that, without giving himself time to finish it, he drew his sabre,
and punished the old woman as she deserved. He ran presently to his
mother queen Haiatalnefous’ apartment with the billet in his hand;
he would have shown it to her, but she did not give him time, crying
out, I know what you mean; you are as impertinent as your brother
Amgiad; begone! and never come into my presence again.

Assad stood as one thunderstruck at these words, which he never
expected. He was so transported with rage, that he had like to have
given very fatal demonstrations of his anger; but he contained
himself, and withdrew without making any reply, fearing, if he
staid, he might say something unworthy the greatness of his soul.
Amgiad had not mentioned to him the billet which he received the
preceding day, and finding by what his mother had said to him that
she was altogether as criminal as queen Haiatalnefous, he went to
his brother, to chide him for not communicating the hated secret to
him, and to mingle his sorrow with his.

The two queens, rendered desperate by finding in the two princes so
much virtue, which should have had an influence on them, renounced
all sentiments of nature and mothers, and conspired together to
destroy them: they made their women believe the two princes had
attempted their virtue: they counterfeited the matter to the life by
their tears, cries, and curses; and lay in the same bed, as if the
resistance they pretended to have made had reduced them almost to
death’s door.

When Camaralzaman returned to the palace from hunting, he was very
much surprised to find them in bed together, all in tears, acting
despondency so well, that he was touched with compassion. He asked
them with earnestness what had happened to them.

At this question the dissembling queens wept and gobbed more
bitterly than before; and after he had pressed them again and again
to tell him, queen Badoura, at last answered him: Sir, our grief is
so well founded, that we ought not to see the light of the sun, nor
live a day, after the violence that has been offered us by the
unparalleled brutality of the princes your sons. They formed a
horrid design, encouraged by your absence, and had the boldness and
insolence to attempt our honour. Your majesty will excuse us from
saying any more; you may guess the rest by our affliction.

[Illustration: PRINCE AMGIAD AND PRINCE ASSAD.]

The king sent for the two princes, and had killed them both with his
own hand, if old king Armanos, his father-in-law, who was by, had
not held his hand. Son, said he, what are you going to do? Will you
stain your hands and your palace with your own blood? There are
other ways of punishing them, if they are really guilty.

He endeavoured thus to appease him, and desired him to examine
whether they did indeed commit the crime of which they were accused.

It was no hard thing for Camaralzaman to be so much master of
himself as not to butcher his own children: he ordered them to be
put under arrest, and sent for an emir called Giondar, whom he
commanded to carry them out of the city, and put them to death, at a
great distance, and in what place he pleased, but not to see him
again, unless he brought their clothes with him, as a token of his
having executed his orders.

Giondar travelled with them all night, and early next morning made
them alight, telling them, with tears in his eyes, the commands he
had received. Believe me, princes, said he, it is a trying duty
imposed on me by your father, to execute this cruel order: would to
Heaven I could avoid it! The princes replied, Do your duty; we know
well you are not the cause of our deaths, and forgive you with all
our hearts.

Then they embraced, and bade each other the last adieu with so much
tenderness, that it was a long time before they could leave one
another’s arms. Prince Assad was the first who prepared himself
for the fatal stroke. Begin with me, Giondar, said he, that I may
not have the trouble to see my dear brother Amgiad die. Amgiad
opposed it; and Giondar could not, without weeping more than before,
be witness of this dispute between them; which showed how perfect
and sincere their friendship was.

At last they thus determined the contest, desiring Giondar to tie
them together, and put them in the most convenient posture for him
to give them the fatal stroke at one blow. Do not refuse the comfort
of dying together to two unfortunate brothers, who from their birth
have shared every thing, even their innocence, said the generous
princes.

Giondar granted their request; he tied them to each other, breast to
breast; and when he had placed them so as he thought he might strike
the blow with more surety, and cut off their heads at once, he asked
them if they had any thing to command him before they died.

We have only one thing to desire of you, replied the princes; which
is, to assure the king our father, at your return, that we are
innocent; but that we do not charge him with our deaths, knowing he
is not well informed of the truth of the crime with which we are
accused.

Giondar promised to do what they would have him, and drew his sabre:
his horse being tied to a tree just by, started at the sight of the
sabre, which glittered against the sun, broke his bridle, and ran
away with all speed into the country.

He was a very valuable good horse, and so richly harnessed, that the
emir could not bear the loss of him. This accident so troubled him,
that instead of beheading the two princes, he threw away his sabre,
and ran after his horse to catch him again.

The horse gallopped on before him, and led him several miles out of
his way into a wood. Giondar followed him, and the horse’s
neighing roused a lion that was asleep. The lion started up, and
instead of running after the horse, made directly towards Giondar,
who thought no more of his horse, but how to save his life and avoid
the lion. He ran into the thickest of the wood, the lion keeping him
in view, pursuing him among the trees. In this extremity he said to
himself, Heaven had not punished me in this manner, but to show the
innocence of the princes whom I was commanded to put to death; and
now, to my misfortune, I have not my sabre to defend myself.

While Giondar was gone, the two princes were seized with a violent
thirst, occasioned by the fear of death, notwithstanding their noble
resolution to submit to the king their father’s cruel order.

Prince Amgiad told the prince his brother there was a spring not far
off. Ah! brother, said Assad, we have so little time to live, what
need have we to quench our thirst? We can bear it a few minutes
longer.

Amgiad, taking no notice of his brother’s remonstrance, unbound
himself, and unbound the prince his brother whether he would or no.
They went to the spring, and having refreshed themselves, heard the
roaring of the lion. They also heard Giondar’s dreadful cries in
the wood, where he and the horse were. Amgiad took up Giondar’s
sabre which lay on the ground, saying to Assad, Come, brother, let
us go and help poor Giondar; perhaps we may arrive soon enough to
deliver him from the danger in which he now is.

The two princes ran to the wood, and entered it just as the lion was
going to fall on Giondar. The beast, seeing prince Amgiad, advancing
towards him with a sabre in his hand, left his prey, and came
against him with fury. The prince met him intrepidly, and gave him a
blow so forcibly and dexterously, that it felled him to the ground.

When Giondar saw that he owed his life to the two princes, he threw
himself at their feet, and thanked them, for the great obligation he
had to them, in words which sufficiently showed his gratitude.
Princes, said he, rising up and kissing their hands, with tears in
his eyes, God forbid that ever I should attempt any thing against
your lives, after you have so kindly and bravely saved mine. It
shall never be said, that the emir Giondar was guilty of such
ingratitude.

The service we have done you, answered the princes, ought not to
hinder you from executing the orders you have received; let us first
catch your horse again, and then return to the place where you left
us. They were at no great trouble to take the horse, whose mettle
was abated with running. When they had restored him to Giondar, and
were near the fountain, they begged of him, and argued with him to
do as their father had commanded him; but all to no purpose. I only
take liberty to desire you, said Giondar, and I pray you not to deny
me, that you will divide my clothes between you, and give me yours,
and go to such a distance, that the king your father may never hear
of you more.

The princes were forced to comply with his request. Each of them
gave him his clothes, and covered themselves with what he could
spare them of his. He also gave them all the money he had about him,
and took leave of them.

When the emir Giondar parted from the princes, he passed through the
wood, where Amgiad had killed the lion, in whose blood he dipped
their clothes; which having done, he proceeded on his way to the
capital city of the isle of Ebene.

At his arrival there, king Camaralzaman asked if he had done what he
ordered him. Giondar replied, See, sir, the proofs of my obedience;
giving him, at the same time, the princes’ clothes.

How did they take the punishment I commanded to be executed on them?
Giondar answered, With wonderful constancy, sir, and resignation to
the decrees of Heaven; which showed how sincerely they made
profession of their religion: but particularly with great respect
towards your majesty, and an inconceivable submission to the
sentence of death. We die innocent, said they; but we do not murmur;
we take our death from the hand of Heaven, and forgive our father;
for we know very well he has not been rightly informed of the truth.

Camaralzaman, sensibly touched at emir Giondar’s relation,
bethought himself of putting his hand in their pockets: he began
with prince Amgiad’s, where he found a billet open, which he read.
He no sooner knew that queen Haiatalnefous writ it, as well by a
lock of her hair which was in it, and by the hand-writing, but he
was chilled with horror. He then trembling put his hand into that of
Assad; and finding there queen Badoura’s billet, his surprise was
so great and sudden, that he fainted.

Never was grief equal to Camaralzaman’s, when he was recovered
from his fit. Barbarous father, cried he, what hast thou done? Thou
hast murdered thy own children, thy innocent children! Did not their
wisdom, their modesty, their obedience, their submission to thy will
in all things, their virtue, all plead in their behalf? Blind and
insensible father! dost thou deserve to live after the execrable
crime thou hast committed? I have brought this abomination on my own
head; and Heaven chastises me for not persevering in that aversion
to women in which I was born. And oh, ye detestable wives! I will
not, no I will not, as ye deserve, wash off the guilt of your sins
with your blood; ye are unworthy of my rage; but perdition seize me
if ever I see you more!

King Camaralzaman was a man of too much religion to break his vow:
he commanded the two queens to be lodged in separate apartments that
very day, where they were kept under strong guards, and he never saw
them again as long as he lived.

While the king of the isle of Ebene afflicted himself for the loss
of the princes his sons, whose death he thought he had been the
author of, by his too rashly condemning them, the royal youths
wandered through deserts, endeavouring to avoid all places that were
inhabited, and to meet any human creature. They lived on herbs and
wild fruits and drank only foul rain-water, which they found in the
crevices of the rocks. They slept, and watched by turns at night,
for fear of wild beasts.

When they had travelled about a month, they came to the foot of a
frightful mountain, of black stones, and to all appearance
inaccessible. They at last espied a sort of path, but so narrow and
difficult, that they durst not venture up it. This obliged them to
go along by the foot of the mountain, in hopes to find a more easy
way to reach the top of it. They went about it five days, but could
see nothing like a path, so they were forced to return to that which
they had neglected. They still thought it would be in vain for them
to attempt going up by it; they deliberated what they should do, a
long time; and at last, encouraging one another, resolved to ascend
the hill.

The more they advanced, they thought it was the higher and the more
steep, which made them think several times of giving over their
enterprise. When the one was weary, the other stopt, and they took
breath together; sometimes they were both so tired, that they wanted
strength to go farther: then, despairing of being able to reach the
top, they thought they must lie down and die of fatigue and
weariness. A few minutes after, when they found they recovered
strength, they animated each other, and went on.

Notwithstanding all their endeavours, and their courage and
perseverance, they could not get to the top that day: night came on,
and prince Assad was so tired and spent, that he stopt, and said to
prince Amgiad, Brother, I can go no farther: I am just dying. --Let
us rest ourselves, replied prince Amgiad, as long as you will, and
have a good heart; it is but a little way to the top, and the moon
befriends us.

They rested themselves about half an hour, and then Assad made a new
effort, and once more ascended what remained of the way to the
mountain’s summit, where they both at last arrived, and lay down.
Amgiad rose first, and advancing, saw a tree at a little distance:
he went to it, and found it was a pomegranate tree with large fruit
upon it, and a spring at the foot of it: he ran to his brother Assad
to tell him the good news, and conduct him to the tree by the
fountain side. They refreshed themselves there by eating each a
pomegranate, after which they fell asleep.

When they awoke next morning, Come, brother, said Amgiad to Assad,
let us go on: I see the mountain is easier to be travelled over on
this side than the other; all our way now is down hill; but Assad
was so tired with the last day’s fatigue, that he wanted three
days repose to recover himself.

They spent them as they had done many before, in discoursing on
their mothers’ inordinate passion, which had reduced them to such
a deplorable state: But, said they, since Heaven has so visibly
declared itself in our favour, we ought to bear it with patience,
and comfort ourselves with hopes that we shall see an end of it.

After having rested three days, the two brothers continued their
travels. As the mountain on that side was composed of several stages
of extensive fields, they were five days in descending it, before
they came into the plain. They then discovered a great city, at
which they rejoiced. Brother, said Amgiad to Assad, are not you of
my opinion, that you should stay in some place out of the city,
where I may find you again, while I go and learn the language, and
inform myself what is the name of the city? in what country we are?
and when I come back, I will bring provisions with me. It may not be
safe for us to go there together.

Brother, replied Assad, your advice is both safe and prudent, and I
approve of what you say; but if one of us must part from the other
on that account, I will not suffer it to be you; you must allow me
to go, for what shall I suffer, if any ill accident should happen to
you?

But, brother, answered Amgiad, the same ill accident you fear for
me, I have as much reason to be afraid of for you; I entreat you to
let me go, and do you stay here with patience. I will never yield to
it, said Assad; if any ill happen to me, it will be some comfort to
think you are safe. Amgiad was forced to submit, and Assad going
towards the city, he stayed under the trees at the foot of the
mountain.

Prince Assad took the purse of money which Amgiad had in charge, and
went forwards towards the city. He had not gone far in the first
street, before he met with a reverend old man with a cane in his
hand: he was neatly dressed, and the prince took him for a man of
note in the place, who would not put a trick upon him, so he
accosted him thus: Pray, my lord, which is the way to the
market-place? The old man looked on prince Assad, smiling: Child,
said he, it is plain you are a stranger, or you would not have asked
that question of me.

Yes, my lord, I am a stranger, replied Assad. The old man answered,
You are welcome then; our country will be honoured by the presence
of so handsome a young man as you are: tell me what business you
have at the market-place.

My lord, replied Assad, it is near two months since my brother and I
set out from our own country, which is a great way from hence: we
have not ceased travelling, and we arrived here but to-day. My
brother, tired with such a long journey, stays at the foot of the
mountain, and I am come to buy some provision for him and me.

Son, said the old man, you could not have come in a better time, and
I am glad of it, for your and your brother’s sake: I made a feast
to-day for some friends of mine, and there is a great deal of
victuals left untouched: come along with me; you shall eat as much
as you please, and when you have done, I will give you enough to
last your brother and you several days: do not spend your money,
when there is no occasion for it; travellers are always in want of
it. While you are eating, I will give you an account of our city,
which nobody can do better than myself, who have borne all the
honourable offices in it. It is well for you that you happened to
light upon me; for I must tell you, all our citizens cannot so well
help and inform you as I can: I can assure you some of them are very
wicked. Come along, you shall see the difference between a real
honest man, as I am, and such as boast of being so, and are not.

I am infinitely obliged to you, replied Assad, for your good will
towards me; I put myself entirely into your hands, and am ready to
go with you where you please.

The old man laughed in his sleeve to think he had got the prince in
his clutches; and as he walked by the side of him, all the way, lest
he should perceive it, talked of various subjects, to preserve the
favourable opinion Assad had of him. Among other things, said he, it
must be confessed you were very fortunate to meet with me, rather
than with any other man. I thank God I met with you: you will know
why I say it when you come to my house.

Thither they came ere it was long, and the old man introduced Assad
into a hall, where were forty such old fellows as himself, who made
a circle round a flaming fire, which they adored. The prince was not
more seized with horror at the sight of so many men mistakingly
adoring the creature for the Creator, than with fear of finding
himself betrayed and in such an abominable place.

While Assad stood motionless with astonishment, the old cheat
saluted the forty grey-headed men. Devout adorers of fire, said he
to them, this is a happy day for us. Where is Gazban? call him.

He spake these words aloud, and a negro, who waited at the lower end
of the hall, presently came up to him. This black was Gazban; who,
as soon as he saw the disconsolate Assad, imagined for what he was
called. He ran to him immediately, knocked him down, and bound his
hands with wonderful activity. When he had done, Carry him down,
said the old man, and fail not to order my daughters, Bostama and
Cavama, to give him every day a good bastinado, with a loaf morning
and night for his subsistence: this is enough to keep him alive till
the next ship departs for the blue sea and the fiery mountain. He
shall be offered up an agreeable sacrifice to our divinity.

As soon as the old man had given this cruel order to Gazban, than
the slave hurried prince Assad out of the hall, through several
doors, till they came to a dungeon, down to which led twenty steps;
there he left him in chains of prodigious weight and bigness,
fastened to his feet. When he had done, he went to give the old
man’s daughters notice of it; but their father had before sent for
them, and given them their instructions himself. Daughters, said he
to them, go down and give the Mussulman I just now brought in the
bastinado, as you know how to do it: do not spare him; you cannot
better show your zeal for the worship of the fire.

Bostama and Cavama, who were bred up in their hatred to Mussulmen,
received this order with joy. They descended into the dungeon that
very moment, stripped Assad, and bastinadoed him unmercifully, till
the blood issued out of his wounds, and he was almost dead. After
this cruel infliction, they put a loaf of bread and a pot of water
by him, and retired.

Assad did not come to himself again for a long time; when he did, he
broke out into a flood of tears, deploring his misery. His comfort
however was, that this misfortune had not happened to his brother
Amgiad.

That prince waited for his brother till evening with impatience:
when it was two, three, or four of the clock in the morning, and
Assad did not return, he was like one in despair. He spent the night
in that dismal condition; and as soon as it was day, went to the
city, where he was surprised to see but very few Mussulmen. He
accosted the first he met, and asked him the name of the place. He
was told it was the city of the Magicians; so called, from the great
number of magicians, who adored the fire, and that there were but
very few Mussulmen. Amgiad then demanded how far it was to the isle
of Ebene. He was answered, four months voyage by sea, and a year’s
journey by land. The man he talked to left him hastily, having
satisfied him as to those two questions, and went about his business.

Amgiad, who had been but six weeks coming from the isle of Ebene
with his brother Assad, could not comprehend how they reached this
city in so little time, unless it was by enchantment, or that the
way across the mountain was much shorter, but not frequented,
because of its difficulty.

Going farther in the town, he stopped at a tailor’s shop, whom he
knew to be a Mussulman by his dress, as he had known the man he had
talked to before. Having saluted him, he sat down, and told the
occasion of the trouble he was in.

When prince Amgiad had done talking, the tailor replied, If your
brother has fallen into the hands of some magician, depend upon it
you will never see him more: he is lost past all recovery; and I
advise you to comfort yourself as well as you can, and to beware of
falling into the same misfortune. To which end, if you will hearken
to me, you shall stay at my house, and I will tell you all the
tricks of these magicians, that you may take care of yourself when
you go out. Amgiad, afflicted for the loss of his brother, accepted
the tailor’s offer, and thanked him a thousand times for his
kindness to him.




The Story of Prince Amgiad and a Lady of the City of the Magicians.


Prince Amgiad did not go out of the tailor’s house for a whole
month, except his host went with him. At last he ventured to go
alone to the bath. As he was returning home through a street where
there was nobody, he met a lady coming to him. Seeing a handsome
young man, fresh come out of the bath, she lifted up her veil, and
asked him, with a smiling air, whither he was going; and ogled him
all the while so amorously, that Amgiad could not resist her charms.
Madam, said he, I am going to my own house, or yours, as you please.

My lord, replied the lady, with an agreeable smile, ladies of my
quality never carry men to their own houses; they always go to the
men’s.

Amgiad was very much confounded at this answer, which he did not
expect: he durst not venture to take her home to his landlord’s
house, fearing the good man would be scandalized by it, and he
should have lost his protection, of which he stood in great need,
considering he was in a city where it was so necessary for him to be
always upon his guard: he knew so little of the town, that he could
not tell where to carry her, and he could not resolve to lose this
lucky adventure. In this uncertainty, he determined to throw himself
upon chance; and without making any answer, he went before, and the
lady followed him. Amgiad led her from street to street, from square
to square, till they were both weary with walking: at last they came
to a street, at the end of which was a great gate, shut up, opening
to a handsome house, and having a seat on each side of it. Amgiad
sat down on one of them, as if to take breath; and the lady, more
weary than he, seated herself on the other.

When she had taken her seat, she asked him whether that was his
house. You see it, madam, said Amgiad. Why do you not open the gate
then? replied the lady; what do you wait for? Fair lady, answered
Amgiad, I have not the key; I left it with my slave when I sent him
on an errand, and he cannot be come back yet: besides, I ordered him
afterwards to get something good for dinner; so that I am afraid we
shall wait a long time for him.

The prince met with so many difficulties in satisfying his passion,
that he began to repent of it. He therefore contrived this answer,
in hopes that the lady would take the hint, and out of resentment
leave him, and seek elsewhere for a lover; but he was mistaken.

This is a most impertinent slave, said the lady, to make us wait so
long. I will chastise him myself as he deserves, if you do not, when
he comes back: it is not decent that I should sit here alone with a
man at a gate. Saying this, she arose and took up a stone to break
the lock, which was only of wood, and weak, according to the fashion
of the country.

Amgiad did all he could to hinder her. What are you doing, madam?
said the prince. For Heaven’s sake stay a little! What are you
afraid of? replied the lady; is it not your house? It is no great
matter to break a wooden lock; a new one will not cost much. The
lock she accordingly broke; and as soon as the door was open,
entered the house, and walked before him.

Amgiad gave himself over for a lost man, when he saw the door forced
open; he paused upon it, whether he should go into the house or not,
or make off as fast as he could, to avoid the danger which he
believed was inevitable; and he was going to fly, when the lady
returned.

Seeing he did not enter, Why do not you come into your house? said
she. The prince answered, I am looking to see if my slave is coming,
fearing we have nothing ready. Come in, come in, said madam; we had
better wait for him within doors than without.

Amgiad, much against his will, followed her into the house. Passing
through a spacious court, neatly paved, they mounted by several
steps into a grand vestibule, which led to a large open hall, very
well furnished, where he and the lady saw a table ready spread with
all sorts of delicacies, another heaped with fruit, and a sideboard
full of bottles of wine.

When Amgiad saw these preparations, he gave himself up for lost.
Poor Amgiad, said he to himself, thou wilt soon follow thy dear
brother Assad!

The lady, on the contrary, transported at the sight, cried out, How,
my lord, did you fear there was nothing ready? You see your slave
has done more than you expected; but if I am not mistaken, these
preparations were made for some other lady, and not for me: no
matter, let her come; I promise you I will not be jealous; I only
beg the favour of you that you will permit me to wait on her and you.

Amgiad, as much as he was troubled at this accident, could not help
laughing at the lady’s pleasantry. Madam, said he, thinking of
something else that tormented his mind, there is nothing in what you
fancy; this is my common dinner, and no extraordinary preparation, I
assure you. As he could not bring himself to sit down at a table
which was not prepared for him, he would have taken his seat on a
sofa, but the lady would not let him. Come, sir, said she, you must
be hungry after bathing, let us eat and enjoy ourselves.

Amgiad was forced to do what the lady would have him: they both sat
down and fell to. The lady, having eat a bit, took a bottle and
glass, poured out some wine, and drank to Amgiad: and when she had
drank herself, she filled another glass, and gave it to Amgiad, who
pledged her. The more the prince thought of this adventure, the more
he was amazed that the master of the house did not appear, and that
so rich a house, and so well provided, should be left without a
servant. It will be lucky, said he to himself, if the master of the
house does not come till I am got clear of this intrigue. While he
was occupied with these thoughts, and others more troublesome, she
eat and drank heartily, and obliged him to do the same. They were
almost come to the fruit, when the master of the house arrived.

It happened to be Bahader, master of the horse to the king of the
magicians: this house belonged to him, but he commonly dwelt in
another; and he seldom came here, unless to regale himself with two
or three chosen friends. He always sent provisions from his other
house on such occasions, and had done so this day by some of his
servants, who were just gone as the lady and Amgiad entered it.

Bahader came as he used to do, in disguise, and without attendants,
and a little before the time appointed for his friends coming: he
was not a little surprised to see the door of his house broken open.
He entered, making no noise, and hearing some persons talking and
making merry in the hall, he stole along under the wall, and put his
head half-way within the door to see who they were.

Perceiving a young man and a young lady eating at his table the
victuals that had been provided for his friends and himself, and
that there was no great harm done, he resolved to divert himself
with the adventure.

The lady’s back was a little turned from him, and she did not see
the master of the horse, but Amgiad saw him immediately: he had then
the glass in his hand, and was going to drink it off; he changed
colour at the sight of Bahader, who made a sign to him not to say a
word, but to come and speak with him.

Amgiad drank and rose. Where are you going? said the lady. The
prince answered, Pray, madam, stay here a little; I shall be back
again in a minute; a small affair obliges me to go out at present.
Bahader waited for him in the vestibule, and led him into the court
to talk to him without being heard by the lady.

When Bahader and Amgiad were in the court, Bahader demanded of the
prince how the lady came into his house, and why they broke open his
door. My lord, replied Amgiad, you may very reasonably think me
guilty of a very unwarrantable action; but if you will have patience
to hear me, I hope my innocence will appear. He then told him, in a
few words, what had happened to him, without disguising any part of
the truth; and to convince him that he was not capable of committing
such an action as to break into a house, he told him plainly he was
a prince, and what was the reason of his coming to the city of the
magicians.

Bahader, who naturally loved strangers, was transported with an
opportunity of obliging one of Amgiad’s rank and quality; for by
his air, his actions, and his well-turned discourse, he did not in
the least doubt of the truth of what he said. Prince, said Bahader,
I am very glad I can oblige you in so pleasant an adventure as this:
far from disturbing the feast, it will be a pleasure to me to
contribute to your satisfaction in any thing. Before I say any more
on this subject, I am happy to inform you my name is Bahader; I am
master of the horse to the king of the magicians: I commonly dwell
in another house which I have in this city, and come here sometimes
to have the more liberty with my friends. You have made this lady
believe you have a slave, though you have none: I will be your
slave; and that this may not disturb you, and to spare your excuses,
I repeat again, that I will positively be so; you will soon know my
reason for it. Go to your place, and continue to divert yourself:
when I return again, and come before you in a slave’s habit, chide
me for staying so long; do not be afraid even to strike me. I will
wait upon you all the while you are at table, till night; you shall
sleep here, and so shall the lady, and to-morrow morning you may
send her home with honour. I shall afterwards endeavour to do you
more important services: go, and lose no time. Amgiad would have
made him an answer, but the master of the horse would not let him,
forcing him to go to the lady. He had scarce got into the hall
before Bahader’s friends, whom he had invited, arrived. Bahader
excused himself for not entertaining them that day, telling them
they would approve of the reason of it when they knew it, which
should be in due time. When they were gone, he went forth and
dressed himself in a slave’s habit.

Prince Amgiad came to the lady much better pleased at finding the
house belonged to a man of quality, who had received him so
courteously. When he sat down to the table again, he said, Madam, I
beg a thousand pardons for my rudeness: I was vexed that my slave
should tarry so long; the rascal shall pay for it, when he comes: I
will teach him to make me stay so for him.

Let not that trouble you, said the lady; so much the worse for him;
if he is guilty of any faults, let him pay for it: do not let us
think of him; we will enjoy ourselves without him.

They continued at the table with the more pleasure, as Amgiad was
under no apprehensions of the consequence of the lady’s
indiscretion, who ought not to have broken open the door, though it
had been Amgiad’s own house. The prince was now as merry as the
lady: they said a thousand pleasant things, and drank more than they
ate, till Bahader arrived, disguised like a slave.

Bahader entered like a slave who feared his master’s displeasure
for staying out when he had company with him: he fell down at his
feet, and kissed the ground, to implore his clemency; and when he
had done, stood behind him with his hands across, in expectation of
his commands.

Sirrah, said Amgiad, with a fierce tone and angry look, is there
such a slave as you in all the world? Where have you been? What have
you been doing, that you came no sooner?

My lord, replied Bahader, I ask your pardon; I was executing your
orders, and did not think you would come home so early.

You are a rascal, said Amgiad, and I shall break your bones, to
teach you to lie and to disappoint me. He then rose up, took a
stick, and gave him two or three slight blows with it; after which
he sat down to table again.

The lady was not satisfied with the chastisement he bestowed on him.
She also rose, took the stick, and fell upon Bahader so
unmercifully, that the tears came into his eyes. Amgiad, offended to
the last degree at the freedom she took, and that she should use one
of the king’s chief officers so ill, cried out to her in vain,
Enough. She continued striking him. Let me alone, said she, I will
give him enough, and teach him to be absent so long another time.
She continued beating him with great fury, till Amgiad rose from the
table, and forced the stick out of her hand; which she did not part
with without much struggling. When she found she could beat Bahader
no longer, she sat down and railed at and cursed him.

Bahader wiped his eyes, and stood up to fill out wine. When he saw
they had done eating and drinking, he took away the cloth, cleared
the hall, put every thing in its place; and, night coming on,
lighted up the lamps. Every time he came in, or went out, the lady
muttered and threatened him, and gave him abusive language, to
Amgiad’s great disliking, who would have hindered her, but could
not. When it was time for them to go to bed, Bahader prepared one
for them on the sofa, and withdrew into a chamber, where he laid
himself down, and it was not long before he fell asleep, having been
fatigued with his beating. Amgiad and the lady entertained one
another a good half hour afterwards, and the lady wanted to go forth
before she went to bed. Passing through the vestibule, she heard
Bahader snore; and having seen a sabre hanging up in the hall, she
turned back again, and said to prince Amgiad, My lord, as you love
me, do one thing for me. In what can I serve you? replied the
prince. The lady answered, Oblige me so far as to take down this
sabre, and cut off your slave’s head with it. Amgiad was
astonished at such a proposal from a lady, not doubting but it was
the wine she had drank that prompted it. Madam, said he, let my
slave alone; he is not worthy of your notice; I have beat him, and
you have beat him: it is sufficient: besides, I am very well
satisfied with him; he does not use to be guilty of such faults.

That shall not do, replied the lady, in violent fury; the rogue
shall die: if not by your hands, by mine. Saying this, she took down
the sabre from the place where it hung, drew it out of the scabbard,
and was going to execute her wicked design.

Amgiad met her in the vestibule, saying, You shall be satisfied,
madam, since you will have it so; but I should be sorry that any
one, beside myself, should kill my slave. When she had given him the
sabre, Come, follow me, said he; make no noise, for fear we wake
him. They went into Bahader’s chamber, where Amgiad, instead of
striking him, struck at the lady, and cut off her head, which fell
upon Bahader.

If the noise of the blow which Amgiad gave the lady, in cutting off
her head, had not waked Bahader, her head falling upon him would
have done it; he was amazed to see Amgiad with a sabre all bloody,
and the body of the lady lying headless on the ground. The prince
told him what had passed, and ending his discourse, said, I had no
other way to hinder this furious woman from killing you, but to take
away her life. My lord, replied Bahader, full of gratitude, persons
of your rank and generosity are not capable of doing such a wicked
action as she desired of you. You are my deliverer, and I cannot
enough thank you. After he had embraced him, to show him what sense
he had of his obligations to him, he said, We must carry this corpse
out before it is quite day, leave it to me, I will do it. Amgaid
would not agree to that, saying, he would carry it away himself,
since he had struck the blow. Bahader replied, You are a stranger in
this city, and cannot do it so well as one who is acquainted here; I
must do it, if for no other reason, yet for both our safeties, to
prevent our being questioned for her death: stay you here, and if I
do not come back before day, you may be sure the watch has seized
me; and for fear of the worst, I will by writing give this house and
furniture for your habitation; you have nothing to do but to live in
it.

When he had written, signed, and delivered the paper to prince
Amgiad, he put the lady’s body in a bag, head and all, laid it on
his shoulder, and went out with it from one street to another,
taking the way to the sea-side. He had not gone far before he met
with one of the judges of the city, who was going the rounds in
person. Bahader was stopped by the judge’s followers, who, opening
the bag, found the body of a murdered lady, bundled up with the
head. The judge, who knew the master of the horse, notwithstanding
his disguise, took him home to his house, and not daring to put him
to death without telling the king of it, because of his quality, he
carried him to court as soon as it was day. When the king had heard
from the judge, what a foul action he had been guilty of, as he
believed from the circumstances, he addressed the master of the
horse in these words: It is thus then that thou murderest my
subjects, to rob them, and then thou wouldst throw their dead bodies
into the sea, to hide thy villany; let us rid them of you; go, hang
him up immediately.

Innocent as Bahader was, he took his sentence of death with all
imaginable resignation, and said not a word to justify himself. The
judge carried him to his house, and, while the gallows was
preparing, he sent a crier to publish throughout the city, that at
noon the master of the horse was to be hanged for a murder committed
by him.

Prince Amgiad, who had in vain expected Bahader’s return, was
struck with terrible consternation when he heard the crier publish
the approaching execution of the master of the horse. If, said he to
himself, somebody must die for the death of such a wicked woman, it
is I, and not Bahader; I will never suffer an innocent man to be
punished for the guilty; and without deliberating any more about it,
he hastened to the place of execution, whither the people were
running from all parts.

When Amgiad saw the judge bringing Bahader to the gibbet, he went up
to him, and said, I am come to tell you, and to assure you, that the
master of the horse whom you are leading to execution is wholly
innocent of the lady’s death: I am guilty of the crime, if it is
one, to have killed a detestable woman, who would have murdered
Bahader; and then he told him all as it happened.

The prince having informed the judge how he met her coming out of
the bath; how she was the cause of going into the master of the
horse’s pleasure-house, and all that had passed to the moment in
which he was forced to cut off her head, to save Bahader’s life;
the judge ordered execution to be stopped, and conducted Amgiad to
the king, taking the master of the horse with him.

The king had a mind to hear the story from Amgiad himself; and the
prince, the better to prove his own innocence and the master of the
horse’s, took that opportunity to discover who he was, and what
had driven him and his brother Assad to that city, with all the
accidents that had befallen them, from their departure from the
capital city of the isle of Ebene, to the time in which he talked to
him.

The prince having done speaking, the king said to him, I rejoice
that I have by this means come to the knowledge of you; I not only
give you your own and my master of the horse’s life, whom I
commend for his kindness to you, but I restore him to his office;
and as for you, prince, I declare you my grand vizier, to make
amends for your father’s unjust usage of you, though it is also
excusable, and I permit you to employ all the authority I now give
you to find out prince Assad.

Prince Amgiad having thanked the king of the city and country of
magicians for the honour he had done him, and taking possession of
his office of grand vizier, he took every possible means to find out
the prince his brother. He ordered the common criers to promise a
great reward to any one who should bring forth prince Assad, or tell
any tidings of him. He sent men up and down the country to the same
purpose; but notwithstanding all his diligence, he could hear no
news of him.




The Sequel of the Story of Prince Assad.


Assad in the meanwhile continued in the dungeon in chains; Bostama
and Cavama, the cunning old conjuror’s daughters, treating him
daily with the same cruelty and inhumanity as at first.

The solemn festival of the adorers of fire approached; and a ship
was fitted out for the fiery mountain as usual; the captain’s name
was Behram, a great bigot to that religion. He loaded it with proper
merchandise; and when it was ready to sail, he put Assad in a chest,
which was half full of goods, a few crevices being left between the
boards for him to breathe, enough to keep life in him. This chest
was stowed in the bottom of the hold, for the greater security.

Before the ship sailed, the grand vizier Amgiad, Assad’s brother,
who had been told that the adorers of fire used to sacrifice a
Mussulman every year on the fiery mountain, suspected that Assad
might have fallen into their hands, and be designed a victim at that
bloody sacrifice; wherefore he resolved to search the ship in
person. He ordered all the passengers and seamen to be brought upon
deck, and commanded his men to search all over the ship, which they
did, yet Assad could not be found, he was so well concealed.

When the grand vizier had done searching the vessel, she sailed, and
as soon as Behram was got out to sea, he ordered prince Assad to be
taken out of the chest, and fettered, to secure him, fearing least
he should fling himself into the sea in despair, since he knew he
was going to be sacrificed.

The wind was very favourable two or three days, and then it turned
contrary, after which there arose a furious storm; and the vessel
was not only driven out of her course, but neither Behram nor his
pilot knew where they were. They were afraid of splitting against
the rocks, for in the violence of the storm they discovered land,
and a dreadful shore before them. Behram saw he was driven into the
port and capital of queen Margiana, which was a great mortification
to him.

This queen Margiana was a devout professor of the Mahometan
religion, and a mortal enemy to the adorers of fire. She banished
all of them out of her dominions, and would not let any of their
ships touch at her ports.

It was no longer in the power of Behram now to help putting into the
port of this queen’s capital city, or else he had been dashed to
pieces against the frightful rocks that lay off the shore. In this
extremity he held a council with his pilot and seamen. My lads, said
he, you see to what a necessity we are reduced; we must choose one
of these two things; either resolve to be swallowed up by the waves,
or put into queen Margiana’s port, whose hatred to all persons of
our religion you very well know. She will certainly seize our vessel
and put us all to death, without mercy. I see but one likely way to
escape her, which is, to take off the fetters from the Mussulman we
have aboard, and dress him like a slave. When queen Margiana
commands me to come before her, and asks what trade I use, I will
tell her I deal in slaves; that I have sold all I had, but one, whom
I keep to be my clerk, because he can read and write. She will see
him, to be sure, and he being handsome, and of her own religion,
will have pity on him. No doubt she will then ask to buy him of me,
and on this condition will let us stay in the port till the weather
is fair. If any of you have any thing else to propose, that will be
of more advantage to us, I am ready to hearken to it. The pilot and
seamen applauded his judgment, and agreed to follow his advice.

Behram commanded prince Assad’s chains to be taken off, and had
him dressed like a slave very neatly, as became one who was to pass
for his clerk before the queen of the country. They had scarce time
to do this, before the ship drove into the port, and dropped anchor.

Queen Margiana’s palace was so near the sea-side, that her garden
extended down to the sea-shore. She saw the ship anchor, and sent to
the captain to come to her, and the sooner to satisfy her curiosity,
waited for him in her garden.

Behram, who expected to be sent for, landed with prince Assad; whom
he required to confirm what he had said of his being a slave, and
his clerk. When he was introduced to the queen, he threw himself at
her feet, and informed her of the necessity he was in to put into
her port; that he dealt in slaves, and had sold all he had but one,
which was Assad there present, whom he kept for his clerk.

The queen was taken with Assad from the minute she first saw him,
and was extremely glad to hear that he was a slave; resolving to buy
him, cost what it would. She asked Assad what was his name.

Great queen, replied Assad, with tears in his eyes, does your
majesty ask what my name was formerly, or what it is now? The queen
answered, Have you two names then? Alas! it is but too true, said
Assad: I was once called Assad (most happy); and now my name is
Motar (devoted to be sacrificed.)

Margiana, not being able to find out the true meaning of this
answer, understood it of his condition of a slave; for she perceived
he had a great deal of wit. Since you are clerk to the captain, said
she, no doubt you can write well: let me see your hand.

Behram had furnished Assad with pen, ink and paper, as a token of
his office, that the queen might take him for what he designed she
should.

The prince stepped a little aside, and wrote as follows, suitable to
his wretched circumstances:

‘The blind man avoids the ditch into which the clear-sighted
falls. Fools advance themselves to honours by discourses which
signify nothing, while men of sense and eloquence live in poverty
and contempt. The Mussulman with all his riches is miserable. The
infidel triumphs. We cannot hope things will be otherwise. The
Almighty has decreed it should be so.’

Assad presented the paper to queen Margiana, who admired alike the
moral of the sentences and the goodness of the writing. She needed
no more to have her heart inflamed, and to feel a sincere concern
for his misfortunes. She had no sooner read it, but she addressed
herself to Behram, saying, Do which you will, either sell me this
slave, or make a present of him to me; perhaps it will turn most to
your account to do the latter.

Behram answered insolently, that he could neither give nor sell him;
that he wanted his slave, and would keep him.

Queen Margiana, provoked at his boldness, would not talk to him any
more about it. She took the prince by the arm, and turned him before
her to the palace, sending Behram word, that if he stayed the night
in her port, she would confiscate his goods, and burn his ship. So
he was forced to go back to his vessel, and prepare to put to sea
again, notwithstanding the tempest was not yet over.

Queen Margiana, on entering her palace, commanded supper to be got
ready; and while it was providing, she ordered Assad to be brought
into her apartment, where she bade him sit down. Assad would have
excused himself: It does not belong to a slave, said he, to presume
to this honour.

To a slave! replied the queen; you were so a moment ago;
henceforward you are no more a slave. Sit down near me, and tell me
the story of your life; for by what you wrote, and the insolence of
that slave-merchant, I guess there is something extraordinary in it.

Prince Assad obeyed her; and, sitting down, began thus: Mighty
queen, your majesty is not mistaken in thinking there is something
extraordinary in the story of my life: it is indeed more so than you
can imagine. The ills, the incredible torments, I have suffered, and
the death to which I was devoted, and from which I am delivered by
your royal generosity, will show the greatness of my obligation to
you, never to be forgotten. But before I enter into particulars of
my miseries, which will strike horror into the hearts of all that
hear it, I must trace the origin of them to its source.

This preamble increased queen Margiana’s curiosity. The prince
then told her of his royal birth; of his brother Amgiad, and their
mutual friendship; of their mothers’ criminal passion, which in a
night turned into inveterate hatred, the cause of all their
sufferings; of the king his father’s rage; how miraculously their
lives were saved; how he lost his brother; how he had been long
imprisoned and tortured, and was only discharged then to be
sacrificed on the fiery mountain.

When Assad had finished his discourse, the queen was more than ever
enraged at the adorers of fire. Prince, said she, though I have
always had an aversion to the adorers of fire, yet hitherto I have
had some humanity for them; but after their barbarous usage of you,
and their execrable design to sacrifice you, I will henceforth
declare perpetual war against them.

She would have said more, but supper being served up, she made
prince Assad sit down at table with her, being charmed with his
beauty and eloquence, and touched with a passion which she hoped
soon to have an opportunity of letting him see. Prince, said she, we
must make you amends for so many fasts and wretched meals, which the
pitiless adorers of fire forced you to make; you will want
nourishment after such sufferings. With these and such like words
she helped him at supper; and ordered the prince to drink a good
deal of wine to recover his spirits; by which means he drank more
than he could well bear.

The cloth being taken away, Assad wanting to go out, took an
opportunity when the queen did not see him. He descended into the
court, and seeing the garden door open, went into it. Being tempted
by the pleasantness of the place, he walked there a while. At last
he came to a fountain, where he washed his face and hands to refresh
himself, and lying down on the turf round the fountain, fell asleep.

It was almost night, and Behram, determined to prevent the queen
from executing her threats, had weighed anchor, troubled at the loss
of Assad, by which he was disappointed of a most acceptable
sacrifice. He comforted himself as well as he could with the
thoughts that the storm was over, and that a land breeze favoured
his getting off from that coast. As soon as he was towed out of the
port by the help of his boat, before it was hoisted up into the ship
again, Stop, my lads, said he to the seamen in it, do not come on
board again; I will give you some casks to fill with water, and will
wait for you. The sailors excused themselves, for that they did not
know where to get water. Behram had observed, while he was talking
to the queen in the garden, that there was a fountain at the end of
it, near the port. Go, said he, land before the palace-garden; the
wall is not above breast high; you may easily get over; there is a
basin in the middle of the garden, where you may fill all your
barrels, and hand them aboard without difficulty.

The sailors went ashore at the place he directed them to, and laying
their casks on their shoulders, easily got over the wall.

As they drew near the basin, they perceived a man sleeping on the
grass, and knew him to be Assad. They immediately divided
themselves; and while some of the crew filled their barren with as
little noise as possible, others surrounded Assad, and watched to
stop him if he should awake.

He was fast, and slept on, giving them time to fill all their casks:
which, as soon as they had filled, they handed over the wall to
others of their crew who waited there to carry them aboard.

They next seized Assad, and bore him away, without giving him time
to recollect himself. They got him over the wall into their boat
with the casks, and rowed to the ship. When they came near her they
cried out for joy, Captain, sound your trumpets, beat your drums; we
have brought you your slave again.

Behram, who could not imagine how the seamen could find and take him
again, and did not see Assad in the boat, it being night, waited
their coming on board with impatience, to ask what they meant; but
when he had seen him, he could not contain himself, so great was his
joy. He commanded him to be chained down again, without staying to
inquire how they came by him; and having hoisted the boat on board,
set sail for the fiery mountain.

In the meanwhile queen Margiana was in a dreadful fright: she did
not much concern herself at first, when she found prince Assad was
gone out, because she did not doubt but he would return in a little
time. When some time had passed without his appearing, she began to
be uneasy, and commanded her women to look for him. They searched
all about without finding him; and night coming on, she ordered them
to search again with torches, which they did to as little purpose.

Queen Margiana was so impatient and alarmed, that she went with
lights, and finding the garden-door open, went into it, and walked
all over it with her women, to seek for him herself; and passing by
the fountain and basin, she espied a slipper, which she took up, and
knew it to be prince Assad’s: her women also said it was his. The
water being spilt about the basin, made her believe that Behram had
carried him off again. She sent immediately to see if he was still
in the port; and hearing he had set sail a little before it was
dark, that he lay to some time off the shore, while he sent his boat
for water from the fountain, she doubted no longer of the prince’s
ill fortune; so she sent word to the commander of ten ships of war,
which lay always ready in the port, to sail on the shortest notice,
that she would embark herself next morning as soon as it was day.
The commander lost no time; ordered the captains and subalterns,
seamen and soldiers aboard, and was ready to sail at the time
appointed. She embarked; and when the squadron was at sea, told the
commander her intention: Make all the sail you can, said she, and
give chase to the merchant-man that sailed yesterday evening out of
this port: I give it to you to be plundered, if you take it; if not,
your life shall answer it.

The ten ships chased Behram’s two whole days without seeing her.
The third day in the morning they discovered her, and at noon had so
surrounded her, that she could not escape.

As soon as cruel Behram espied the ten ships of war, he doubted not
it was queen Margiana’s squadron in pursuit of him; and upon that
he ordered Assad to be bastinadoed, which he did every day, and had
not missed once treating him so barbarously since he left the port
of the city of magicians. On sight of these ships, he used him more
cruelly than before. He was much perplexed what to do, when he found
he was going to be surrounded. To keep Assad, was to declare himself
guilty; to kill him was as dangerous, for he feared some tokens or
other of it might be seen. He therefore commanded him to be
unfettered and brought from the bottom of the hold where he lay.
When he came before him, It is thou, said he, that art the cause of
my being pursued; and so saying, he flung him into the sea.

Prince Assad knowing how to swim, made so good use of his feet and
hands, that he got safe to shore; the waves seconding his bold
exertions. The first thing he did after he got on shore was to thank
God who had delivered him from so great danger, and once more
rescued him out of the hands of the adorers of fire. He then
stripped himself, and wringing the water out of his clothes, he
spread them on a rock, where, by the heat of the sun, and the rock
together, they soon dried. After which he lay down to rest himself,
deploring his miserable condition, not knowing in what country he
was, nor which way to turn himself. He dressed himself again and
walked on, keeping as near the sea side as he could. At last he came
to a sort of path which he followed, and travelled ten days through
a country which was not inhabited, still living on herbs, plants,
and wild fruits. At last he approached the banks of a rivulet near a
city, which he knew to be that of the magicians, where he had been
so ill used, and where his brother Amgiad was grand vizier: he was
very glad of it, resolving not to come near any of the adorers of
fire, but only to converse with Mussulmen; for he remembered he had
seen some the first time he entered the town. It being late, and he
knowing the shops were already shut, and few people in the streets,
resolved to stay in a burying-ground near the city, where there were
several tombs built in the form of mausoleums. He found the door of
one of them open; he entered it, and designed to pass the night
there.

We must now return to Behram’s ship, which was soon surrounded on
all sides by queen Margiana’s squadron, after he had thrown prince
Assad overboard. The ship in which queen Margiana was in person
first boarded him, and Behram, being in no condition of defence
against so many, furled his sails in token of yielding.

The queen herself came aboard him, and demanded of him where the
clerk was, whom he had the boldness to take or cause to be taken out
of her very palace. Behram replied, O queen! I swear by your
majesty, he is not in my ship; you will, by searching it, see my
innocence.

Margiana ordered the ship to be searched as narrowly as possible,
but she could not find the man whom she so passionately longed to
recover, as well out of love to him, as out of that generosity which
was her distinguishing character. She was going to kill Behram with
her own hand, but refrained, contenting herself with seizing his
ship and cargo, and turning him and his men on shore in their boat.

Behram and his seamen arrived at the city of the magicians the same
night that Assad did, stopped at the same burying ground, the city
gates being shut, intending to stay in some tomb till the next day,
when they were opened again.

As Assad’s ill luck would have it, Behram passed before that in
which the prince was sleeping, with his head wrapt up in his habit:
Assad awoke at the noise he made, and asked, Who’s there?

Behram knew him again presently. Hah, hah! said he, thou art the man
who hast ruined me for ever; thou hast escaped being sacrificed this
year, but depend on it thou shalt not escape the next. Saying this,
he flew upon him, clapped his handkerchief into his mouth to prevent
his making a noise, and by the help of his seamen bound him.

The next morning, as soon as the city gates were open, Behram and
his men easily carried Assad by a round-about way, through streets
where nobody was up, to the old man’s house, where he had been so
inhumanly treated. As soon as he got in, he was again thrown into
the same dungeon. Behram acquainted the old fellow with the sad
occasion of his return, and the ill success of his voyage. The old
rascal, upon this, commanded his two daughters, Bostama and Cavama,
to treat Assad more cruelly than before, if possible.

Assad was in a terrible surprise to find himself in the hands of his
old persecutors, from whom he had suffered so much, and expected to
undergo another time the torments from which he hoped that he had
been delivered. He was bemoaning the rigour of his destiny, when he
saw Bostama enter with a cudgel, a loaf, and a pitcher of water. He
was almost dead at the sight of that unmerciful wretch, and the
thoughts of the daily sufferings he was to endure for another year,
after which he was to die the most horrible death.

Bostama dealt not so inhumanly by prince Assad as she had done the
first time of his confinement. His cries, complaints, and earnest
entreaties to her to spare him, joined with his tears, were so
moving, that Bostama could not help being affected by them, and
shedding tears with him. My lord, said she, covering his shoulders
again, I ask a thousand pardons for my inhuman treatment of you
formerly, and for making you now feel its effect. Till now I was
afraid of disobeying a father, who is unjustly enraged against you,
and resolved on your destruction; but at last I loathe and abhor
this barbarity. Be comforted; your evil days are over. I will
endeavour, by better treatment of you, to make amends for all my
crimes, the enormity of which you will find I am convinced of. You
have hitherto looked on me as an infidel; henceforth believe me one
of your own religion; having been converted by a slave, who is a
Mussulman. I hope your lessons will finish my conversion. To show my
good intentions, I first beg pardon of the true God for all my sins,
in dealing so cruelly by you, and I trust he will put it in my power
to set you entirely at liberty.

The prince was much comforted to hear her talk thus: he thanked the
Almighty for the change wrought in her heart He also thanked her for
her good disposition towards him, and omitted no arguments which he
thought would have any effect to confirm her in them, by instructing
her in the Mussulman religion, and telling her his whole story, his
high birth, and adventures, to that time. When he was convinced she
was fixed in her good resolution, he asked her how she could hinder
her sister Cavama knowing it, and treating him as barbarously as she
used to do? Let not that trouble you, replied Bostama; I know how to
order matters so that she shall never come near you.

And as she said, she every day prevented her coming down into the
dungeon, where she often visited the prince, and instead of carrying
him bread and water, she brought him the best wine and the choicest
victuals she could get, which was prepared by her twelve Mahometan
slaves. She eat with him herself from time to time, and did her
utmost to make his confinement comfortable.

A few days afterwards, Bostama, as she stood at her father’s door,
heard the public crier making proclamation; but she could not hear
what it was about, being too far off.

As he came near her father’s house, she withdrew into it, holding
the door half open, perceiving he went before the grand vizier
Amgiad, brother to Assad; who was accompanied by several officers,
and other attendants, walking before and behind him.

The crier, going a few steps from the house, repeated the
proclamation with a loud voice, as follows: ‘The most excellent
and illustrious grand vizier, is come in person to seek for his dear
brother, from whom he was separated about a year ago; he is a young
man of such a person; if any one has him in keeping, or knows where
he is, his excellency commands that they bring him forth, or give
him notice where he shall find him, promising a great reward to the
person that shall so do: if any one conceals him, and he is found,
his excellency declares he shall be punished with death, together
with his wife, children, and all his family, and his house be razed
to the ground.’ Bostama, as soon as she had heard this, shut the
door as fast as she could, and ran to Assad in the dungeon. Prince,
said she, with joy, your troubles are at an end, follow me
immediately. She had taken off his fetters the first day he was
brought in. So the prince followed her into the street, where she
cried, There he is! there he is!

The grand vizier, who was not far from the house, returned. Assad
knew him to be his brother, ran to him, and embraced him. Amgiad,
who presently recollected him, returned his embrace with all
possible tenderness, made him mount one of his officer’s horses,
who alighted for that purpose, and conducted him in triumph to the
palace, where he presented him to the king, by whom he was advanced
to the post of a vizier.

Bostama would not return to her father’s house, which was the next
day razed to the ground, but kept prince Assad in sight, and was
sent to the queen’s apartment.

The old man, her father, and Behram, and all their families, were
brought before the king, who condemned them to be beheaded. They
threw themselves at his feet, and implored his mercy. There is no
mercy for you to expect, said the king, unless you renounce your
adoring of fire, and profess the Mahometan religion.

They accepted the condition, and were pardoned at the intercession
of Assad, in consideration of Bostama’s friendship; for whose sake
Cavama’s life, and the lives of the rest of their families, were
saved.

Amgiad, in consideration of Behram turning Mussulman, and to
compensate for his loss, which he had suffered before he deserved
his favour, made him one of his principal officers, and lodged him
in his house. Behram being informed of Amgiad and his brother
Assad’s story, proposed to his benefactor to fit out a vessel to
convey them to their father king Camaralzaman’s court: For, said
he, the king must certainly have heard of your innocence, and
impatiently desire to see you ere this; otherwise we can easily
inform him of the truth before we land; and if he is still in the
same mind, you can but return hither.

The two brothers accepted the proposal, communicated it to the king
of the city of the magicians, who approved of it, and commanded a
ship to be equipped. Behram undertook the employment cheerfully, and
soon got in readiness to sail. The two princes, when they understood
the ship was ready, waited upon the king one morning to take their
leave of him. While they were making their compliments, and thanking
the king for his favours, they were interrupted by a great tumult in
the city; and presently an officer came to give them notice, that a
numerous army was advancing against the city, nobody knowing who
they were, or whence they came.

The king being alarmed at the news, Amgiad addressed himself to him
thus: Sir, though I have just resigned into your majesty’s hands
the dignity of your first minister, with which you were pleased to
honour me, I am ready to do you all the service in my power. I
desire, therefore, that you would be pleased to let me go and see
who this enemy is, that comes to attack you in your capital city,
without having first declared war.

The king desired him to do so. Amgiad departed from him immediately,
with a very small retinue, to see what enemy approached, and what
was the reason of their coming.

It was not long before prince Amgiad descried the army, which
appeared very formidable, and which approached nearer and nearer.
The advanced guards received him favourably, and conducted him to a
princess, who stopped, and commanded her army to halt, while she
talked with the prince; who, bowing profoundly to her, demanded if
she came as a friend or an enemy? if as an enemy, what cause of
complaint she had against the king, his master?

I come as a friend, replied the princess, and have no cause of
complaint against the king of the city of the magicians: his
territories and mine are so situated, that it is almost impossible
for us to have any disputes. I only come to require a slave, named
Assad, to be delivered up to me. He was carried away by one Behram,
a captain of a ship belonging to this city, the most insolent man in
the world. I hope your king will do me justice, when he knows I am
Margiana.

The prince answered, Mighty queen, the slave whom you take so much
pains to seek for is my brother; I lost him, and have found him
again. Come, and I will deliver him up to you myself, and will do
myself the honour to tell you the rest of the story: the king my
master will rejoice to see you.

The queen ordered her army to pitch their tents, and encamp where
they were, and accompanied prince Amgiad to the city and palace,
where he presented her to the king, who received her in a manner
becoming her dignity. Assad, who was present, and knew her as soon
as he saw her, also paid his respects to her. She showed great joy
at the sight of him; and while they were thus engaged, tidings came
that an army more powerful than the former approached on the other
side of the city.

The king of the magicians was more terrified than before,
understanding the second army was more numerous than the first; for
he saw this by the clouds of dust they raised, which hid the face of
the heavens. Amgiad, cried he, what shall we do now? a new army
comes to destroy us. Amgiad guessed what the king meant; he mounted
on horseback again, and gallopped towards the second army. He
demanded of the advanced guards to speak with their general; they
conducted him to a king, for such he was he saw by the crown on his
head. --When he drew near him, he alighted, prostrated himself to
the ground, and asked what he required of the king, his master.

The monarch replied, I am Gaiour, king of China; my desire to learn
tidings of a daughter, whose name is Badoura, whom I married to
Camaralzaman, son of Schahzaman, king of the isles of the Children
of Khaledan, obliged me to leave my dominions. I suffered that
prince to go to see his father Schahzaman, king of the isles of the
Children of Khaledan, on condition he came back in a year with my
daughter; from that time I have heard nothing of them. Your king
will lay an infinite obligation on an afflicted father, to tell him
if he knows what is become of them.

Prince Amgiad, perceiving by his discourse that the king was his
grandfather, kissed his hand with tenderness, and answered him thus:
Sir, I hope your majesty will pardon my freedom, when you know that
I take it only to pay my duty to my grandfather: I am the son of
Camaralzaman, king of the isle of Ebene, and of queen Badoura, for
whom you are thus troubled; and I doubt not but they are both in
good health in their kingdom.

The king of China, overjoyed to see his grandson, tenderly embraced
him. Such a meeting, so happy and unexpected, drew tears from both.
The king, inquiring on what occasion he came into a strange country,
the prince told him all that had happened to him and his brother
Assad. When he had ended his relation, My son, replied the king of
China, it is not just that such innocent princes as you are should
be longer ill used. Comfort yourself; I will carry you and your
brother home, and make your peace. Return, and acquaint your brother
with my arrival.

While the king of China encamped in the same place where prince
Amgiad met him, that prince returned to let the king of the
magicians, who waited for him impatiently, know how he had succeeded.

The king was amazed that so mighty a king as he of China should
undertake such a long and troublesome journey, out of a desire to
see his daughter, and that he was so near his capital. He gave
orders to make things ready for his reception, and went forth to
meet him.

While these things were transacting, a great dust was seen on
another side of the town; and suddenly news came of the arrival of a
third army, which obliged the king to stop, and to desire the prince
Amgiad once more to see who they were, and on what account they
came. Amgiad went accordingly, and prince Assad accompanied him.
They found it was Camaralzaman their father’s army, with which he
was coming to seek for them. He was so grieved for the loss of his
sons, that at last emir Giondar declared how he had saved their
lives, which made him resolve to go and see towards what country the
two princes had travelled.

The afflicted father embraced the two princes with floods of tears
of joy, which put an end to those he had a long time shed for grief.
The princes had no sooner told him the king of China, his
father-in-law, was arrived, but he, with them and a small party,
rode to wait upon him in his camp. They had not gone far before they
saw a fourth army, advancing in good order, which seemed to come
from Persia.

Camaralzaman told the two princes to go and see what army it was,
and he would in the meanwhile stay for them. They departed
immediately; and, coming up to it, were presented to the king to
whom the army belonged; and, after having saluted him with due
reverence, they demanded on what design he approached so near the
king of the magicians’ capital. The grand vizier, who was present,
answered in the name of the king his master, The monarch to whom you
speak is Schahzaman, king of the isles of the Children of Khaledan:
who has a long time travelled, thus attended, to seek his son,
prince Camaralzaman, who left his dominions many years ago: if you
know any thing of him, you cannot oblige him more than to acquaint
him with it.

The princes only replied, that they would bring him an answer in a
little time: and, gallopping back as fast as they could, told
Camaralzaman it was king Schahzaman’s army, and that the king his
father was with it in person.

Wonder, surprise, joy, and grief, to have left the king his father
without taking leave of him, had such an effect on king
Camaralzaman, that he fainted as soon as he heard he was so near.
Prince Amgiad and prince Assad, by their assiduities, at length
brought him to himself; and when he had recovered his strength, he
went to his father’s tent, and threw himself at his feet.

Never was there a more moving interview between a father and a son.
Schahzaman kindly upbraided Camaralzaman with unkindness in so
cruelly leaving him; and Camaralzaman discovered a hearty sorrow for
the fault which love had urged him to commit.

The three kings and queen Margiana stayed three days at the court of
the king of the magicians, who treated them magnificently. These
three days were rendered more remarkable by prince Assad’s
marriage with queen Margiana, and prince Amgiad with Bostama, for
the service she had done his brother Assad.

At last the three kings, and queen Margiana, with her husband Assad,
returned to their respective kingdoms. As for Amgiad, the king of
the magicians had such an affection for him, he would not part with
him; and being very old, he resigned his crown to him. Amgiad, when
he had the supreme authority, did his utmost to exterminate the
worship of fire, and establish the Mahometan religion throughout his
dominions.




The Story of Noureddin and the Fair Persian.


The city of Balsora was for many years the capital of a kingdom
tributary to the caliphs of Arabia. The king who governed it in the
days of the caliph Haroun Alraschid was named Zinebi. They were
cousins, the sons of two brothers. Zinebi not thinking it proper to
commit the administration of his affairs to one single vizier, made
choice of two, Khacan and Saouy.

Khacan was of a sweet, generous, and affable temper, and took a
pride in obliging to the utmost of his power those with whom he had
any concern, without the least hinderance to justice, which he was
obliged to distribute; so that he was universally respected at
court, in the city, and throughout the whole kingdom; and the
praises he so highly deserved were the general theme.

Saouy was of a quite different character: he was always sullen and
morose, and disgusted every body, without regard to their rank or
quality. Instead of making himself beloved and admired for his
riches, he was so perfect a miser as to deny himself the necessaries
of life. In short, nobody could endure him, and nothing good was
said of him. But what increased the people’s hatred against him
the more, was his implacable aversion to Khacan; always interpreting
in the worst sense the actions of that worthy minister, and
endeavouring to do him all the ill offices imaginable with the king.

One day, after council, the king of Balsora amused himself with his
two viziers and some other members of the council. The conversation
turned upon the women slaves that are daily bought and sold, and are
with us almost accounted in the same rank with our lawful wives.
Some were of opinion that it was enough if the slave so bought was
beautiful and well-shaped, to make amends for the wives, which very
often, on account of alliance or interest in families, men are
obliged to marry, though they are not always the greatest beauties,
or possessed of any perfection, either of mind or body.

Others maintained, and amongst the rest Khacan, that neither beauty
nor all bodily perfections were the only things to be desired in a
slave, but that they ought to be accompanied with a great share of
wit, prudence, modesty, and agreeableness, and if possible, much
pleasing knowledge. The reason they gave for it was, that nothing
could be more agreeable to persons on whom the management of
important affairs depends, than after having spent the whole day in
that fatiguing employment, to have a companion in their retirement,
whose conversation is not only pleasing, but useful and amusing;
for, in short, continued they, there is but little difference
between brutes and those men who keep a slave only to look at, and
gratify a passion that we have in common with them.

The king was entirely of their opinion who spoke last, and he gave a
proof of it, by ordering Khacan to buy him a slave, a perfect
beauty, mistress of all those qualifications they had just
mentioned, and in particular, possessed of knowledge.

Saouy, jealous of the honour the king had done Khacan, and being of
a contrary opinion, said, Sire, it will be very difficult to find a
slave so accomplished as your majesty requires; and should they
light upon such a one, (as I scarce believe they will,) she will be
a cheap bargain at ten thousand pieces of gold. Saouy, replied the
king, I perceive plainly you think it too great a sum; it may be so
for you, though not for me. Then turning to his high treasurer, he
ordered him to send the ten thousand pieces of gold to the
vizier’s house.

Khacan, as soon as he came home, sent for all the brokers who used
to deal in women slaves, and strictly charged them that if ever they
met with a slave that answered the description he gave them, they
should come and acquaint him with it. The brokers, partly to oblige
the vizier, and partly for their own interest, promised to use their
utmost endeavours to find out one to his liking. Scarce a day passed
but they brought him one; but he always found some fault or other.

One day, as Khacan was getting on horseback, very early in the
morning to go to court, a broker came to him, and catching hold of
the stirrup with great eagerness, told him there was a Persian
merchant arrived very late the day before, who had a slave to sell,
so surprisingly beautiful, that she excelled all women that his eyes
had ever beheld: and for wit and knowledge, added he, the merchant
engages she shall match the finest wits, and the most learned
persons of the age.

Khacan, overjoyed at this news, which made him hope for a favourable
opportunity of making his court, ordered him to bring the slave to
his palace against his return, and continued his journey.

The broker failed not to be at the vizier’s at the appointed hour;
and Khacan, finding the lovely slave so much beyond his
expectations, immediately gave her the name of the Fair Persian. As
he had an infinite deal of wit and learning, he soon perceived by
her conversation, that it was in vain to search farther for a slave
that surpassed her in any of those qualifications required by the
king, and therefore he asked the broker at what rate the Persian
merchant valued her.

Sir, replied the broker, he is a man of few words in bargaining; and
he tells me, that the very lowest price he can part with her at, is
ten thousand pieces of gold. He has also sworn to me, that without
reckoning his care and pains, from the time of his first taking
charge of her, he has laid out pretty near the sum upon her
education, in masters to accomplish both her body and her mind,
besides clothes and maintenance; and as he always thought her fit
for a king, so from her very infancy, when he first bought her, he
has not been sparing of any thing that might contribute towards
advancing her to that high honour. She plays upon all sorts of
instruments to perfection; she sings, dances, writes better than the
most celebrated authors, makes verses, and, in short, there is
scarce any book but she has read; so that there never was a slave of
so great a capacity heard of before.

The vizier Khacan, who understood the merit of the Fair Persian
better than the broker, who only reported what he had heard from the
merchant, was unwilling to drive off the bargain to another time;
and therefore sent one of his servants to look after the merchant,
where the broker told him he was to be found.

As soon as the Persian merchant came, It is not for myself, but the
king, said the vizier Khacan, that I buy your slave; but however,
you must let him have her at a more reasonable price than what you
have set upon her.

Sir, replied the merchant, I should do myself an unspeakable honour
in offering her as a present to his majesty, if it became a person
in my situation to make him one of such inestimable value. I ask no
more than her education and accomplishments have cost me; and all I
have to say is, that I believe his majesty will be extremely pleased
with the purchase.

The vizier Khacan would no longer stand bargaining with the
merchant, but paid him the money down immediately. Sir, said he to
the vizier, upon taking his leave of him, since the slave is
designed for the king’s use, give me leave to tell you, that being
extremely fatigued with our long journey, you see her at a great
disadvantage; and though she has not her equal in the world for
beauty, yet if you please to keep her at your own house but a
fortnight, and take a little pains with her, she will appear quite
another creature: after that, you may present her to the king with
honour and credit; for which I hope you will think yourself much
obliged to me. The sun, you see, has a little altered her
complexion; but after two or three times bathing, and when you have
dressed her as you think proper, she will be so changed that she
will appear to your eyes infinitely more charming than now.

Khacan was much pleased with the advice the merchant gave him, and
was resolved to follow it. He assigned the Fair Persian a particular
apartment near his lady’s, whom he desired to invite her to an
entertainment, and henceforth treat her as a person designed for the
king; he also entreated her to get several suits of the richest
clothes for her that could be had, and that became her best. Before
he took his leave of the Fair Persian, Your happiness, madam, said
he, cannot be greater than what I am about to procure for you: you
shall judge for yourself; it is for the king himself I have
purchased you, and I hope he will be better pleased with possessing
you than I am in having discharged the commission his majesty has
honoured me with. I think it, however, my duty to warn you, that I
have a son, who, though he does not want wit, yet is young,
insinuating, and forward; and to caution you how you suffer him to
come near you. The Fair Persian thanked him for his good advice; and
after she had given him an assurance of her intention to follow it,
he withdrew.

Noureddin, for so the vizier’s son was named, had free access to
his mother’s apartment, with whom he usually eat his meals. He was
very genteel, young, agreeable, and bold; and being master of
abundance of wit and readiness of expression, had the art of
persuading others as he pleased. He saw the Fair Persian; and from
the first interview, though he knew his father had bought her
purposely for the king, and had declared the same to him, yet he
never used the least endeavours to check the violence of his
passion. In short, he resigned himself wholly to the power of her
charms, by which his heart was at first conquered; and from his
first conversation with her, he resolved to employ his utmost
endeavours to get her from the king.

On the other hand, the Fair Persian had no dislike to Noureddin. The
vizier, said she to herself, has done me honour to purchase me for
the king of Balsora; but I should have thought myself very happy, if
he had designed me only for his own son.

Noureddin was not backward in making use of the advantage of seeing
and conversing with a beauty he was so passionately enamoured with;
for he never would leave her till his mother forced him to do it. My
son, said she, it is not proper for a young man like you to be
always in the women’s apartment: go, mind your studies, and
endeavour to qualify yourself to succeed your father in his high
posts and honours.

It being a great while since the Fair Persian had bathed upon
account of her long journey, the vizier’s lady, five or six days
after she was purchased, ordered the bath in her own house to be got
ready purposely for her. She sent her to it, with many of her women
slaves, who were charged by the vizier’s lady to be as attentive
to her as to herself; and after bathing, to put her on a very rich
suit of clothes that she had provided for her. She was the more
careful, in order to ingratiate herself with her husband, by letting
him see how much she interested herself in every thing that
contributed to his pleasure.

As soon as she came out of the bath, the Fair Persian, a thousand
times more beautiful than ever she appeared to Khacan when he
brought her, went to make a visit to his lady, who at first sight
hardly knew her. The Fair Persian kissed her hand in a very graceful
manner, and said to her, Madam, I know not how you like me in this
dress you have pleased to order for me; but your women, who tell me
it becomes me so extremely well, they should scarce know me,
certainly flatter me: from you alone I expect to hear the truth;
but, if what they say be really so. I am indebted to you, madam, for
the advantage it has given me.

Oh! my daughter, cried the vizier’s lady, transported with joy,
you have no reason to believe my women have flattered you: I am
better skilled in beauty than they: and, setting aside your dress,
which becomes you admirably well, your beauty is so much improved by
the bath, that I hardly knew you myself. If I thought the bath was
warm enough, I would take my turn; for I am now of an age that
requires frequent use of it. Madam, replied the Fair Persian, I have
nothing to say to the undeserved civilities you have been pleased to
show me; but as for the bath, it is in wonderful fine order; and if
you design to go in, you have no time to lose, as your women can
inform you as well as I.

The vizier’s lady, considering that she had not bathed for some
days past, was desirous to make use of that opportunity; and
accordingly she acquainted her women with her intention, who
immediately prepared all things necessary on such an occasion. The
Fair Persian withdrew to her apartment; and the vizier’s lady,
before she went to bathe, ordered two little female slaves to stay
with her, with a strict charge, that if Noureddin came, they should
not give him admittance.

While the vizier’s lady was bathing, and the fair slave alone in
her apartment, in came Noureddin, and not finding his mother in her
chamber, went directly to the Fair Persian’s, where he found the
two little slaves in the antechamber: he asked them where his mother
was? They told him, in the bath. Where is the Fair Persian, then?
replied Noureddin. In her chamber, answered the slaves; but we have
positive orders from your mother not to let you go in.

The entrance into the Fair Persian’s chamber being only covered
with a piece of tapestry, Noureddin went to lift it up, in order to
go in, but was opposed by the two slaves, who clapped themselves
just before it, on purpose to stop his passage: he presently caught
hold of them both by the arms, and, thrusting them out of the
antechamber, locked the door upon them. Away they immediately ran,
with a great outcry, to the bath, and, with tears in their eyes,
told their lady, that Noureddin, having driven them away by force,
was got into the Fair Persian’s chamber.

The vizier’s lady received the astonishing news of her son’s
presumption with the greatest concern. She immediately left off
bathing, and, dressing herself with all possible speed, came
directly to the Fair Persian’s chamber; but before she could get
thither, Noureddin was gone.

The Fair Persian was extremely surprised to see the vizier’s lady
enter her chamber all in tears, and in the utmost confusion. Madam,
said she to her, may I presume to ask the occasion of your concern?
and what accident has happened in the bath, that makes you leave it
so soon?

What! cried the vizier’s lady, can you so calmly ask that
question, when my son Noureddin has been with you alone in your
chamber? Can there happen a greater misfortune to him or me?

I beseech you, madam, said the fair slave, what prejudice can this
action of Noureddin’s do to you or him?

How! replied the vizier’s lady, did not my husband tell you that
you were designed for the king, and sufficiently cautioned you to
beware of Noureddin?

I have not forgot it, madam, replied the Fair Persian; but your son
came to tell me the vizier, his father, had changed his mind, and
instead of reserving me for the king, as he first designed, has made
him a present of my person. I easily believed him, madam; for, oh!
think how a slave as I am, accustomed from my infant years to the
laws of servitude, could or ought to resist him! I must own I did it
with the less unwillingness on account of a violent inclination for
him, which the freedom of conversation and daily intercourse has
raised in my soul. I could, without regret, lose the hope of ever
being the king’s, and think myself perfectly happy in spending my
whole life with Noureddin.

At this discourse of the Fair Persian’s, Would to God, cried the
vizier’s lady, that what you say were true! I should hear it with
joy; but, believe me, Noureddin is an impostor, and has deceived
you; for it is impossible his father should ever make him the
present he spoke of. Ah! wretched youth, how miserable has he made
me! but more his father, by the dismal consequences we must all
expect to share with him! Neither my prayers her tears will be able
to prevail, or obtain a pardon for him: but as soon as his father
hears of his violence to you, he will inevitably sacrifice him to
his just resentment. At these words she fell to weeping bitterly;
and the slaves, who were as much afraid for Noureddin as herself,
bore her company.

A little after this, in came the vizier Khacan; and being surprised
to find his lady and her slaves all in tears, and the Fair Persian
very melancholy, asked the reason of it; but, instead of answering
him, his wife and his slaves kept on weeping and lamenting. He was
more astonished at this than before: at last, addressing himself to
his wife, I command you, said he, to let me know the occasion of
your tears, and to tell me the whole truth.

The poor disconsolate lady could no longer refuse to satisfy her
husband. Sir, said she, first promise not to use me unkindly for
what I tell you, since I assure you that what has happened has not
been occasioned by any fault of mine; then, without staying for his
answer, Whilst I was bathing with my women, continued she, your son,
laying hold of that fatal opportunity to ruin us both, came hither,
and made the Fair Persian believe, that instead of reserving her for
the king, as you once designed, you had given her to him as a
present; I do not say what he did after such a notorious falsehood,
but shall leave you to judge of it yourself. This is the cause of my
affliction, upon your account, and his, for whom I want confidence
to implore your pardon.

It is impossible to express the vizier Khacan’s distraction upon
hearing of the insolence of his son Noureddin. Ah! cried he, beating
his breast, and tearing his beard, miserable son! unworthy of life!
hast thou at last thrown thy father from the highest pinnacle of
happiness into a misfortune that must inevitably involve thee also
in his ruin? neither will the king be satisfied with thy blood or
mine, to avenge the affront offered to his royal person.

His lady endeavoured to comfort him. Afflict yourself no more about
the matter, said she; I shall easily raise, with part of my jewels,
ten thousand pieces of gold, and you may buy another slave, more
beautiful, and more worthy of the king.

Ah! replied the vizier, could you think me capable of being so
extremely afflicted at losing ten thousand pieces of gold? It is not
that loss, nor the loss of all I am worth, for that I should not
feel; but the forfeiting my honour, more precious than all the
riches in the world. However, methinks, replied the lady, a loss
that can be repaired by money cannot be so very great.

How! cried the vizier; don’t you know Saouy is my mortal enemy;
and as soon as this affair comes to his knowledge, do you think he
will not exult over me before the king? Your majesty, will he say to
him, is always talking of Khacan’s zeal and affection for your
service; but see what a proof he has lately given of his being
worthy the regard you have hitherto shown him. He has received ten
thousand pieces of gold to buy a slave with; and, to do him justice,
he has most honourably acquitted himself of that commission, in
buying the most beautiful that ever eyes beheld; but, instead of
bringing her to your majesty, he has thought it better to make a
present of her to his son. Here, my son, said he, take this slave,
since thou art more worthy of her than the king. Then with his usual
malice will he go on, His son has her now entirely in his
possession, and every day revels in her arms, without the least
disturbance. This, sir, is the exact truth, that I have done myself
the honour of acquainting you with, and if your majesty questions
it, you may easily satisfy yourself. Do you not plainly see,
continued the vizier, how, upon such a malicious insinuation as
this, I am every moment liable to have my house forced by the
king’s guards, and the Fair Persian taken from me, besides a
thousand other misfortunes that will unavoidably follow? Sir,
replied the vizier’s lady to her husband, I am sensible the malice
of Saouy is very great, and that, if he has but the least intimation
of this affair, he will certainly give it a turn very
disadvantageous to your interest; but how is it possible that he or
any body else should come to the knowledge of what has been
privately transacted in your family? Suppose it comes to the
king’s ears, and he should ask you about it; cannot you say, that
upon a strict examination you did not think the slave so fit for his
majesty’s use as you did at the first view; that the merchant has
cheated you; that, indeed, she has a great deal of beauty, but is
nothing near so accomplished as she was reported to be? The king
will certainly believe what you say, and Saouy be vexed to the soul,
to see all his malicious designs of ruining you entirely
disappointed: take courage then, and if you will follow my advice,
send for all the brokers, tell them you do not like the Fair
Persian, and order them to be as expeditious as possible in getting
another slave.

The vizier Khacan, approving of this reasonable advice, resolved to
make use of it, as his passion began to cool; yet his indignation
against his son Noureddin was not in the least abated.

Noureddin came not in sight all that day, and not daring to hide
himself among his young companions, lest his father should search
for him in their houses, he went a little way out of town, and took
sanctuary in a garden where he had never been before, and where he
was totally unknown. He did not come back till it was very late,
when he knew his father was in bed; and then his mother’s women,
opening the door very softly, let him in without any noise. He went
out next morning before his father was stirring: and this plan he
pursued for a whole month, to his great mortification. Indeed, the
women never flattered him, but told him plainly, his father’s
anger was as great as ever, and that he protested, if he came in his
sight, he would certainly kill him.

Though the vizier’s lady was informed by her women of
Noureddin’s lying every night in the house, she durst not presume
to entreat her husband to pardon him. At last she ventured; and one
day said to him, I have hitherto been silent, sir, not daring before
to take the liberty of talking to you about your son; but now give
me leave to ask you what you design to do with him? It is impossible
for a son to be more criminal towards a father than Noureddin has
been towards you; he has robbed you of the honour and satisfaction
of presenting the king with a slave so accomplished as the Fair
Persian; this I acknowledge; but, after all, are you absolutely
resolved to destroy him, and, instead of a light evil no more to be
thought of, draw upon yourself a far greater than perhaps you at
present imagine? Are you not afraid that the malicious world, which
inquires after the reason of your son’s absconding, may find out
the true cause, which you are so desirous of concealing? and if that
should happen, you would certainly fall into a misfortune, which it
is so much your interest justly avoid.

Madam, said the vizier, there is sound reasoning in what you have
urged; however, I cannot think of pardoning Noureddin, till I have
mortified him as he deserves. He will be sufficiently mortified,
replied the lady, if you will put in execution what is just come
into my mind: you must know then your son comes hither every night
after you are in bed; he sleeps here, and steals out every morning
before you are stirring. Wait for his coming in to-night, make as if
you designed to kill him; upon which I will run to his assistance,
and when he finds his life entirely owing to my prayers and
entreaties, you may oblige him to take the Fair Persian on what
condition soever you please: he loves her, and I am sensible the
fair slave has no aversion for him.

Khacan was very willing to make use of this stratagem. So, when
Noureddin came in at the usual hour, before the door was opened, he
placed himself behind it: as soon as he entered, he rushed suddenly
upon him, and got him down under his feet. Noureddin, lifting up his
head, saw his father with a dagger in his hand, ready to stab him.

In that instant came his mother, and catching hold of the vizier’s
arm, Sir, cried she, what are you doing? --Let me alone, replied the
vizier, that I may kill this base unworthy son. --You shall kill me
first, cried the mother; never will I suffer you to imbrue your
hands in your own blood. Noureddin improved this moment. My father,
cried he, with tears in his eyes, I implore your clemency and
compassion; nor must you deny me pardon, since I ask it in his name
before whom we must all appear at the last day.

Khacan suffered the dagger to be taken out of his hand; and as soon
as Noureddin was released, he threw himself at his father’s feet
and kissed them, to show how sincerely he repented of having
offended him. Noureddin, said he, return thanks to your mother,
since it is purely for her sake I pardon you. I design also to give
you the Fair Persian, on condition that you will oblige yourself by
an oath not to look upon her any longer as a slave, but as your
wife; that you will not sell her, nor ever be divorced from her; for
she having abundance of wit and prudence, and much better conduct
than you, I am persuaded she will be able to moderate those rash
sallies of youth, which are enough to ruin you.

Noureddin, who little expected to be treated after so kind and
indulgent a manner, returned his father a thousand thanks, with all
the gratitude and sincerity imaginable; and the vizier, the Fair
Persian, and he, were very well pleased and satisfied with the match.

The vizier Khacan would not wait for the king’s asking him about
the commission that he had given him, but took particular care to
mention it often, representing to his majesty the many difficulties
he met with in that affair, and how fearful he was of not acquitting
himself to his majesty’s satisfaction. In short, he managed the
business with so much address, that the king insensibly forgot it;
and though Saouy had got some small information of the matter, yet
Khacan was so much in the king’s favour, that he was afraid to
speak of it.

It was now above a year that this nice affair had been kept with
greater secrecy than the vizier at first expected, who being one day
in the bath, and some important business obliging him to leave it,
warm as he was, the air, which was then a little cold, struck to his
breast, caused a defluxion to fall upon his lungs, which threw him
into a violent fever, and confined him to his bed. His illness
increasing every day, and perceiving he had but a short time to
live, he thus addressed himself to his son Noureddin, who never
stirred from him during his whole sickness: My son, said he, I know
not whether I have made a good use of the riches Heaven has blessed
me with, but you see they are not able to save me from the hands of
death: the last thing I desire of you with my dying breath is, that
you would be mindful of the promise you made me concerning the Fair
Persian, and in this assurance I shall die content.

These were the vizier Khacan’s last words. He died a few moments
after, and left his family, the court, and the whole city, in great
affliction for his death. The king lamented him as a wise, zealous,
and faithful minister; and the whole city bewailed him as their
protector and benefactor. Never was there a funeral in Balsora
solemnized with greater pomp and magnificence; the viziers and emirs,
and in general all the grandees of the court, strove for the honour
of bearing his coffin, one after another, upon their shoulders, to
the place of burial; and both rich and poor accompanied him thither
with tears in their eyes.

Noureddin gave all the demonstrations of a sorrow equal to the loss
he had lately sustained, and lived a great while without ever seeing
any company: at last he admitted of a visit from an intimate friend
of his. His friend endeavoured to comfort him; and finding him
inclined to hear reason, he told him, that having done what was due
to the memory of his father, and fully satisfied all that decency
required of him, it was now high time to appear again in the world,
to converse with his friends, and maintain a character suitable to
his birth and merit. For, continued he, we should sin both against
the laws of nature and civil society, and be thought insensible, if
upon the death of our fathers we neglect to pay them what filial
love requires at our hands; but having once performed that duty, and
put it out of the power of any man to reproach us on that account,
we are obliged to return to our usual method of living. Dry up your
tears then, and re-assume that wonted air of gaiety, which always
inspires with joy those that have the honour of your conversation.

This advice seemed very reasonable. Noureddin was easily persuaded
to follow it; and if he had followed it with all the regularity it
required, he would certainly have avoided all the misfortunes that
afterwards befell him. He treated his friend very nobly; and when he
took his leave, Noureddin desired him to come the next day, and
bring three or four friends of their acquaintance. By this means he
insensibly fell into the society of about ten young men pretty near
his own age, with whom he spent his time in continual feasting and
entertainments; and scarce a day passed but he made every one of
them some considerable present.

Sometimes, to oblige his friends, Noureddin would send for the Fair
Persian, who, notwithstanding her obedience to his command, never
approved of his extravagant way of living, but often spoke her mind
freely. I question not, said she, but the vizier your father has
left you an ample fortune; but great as it may be, be not displeased
with your slave for telling you, that at this rate of living you
will quickly see an end of it. We may sometimes indeed treat our
friends, and be merry with them; but to make a daily practice of it,
is certainly the high road to ruin and destruction: for your own
honour and reputation, you would do better to follow the footsteps
of your deceased father, that in time you may rise to that dignity
by which he has acquired so much glory and renown.

Noureddin hearkened to the Fair Persian’s discourse with a smile:
and when she had done, My charmer, said he, with the same air of
mirth, say no more of that; let us talk of nothing but mirth and
pleasure. In my father’s lifetime I was always under restraint;
and I am now resolved to enjoy the liberty I so much sighed for
before his death. It is time enough for me to think of leading the
sober, regular life you talk of; and a man of my age ought to taste
the pleasures of youth.

What contributed still more to the ruin of Noureddin’s fortune,
was his unwillingness to reckon with his steward; for whenever he
brought in his accounts, he still sent him away without examining
them: Go, go, said he, I trust wholly to your honesty; only take
care to let me have wherewith to make merry.

You are the master, sir, replied he, and I but the steward; however,
you would do well to think upon the proverb, He that spends much,
and has but little, must at last insensibly be reduced to poverty.
You are not contented with keeping an extravagant table, but you
must lavish away your estate with both hands: and were your coffers
as large as mountains, they would not be sufficient to maintain you.
Begone, replied Noureddin; I want not your grave lessons; only take
care to provide good eating and drinking, and trouble your head no
farther about the rest.

In the mean time, Noureddin’s friends were constant guests at his
table, and never failed to take advantage of the easiness of his
temper. They praised and flattered him, extolling his most
indifferent actions: but, above all, they took particular care to
commend whatever belonged to him; and in this they found their
account. Sir, said one of them, I came the other day by your estate
that lies in such a place; nothing can be so magnificent or so
handsomely furnished as your house; and the garden belonging to it
is a paradise upon earth. I am very glad it pleases you, said
Noureddin; bring me pen, ink, and paper; without more words, it is
at your service; I make you a present of it. No sooner had others
commended one of his houses, baths, and public buildings erected for
the use of strangers, the yearly revenue of which was very
considerable, but he immediately gave them away. The Fair Persian
could not forbear letting him know how much injury he did himself:
but, instead of hearkening to her, he continued his extravagancies,
and, the first opportunity that offered, squandered away the little
he had left.

In short, Noureddin did nothing for a whole year but feast and make
merry, wasting and consuming, after a prodigal manner, the great
wealth that his predecessors, and the good vizier his father, had
with so much pains and care acquired and preserved.

The year was but just expired, when somebody one day knocked at the
hall door, where he and his friends were at dinner together by
themselves, having sent away the slaves, that they might enjoy a
greater liberty.

One of his friends offered to rise; but Noureddin, stepping before
him, opened the door himself. It seems it was the steward; and
Noureddin, going a little out of the hall to know his business, left
the door half open.

The friend that offered to rise from his seat, seeing it was the
steward, and being curious to know what he had to say to Noureddin,
placed himself between the hangings and the door, where he plainly
overheard the steward’s discourse to his master. Sir, said he, I
ask a thousand pardons for coming to disturb you in the height of
your pleasure; but what I have to say is of such importance, that I
thought myself bound in duty to acquaint you with it. I am come,
sir, to make up my last accounts, and to tell you, that what I all
along foresaw, and have often warned you of, is at last come to
pass. I have not the smallest piece left of all the sums I have
received from you for your expenses; the other funds you assigned me
are all exhausted. The farmers, and those that owe you rent, have
made it so plainly appear to me, that you have assigned over to
others what they held of you, that it is impossible for me to get
any more of them on your account. Here are my books; if you please,
examine them; and if you wish I should continue useful to you,
assign me other funds, or else give me leave to quit your service.
Noureddin was so astonished at his discourse, that he gave him no
answer.

The friend, who had been listening all this while, and had heard
every syllable of what the steward said, immediately came in, and
told the company what he had overheard. It is your business,
gentlemen, said he, to make your use of this caution; for my part, I
declare to you this is the last visit I design ever to make
Noureddin. Nay, replied they, if matters go thus, we have as little
business here as you; and for the future shall take care not to
trouble him with our company.

Noureddin returned presently after; yet, notwithstanding all his
efforts to carry it pleasantly to his guests, he could not dissemble
the matter; but they plainly perceived the truth of what they had
heard. He was scarce sat down in his place, but one of his friends
rose up: Sir, said he, I am sorry I cannot have the honour of
keeping you company any longer; and therefore I hope you will excuse
my rudeness in leaving you so soon. What urgent affair, replied
Noureddin, obliges you to be going so soon? My wife, sir, said he,
is brought to bed to-day; and, upon such an occasion, you know, a
husband’s company is always necessary. So, making a very low bow,
away he went. A minute afterwards a second took his leave, with
another excuse. The rest did the same, one after another, till at
last not one of those ten friends, that had hitherto kept Noureddin
company, was left in the room.

As soon as they were gone, Noureddin, little suspecting the
resolution they had formed never to see him again, went directly to
the Fair Persian’s apartment; to whom, in private, he related all
the steward had told him, and seemed extremely concerned at the ill
state of his affairs. Sir, said the Fair Persian to him, allow me to
say, you would never take my advice, but always managed your
concerns after your own way, and now you see the fatal consequence
of it. I find I was not mistaken when I presaged to what a miserable
condition you would bring yourself at last: but what afflicts me the
more is, that at present you do not see the worst of your
misfortunes. Whenever I presumed freely to impart my thoughts to
you, Let us be merry, said you, and improve the time that Fortune
offers us: perhaps she will not always be so prodigal in her
favours: but, was I now to blame in telling you that we are
ourselves the makers of our own fortunes by a prudent management of
them? You would not hearken to me, and I was forced to let you go
on, however reluctantly.

I must own, replied Noureddin, I was extremely in the wrong in not
following the advice that you, out of your admirable prudence, gave
me. It is true, I have spent my estate; but do you not consider, it
is among a chosen set of friends whom I have long known, and who, I
am persuaded, have more generosity and gratitude in them than to
abandon me in distress? Sir, replied the Fair Persian, if you have
nothing but the gratitude of your friends to depend on, your case is
desperate; for, believe me, that hope is ill-grounded, and you will
tell me so yourself in time.

To this Noureddin replied, Charming Persian, I have a better opinion
of my friends’ generosity than you: to-morrow I design to make a
visit to them all, before the usual time of their coming hither; and
you shall see me return with a round sum, that they will assist me
with. I am resolved to alter my way of living, and, with the money
they lend me, set up in some business.

Next morning Noureddin failed not to visit his ten friends, who
lived in the very same street. He knocked at the first door he came
at, where one of the richest of them lived. A slave came to the
door: but before he would open it, he asked who was there. Tell your
master, said he to the slave, it is Noureddin, the late vizier
Kahcan’s son. The slave opened the door, and showed him into a
hall, where he left him, to go tell his master, who was in an inner
room, that Noureddin was come to wait on him. Noureddin! cried he,
in a disdainful tone, loud enough for Noureddin to hear it, with
surprise; go, tell him I am not at home; and, whenever he comes
hither, be sure you give him the same answer. The slave came back,
and told Noureddin he thought his master was within, but he was
mistaken.

Noureddin came away in the greatest confusion. Ah! base, ungrateful
wretch! cried he, to treat me so to-day after the vows and
protestations of friendship that he made me yesterday. He went to
another door, but that friend ordered his slaves also to say he was
gone out. He had the same answer at the third; and, in short, all
the rest denied themselves, though every one was at home at the same
time.

Noureddin now began in earnest to reflect with himself, and see the
folly of relying upon the protestations of attachment that his false
friends had solemnly made him in the time of his prosperity, when he
could treat them so sumptuously, and load them with favours. It is
very true, said he to himself, with tears in his eyes, that a
fortunate man, as I was, may be compared to a tree laden with fruit,
which, as long as there is any on its boughs, people will be
crowding round, and gathering; but, as soon as it is stripped of
all, they immediately leave it, and go to another. He smothered his
passion as much as possible white he was abroad; but no sooner was
he got home, than he gave a loose to his affliction, and discovered
it to the Fair Persian.

The Fair Persian, seeing him so extremely concerned, fancied he had
not found his friends so ready to assist him as he expected. Well,
sir, said she, are you now convinced of the truth of what I told
you? Ah! cried he, my dear, thou hast been too true a prophetess;
for not one of them would know me, see me, or speak to me. Who could
ever have believed, that persons so highly obliged to me, and on
whom I have spent my estate, could have used me so barbarously? I am
distracted; and I fear committing some action unworthy myself, in
the deplorable and desperate condition I am reduced to, without the
assistance of your prudent advice. Sir, replied the Fair Persian, I
see no other way of supporting yourself in your misfortunes, but
selling off your slaves and furniture, and living on the money they
produce, till Heaven points out some other means to deliver you from
your present misery.

Noureddin was very loth to make use of this expedient; but what
could he do in the necessitous circumstances he was in? He first
sold off his slaves, those unprofitable mouths, which would have
been a greater expense to him than in his present condition he could
bear. He lived on the money for some time; and when it was all
spent, he ordered his goods to be carried into the market-place,
where they were sold for half their worth, though there were among
them several valuable things that cost immense sums. Upon this he
lived a considerable time; but that supply failing at last, he had
nothing left by which he could raise any more money, of which he
complained to the Fair Persian in the most sorrowful expressions.

Noureddin little expected the answer this prudent woman made him.
Sir, said she, I am your slave: and you know that the late vizier
your father gave ten thousand pieces of gold for me. I know I am a
little sunk in value since that time; but I believe I shall sell for
pretty near that sum. Let me entreat you then instantly to carry me
to the market, and expose me to sale, and with the money that you
get for me, which will be very considerable, you may turn merchant
in some city where you are not known, and by that means find a way
of living, if not in splendour, yet with happiness and content.

Lovely and adorable Persian, cried Noureddin, is it possible you can
entertain such a thought? Have I given you such slender proofs of my
love, that you should think me capable of so base an action? But
suppose me so vile a wretch, could I do it without being guilty of
perjury, after the oath I have taken to my late father never to sell
you? I could sooner die than break it, and part with you, whom I
love infinitely beyond myself: though, by the unreasonable proposal
you have made me, you show me that your love is by no means
reciprocal.

Sir, replied the Fair Persian, I am convinced that your passion for
me is as violent as you say it is; and Heaven, who knows with what
reluctance I have made this proposal, that makes you think so hardly
of me, is my witness, that mine is as great as yours; but to silence
your reasons at once, I need only bid you remember, that necessity
has no law. I love you to that degree, that it is impossible for you
to love me more; and be assured, that to what master soever I shall
belong, my love for you will always continue the same; and if you
are ever able to redeem me, as I hope you may, it will be the
greatest pleasure in the world to be restored to you again. I
confess it is a fatal and cruel necessity to which we are driven;
but I see no other way of freeing ourselves from the misery that
involves us both.

Noureddin, who was convinced of the truth of what the Fair Persian
had said, and that there was no other way of avoiding a shameful
poverty, was forced to yield to her proposal. Accordingly he led her
to the market where the women slaves are exposed to sale, with a
regret that cannot easily be expressed. He applied himself to a
broker, named Hagi Hassan. Hagi Hassan, said he, here is a slave
that I have a mind to sell; prithee see what they will give for her.

Hagi Hassan desired Noureddin and the Fair Persian to walk into the
room; and when she pulled off the veil that covered her face, Sir,
said Hagi Hassan to Noureddin, in a great surprise, if I am not
mistaken, this is the slave your father, the late vizier, gave ten
thousand pieces of gold for. Noureddin assured him it was the same;
and Hagi Hassan gave him some hopes of selling her at a good rate,
and promised to use all his art to raise her price as high as he
could.

Hagi Hassan and Noureddin went out of the room; and Hagi Hassan
locked the Fair Persian in. He went immediately after the merchants;
but they being busy in buying slaves that came from different
countries, Greeks, Franks, Africans, Tartars, and others, he was
forced to stay till the market was done. When the sale was over, and
the greatest part of them were got together again, My masters, said
he to them, with an air of gaiety in his looks and actions, every
thing that is round is not a nut: every thing that is long is not a
fig; all that is red is not flesh, and all eggs are not fresh: it is
true you have seen and bought a great many slaves in your lives, but
you never yet saw one comparable to her I am going to tell you of.
She is the very pearl of slaves. Come, follow me, and you shall see
her yourselves, and judge at what rate I shall cry her.

The merchants followed Hagi Hassan into the apartment where the Fair
Persian was; and as soon as they beheld her, they were so surprised
at her beauty, that at the first word they unanimously agreed that
four thousand pieces of gold was the very lowest price they could
set upon her. The merchants left the room; and Hagi Hassan, who came
out with them, without going any farther, proclaimed with a loud
voice. ‘Four thousand pieces of gold for the Persian slave.’

None of the merchants had yet offered any thing, and they were
consulting together about what they might afford to give for her,
when the vizier Saouy appeared. Perceiving Noureddin in the market,
said he to himself, Noureddin is certainly still making money of his
goods (for he knew he had exposed them to sale,) and is come hither
to buy a slave with it. He advanced forward just as Hagi Hassan
began to proclaim a second time, ‘Four thousand pieces of gold for
the Persian slave.’

The vizier Saouy, who concluded by the high price, that the slave
must be extraordinarily beautiful, was very desirous to see her; so
spurring his horse forward, he rode up to Hagi Hassan, who was
surrounded by the merchants. Open the door, said he, and let me see
the slave. It was not the custom to show a slave to a particular
person after the merchants had seen her and were treating for her;
but none of them durst dispute their right with the vizier: and Hagi
Hassan was obliged to open the door, and made a sign to the Fair
Persian to come forward, that Saouy might have a sight of her,
without alighting from his horse.

The vizier was astonished at the sight of so beautiful a slave; and
knowing the broker’s name, (having formerly dealt with him,) Hagi
Hassan, said he, is it not at four thousand pieces of gold that you
cry her? Yes, sir, answered he; the merchants just now agreed that I
should put her up at that price. I wait their advance on it; and I
question not but they will give a great deal more.

If nobody offers more, I will give that sum, replied Saouy, looking
upon the merchants at the same time with a countenance that forbad
them to advance any more. He was so universally dreaded, that nobody
durst speak a word, even to complain of his encroaching upon their
privilege.

The vizier Saouy having staid some time, and finding none of the
merchants outbid him, What do you stay for? said he to Hagi Hassan.
Go, look after the seller, and strike a bargain with him at four
thousand pieces of gold, or inquire if he demands more; not knowing
yet the slave belonged to Noureddin.

Hagi Hassan, having locked the chamber door, went to confer with
Noureddin. Sir, said he to him, I am very sorry to bring you the ill
news of your slave’s being just going to be sold for nothing. How
so? replied Noureddin. Why, sir, said Hagi Hassan, you must know,
that the business at first went on well; for as soon as the
merchants had seen your slave, they ordered me, without hesitation,
to cry her at four thousand pieces of gold: accordingly, I cried her
at that price, and presently the vizier Saouy came, and his presence
has stopped the mouths of all the merchants, who seemed inclinable
to raise her, at least to the same price your deceased father gave
for her. Saouy will give no more than four thousand pieces; and it
is much against my inclination that I am come to tell you the
despicable price he offers. The slave indeed is your own; but I will
never advise you to part with her upon those terms, since you and
every body else are sensible of her being worth infinitely more;
besides, he is base enough to contrive a way to trick you out of the
money.

Hagi Hassan, replied Noureddin, I am highly obliged to thee for thy
advice; do not think I will ever sell my slave to any enemy of our
family: my necessities, indeed, are at present very great; but I
would sooner die in the utmost poverty than consent to the
delivering her up to him. I have only one thing to beg of thee, who
art skilful in all the turns and shifts of sale, that thou wouldst
put me in a way to prevent the sale of her.

Sir, said Hagi Hassan, there is nothing more easy: you must pretend,
that, being in a violent passion with your slave, you swore to
expose her in the market; and for the sake of your oath, you have
now brought her hither, without any intention of selling her. This
will satisfy every body, and Saouy will have nothing to say against
it. Come along with me, then; and just as I am presenting her to
Saouy, as if it were by your own consent, pull her to you, give her
two or three blows, and send her home. I thank thee for thy counsel,
said Noureddin: and thou shalt see I will make use of it.

Hagi Hassan went back to the chamber; and having in two words
acquainted the Fair Persian with their design, that she might not be
surprised at it, he took her by the hand, and led her to the vizier
Saouy, who was still on horseback at the door. Sir, said he, here is
the slave; she is yours; take her.

The words were scarce out of Hagi Hassan’s mouth but Noureddin,
catching hold of the Fair Persian, pulled her to him, and giving her
a box on the ear, Come hither, impertinence, said he, and get you
home again; for though your ill humour obliged me to swear I should
bring you hither, yet I never intended to sell you. I have business
for you to do yet; and it will be time enough to part with you when
I have nothing else left.

This action of Noureddin put the vizier Saouy into a violent
passion. Miserable debauchee, cried he, wouldst thou have me believe
thou hast any thing else left to make money of but thy slave? And at
the same instant, spurring his horse directly against him,
endeavoured to have carried off the Fair Persian. Noureddin, nettled
to the quick at the affront the vizier had put upon him, quitted the
Fair Persian, and laying hold of his horse’s bridle, made him run
two or three paces backwards. Vile dotard, said he to the vizier, I
would tear thy soul out of thy body this moment, were it not out of
respect for the crowd of people here present.

The vizier Saouy being loved by nobody, but hated by all, there was
not one among them but was pleased to see Noureddin mortify him a
little; and by signs they gave him to understand, that he might
revenge himself upon him as much as he pleased, for nobody would
interfere in their quarrel.

Saouy endeavoured to make Noureddin quit the bridle; but he being a
lusty, vigorous man, and encouraged by those that stood by, pulled
him off his horse, in the middle of a brook, gave him a thousand
blows, and dashed his head against the stones, till it was all over
blood. The slaves that waited upon the vizier would have drawn their
scimitars, and have fallen upon Noureddin, but the merchants
interposing, prevented them. What do you mean? said they to him; do
you not see that one is a vizier, the other a vizier’s son? Let
them fight it out between themselves; perhaps they will be
reconciled one time or other: whereas, if you had killed Noureddin,
your master, with all his greatness, could not have been able to
protect you against the law.

Noureddin, having given over beating the vizier Saouy, left him in
the middle of the brook; and taking the Fair Persian, marched home
with her, attended by the people, with shouts and acclamations for
the actions he had performed.

The vizier Saouy, cruelly bruised with the blows he had received,
made shift to get up, by the assistance of his slaves, and had the
mortification to see himself besmeared with blood and dirt. He
leaned upon the shoulders of two slaves, and in that condition went
straight to the palace, in the sight of all the people, with greater
confusion, because nobody pitied him. As soon as he reached the
king’s apartment, he began to cry out, and call for justice, after
a lamentable manner. The king ordered him to be admitted; and as
soon as he came, he asked him who it was that had abused and put him
into that miserable pickle. Sire, cried Saouy, it is the favour of
your majesty, and being admitted into your sacred counsels, that has
occasioned me to have been so barbarously treated. Say no more of
that, replied the king; only let me hear the whole story simply as
it is, and who the offender is; and if he is in the wrong, you may
depend upon it he shall be severely punished.

Sire, said Saouy then, telling the whole matter to his own
advantage, having an occasion for a cook-maid, I went to the market
of women slaves to buy me one: when I came thither, there was a
slave just cried at four thousand pieces of gold: I ordered them to
bring the slave before me; and I think my eyes never did nor will
behold a more beautiful creature. I had no sooner examined her
beauty with the highest satisfaction, but I immediately asked to
whom she belonged; and upon inquiry I found that Noureddin, son to
the late vizier Khacan, had the disposing of her.

Sire, your majesty may remember, that about two or three years ago
you gave that vizier ten thousand pieces of gold, strictly charging
him to buy you a slave with it. The money, indeed, was laid out upon
this very slave; but instead of bringing her to your majesty,
thinking his son deserved her better, he made him a present of her.
Noureddin, since his father’s death, having wasted his whole
fortune in riot and feasting, has nothing left but this slave, which
he at last resolved to part with, and she was to be sold in his
name. I sent for him; and without mentioning any thing of his
father’s prevarication, or rather treachery, to your majesty, I in
the civilest manner said to him, Noureddin, the merchants, I
perceive, have put your slave up at four thousand pieces of gold;
and I question not, but in emulation of each other, they will raise
the price considerably; let me have her for the four thousand
pieces; I am going to buy her for the king, our lord and master:
this will be a handsome opportunity of making your court to him; and
his favour will be worth a great deal more than the merchants can
propose to give you.

Instead of returning me a civil answer, the insolent wretch,
beholding me with a fierce air, Decrepit villain, said he, I would
rather give my slave to a Jew for nothing, than to thee for money.
Noureddin, replied I, without passion, though I had some reason to
be a little warm, you do not consider, that in talking at this rate
you affront the king, who raised both your father and me to the
honours we have enjoyed.

This admonition, instead of softening him, only provoked him to a
higher degree: so that, falling upon me like a madman, without
regard to my age or rank, he pulled me off my horse, beat me as long
as he could stand over me, and has put me into this miserable plight
your majesty sees me in. I beseech you to consider, that upon your
account I have been so publicly affronted. At the end of these words
he held down his head and turned away, to shed a shower of tears.

The abused king, highly incensed against Noureddin by this relation,
full of malice and artifice, discovered by his countenance the
violence of his anger; and turning to the captain of his guards, who
stood near him, Take forty of your soldiers, said he, and
immediately go plunder Noureddin’s house; and having ordered it to
be razed to the ground, bring him and his slave along with you to me.

The captain of the guards was not gone out of the king’s presence,
when an officer belonging to the court, who overheard the order that
had been given, got before him. His name was Sangiar; and he had
been formerly a slave of the vizier Khacan, who had introduced him
at court, where by degrees be raised himself.

Sangiar, full of gratitude for his old master, and affection for
Noureddin, whom he remembered a child, and being no stranger to
Saouy’s hatred to Khacan’s family, could not hear the order
without concern. This action of Noureddin’s, said he to himself,
may not be altogether so black as Saouy has represented it. He has
prejudiced the king against him, who will certainly put him to
death, without allowing him time to justify himself. He made so much
haste to Noureddin’s house, as to get thither soon enough to
acquaint him with what had passed at court, and give him time to
provide for his own and the Fair Persian’s safety. He knocked so
violently at the door, that Noureddin, who had been a great while
without any servant, ran immediately to open it. My dear lord, said
Sangiar, here is no more safety for you in Balsora; you must lose no
time, but depart hence this moment.

How so? replied Noureddin. What is the reason I must be gone so
soon? Make haste away, sir, said Sangiar, and take your slave with
you. In short, Saouy has been just now acquainting the king, after
his own way of telling it, all that passed between you and him; and
the captain of the guard will be here in an instant, with forty
soldiers, to seize you and the Fair Persian. Take these forty pieces
of gold to assist you in finding out some other place of safety. I
would give you more if I had it about me. Excuse my not staying any
longer; I leave you with great reluctance; but it is for the good of
us both. I have so much interest with the captain of the guards,
that he will take no notice of me. Sangiar gave Noureddin but just
time to thank him, and away he went.

Noureddin presently acquainted the Fair Persian with the absolute
necessity of their going that moment. She only stayed to put on her
veil, and then they both stole out of the house together, and were
so lucky as not only to get clear of the city without the least
notice being taken of their escape, but also safely to arrive at the
mouth of the Euphrates, which was not far off, where they embarked
in a vessel that lay ready to weigh anchor.

They were no sooner on shipboard, but the captain came on deck
amongst his passengers. Children, said he to them, are you all here?
have any of you any more business to do in the city, or have you
left any thing behind you? They were all there, they answered him,
and ready; so that he might sail as soon as he pleased.

When Noureddin came on board, the first question he asked was,
whither the ship was bound? and being told for Bagdad, he rejoiced
at it. The captain, having weighed anchor, set sail; and the vessel,
with a very favourable wind, lost sight of Balsora.

Let us now see how matters went at Balsora, while Noureddin and the
Fair Persian made their escape from the fury of the enraged king.

The captain of the guards came to Noureddin’s house, and knocked
at the door; but nobody coming to open it, he ordered his soldiers
to break it open, who immediately obeyed him, and rushed in. They
searched every hold and comer of the house; but neither he nor the
Fair Persian was to be found. The captain of the guards made them
inquire of the neighbours; and he himself asked if they had seen
them lately. It was all in vain; for if they had seen him go out of
his house, so universally beloved was Noureddin, that not one of
them would have said the least word to his prejudice. While they
were rifling the house, and levelling it to the ground, he went to
acquaint the king with the news. Look for them, said he, every
where; for I am resolved to have them.

The captain of the guards made a second search after them, and the
king dismissed the vizier Saouy with honour. Go home, said he to
him; trouble yourself no farther to punish Noureddin: I will revenge
his insolence.

Without delay the king ordered to be proclaimed throughout the whole
city a reward of a thousand pieces of gold for any person that
should apprehend Noureddin and the Fair Persian, with a severe
punishment upon whoever should conceal them. But after all his pains
and diligence, no tidings could be heard of them; and the vizier
Saouy had only the comfort of seeing the king espouse his quarrel.

In the mean time, Noureddin and the Fair Persian, after a prosperous
voyage, landed safe at Bagdad. As soon as the captain came within
sight of that city, pleased that his voyage was at an end, Rejoice,
my children, cried he to the passengers, yonder is that great and
wonderful city, where there is a perpetual concourse of people from
all parts of the world: there you shall meet with innumerable
crowds, and never feel the extremity of cold in winter, nor the
excess of heat in summer, but enjoy an eternal spring with all it
flowers, and the delicious fruits of autumn. When the vessel came to
anchor, a little below the city, the passengers went ashore, each to
their respective place of abode. Noureddin gave the captain five
pieces of gold for his passage, and went ashore also with the Fair
Persian; but being a perfect stranger in Bagdad, he was at a loss
for a lodging. They rambled a considerable time along by the gardens
that bordered on the Tigris; and keeping close to one of them that
was enclosed with a very fine long wall at the end of it, they
turned into a street well paved, where they perceived a garden-door,
and a charming fountain near it.

The door, which was very magnificent, happened to be shut, but the
porch was open; in which there was a sofa on each side. This is a
very convenient place for us, said Noureddin to the Fair Persian;
night comes on apace: and though we have eaten nothing since our
landing, I am for passing the night here, and to-morrow we shall
have time enough to look for a lodging: what say you to it? --Sir,
replied the Fair Persian, you know your wishes are mine; let us go
no farther, since you are willing to stay here. Each of them having
drank a draught of water at the fountain, they laid themselves down
upon one of these sofas; and after a little chat, being invited by
the agreeable murmur of the water, they fell fast asleep.

The garden belonged to the caliph: and in the middle of it there was
a pavilion, called the Pavilion of Pictures, because its chief
ornaments were pictures, after the Persian manner, drawn by the most
celebrated painters in Persia, whom the caliph had sent for on
purpose. The stately hall within this pavilion was lighted by
fourscore windows, with a lustre in each: but these were only
lighted when the caliph came thither to spend the evening; and the
weather was so very calm, that not a breath of air was stirring.
Then they made a glorious illumination, and could be seen at a great
distance in the country on that side, and by great part of the city.

There was but one person that had the charge of this fine garden;
and the office was at this time held by a very aged officer, named
Scheich Ibrahim, whom the caliph himself, for some important
service, put into that employment, with strict charge not to let all
sorts of people in, but especially to suffer nobody either to sit or
lie down on the sofas at the outward door, that they might always be
clean; and whenever he found any body there, to punish them severely.

Some business had obliged this officer to go abroad, and he was not
yet returned. When he came back, there was just daylight enough for
him to discern two persons asleep upon one of the sofas, with both
their heads under a piece of linen, to defend them from the gnats.
Very well, said Scheich Ibrahim to himself, these people disobey the
caliph’s orders: but I will take care to teach them better
manners. Upon this he opened the door very softly, and a moment
after returned with a swinging cane in his hand, and his sleeve
tucked up to the elbow: he was just going to lay on them both with
all his might, but withholding his arm, he began to reason with
himself after this manner: Thou wast going to strike, without
reflection, these people, who perhaps are strangers, destitute of a
lodging, and utterly ignorant of the caliph’s order: so that it
would be advisable to know first who they are. Upon this he gently
lifted up the linen that covered their heads, and was astonished to
see a young man so well shaped, and a young woman so beautiful; he
then waked Noureddin, by pulling him softly by the feet.

Noureddin, presently lifting up his head, and seeing an old man with
a long white beard standing at his feet, got up, and throwing
himself upon his knees and taking his hand, kissed it. Good father,
said he, Heaven preserve you! What do you want, my son? replied
Scheich Ibrahim; who are you, and whence came you? We are strangers
newly arrived, answered Noureddin, and we would fain tarry here till
to-morrow. This is not a proper place for you, said Scheich Ibrahim;
come in with me, and I will find one fitter for you to sleep in than
this; and the sight of the garden which is very fine will please
you, when you see it to-morrow by day-light. Is this garden your
own? said Noureddin. Yes, replied Scheich Ibrahim, smiling; it is an
inheritance left me by my father; pray walk in, for I am sure you
will not repent seeing it.

Noureddin rose up to thank Scheich Ibrahim for the civility he had
shown them; and afterwards the Fair Persian and he went into the
garden. Scheich Ibrahim locked the door, and going before, led them
to a spot from whence, at one view, they might see the disposition,
grandeur, and beauty of the whole garden.

Noureddin had seen very fine gardens in Balsora, but never any
comparable to this. Having satisfied his curiosity, as he was
walking in one of the walks, he turned about to the officer that was
with him, and asked him what his name was. As soon as he told him it
was Scheich Ibrahim, Scheich Ibrahim, said he to him, I must confess
this is a charming garden indeed. Heaven send you long to enjoy the
pleasures of it! we cannot sufficiently thank you for the favour you
have done us by showing us a place so well worth seeing; however, it
is but just that we should make you some amends for your kindness:
here are two pieces of gold; take them, and get us something to eat,
that we may be merry together.

At the sight of the two pieces of gold, Scheich Ibrahim, who was a
great admirer of that metal, laughed in his sleeve: he took them,
and leaving Noureddin and the Fair Persian by themselves, went to
provide what was necessary, for he was alone. Said he to himself
with great joy, These are generous people; I should have done very
wrong, if, through imprudence, I had ill-treated and driven them
away. A tenth part of the money will suffice to treat them; and the
rest I will keep for my pains.

While Scheich Ibrahim was gone to fetch something for his own
supper, as well as for his guests, Noureddin and the Fair Persian
walked up and down the garden, till at last they came to the
pavilion of pictures that was in the middle of it. They stood awhile
to admire its wonderful structure, size, and loftiness; and after
taking a full view of it on every side, they went up a great many
steps of fine white marble, to the hall-door, which they found
locked.

They were but just got to the bottom of the steps as Scheich Ibrahim
returned loaded with provisions. Scheich Ibrahim, said Noureddin, in
great surprise, did you not tell us that this was your garden? I
did, replied Scheich Ibrahim, and do so still. And does this
magnificent pavilion also belong to you? said Noureddin. Scheich
Ibrahim was staggered at this unexpected question. If, said he to
himself, I should say it is none of mine, they will ask me how I can
be master of the garden, and not of the pavilion. As he had made
them believe the garden was his, he said the same of the pavilion.
My son, said he, the pavilion is not distinct from the garden, but
they both belong to me. If so, said Noureddin, since you invite us
to be your guests to-night, do us the favour to show us the inside
of it; for if we may judge by the outward appearance, it must
certainly be extraordinarily magnificent.

It would have been a great piece of incivility in Scheich Ibrahim to
have refused Noureddin that favour, after what he had already done
for him: moreover, he considered that the caliph not having given
him notice, according to his usual custom, it was likely he would
not be there that night, and therefore resolved to treat his guests,
and sup with them in that room. He laid the provisions upon the
first step, while he went to his apartment for the key: he soon
returned with a light and opened the door.

Noureddin and the Fair Persian entered the hall; and finding it so
surprising, were never tired with admiring the beauty and richness
of the place. Indeed, without saying any thing of the pictures,
which were admirably well drawn, the sofas were very noble and
costly; and besides lustres that were fixed to every window, there
was between each bar a silver arm, with a wax candle in it.
Noureddin could not behold these glorious objects without
recollecting his former splendour, and sighing.

In the mean time Scheich Ibrahim was getting ready; and the cloth
being laid upon a sofa, and every thing in order, Noureddin, the
Fair Persian, and he, sat down and eat together. When supper was
done, and they had washed their hands, Noureddin opened the
casement, and calling the Fair Persian to him, Come hither, my dear,
said he, and with me admire the charming prospect and beauty of the
garden by moonlight; nothing can be more agreeable. She came to him;
and they both enjoyed the view; while Scheich Ibrahim was busy in
taking away the cloth.

When Scheich Ibrahim came to his guests again, Noureddin asked him
whether he had any liquor to treat them with. What liquor would you
have! replied Scheich Ibrahim: sherbet? I have the best in the
world; but sherbet, you know, my son, is never drank after supper.

I know that very well, said Noureddin: It is not sherbet, but
another sort of liquor that we ask you for: and I am surprised at
your not understanding me. It is wine then you mean, said Scheich
Ibrahim. You guess right, replied Noureddin; and if you have any,
oblige us with a bottle: you know a bottle after supper is a very
proper companion to spend the hours with till bed-time.

Heaven defend me from keeping wine in my house, cried Scheich
Ibrahim, and from ever coming to a place where any is! A man who,
like me, has been a pilgrimage four times to Mecca, has renounced
wine for ever.

You would do us a singular kindness, said Noureddin, in getting a
little for our own drinking; and if it be not too much trouble, I
will put you in a way how you may do it, without going into an inn,
or so much as laying your hand upon the vessel that contains it.
Upon that condition I will do it, replied Scheich Ibrahim; only let
me know what I am to do.

Why, then, said Noureddin to him, we just now saw an ass tied to the
entrance of your garden, which certainly must be yours, and which
you may make use of in this extremity. Here are two pieces of gold
more: take them, and lead your ass with the panniers to the next
inn; you may stand at as great a distance as you please; do but give
something to the first person that comes by, and desire him to go
with your ass to the inn, and get two pitchers of wine: put one in
one pannier, and an other in another, which he must pay for out of
the money you give him, and so let him bring the ass back to you:
you will have nothing to do but to drive the beast hither before
you; we will take the wine out of the panniers. By this means you
will do nothing that will give you any scruple.

The two last pieces of gold that Scheich Ibrahim was going to
receive wrought wonderfully upon his mind. Ah! my son, cried he,
after Noureddin had done speaking, you have an excellent
contrivance; and had it not been for your invention, I should never
have thought of this way of getting you some wine without any
scruple of conscience. Away he went to execute the orders, which he
did in a little time; and, upon his return, Noureddin went down the
stairs, and taking the pitchers out of the panniers, carried them
into the hall.

Scheich Ibrahim, having led the ass back to the place from whence he
took him, came back again. Scheich Ibrahim, said Noureddin to him,
we cannot enough thank you for the trouble we have already given
you, but we want something yet. What is that, replied Scheich: what
more service can I do you? We have no cups to drink out of, said
Noureddin; and a little fruit, if you had any, would be very
acceptable. Do but say what you have a mind to, replied Scheich
Ibrahim, and you shall have every thing to your heart’s content.

Down went Scheich Ibrahim, and in a short time spread a table for
them with beautiful porcelain dishes, full of all sorts of delicious
fruits, besides gold and silver cups to drink out of; and having
asked them if they wanted any thing else, he withdrew, though they
pressed him earnestly to stay.

Noureddin and the Fair Persian sat down again, and drank each a cup
a-piece. They were mightily pleased with the wine. Well, my dear,
said Noureddin to the Fair Persian, are we not the most fortunate
persons in the world, after so many dangers, to meet with so
charming and agreeable a place? Let us be merry, and think no more
on the hardships of our voyage. Can my happiness be greater in this
world, than to have you on one side of me, and my glass on the
other? They drank freely, and diverted themselves with agreeable
conversation, each singing a song.

Both having very good voices, but especially the Fair Persian, their
singing attracted Scheich Ibrahim, who had stood hearkening a great
while on the steps, without discovering himself. He could contain
himself no longer, but thrusting his head in at the door, Courage,
sir, said he to Noureddin, whom he took to be quite drunk, I am glad
to see you so pleased.

Ah! Scheich Ibrahim, cried Noureddin, turning to him, you are a
glorious man, and we are extremely obliged to you. We dare not ask
you to drink a cup; but walk in; come, sit down, and let us have the
honour at least of your company. Go on, go on, said Scheich Ibrahim;
the pleasure of hearing your songs is sufficient for me. Upon this
he immediately retired.

The Fair Persian perceiving Scheich Ibrahim, through one of the
windows, standing upon the steps without the door, told Noureddin of
it. Sir, said she, you see what an aversion he has for wine; yet I
question not in the least to make him drink some, if you will do as
I would have you. Noureddin asked her what it was. Do but say the
word, replied he, and I am ready to do what you please. Prevail with
him then only to come in, and bear us company; some time after fill
up a bumper, and give it him; if he refuses it, drink it yourself,
pretend to be asleep, and leave the rest to me.

Noureddin understood the Fair Persian’s design, and called to
Scheich Ibrahim, who came again to the door. Scheich Ibrahim, said
he, we are your guests; you have entertained us in the most obliging
manner in the world, and will you now refuse our solicitations to
honour us with your company? We do not ask you to drink, but only
the favour of seeing you.

Scheich Ibrahim being at last prevailed upon, came into the hall,
and sat down upon the edge of a sofa that stood nearest to the door.
You do not sit well there, said Noureddin, and we cannot have the
honour of seeing you; pray come nearer, and sit you down by the
lady; she will like it much. I will obey you, replied Scheich
Ibrahim; so coming forward, simpering, to think he should be seated
near so beautiful a creature, he placed himself at some distance
from the Fair Persian. Noureddin desired a song of her, in return
for the honour that Scheich Ibrahim had done them; and she sung one
that charmed him.

When the Fair Persian had ended her song, Noureddin poured out a cup
of wine, and presented it to Scheich Ibrahim, Scheich Ibrahim, said
he, I entreat you drink this to our healths. Sir, replied he,
starting back, as if he abhorred the very sight of the wine, I
beseech you to excuse me; I have already told you that I have
forsworn the use of wine these many years. Then since positively you
will not drink our healths, said Noureddin, give me leave to drink
yours.

While Noureddin was drinking, the Fair Persian cut half an apple,
and presented it to Scheich Ibrahim. Though you refused drinking,
said she, yet I believe you will not refuse tasting this apple; it
is very excellent. Scheich Ibrahim had no power to refuse it from so
fair a hand, but taking it with a very low bow, put it in his mouth.
She said a great many pleasant things upon the occasion; and
Noureddin, falling back upon the sofa, pretended to fall fast
asleep. The Fair Persian presently advanced towards Scheich Ibrahim,
and speaking in a low voice, Look at him, said she; thus, in all our
merry parties he constantly serves me; and no sooner has he drank a
cup or two, but he falls asleep, and leaves me alone; but I hope you
will have the goodness to keep me company till he awakes.

At this the Fair Persian took a cup, and filling it with wine,
offered it to Scheich Ibrahim. Here, said she, drink off this to my
health; I am going to pledge you. Scheich Ibrahim made a great many
difficulties, and begged her to excuse him from drinking: but she
pressed him so, that, overcome by her charms and entreaties, he took
the cup, and drank off every drop of the wine.

The good old man loved a cheering cup in his heart, but was ashamed
to drink among strangers. He often went to the tavern in private, as
many other people do; and he did not take the precaution Noureddin
recommended, but went directly to an inn, where he was well known
(night serving him instead of a cloak), and saved the money that
Noureddin had ordered him to give the messenger that was to have
gone for it.

While Scheich Ibrahim was eating the half apple after his draught,
the Fair Persian filled him out another, which he received with less
difficulty than the former, but made none at all at the third. In
short, a fourth was drank before Noureddin started up from his
pretended sleep; and bursting out into a violent fit of laughter,
and looking upon him, Ha! ha! said he, Scheich Ibrahim, have I
caught you at last? Did you not tell me you had forsworn wine, and
now you have drank it all up from me.

Scheich Ibrahim, not expecting to be surprised after that manner,
blushed a little; however, that did not spoil his draught; but when
he had done, Sir, said he to Noureddin, laughing, if there is any
crime in what I have done, it lies at this fair lady’s door, not
mine; for who could possibly resist so many charms?

The Fair Persian, who perfectly understood Noureddin, took Scheich
Ibrahim’s part. Let him talk, said she: Scheich Ibrahim, take no
notice of him, but let us drink on and be merry. A while after,
Noureddin filled out a cup for himself and the Fair Persian; but
when Scheich Ibrahim saw that Noureddin had forgot him in his turn,
he took his cup, and presenting it to the Fair Persian, Madam, said
he, do you pretend I cannot drink as well as you?

At these words of Scheich Ibrahim, Noureddin and the Fair Persian
were ready to split their sides with laughing. Noureddin poured him
out some wine, and they sat laughing, chatting, and drinking, till
pretty near midnight. About that hour the Fair Persian began to take
notice that there was but one candle upon the table. Scheich
Ibrahim, said she to the good old officer, you have afforded us but
one candle, when there are so many wax lights yonder; pray do us the
favour to light some of them, that we may see a little better what
we are doing.

Scheich Ibrahim, making use of the liberty that wine inspires when
it gets into the head, and not caring to be interrupted in his
discourse with Noureddin, bade the Fair Persian light them herself.
It is fitter for a young person like you to do it, said he, than for
me; but be sure not to light above five or six, for that is enough.
Up rose the Fair Persian immediately, and taking a wax candle in her
hand, lighted it with that which stood upon the table; and, without
any regard to Scheich Ibrahim’s order, lighted up the whole
fourscore.

By and by, while Scheich Ibrahim was entertaining the Fair Persian
with some other discourse, Noureddin took his turn to desire him to
light up some of the candles in the lustres, not taking notice that
all the wax lights were already in a blaze. Certainly, replied
Scheich Ibrahim, you must be very lazy, or less vigorous than I am,
that you are not able to light them yourself: get you gone, and
light them; but be sure you light no more than three. To work he
went; but instead of that number, he lighted them all, and opened
the shutters of the fourscore windows, before Scheich Ibrahim, who
was deeply engaged with the Fair Persian, knew any thing of the
matter.

The caliph Haroun Alraschid being not yet gone to bed, was in a room
at his palace by the river Tigris, from whence he could command a
view both of the garden and pavilion. He accidentally opened the
casement, and was extremely surprised at seeing the pavilion
illuminated; and at first by the greatness of the light, thought the
city was on fire. The grand vizier Giafar was still with him, who
only waited for his going to rest, and then designed to go home too.
The caliph, in a great rage, called the vizier to him. Careless
vizier, said he, come hither, come hither; look upon the pavilion of
pictures, and tell me the reason of its being illuminated at this
hour, now I am not there.

The grand vizier Giafar, upon this news, fell into a violent
trembling, fearing something else was the matter: but when he came
nearer, and with his own eyes saw the truth of what the caliph had
told him, he was more alarmed than before. Some excuse must be made
to appease the caliph’s anger. Commander of the true believers,
said he, all that I can say to your majesty about this matter is,
that some five or six days ago Scheich Ibrahim came to acquaint me,
that he had a design to assemble the ministers of his mosque, to
assist at a ceremony he was ambitious of performing in your
majesty’s auspicious reign. I asked him if I could be any way
serviceable to him in this affair; upon which he entreated me to get
leave of your majesty to perform the ceremony in the pavilion. I
sent him away with leave to hold the assembly, telling him I would
take care to acquaint your majesty with it; and I ask pardon for
having quite forgotten it Scheich Ibrahim, continued he, has
certainly made choice of this day for the ceremony; and after
treating the ministers of his mosque, he was willing to indulge them
with the sight of this illumination.

Giafar, said the caliph, with a tone that plainly showed his anger
was a little mollified, according to your own account you have
committed three faults that are unpardonable; the first, in giving
Scheich Ibrahim leave to perform this ceremony in my pavilion; for a
person in such an office as his is not worthy of so great an honour;
the second, in not acquainting me with it; and the third, in not
diving into the good old man’s intention. For my part, I am
persuaded he only did it to try if he could get any money towards
bearing the charge of it; but that never came into your head; and
sure I shall not wrong him in allowing him to revenge himself for
not having obtained the expense of the night’s illumination.

The grand vizier Giafar, overjoyed to hear the caliph put the matter
upon that footing, very willingly owned the faults he reproached him
with, and freely confessed he was to blame in not giving Scheich
Ibrahim a few pieces of gold. Since the case is so, added the
caliph, it is just that thou shouldst be punished for thy mistakes,
but thy punishment shall be light: thou shalt spend the remainder of
the night, as I mean to do, with these honest people, whose company
I shall be well pleased with; and while I am putting on a
citizen’s habit, go thou and disguise thyself with Mesrour, and
come both of you along with me. The vizier Giafar would have
persuaded him it was late, and that all the company would be gone
before he could get thither; but the caliph said he would positively
go. The vizier, who knew that not a syllable of what he had said was
true, began to be in great consternation; but there was no reply to
be made, and go he must.

The caliph, then, disguised like a citizen, with the grand vizier
Giafar and Mesrour, chief of the eunuchs, stole out of the palace
together. They rambled through the streets of Bagdad till they came
to the garden; the door, through the carelessness of Scheich
Ibrahim, was open, he having forgot to shut it when he came back
from buying the wine. The caliph was very angry at it. Giafar, said
he to the grand vizier, what excuse have you for the door being open
at this unseasonable hour? Is it possible that Scheich Ibrahim makes
a custom of leaving it thus all night? I rather believe the hurry of
the feast has been the occasion of this neglect.

The caliph went into the garden; and when he came to the pavilion,
resolving not to go into the hall till he knew what was doing there,
he consulted with the grand vizier whether it was not his best way
to climb up into one of the trees that was near it, to make a
discovery. The grand vizier, casting his eyes upon the door,
perceived it stood half open, and told the caliph. It seems Scheich
Ibrahim had left it so, when he was prevailed upon to come in and
bear Noureddin and the Fair Persian company.

The caliph, laying aside his first design, stole softly up to the
hall door, which standing half open, he could see all the company
that were within, without being discovered himself.

But how was he surprised, when he saw a lady of incomparable beauty
and a handsome young man sitting at the table, with Scheich Ibrahim
by them. Scheich Ibrahim held a cup in his hand. My fair lady, said
he to the Fair Persian, a true toper never drinks without singing a
song first: if you please to hear, I will give you one of my best
songs.

Scheich Ibrahim sung: and the caliph was the more surprised,
because, till that moment, he never knew of his drinking wine, but
always took him for a grave, solid man, as he seemed to be to
outward appearance. The caliph retired from the door with the same
caution as he made his approaches to it; and coming to the grand
vizier Giafar, who was standing upon the steps a little lower, Come
up, said he to him, and see if those within yonder are the ministers
of the mosque, as you would have made me believe.

By the tone of voice in which the caliph spoke these last words, the
vizier understood that things went ill on his side: however, he went
up the steps; but when he had peeped in at the door, and saw all the
three sitting in that condition, he trembled for fear of his life.
He went back to the caliph, but in so great confusion, that he knew
not what to say. What riotous doings are here? said the caliph to
him: who are these people that have presumed to take the liberty of
diverting themselves in my garden and pavilion? I must however
confess, I never saw two persons more beautiful or better paired in
my life; and therefore, before I discover my anger, I will inform
myself better, and know who they are, and the reason of their being
here. He went to the door again to observe them more narrowly; and
the vizier, who followed, stood behind him, while he fixed his eyes
upon them. They both plainly heard every word that Scheich Ibrahim
said to the Fair Persian. Is there any thing, my charming lady,
wanting to render the pleasure of the evening more complete? Nothing
but a lute, replied the Fair Persian; and methinks, if you could get
me one, all would be very well. Can you play upon it? said Scheich
Ibrahim. Fetch me one, replied the Fair Persian; and you shall hear
whether I can or not.

Scheich Ibrahim, without stirring very far from his place, took a
lute out of a press, and presented it to the Fair Persian, who began
to tune it. The caliph, in the mean time, turning to the grand
vizier, Giafar, said he, the young lady is going to play upon the
lute; and if she performs well, I will forgive her, and the young
man for her sake; but as for thee, I will have thee hanged.
Commander of the true believers, replied the grand vizier, if that
is your intention, I wish to God she may play ill. Why so? said the
caliph. Because, replied the grand vizier, the longer we live in
this world, the more reason we shall have to comfort ourselves with
the hopes of dying in good sociable company. The caliph, who loved a
repartee began to laugh at this; and putting his ear to the opening
of the door, he listened to hear the Fair Persian play.

The Fair Persian began in a style, that, from the moment of her
touching the lute, the caliph perceived she did it with a masterly
hand. Afterwards she began to sing an air; and accompanying the lute
with her voice, which was admirably fine, she sung and played with
so much skill and sweetness, that the caliph was quite ravished to
hear her.

As soon as the Fair Persian had finished her song, the caliph went
down the steps, and the vizier Giafar followed him. When he came to
the bottom, I never, said he, to the vizier, heard a more charming
voice, or a lute better touched in my life. Isaac, [88] whom I
thought the most skilful player in the world, does not come up to
her. I am so charmed with her music, that I will go in and hear her
play before me. We must, therefore, consider how I can do it.

Commander of the true believers, said the grand vizier, if you
should go in, and Scheich Ibrahim chance to know you, he would
infallibly die with the fright. It is that hurts me, replied the
caliph; and I should be loth to be the occasion of his death, after
so many years’ service. A thought is just come into my head, that
may succeed: stay here with Mesrour, and wait for me in the next
walk.

The neighbourhood of the Tygris had given the caliph an opportunity
of turning a sufficient quantity of water under a stately bridge
into his garden, to make a piece of water well terraced, whither the
choicest fish of the whole river used to retire. The fishermen knew
it very well, and would have given the world to fish there; but the
caliph had expressly charged Scheich Ibrahim not to suffer any of
them to come near it. However, that very night, a fisherman, passing
by the garden-door, which the caliph had left open as he found it,
made use of this opportunity, and, going in, went directly to the
canal.

The fisherman immediately fell to work with his casting nets, and
was just ready to draw them, when the caliph, fearing what would be
the effect of Scheich Ibrahim’s negligence, but willing to make
use of it to bring his design about, came to the same place. The
fisherman, in spite of his disguise, knew him, and, throwing himself
at his feet, humbly implored his pardon, and excused himself upon
the account of his poverty. Rise, said the caliph, and be not
afraid; only draw your nets, that I may see what fish you have got.

The fisherman, recovered of his fright, quickly obeyed the
caliph’s orders. He drew out five or six very large fishes; and
the caliph choosing the two biggest, tied them together by the head
with the twig of a tree. After this, said he to the fisherman, Give
me thy clothes, and here take mine. The exchange was soon made; and
the caliph being dressed like a fisherman, even to his boots and
turban, Take thy nets, said he to the fisherman, and get thee about
thy business.

When the fisherman, very well pleased with his good fortune, was
gone, the caliph, taking the two fishes in his hand, went to look
after the grand vizier Giafar and Mesrour; he stopped at the grand
vizier, who not knowing him, asked him what he wanted, and bid him
go about his business. The caliph fell a laughing; by which the
vizier finding it to be him, Commander of the true believers, said
he, is it possible it can be you? I knew you not; and I ask a
thousand pardons for my rudeness. You are so disguised, that you may
venture into the hall, without any fear of being discovered by
Scheich Ibrahim. Stay you here with Mesrour, said the caliph, while
I go yonder and play my part.

The caliph went up to the hall, and knocked at the door. Noureddin
hearing him first, told Scheich Ibrahim of it, who asked who was
there. The caliph opened the door, and stepping a little way into
the hall to show himself, Scheich Ibrahim, said he, I am the
fisherman Kerim, who, being informed of your design to treat some of
your friends, have brought you two very fine fishes, fresh caught,
to ask if you have any occasion for them.

Noureddin and the Fair Persian, mightily pleased to hear him name
fish, Pray, said she to Scheich Ibrahim, let him come in, that we
may look at them. Scheich Ibrahim, by this time, was incapable of
asking this counterfeit fisherman how or which way he came thither,
his whole thought being only to oblige the Fair Persian. With much
ado he turned his head towards the door, being quite drunk, and, in
a stammering tone, calling to the caliph, whom he took to be a
fisherman, Come hither, thou nightly thief, said he, and let us see
what thou hast got.

The caliph went forwards, and counterfeiting all the actions of a
fisherman to a nicety, presented the two fishes. These are very fine
ones indeed, said the Fair Persian; and if they were well dressed
and seasoned, I should be glad to eat some of them. The lady is in
the right on it, answered Scheich Ibraham; but what can you do with
your fish, unless it were dressed? Go dress it thyself, and bring it
to us; thou wilt find every thing necessary in my kitchen.

The caliph went back to the grand vizier, Giafar, said he, I have
been very well received; but they want the fish to be dressed. I
will take care to dress it myself, said the grand vizier, and they
shall have it in a moment. Nay, replied the caliph, so eager am I to
accomplish my design, that I will take that trouble myself; for
since I have personated the fisherman so well, sure I can play the
cook for once. In my younger days, I dealt a little in cookery, and
always came off with credit. So saying, he went directly towards
Scheich Ibrahim’s lodgings, and the grand vizier and Mesrour
followed him.

They all three fell to work; and though Scheich Ibrahim’s kitchen
was not very large, yet there was every thing in it that they
wanted. The fish was quickly cooked; and the caliph served it up,
putting to every one’s plate a lemon to squeeze in the sauce if
they thought proper. They all eat very heartily, but especially
Noureddin and the Fair Persian: and the caliph stood before them.

As soon as the repast was over, Noureddin looking upon the caliph,
Fisherman, said he, there never was better fish eaten; and you have
done us the greatest favour in the world. At the same time, putting
his hand into his bosom, and pulling out a purse of thirty pieces of
gold, the remainder of forty that Sangiar, the officer of the king
of Balsora, had given him just upon his departure, Take it, said he
to him; if I had any more, thou shouldst have it; had I known thee
in my prosperity, I would have taken care to secure thee from ever
wanting: do not refuse the small present I make thee, but accept of
it as kindly as if it was much greater.

The caliph took the purse, and thanked Noureddin; and perceiving by
the weight that it contained gold, Sir, said he to him, I cannot
enough thank you for your liberality, and I think myself very
fortunate in having to do with a person of your generosity; but
before I take my leave I have a favour to ask, which I beg you not
to deny me. Yonder is a lute, which makes me believe that the lady
understands playing upon it; and if you can prevail with her to play
but one tune, I shall go away perfectly satisfied; for a lute, sir,
is an instrument I am particularly fond of.

Fair Persian, said Noureddin, immediately addressing himself to her,
I ask that favour of you, and I hope you will not refuse me. She
took up the lute without more entreaties, and putting it presently
in tune, played and sung with such an air, as charmed the very soul
of the caliph. Afterwards she played upon the lute without singing,
but with so much strength and softness, that transported him into an
ecstacy.

When the Fair Persian had given over playing, the caliph cried out,
What a voice! what a hand! what skill! was there ever finer singing,
or better playing upon the lute? Never was there any seen or heard
like it.

Noureddin, who was accustomed to give all that belonged to him to
persons who praised him, Fisherman, said he, I find thou hast some
taste for music; since thou art so delighted with her performance,
she is thine; I make thee a present of her. At the same time he rose
up, and taking his robe, which he had laid by, was going away, and
leaving the caliph, whom he believed to be no other than a
fisherman, in possession of the Fair Persian.

The Fair Persian was extremely surprised at Noureddin’s
liberality: she took hold of him, and, looking tenderly at him,
Whither, sir, said she, are you going? Sit down in your place, I
entreat you, and hearken to what I am going to sing and play. He did
as she desired him; and then the Fair Persian, touching the lute,
and looking upon him with tears in her eyes, sung some verses that
she had made extempore, to reproach him with his indifference, and
the easiness as well as cruelty with which he resigned her to Kerim.
She only hinted without explaining herself any farther to a
fisherman as Kerim was; for she, as well as Noureddin, was ignorant
of his being the caliph. When she had done playing, she put the lute
down by her, and clapped a handkerchief to her face, to hide the
tears she could not help shedding.

Noureddin made no answer to all these reproaches, but by his silence
seemed to declare he did not repent of what he had done. The caliph,
surprised at what he had heard, Sir, said he, as far as I see, this
beautiful, rare, and accomplished lady, that so generously you have
made me a present of just now, is your slave, and you are her
master. It is very true, Kerim, replied Noureddin; and thou wouldst
be more surprised than thou art now, should I tell thee all the
misfortunes that have happened to me upon her account. Ah! I beseech
you, sir, replied the caliph, still behaving like a fisherman,
oblige me so far as to let me hear part of your story.

Noureddin, who had already obliged him in several things of more
consequence, was so complaisant as to relate the whole story to him.
He began with the vizier his father’s buying the Fair Persian for
the king of Balsora, and omitted nothing of what he had done, or
what had happened to him from that time to their arrival at Bagdad,
and to that very moment he was talking to him.

When Noureddin had ended his story And whither are you going now?
said the caliph. Where Heaven shall direct me, answered Noureddin.
If you will believe me, replied the caliph, you shall go no farther,
but, on the contrary, you must return to Balsora. I will write a
short letter, which you shall give the king in my name: you shall
see, upon the reading it, he will give you a very handsome
reception, and nobody will dare to speak against you.

Kerim, said Noureddin, what thou hast told me is very singular; I
never heard that a poor fisherman, as thou art, had any
correspondence with a king. Be not astonished at that, replied the
caliph: you must know, that we both studied together under the same
masters, and were always the best friends in the world. It is true,
fortune has not been equally favorable to us; she has made him a
king, and me but a fisherman. But this inequality has not lessened
our friendship: he has often expressed a readiness and desire to
advance my fortune, but I always refused it; and am better pleased
with the satisfaction of knowing that he will never deny me whatever
I ask for the service and advantage of my friends: let me do it, and
you shall see the success.

Noureddin consented to what the caliph had proposed; and there being
every thing necessary for writing in the hall, the caliph wrote a
letter to the king of Balsora; at the top of which, near the edge of
the paper, he placed this form, in three small characters, ‘In the
name of the most merciful God,’ to show he would be absolutely
obeyed.




The letter of Caliph Haroun Alraschid to the King of Balsora.


‘Haroun Alraschid, son of Mandi, sends this letter to Mahommed
Zinebi, his cousin. As soon as Noureddin, son to the late vizier
Khacan, the bearer, has delivered you this letter, and you have read
it, pull off the royal mantle, put it on his shoulders, and place
him in thy seat without fail. Farewell.’

The caliph folded up the letter, and sealed it; and giving it to
Noureddin, without saying any thing of what was in it, Go, said he,
embark immediately in a vessel that is ready to go off, (as there
did constantly every every day at the same hour;) you may sleep when
you are abroad.

Noureddin took the letter, and away he went, with the little money
he had about him when Sangiar gave him his purse; and the Fair
Persian, distracted with grief at his departure, retired to one of
the sofas, and fell to weeping bitterly.

Noureddin was scarce gone out of the hall, when Scheich Ibrahim, who
had been silent during the whole transaction, looking stedfastly
upon the caliph, whom he still took for the fisherman Kerim,
Hark’e, said he, Kerim, thou hast brought us two fishes that are
worth twenty pieces of copper at most, and thou hast got a purse and
a slave; but dost thou think to have it all for thyself? I here
declare, that I will go halves with thee in the slave; and as for
the purse, show me what is in the inside: if it is silver, thou
shalt have one piece for thyself; but if it is gold, I will have it
all, and give thee in exchange some pieces of copper which I have in
my purse.

For the better understanding of what follows, Scheherazade,
interrupting herself here, said, we must observe, that the caliph,
before his serving up the fish, had despatched the grand vizier
Giafar to his palace, with orders to get four slaves, with a rich
habit, and to wait on the other side of the pavilion till he gave a
signal with his finger against the window. The grand vizier
performed his commission, and he, Mesrour, and the four slaves,
waited at the appointed place, expecting the sign.

But to return to my story, said the sultaness. The caliph, still
personating the fisherman, answered Scheich Ibrahim boldly, I know
not what there is in the purse; gold or silver, you shall freely go
my halves; but as to the slave, I will have her all to myself; and
if you will not accept these conditions, you shall have nothing.

Scheich Ibrahim, enraged to the last degree at this insolence,
considering him only as a fisherman, snatched up one of the china
dishes which were on the table, and flung it at the caliph’s head.
The caliph easily avoided the blow, being thrown by a person in
liquor; but the dish striking against the wall, was dashed into a
thousand pieces. Scheich Ibrahim grew more enraged at having missed
his aim; and, catching up the candle that stood upon the table, rose
from his seat, and went staggering down a pair of back stairs to
look for a cane.

The caliph took this opportunity, and striking his hands against the
window, the grand vizier, Mesrour, and the four slaves, were with
him in a trice; the slaves quickly pulled off the fisherman’s
clothes, and put him on the habit they had brought. They had not
quite dressed the caliph, who had seated himself upon the throne
that was in the hall, but were very busy about him, when Scheich
Ibrahim, spurred on by interest, came back, with a swinging cane in
his hand, with which he designed to pay the pretended fisherman
soundly; but instead of finding him, he saw his clothes in the
middle of the hall, and the caliph upon his throne, with the grand
vizier and Mesrour on each side of him. He stood awhile gazing upon
this unexpected sight, doubting whether he was awake or asleep. The
caliph fell a laughing at his astonishment; and calling to him,
Scheich Ibrahim, said he, what dost thou want? whom dost thou look
after?

Scheich Ibrahim, no longer doubting that it was the caliph,
immediately threw himself at his feet, with his face and long beard
to the ground. Commander of the true believers, cried he, your vile
slave has offended you; but he implores your clemency, and asks a
thousand pardons for his offence. As soon as the slaves had made an
end of dressing him, he came down from his throne, and advancing
towards him, Rise, said he; I forgive thee.

The caliph then addressed himself to the Fair Persian, who had
suspended her sorrow as soon as she understood that the garden and
pavilion belonged to that prince, and not to Scheich Ibrahim, as he
had all along made her believe, and that it was he himself disguised
in the fisherman’s clothes. Fair Persian, said he, rise, and
follow me: by what you have lately seen, you ought to know who I am,
and to believe that I am above taking any advantage of the present
which Noureddin, with a generosity not to be paralleled, has made me
of your person. I have sent him to Balsora to be king there; and
when I have given him the despatches necessary for his
establishment, you shall go thither and be queen. In the mean time,
I am going to order an apartment for you in my palace, where you
shall be treated according to your desert.

This discourse encouraged the Fair Persian, and comforted her very
sensibly. The joy for the advancement of Noureddin, whom she
passionately loved, to so high an honour, made her sufficient amends
for her affliction. The caliph kept his promise, and recommended her
to the care of his lady Zobeide, whom he acquainted with the esteem
he had lately entertained for Noureddin.

Noureddin’s return to Balsora was more fortunate, and speedier by
some days, than he could have expected. Upon his arrival, without
visiting any of his friends or relations, he went directly to the
palace, where the king at that time was giving public audience. With
the letter held up in his hand, he pressed through the crowd, who
presently made way for him to come forward and deliver it. The king
took and opened it, and his colour changed in reading it: he kissed
it thrice, and was just about to obey the caliph’s orders, when he
bethought himself of shewing it to the vizier Saouy, Noureddin’s
irreconcilable enemy.

Saouy, who had discovered Noureddin, and began to conjecture, with
great uneasiness, what might be the design of his coming, was no
less surprised than the king at the order contained in the letter;
and being as much concerned in it, he thought that very moment upon
a way to evade it. He pretended not to have read the letter quite
through, and therefore, desiring a second view of it, he turned
himself a little on one side, as if he wanted a better light, and,
without being perceived by any body, dexterously tore off from the
top of it the form that showed the caliph would be absolutely
obeyed, and putting it into his mouth, swallowed it.

After this egregious piece of villany, Saouy turned to the king, and
giving him the letter, Sir, said he to him, in a low voice, what
does your majesty intend to do? What the caliph has commanded me,
replied the king. Have a care, sir, said the wicked vizier, what you
do. It is true, this is the caliph’s hand, but the form is not to
it. The king had observed that very well, but in his confusion, he
thought his eyes deceived him when he saw it was gone.

Sir, continued the vizier, we have no reason to doubt but that the
caliph, upon the complaints he has made against your majesty and me,
has granted him this letter purely to get rid of him, and not with
any intention of having the order contained in it executed. Besides,
we must consider he has sent no express with a patent; and without
that, the order is of no force. And since a king like your majesty
was never deposed without that formality, any other man as well as
Noureddin might come with a forged letter: let who will bring such a
letter as this, it ought not to be put in execution. --Your majesty
may depend upon it, that is never done; and I will take upon myself
all the consequence of disobeying this order.

King Zinebi, easily persuaded by this pernicious counsel, left
Noureddin entirely to the discretion of the vizier Saouy, who led
him to his house after a very insulting manner; where, after causing
him to be bastinadoed till he was almost dead, he ordered him to a
prison, where he commanded him to be put in the darkest and deepest
dungeon, with a strict charge to the gaoler to give him nothing but
bread and water.

When Noureddin, half dead with the strokes, came to himself, and
found what a nasty dungeon he was in, he bewailed his misfortunes in
the most pathetic manner. --Ah! fisherman, cried he, how hast thou
cheated me, and how easy have I been in believing thee! Could I,
after the civility I showed thee, expect so inhuman and barbarous
usage? However, may Heaven reward thee; for I cannot persuade myself
that thy intention was so base; and I will with patience wait the
end of my afflictions.

The poor disconsolate Noureddin remained six whole days in this
miserable condition; and Saouy did not forget that he had confined
him there: but being resolved to put him to a shameful death, and
not daring to do it by his own authority, to accomplish his
villanous design, he loaded some of his slaves with rich presents,
which he, at the head of them, went and presented to the king.
Behold, sire, said he, with the blackest malice, what the new king
has sent you upon his accession to the crown, and begs your majesty
to accept of it.

The king, taking the matter just as Saouy intended it, What! replied
he, is that wretch still living? I thought you had put him to death
already. Sire, I have no power, answered the vizier, to take any
person’s life away; that only belongs to your majesty. Go, said
the king, behead him instantly; I give you full authority. Sire,
replied the vizier Saouy, I am infinitely obliged to your majesty
for the justice you do me; but since Noureddin has publicly
affronted me, I humbly beg the favour that his execution may be
performed before the palace, and that the criers may publish in
every quarter of the city, that every body may be satisfied he has
made a sufficient reparation for the affront. The king granted his
request; and the criers, in performing their office, diffused an
universal sorrow through the whole city. The memory of his
father’s virtues being yet very fresh among them, no one could
hear without horror and indignation that the son was going to suffer
an ignominious death, through the villany and instigation of the
vizier Saouy.

Saouy went in person to the prison, accompanied with twenty slaves,
ministers of his cruelty, who took Noureddin out of the dungeon, and
put him upon a shabby horse without a saddle. When Noureddin saw
himself in the hands of his enemy, Thou triumphest now, said he, and
abusest thy power; but I trust in the truth of what is written in
one of our books, ‘You judge unjustly, and in a little time you
shall be judged yourself.’ The vizier Saouy, who really triumphed
in his heart, What, insolent! said he, darest thou insult me yet?
--but go, I pardon thee, and care not whatever happens to me, so I
have the pleasure of seeing thee lose thy head in the public view of
all Balsora. Thou oughtest also to remember what another of our
books says, ‘What signifies if one dies the next day after the
death of his enemy?’

The vizier, still implacable in his hatred and enmity, surrounded by
part of his slaves in arms, ordered Noureddin to be conducted by the
other, and went himself towards the palace. The people were ready to
fall upon him as he went along; and if any body had set the example,
they would certainly have stoned him to death. When he had brought
him to the place of suffering, which was to be in sight of the
king’s apartment, he left him in the executioner’s hands, and
went straight to the king, who was in his closet, ready to glut his
eyes with the bloody spectacle he had prepared.

The king’s guard and the vizier’s slaves, which made a circle
round Noureddin, had much ado to withstand the people, who made all
possible efforts, but in vain, to break through them, and carry him
off by force. The executioner coming up to him, Sir, said he, I hope
you will forgive me; I am but a slave, and cannot help doing my
duty. If you have no occasion for any thing more, I beseech you
prepare yourself; for the king is just going to give me orders to
strike the blow.

The poor unfortunate Noureddin, at that cruel moment, looking round
upon the people, Will no charitable body, cried he, bring me a
little water to quench my thirst? which immediately they did, and
handed it up to him upon the scaffold. The vizier Saouy, perceiving
this delay, called out to the executioner from the king’s
closet-window, where he had planted himself, Strike! what dost thou
stay for? At these barbarous and inhuman words the whole place
echoed with loud imprecations against him; and the king, jealous of
his authority, made it appear, by enjoining him to stay awhile, that
he was angry at his presumption. But there was another reason; for
the king that very moment, casting his eye to a large street that
faced him, and joining to the place of execution, saw about the
middle of it a troop of horsemen come gallopping full speed towards
the palace. Vizier, said the king immediately, look yonder; what is
the meaning of those horsemen? Saouy, who knew not what it might be,
earnestly pressed the king to give the executioner the sign. No,
replied the king; I will first know who those horsemen are. It was
the vizier Giafar, with his train, who came in person from Bagdad by
the caliph’s order.

To understand the occasion of this minister’s coming to Balsora,
we must observe, that after Noureddin’s departure with the
caliph’s letter, the caliph, the next day, nor several days after,
never thought of sending him the patent that he mentioned to the
Fair Persian. He happened one day to be in the inner palace, which
was that of the women, and passing by the apartment, he heard the
sound of a fine voice. He listened to it; and he had no sooner heard
the words of one complaining for the absence of somebody, than he
asked the officer of the eunuchs that attended him, who that woman
was that belonged to that apartment? The officer told him it was the
young stranger’s slave, whom he had sent to Balsora to be king in
the room of Mohammed Zinebi.

Ah! poor Noureddin, cried the caliph presently, I had forgot thee:
but haste, said he to the officer, and bid Giafar come to me. The
vizier was with him in an instant. As soon as he came, Giafar, said
he, I have hitherto neglected sending the patent to Noureddin, which
was to confirm him king of Balsora; but we have no time now to draw
up one; therefore immediately take post-horses, and, with some of
your servants, make what haste you can to Balsora. If Noureddin is no
longer alive, but put to death by them, order the vizier Saouy to be
hanged; but if he is living, bring him to me, with the king and the
vizier.

The grand vizier stayed no longer than just to get on horseback; and
being attended by a great train of officers belonging to his house,
he set off for Balsora, where he arrived in the manner and at the
time already mentioned. As soon as he came to the palace-yard, the
people cleared the way for him, crying out, A pardon for Noureddin!
and with his whole train he rode into the palace, even to the very
stairs, where he alighted.

The king of Balsora, knowing him to be the caliph’s chief
minister, went to meet him, and received him at the entrance of his
apartment. The first question the vizier asked, was, If Noureddin
was living? and if he was, that he might be sent for. The king made
answer he was alive, and gave orders to have him brought in.
Accordingly he soon made his appearance as he was, tied and bound
with cords. The grand vizier Giafar caused him to be untied, and
setting him at liberty, ordered the vizier Saouy to be seized, and
bound him with the same cords.

The grand vizier Giafar lay but one night in Balsora; the next day
he set out again for Bagdad; and, according to the order he had
received, carried Saouy, the king of Balsora, and Noureddin, along
with him. As soon as he came to Bagdad, he presented them all to the
caliph: and after he had given him an account of his journey, and
particularly the miserable condition he found Noureddin in, and his
ill usage by the advice and malice of Saouy, the caliph desired
Noureddin to behead the vizier himself. Commander of the true
believers, said Noureddin, notwithstanding the injury this wicked
man has done me, and the mischief he endeavoured to do my deceased
father, I should think myself the basest of mankind, if I were to
stain my hands with his blood. The caliph was extremely pleased with
his generosity, and ordered justice to be done by the
executioner’s hand.

The caliph would fain have sent Noureddin back to Balsora to have
been king there: but Noureddin humbly begged to be excused from
accepting of the offer. Commander of the true believers, said
Noureddin, the city of Balsora, after the misfortunes that have
happened to me there, will be so much my aversion, that I beseech
your majesty to give me leave to keep the oath that I have made, of
never returning thither again; and I shall think it my greatest
glory to serve near your royal person, if you are pleased to allow
me the honour. The caliph consented to it; and placing him among the
number of those courtiers who were his greatest favourites restored
the Fair Persian to him again. To all these favours he added a
plentiful fortune; and he and the Fair Persian lived together to
their dying day, with all the happiness they could desire.

As for the king of Balsora, the caliph contented himself with only
letting him see how careful he ought to be in the choice of his
viziers, and so sent him back into his kingdom.




The Story of Beder, Prince of Persia, and Giahaure, Princess of
Samandal.


Persia is a country of so vast extent, that their ancient monarchs
have, not without some colour of reason, assumed the haughty title
of King of Kings. For, not to mention those subdued by their arms,
there are kingdoms and provinces whose kings are not only tributary,
but also in as great subjection as governors in other nations are to
kings.

One of these kings, who in the beginning of his reign had signalized
himself by many glorious and successful conquests, enjoyed so
profound a peace and tranquillity, as rendered him the happiest of
monarchs. The only thing in which he thought himself unfortunate
was, that amongst all his wives, not one of them ever brought him a
son; and being now far advanced in years, he was desirous of an heir
to succeed him after his death. However, he had above a hundred
ladies, all lodged in separate apartments, after a magnificent
manner, with women-slaves to wait upon, and eunuchs to guard them;
yet, notwithstanding all his endeavours to please and gratify them
in every thing, there was not one that answered his expectation. He
had women very often brought him from the most remote countries; and
if they pleased him, he not only gave the merchants their full price
at first word, but loaded them with honours, favours, and
benedictions, in hopes that at last he might be so happy as to meet
with one by whom he might have a son. There was scarce any act of
charity but what he performed, to prevail with Heaven. He gave
immense sums to the poor, besides large donatives to the religious
of his religion; building for their use many noble colleges richly
endowed, in hopes of obtaining by their prayers what he so earnestly
desired.

One day, according to the custom of his royal predecessors, during
their residence in their capital city, he held an assembly of his
courtiers, at which all the ambassadors and strangers of quality
about the court were present; and where they not only entertained
one another with talking of news and politics, but also of the
sciences, history, poetry, literature, and whatever else was capable
of diverting the mind after the most agreeable manner. Upon that day
an eunuch came to acquaint him with the arrival of a certain
merchant from a far country, who, having brought a slave along with
him, desired leave to show her to his majesty. Give him admittance
instantly, said the king, and after the assembly is over I will talk
with him. The merchant was introduced, and seated in a convenient
place, from whence he might easily have a full view of the king, and
hear him talk familiarly to those that stood near his person. The
king observed this rule to all strangers, with a design that by
degrees they might grow acquainted with him; so that, when they saw
with what freedom and civility he addressed himself to all, they
might be encouraged to talk with him in the same manner, without
being the least surprised at the pomp and splendour of his
appearance, which was enough to deprive those of their power of
speech that were not used to it. He treated the ambassadors also
after the same manner. He eat with them, and during the repast asked
them several questions concerning their health, their journey, and
the particularities of their country. After they had been thus
encouraged, he gave them audience.

When the assembly was over, and all the company retired, the
merchant, who was the only person left, fell prostrate before the
king’s throne with his face to the earth, wishing his majesty an
accomplishment of all his desires. As soon as he rose up, the king
asked him if the news of his having brought a slave for him was
true, and whether she was handsome.

Sire, replied the merchant, I doubt not in the least but your
majesty has very beautiful women, since you search every corner of
the earth for them; but I may boldly affirm, without overvaluing my
merchandise, that you never yet saw a woman that could stand in
competition with her for shape and beauty, agreeable qualifications,
and all the perfections that she is mistress of. --Where is she?
said the king: bring her to me instantly. --Sire, replied the
merchant, I have delivered her into the hands of one of your chief
eunuchs; and your majesty may send for her at your pleasure.

The fair slave was immediately brought in; and no sooner had the
king cast his eyes on her, but he was charmed with her beautiful and
easy shape. He went presently into a closet, whither the merchant,
with a few eunuchs, followed him. The fair slave wore a red satin
veil striped with gold over her face; and when the merchant had
taken it off, the king of Persia beheld a lady that surpassed in
beauty, not only his present ladies, but all that he ever had
before. He immediately fell passionately in love with her, and bid
the merchant name his price.

Sire, said he, I gave a thousand pieces of gold to the person of
whom I bought her; and in my three years’ journey to your court, I
reckon I have spent as much; but I shall forbear setting any price
to so great a monarch; and therefore, if your majesty likes her, I
humbly beg you would accept of her as a present. I am highly obliged
to you, replied the king; but it is never my custom to treat
merchants, who come hither purely for my pleasure, after so
ungenerous a manner: I am going to order thee ten thousand pieces of
gold; will that be sufficient? Sire, answered the merchant, I should
have esteemed myself very happy in your majesty’s acceptance of
her for nothing, yet I dare not refuse so generous an offer. I shall
not fail to publish it in my own country, and in every place through
which I pass. The money was presently paid; and before he departed,
the king made him put on a rich suit of cloth of gold.

The king caused the fair slave to be lodged in the finest apartment
next his own, and gave particular orders to the matrons, and the
women-slaves appointed to attend her, that after bathing they should
dress her in the richest habit they could find, and carry her the
finest pearl necklaces, the brightest diamonds, and other the
richest precious stones, that she might choose those she liked best.

The officious matrons, whose only care was to please the king, were
astonished at her beauty; and being well versed therein, they told
his majesty, that if he would allow them but three days, they would
engage to make her so much handsomer than she was at present, that
he could scarce know her again. The king could hardly deprive
himself of the pleasure of enjoying her so long; but at last he
consented, upon condition they would be as good as their word.

The king of Persia’s capital was situated in an island: and his
palace, which was very magnificent, was built upon the seashore: his
apartment looked upon that element; and the fair slave’s, which
was pretty near it, had also the same prospect, and it was the more
agreeable, upon the account of the sea’s beating almost against
the foot of the wall.

At the three days’ end, the fair slave, magnificently dressed and
set off, was alone in her chamber, sitting upon a sofa, and leaning
against one of the windows that faced the sea, when the king, being
informed that he might visit her, came in. The slave hearing
somebody walk in the room, with an air quite different from that of
the women-slaves, who had hitherto attended her, immediately turned
her head about, to see who it was. She knew him to be the king; but
without discovering the least surprise, or so much as rising from
her seat to salute or receive him, as if he had been the most
indifferent person in the world, she put herself in the same posture
again.

The king of Persia was extremely surprised to see a slave of so
beauteous a form so very ignorant of the world. He attributed this
to the narrowness of her education, and the little care that was
taken of instructing her in the first rules of civility. He went to
her at the window, where, notwithstanding the coldness and
indifference with which she had just now received him, she suffered
herself to be admired, caressed, and embraced as much as he pleased.

In the midst of these amorous embraces and tender endearments, this
monarch paused awhile, to gaze upon, or rather to devour her with
his eyes. My goddess! my angel! my charmer! cried the king; whence
came you, and where do those happy parents live that brought into
the world so surprising a master-piece of nature as you are? Ah! how
I love you, and shall always continue to do so. Never did I feel for
a woman what I now feel for you; and though I have seen, and do see
every day, a vast number of beauties, yet never did my eyes behold
so many charms in one single person, which have so transported me
out of myself, that I shall entirely devote myself to you. My
dearest life, continued he, you neither answer, nor by any visible
token give me the least reason to believe that you are sensible of
the many demonstrations I have given you of the violence of my
passion; neither will you turn your eyes on me to afford mine the
pleasure of meeting them, and to convince you that it is impossible
to love more than I do you. Why will you still keep this obstinate
silence, which chills me? and whence proceeds the seriousness, or
rather sorrow, that torments me to the soul? Do you mourn for your
country, your friends, or your relations? Alas! is not the king of
Persia, who loves and adores you, capable of comforting, and making
you amends for the loss of every thing in the world?

What protestations of love soever the king of Persia made the fair
slave, or all he could say to oblige her to speak to him, she
continued her astonishing reserve; and keeping her eyes still fixed
upon the ground, would neither look at him nor utter a word.

The king of Persia, charmed with the purchase he had made of a slave
that pleased him so well, pressed her no farther, in hopes that by
treating her kindly, he might prevail upon her to change her mind.
He presently clapped his hands; and the women that waited in an
outward room entered: he commanded them to bring in supper. When it
was on the table, My soul, said he to the slave, come hither and sup
with me. She rose from her seat; and being seated over against the
king, his majesty helped her, before he began eating himself; and so
he did of every dish during the whole supper. The slave eat as well
as the king, but still with downcast eyes, and without speaking a
word; though he often asked her how she liked the entertainment, and
whether it was dressed according to her taste.

The king, willing to change the discourse, asked her what her name
was, how she liked the clothes and the jewels she had on, what she
thought of her apartment and the rich furniture, and whether the
prospect of the sea was not very agreeable? but to all these
questions she answered not a word; so that the king was at a loss
what to think of her silence. He imagined, at first, that perhaps
she might be dumb: but then, said he to himself, can it be possible
that Heaven should form a creature so beautiful, so perfect, and so
accomplished, yet, at the same time, with so great an imperfection?
Were it however so, I could not love her with a less passion than I
do.

When the king of Persia rose from the table, he washed his hands on
one side, while the fair slave washed hers on the other. He took
that time to ask the women that held the basin and napkin, if ever
they had heard her speak. One of them presently made answer, Sire,
we have neither seen her open her lips, nor heard her speak any more
than your majesty has just now; we have rendered her our services in
the bath; we have combed and dressed her head, put on her clothes,
and waited upon her in her chamber, but she has never opened her
lips, so much as to say, that is well, or I like this. We have often
asked her, Madam, do you want any thing? is there any thing you wish
for? Do but ask, and command us: but we have never been able to draw
a word from her. We cannot tell whether her silence proceeds from
pride, sorrow, stupidity, or dumbness; and this is all we can inform
your majesty of.

The king of Persia was more astonished at hearing this than he was
before: however, believing the slave might have some cause of
sorrow, he was willing to endeavour to divert and amuse her.
Accordingly he made a very splendid assembly, to which all the
ladies of the court came; and those who were skilful in playing upon
musical instruments performed their parts, while others sung or
danced, or did both together; at last, they played at all sorts of
games, which mightily diverted the king. The fair slave was the only
person that took no pleasure in these diversions; she never stirred
out of her place, but kept her eyes fixed on the ground with so much
indifference, that all the ladies were no less surprised than the
king. After the assembly was over, every one retired to her
apartment, and the king, who was left alone with the fair slave, lay
with her that night.

The next morning the king of Persia rose more pleased than ever he
had been with all his women he had seen before, and more enamoured
with the fair slave than he was the day before. Indeed, he soon made
it appear, by resolving henceforth to attach himself only to her;
and he performed his resolution. On the very same day he dismissed
all his other women, giving every one of them their jewels, and
other valuable things, besides a considerable fortune, with free
leave to marry whom they thought fit; and only kept the matrons and
a few other elderly women to wait upon the fair slave. However, for
a whole year together, she never afforded him the pleasure of one
single word; yet the king continued his assiduities to please her,
with all the complaisance imaginable, and to give her the most
signal proofs of a violent passion.

The year was now expired, when the king, sitting one day by his
mistress, protested to her that his love, instead of being
diminished, grew every day more violent. My queen, said he, I cannot
divine what your thoughts are: but nothing is more true, and I swear
to you, that having the happiness of possessing you, there remains
nothing for me to desire: I esteem my kingdom, great as it is, less
than an atom, when I have the pleasure of beholding you, and of
telling you a thousand times, that I adore you. I desire not that my
words alone should oblige you to believe me. Surely you can no
longer doubt it, after the vast number of women who were in my
palace, whom I have sacrificed to your beauty. You may remember it
is about a year since I sent them all away; and I repent of it as
little even now I am talking with you, as I did the first moment of
their departure; and I never shall repent. Nothing would be wanting
to complete my happiness and crown my joy, would you but speak one
single word to me, by which I might be assured that you thought
yourself at all obliged to me. But how can you speak to me if you
are dumb? and alas! I feel too fearful this is the case. How can I
doubt, since you still torment me with silence, after a whole
year’s entreating you continually to speak to me? If it is
impossible for me to obtain of you that consolation, may Heaven at
least grant me the blessing of a son by you, to succeed me after my
death. I find myself growing old every day, and I begin already to
want one to assist me in bearing the weight of my crown. Still I
cannot conceal the great desire I have of hearing you speak; for
something within me tells me you are not dumb: and I beseech, I
conjure you, dear madam, to break through this long silence, and
speak but one word to me; and after that I care not how soon I die.

At this discourse the fair slave, who, according to her usual
custom, had hearkened to the king with downcast eyes, and had given
him cause to believe not only that she was dumb, but that she had
never laughed in her life, began to smile a little. The king of
Persia perceived it with a surprise that made him break forth into
an exclamation of joy: and no longer doubting but that she was going
to speak, he waited for that happy moment with an eagerness and
attention that cannot easily be expressed.

At last the fair slave, breaking her long-kept silence, thus
addressed herself to the king: Sire, said she, I have so many things
to say to your majesty, that having once broke silence, I know not
where to begin. However, in the first place, I think myself in duty
bound to thank you for all the favours and honours you have been
pleased to confer upon me, and to implore Heaven to bless and
prosper you, to prevent the wicked designs of your enemies, and not
suffer you to die, after hearing me speak, but to grant you a long
life. After this, sire, I cannot give you a greater satisfaction
than by acquainting you that I am with child; and I wish, as you do,
it may be a son. Had it never been my fortune to have been pregnant,
I was resolved (I beg your majesty to pardon the sincerity of my
intention) never to have loved you, as well as to have kept an
eternal silence; but now I love you as I ought to do.

The king of Persia, ravished to hear the fair slave not only speak,
but tell him tidings in which he was so nearly concerned, embraced
her tenderly. Shining light of my eyes, said he, it is impossible
for me to receive a greater joy than what you have now given me: you
have spoken to me, and you have declared your being with child,
which I did not expect. After these two occasions of joy, I am
transported out of myself.

The king of Persia, in the transport of his joy, said no more to the
fair slave. He left her, but in such a manner as made her perceive
his intention was speedily to return: and being willing that the
occasion of his joys should be made public, he declared it to his
officers, and sent in all haste for the grand vizier. As soon as he
came, he ordered him to distribute a thousand pieces of gold among
the holy men of his religion, who made vows of poverty; as also
among the hospitals and the poor, by way of returning thanks to
Heaven: and his will was obeyed by the direction of that minister.

After the king of Persia had given this order, he returned to the
fair slave again. Madam, said he, pardon me for leaving you so
abruptly, since you have been the occasion of it; but I hope you
will indulge me with some conversation, since I am desirous to know
of you several things of much greater consequence. Tell me, my
dearest soul, what were the powerful reasons that induced you to
persist in that obstinate silence for a whole year together, though
every day you saw me, heard me talk to you, eat and drank with me,
and every night lay with me? I shall pass by your not speaking; but
how you could carry yourself so as that I could never discover
whether you were sensible of what I said to you or no, I confess,
surpasses my understanding; and I cannot yet comprehend how you
could contain yourself so long; therefore I must conclude the
occasion of it to be very extraordinary.

To satisfy the king of Persia’s curiosity, replied this fair
person, think whether or no to be a slave, far from my own country,
without any hopes of ever seeing it again, --to have a heart torn
with grief, for being separated for ever from my mother, my brother,
my friends, and my acquaintance, --are not these sufficient reasons
for my keeping a silence your majesty has thought so strange and
unaccountable? The love of our native country is as natural to us as
that of our parents; and the loss of liberty is insupportable to
every one who is not wholly destitute of common sense, and knows how
to set a value on it. The body indeed may be enslaved, and under the
subjection of a master, who has the power and authority in his
hands; but the will can never be conquered, but remains free and
unconfined, depending on itself alone, as your majesty has found an
instance of it in me: and it is a wonder that I have not followed
the example of abundance of unfortunate wretches, whom the loss of
liberty has reduced to the melancholy resolution of procuring their
own deaths a thousand ways, by a liberty which cannot be taken from
them.

Madam, replied the king, I am convinced of the truth of what you
say; but till this moment I was of opinion, that a person beautiful,
well-shaped, of good understanding, like yourself, whom her evil
destiny had condemned to be a slave, ought to think herself very
happy in meeting with a king for her master.

Sire, replied the fair slave, whatever the slave is, as I have
already observed to your majesty, there is no king on earth can
tyrannize over her will. But when you speak of a slave mistress of
charms enough to captivate a monarch, and induce him to love her; if
she is of a rank infinitely below him, I am of your opinion, she
ought to think herself happy in her misfortunes: but what happiness
can it be, when she considers herself only as a slave, torn from a
parent’s arms, and perhaps from those of a lover, her passion for
whom death only can extinguish? But when this very slave is in
nothing inferior to the king that bought her, your majesty shall
then judge yourself of the rigour of her destiny, her misery, and
her sorrow, and to what desperate attempts the anguish of despair
may drive her.

The king of Persia, astonished at this discourse, Madam, said he,
can it be possible that you are of royal blood, as by your words you
seem to intimate? Explain the whole secret to me, I beseech you, and
no longer augment my impatience. Let me instantly know who are the
happy parents of so great a prodigy of beauty; who are your
brothers, your sisters, and your relations; but, above all, what
your name is.

Sire, said the fair slave, my name is Gulnare [89] of the Sea; and
my father, who is now dead, was one of the most potent monarchs of
the ocean. When he died, he left his kingdom to a brother of mine,
named Saleh, [90] and to the queen my mother, who is also a
princess, the daughter of another puissant monarch of the sea. We
enjoyed a profound peace and tranquillity through the whole Kingdom,
till a neighbouring prince, envious of our happiness, invaded our
dominions with a mighty army; and penetrating as far as our capital,
made himself master of it: and we had but just time enough to save
ourselves in an impenetrable and inaccessible place, with a few
trusty officers who did not forsake us in our distress.

In this retreat, my brother was not negligent in contriving all
manner of ways to drive the unjust invader from our dominions. One
day taking me into his closet, Sister, said he, the events of the
smallest undertakings are always dubious. As for my own part, I may
fail in the attempt I design to make to recover my kingdom; and I
shall be less concerned for my own disgrace, than what may possibly
happen to you. To prevent it, and to secure you from all accident, I
would fain see you married first: but in the miserable condition of
our affairs at present, I see no probability of matching you to any
of the princes of the sea; and therefore I should be very glad if
you would concur with my opinion, and think of marrying to some of
the princes of the earth. I am ready to contribute all that lies in
my power towards it; and I am certain there is not one of them,
however powerful, but, considering the beauty you are mistress of,
would be proud of sharing his crown with you.

At this discourse of my brother’s, I fell into a violent passion.
Brother, said I, you know that I am descended, as well as you, by
both father and mother’s side, from the kings and queens of the
sea, without any mixture of alliance with those of the earth;
therefore I do not design to marry below myself, any more than they
did; and I took an oath to that effect as soon as I had
understanding to inquire into the nobleness and antiquity of our
family. The condition to which we are reduced shall never oblige me
to alter my resolution; and if you perish in the execution of your
design, I am prepared to fall with you, rather than to follow the
advice I so little expected from you.

My brother, who was still earnest for the marriage, however improper
for me, endeavoured to make me believe, that there were kings of the
earth who were nowise inferior to those of the sea. This put me into
a more violent passion, which occasioned him to say several bitter
reflecting things, that nettled me to the quick. He left me, as much
dissatisfied with myself as he could possibly be with me; and in
this peevish mood I gave a spring from the bottom of the sea, up to
the island of the moon.

Notwithstanding the violent discontent that made me cast myself upon
that island, I lived content in retirement. But in spite of all my
precautions, a person of distinction, attended by his servants,
surprised me sleeping, and carried me to his own house. He expressed
much love to me, and omitted nothing which he thought might induce
me to make a return to his passion. When he saw that fair means
would not prevail upon me, he attempted to make use of force; but I
soon made him repent of his insolence. So at last he resolved to
sell me; which he did to that very merchant who brought me hither
and sold me to your majesty. He was a very prudent, courteous,
humane person; and during the whole of the long journey, never gave
me the least reason to complain.

As for your majesty, continued the princess Gulnare, if you had not
shown me all the respect you have hitherto paid, (for which I am
extremely obliged to your goodness,) and given me such undeniable
marks of your affection, that I could no longer doubt of it; if you
had not immediately sent away your women, I hesitate not to tell you
plainly, that I should not have remained with you. I would have
thrown myself into the sea out of this very window, where you
accosted me when you first came into this apartment, and I would
have gone in search of my mother, my brother, and the rest of my
relations. I should have persisted in that design, and I would
infallibly have put it in execution, if after a certain time I had
found myself deceived in the hopes of being with child; but now, in
the condition I am in, all I could say to my mother or brother,
would never convince them that I have been a slave to a king like
your majesty. They would never believe it, but would for ever
upbraid me with the crime I have voluntarily committed against my
honour. However, sire, be it a prince or princess that I shall bring
into the world, it will be a pledge to engage me never to be parted
from your majesty; and therefore I hope you will no longer look upon
me as a slave, but as a princess worthy your alliance.

After this manner the princess Gulnare discovered herself to the
king of Persia, and finished her story. My charming, my adorable
princess, cried he, what wonders have I heard! and what ample matter
for my curiosity to ask a thousand questions concerning those
strange and unheard-of things which you have related to me! But
first, I ought to thank you for your goodness and patience in making
trial of the truth and constancy of my passion. I thought it
impossible for me to love you more than I did; but since I know you
to be so great a princess, I love you a thousand times more.
Princess! did I say? Madam, you are no longer so, but you are my
queen --the queen of Persia; and by that title you shall soon be
proclaimed throughout the whole kingdom. To-morrow the ceremony
shall be performed in my capital, with a pomp and magnificence that
was never yet beheld; which will plainly show that you are my queen
and my lawful wife. This should long ago have been done, had you
sooner convinced me of my error; for from the first moment of my
seeing you. I have been of the same opinion as now, to love you
always, and never to place my affections on any other.

But that I may satisfy myself, and pay you all the respect that is
your due, I beseech you, madam, to inform me more particularly of
the kingdom and people of the sea, which are altogether unknown to
me. I have heard much talk, indeed, of the inhabitants of the sea,
but I always looked upon it as nothing but a tale or fable; but, by
what you have told me, I am convinced there is nothing more true;
and I have a very good proof of it in your own person, who are one
of them, and are pleased to condescend to be my wife; which is an
honour no other inhabitant on the earth can boast of besides myself.
There is one thing yet which puzzles me; therefore I must beg the
favour of you to explain it; that is, I cannot comprehend how it is
possible for you to live or move in the water without being drowned.
There are very few amongst us who have the art of staying under
water; and they would surely perish, if, after a certain time,
according to their activity and strength, they did not come up again.

Sire, replied the queen Gulnare, I shall with pleasure satisfy the
king of Persia. We can walk at the bottom of the sea with as much
ease as you can upon land; and we can breathe in the water as you do
in the air; so that instead of suffocating us, as it does you, it
absolutely contributes to the preservation of our lives. What is yet
more remarkable is, that it never wets our clothes; so that when we
have a mind to visit the earth, we have no occasion to dry them. Our
common language is the same with that of the writing engraved upon
the seal of the great prophet Solomon, the son of David.

I must not forget to tell you further, that the water does not in
the least hinder us from seeing in the sea; for we can open our eyes
without any inconvenience; and as we have quick, piercing sight, we
can discern any object as clearly in the deepest part of the sea, as
upon land. We have also there a succession of day and night, the
moon affords us her light, and even the planets and the stars appear
visible to us. I have already spoken of our kingdoms; but as the sea
is much more spacious than the earth, so there are a greater number
of them, and of greater extent. They are divided into provinces; and
in each province there are several great cities, well peopled. In
short, there are an infinite number of nations, differing in manners
and customs, as well as upon the earth.

The palaces of the kings and princes are very sumptuous and
magnificent. Some of them are of marble of various colours; others
of rock-crystal, with which the sea abounds, mother-of-pearl, coral,
and of other materials more valuable; gold, silver, and all sorts of
precious stones, are more plentiful there than on earth. I say
nothing of the pearls, since the largest that ever was seen upon
earth, would not be valued amongst us; and none but the very lowest
rank of citizens would wear them.

As we have a marvellous and incredible agility to transport
ourselves whither we please in the twinkling of an eye, we have no
occasion for any carriages or riding-horses; not but the king has
his stables, and his stud of sea-horses; but they are seldom made
use of, except upon public feasts, or rejoicing days. Some, after
they have trained them, take delight in riding them, and show their
skill and dexterity in races; others put them to chariots of
mother-of-pearl, adorned with an infinite number of shells of all
sorts, of the liveliest colours. These chariots are open; and in the
middle there is a throne upon which the king sits, and shows himself
to the public view of his subjects. The horses are trained up to
draw by themselves; so that there is no occasion for a charioteer to
guide them. I pass over a thousand other curious particulars
relating to these marine countries, which would be very entertaining
to your majesty; but you must permit me to defer it to future
leisure, to speak of something of much greater consequence; which
is, that the method of delivering, and the way of managing the women
of the sea in their lying-in, is quite different from those of the
women of the earth; and I am afraid to trust myself in the hands of
the midwives of this country: therefore since my safe delivery
equally concerns us both, with your majesty’s permission, I think
it proper for greater security, to send for my mother and my
cousins, to assist at my labour; at the same time to desire the king
my brother’s company, to whom I have a great desire to be
reconciled. They will be very glad to see me again, after I have
related my story to them, and when they understand I am wife to the
mighty king of Persia. I beseech your majesty to give me leave to
send for them: I am sure they will be happy to pay their respects to
you; and I venture to say you will be extremely pleased to see them.

Madam, replied the king of Persia, you are mistress; do whatever you
please; I will endeavour to receive them with all the honours they
deserve. But I would fain know how you would acquaint them with what
you desire, and when they will arrive, that I may give orders to
make preparation for their reception, and go myself in person to
meet them. Sire, replied the queen Gulnare, there is no need of
these ceremonies; they will be here in a moment; and if your majesty
will but step into the closet, and look through the lattice, you
shall see the manner of their arrival.

As soon as the king of Persia was in the closet, queen Gulnare
ordered one of her women to bring her a fire-pan with a little fire.
After that she bid her retire and shut the door. When she was alone,
she took a piece of aloes out of a box, and put it into the
fire-pan. As soon as she saw the smoke rise, she repeated some words
unknown to the king of Persia, who observed with great attention all
that she did. She had no sooner ended, but the sea began to be
disturbed. The closet the king was in was so contrived, that looking
through the lattice on the same side with the windows that faced the
sea, he could plainly perceive it.

At length the sea opened at some distance; and presently there arose
out of it a tall, handsome young man, with whiskers of a sea-green
colour; a little behind him, a lady, advanced in years, but of a
majestic air, attended by five young ladies, nothing inferior in
beauty to the queen Gulnare.

Queen Gulnare immediately came to one of the windows, and saw the
king her brother, the queen her mother, and the rest of her
relations, who at the same time perceived her also. The company came
forward, borne, as it were, upon the surface of the waves. When they
came to the edge, they nimbly, one after another, sprung to the
window, from whence the queen Gulnare had retired to make room for
them. King Saleh, the queen her mother, and the rest of her
relations, embraced her tenderly, with tears in their eyes, on their
first entrance.

After queen Gulnare had received them with all imaginable honour,
and made them sit down upon a sofa, the queen her mother addressed
herself to her: Daughter, said she, I am overjoyed to see you again
after so long an absence; and I am confident that your brother and
your relations are no less so. Your leaving us without acquainting
any body with it, involved us in inexpressible concern; and it is
impossible to tell you how many tears we have shed upon that
account. We know of no other reason that could induce you to take
such a surprising resolution, but what your brother told us of the
conversation that passed between him and you. The advice he gave you
seemed to him at that time very advantageous for settling you
handsomely in the world, and very suitable to the then posture of
our affairs. If you had not approved of his proposal, you ought not
to have been so much alarmed; and, give me leave to tell you, you
took the thing in a quite different light from what you ought to
have done. But no more of this discourse; it serves only to renew
the occasion of our sorrow and complaint, which we and you ought to
bury for ever in oblivion: give us now an account of all that has
happened to you since we saw you last, and of your present
situation; but especially let us know if you are satisfied.

Queen Gulnare immediately threw herself at her mother’s feet; and
after rising and kissing her hand, Madam, said she, I own I have
been guilty of a very great fault, and I am indebted to your
goodness for the pardon which you are pleased to grant me. What I am
going to say, in obedience to your commands, will soon convince you,
that it is very often in vain for us to have an aversion for certain
measures, I have myself experienced, that the only thing I had an
abhorrence to, is just that to which my destiny has led me. She
related the whole of what had befallen her since she quitted the sea
in a violent passion for the earth. As soon as she had made an end,
and had acquainted them with her having been sold to the king of
Persia, in whose palace she was at present; Sister, said the king
her brother, you have been very much to blame to suffer so many
indignities, but you can blame nobody but yourself; you have it in
your power now to free yourself; and I cannot but admire your
patience, that you could endure so long a slavery. Rise, and return
with us into my kingdom, that I have reconquered from the proud
usurper who had made himself master of it.

The king of Persia, who heard these words from the closet where he
stood, was in the utmost alarm. Ah! said he to himself. I am ruined;
and if my queen, my Gulnare, hearkens to this advice, and leaves me,
I shall surely die; for it is impossible for me to live without her,
and they want to deprive me of her. Queen Gulnare soon put him out
of his fears.

Brother, said she smiling, what I have just now heard gives me a
greater proof than ever I had of the sincerity of your friendship
for me: I could not brook your proposing to me a match with a prince
of the earth; now I can scarce forbear being angry with you for
advising me to break the engagement I have made with the most
puissant and most renowned monarch in the world. I do not speak here
of any engagement between a slave and her master; it would be easy
to return the ten thousand pieces of gold that I cost him; but I
speak now of a contract between a wife and a husband, and a wife who
has not the least reason to complain. He is a religious, wise, and
temperate king, and has given me the most essential demonstrations
of his love. What can be a greater instance of the violence of his
passion, than sending away all his women (of which he had a great
number) immediately upon my arrival, and confining himself only to
me? I am now his wife, and he has lately declared me queen of
Persia, to share with him in his councils; besides, I am pregnant,
and if Heaven permits me to give him a son, that will be another
motive to engage my affections to him the more.

So that, brother, continued the queen Gulnare, instead of following
your advice, you see I have all the reason in the world, not only to
love the king of Persia as passionately as he loves me, but also to
live and die with him, more out of gratitude than duty. I hope then
neither my mother, nor you, nor any of my cousins, will disapprove
of the resolution or the alliance I have made, which will be an
equal honour to the kings of the sea and earth. Excuse me for giving
you the trouble of coming hither from the bottom of the deep, to
communicate it to you, and for the pleasure of seeing you after so
long a separation.

Sister, replied king Saleh, the proposal I made you of going back
with us into my kingdom, upon the recital of your adventures, (which
I could not hear without concern,) was only to let you see how much
we all love you, and how much I in particular honour you, and that
nothing in the world is so dear to me as your happiness. Upon the
same account then, for my own part, I cannot condemn a resolution so
reasonable and so worthy of yourself, after what you have told us of
the king of Persia, your husband, and the great obligations you have
to him; and I am persuaded that the queen our mother will be of the
same opinion.

The queen confirmed what her son had just spoken, and addressing
herself to queen Gulnare, said, I am very glad to hear you are
pleased; and I have nothing else to add to what your brother has
just said to you. I should have been the first to have condemned
you, if you had not expressed all the gratitude you owe to a monarch
that loves you so passionately, and has done such great things for
you.

As the king of Persia, who was still in the closet, had been
extremely concerned for fear of losing his beloved queen, so now he
was transported with joy at her resolution never to forsake him; and
having no room to doubt of her love after so open a declaration, he
began to love her more than ever, and resolved to express his
gratitude in every possible way.

While the king was indulging incredible pleasure, queen Gulnare
clapped her hands, and presently in came some of her slaves, whom
she had ordered to bring in a collation; as soon as it was served
up, she invited the queen her mother, the king her brother, and her
cousins, to sit down and take part of it. They began to reflect,
that without asking leave, they were got into the palace of a mighty
king, who had never seen nor heard of them, and that it would be a
great piece of rudeness to eat at his table without him. This
reflection raised a blush in their faces, and in their emotion their
eyes glowing like fire, they breathed flames at their mouths and
nostrils.

This unexpected sight put the king of Persia, who was totally
ignorant of the cause of it, into a dreadful consternation. Queen
Gulnare suspecting this, and understanding the intention of her
relations, rose from her seat, and told them she would be back in a
moment. She went directly to the closet, and by her presence
recovered the king of Persia from his surprise. Sir, said she, I
doubt not but that your majesty is well pleased with the
acknowledgment I have lately made of the many favours for which I am
indebted to you. I might have complied with the wishes of my
relations, and gone back with them into their dominions; but I am
not capable of such ingratitude, for which I should have been the
first to have condemned myself. Ah! my queen, cried the king of
Persia, speak no more of your obligations to me; you have none: I am
under so great to you, that I shall never be able to repay or
express them. I never thought it possible you could have loved me so
tenderly as you do, and as you have made appear to me in the most
expressive manner. Ah! sir, replied the queen Gulnare, could I do
less than I have done? I fear I have not done enough, considering
all the honours that your majesty has heaped upon me; and it is
impossible for me to remain insensible of your love, after so many
convincing proofs as you have given me.

But sir, continued queen Gulnare, let us drop this, and give me
leave to assure you of the sincere friendship that the queen my
mother, and the king my brother, are pleased to honour you with;
they earnestly desire to see you, and tell you so themselves; I
intended to have some conversation with them by ordering a banquet
for them, before I introduced them to your majesty, but they are
very impatient to pay their respects to you; and therefore I desire
your majesty would be pleased to walk in, and honour them with your
presence.

Madam, said the king of Persia, I should be very glad to salute
persons that have the honour to be so nearly related to you, but I
am afraid of the flames that they breathe at their mouths and
nostrils. Sir, replied the queen, laughing, you need not in the
least be afraid of those flames, which are nothing but a sign of
their unwillingness to eat in your palace, without your honouring
them with your presence, and eating with them.

The king of Persia, encouraged by these words, rose up, and went
into the chamber with his queen Gulnare. She presented him to the
queen her mother, to the king her brother, and to her other
relations, who instantly threw themselves at his feet, with their
faces to the ground. The king of Persia ran to them, and lifting
them up, embraced them one after another. After they were all
seated, king Saleh began: Sir, said he to the king of Persia, we are
at a loss for words to express our joy, to think that the queen my
sister, in her disgrace, should have the happiness of falling under
the protection of so powerful a monarch. We can assure you she is
not unworthy of the high rank you have been pleased to raise her to;
and we have always had so much love and tenderness for her, that we
could never think of parting with her to any of the puissant princes
of the sea, who have often demanded her in marriage before she came
of age. Heaven has reserved her for you, sir, and we have no better
way of returning thanks to it for the favour it has done her, than
beseeching it to grant your majesty a long and happy life with her,
and to crown you with prosperity and satisfaction.

Certainly, replied the king of Persia, Heaven reserved her purely
for me, as you observe. I love her with so tender and violent a
passion, that I am satisfied I never loved any woman till I saw her.
I cannot sufficiently thank either the queen her mother, or you,
prince, or your whole family, for the generosity with which you have
consented to receive me into an alliance so glorious to me as yours.
So saying, he invited them to take part of the collation, and he and
his queen sat down at the table with them. After the collation was
over, the king of Persia conversed with them till it was very late;
and when they thought it convenient to retire, he waited upon them
himself to the several apartments he had ordered to be prepared for
them.

The king of Persia treated his illustrious guests with continual
feasts; in which he omitted nothing that might show his grandeur and
magnificence, and insensibly prevailed with them to stay with him
till the queen was brought to bed. When the time of her lying-in
drew near, he gave particular orders that nothing should be wanting
that was necessary upon such an occasion. At night she was brought
to bed of a son, to the great joy of the queen her mother, who
assisted at the labour; and as soon as he was dressed in
swaddling-clothes, which were very magnificent, went and presented
him to the king.

The king of Persia received this present with a joy easier to be
imagined than expressed. The young prince being of a beautiful
countenance, he thought no name so proper for him as that of
_Beder_, which in the Arabian language signifies the _Full Moon_. To
return thanks to Heaven, he was very liberal in his alms to the
poor, and caused the prison doors to be set open, and gave all his
slaves of both sexes their liberty. He distributed vast sums among
the ministers and holy men of his religion. He also gave large
donations to his courtiers, besides a great deal that was thrown
amongst the people; and by proclamation ordered rejoicing for
several days to be kept through the whole city.

One day, after the queen was up again, as the king of Persia, queen
Gulnare herself, the queen her mother, king Saleh, her brother, and
the princesses their relations, were discoursing together in her
majesty’s bedchamber, the nurse came in with the young prince
Beder in her arms. King Saleh no sooner saw him, but he ran to
embrace him; and taking him in his arms, fell to kissing and
caressing him with the greatest demonstration of tenderness. He took
several turns with him about the room, dancing and tossing him
about, when all of a sudden, through a transport of joy, the window
being open, he sprung out, and plunged with him into the sea.

The king of Persia, who expected no such sight, set up a hideous
cry, verily believing he should either see the dear prince his son
no more, or else that he should see him drowned; he was like to have
died of grief and affliction. Sir, said queen Gulnare, (with a quiet
and undisturbed countenance, the better to comfort him,) let your
majesty fear nothing; the young prince is my son as well as yours,
and I do not love him less than you do. You see I am not alarmed;
neither in truth ought I to be so. He runs no risk, and you will
soon see the king his uncle appear with him again, and bring him
back safe and sound. Although he was born of your blood, he is
equally of mine, and will have the same advantage his uncle and I
have, of living equally in the sea and upon the land. The queen his
mother, and the princesses his relations, confirmed the same thing;
yet all they said had no effect on the king’s fright, from which
he could not recover till he saw prince Beder appear again before
him.

The sea at length became troubled, when immediately king Saleh arose
with the young prince in his arms, and holding him up in the air, he
re-entered at the same window he went out at. The king of Persia
being overjoyed to see prince Beder again, and astonished that he
was as calm as before he lost sight of him; king Saleh said, Sir,
was not your majesty in a great fright, when you first saw me plunge
into the sea with the prince my nephew? Alas! prince, answered the
king of Persia, I cannot express my concern. I thought him lost from
that very moment, and you now restore life to me by bringing him
again. I thought as much, replied king Saleh, though you had not the
least reason to apprehend any danger; for, before I plunged into the
sea with him, I pronounced over him certain mysterious words which
were engraven on the seal of the great Solomon, the son of David. We
practise the like in relation to all those children that are born in
the regions at the bottom of the sea, by virtue whereof they receive
the same privileges that we have over those people who inhabit the
earth. From what your majesty has observed, you may easily see what
advantage your son prince Beder has acquired by his birth on the
part of his mother, queen Gulnare my sister, for as long as he
lives, and as often as he pleases, he will be at liberty to plunge
into the sea, and traverse the vast empires it contains in its bosom.

Having so spoke, king Saleh, who had restored prince Beder to his
nurse’s arms, opened a box he had fetched from his palace in the
little time he had disappeared, which was filled with three hundred
diamonds, as large as pigeons’ eggs, a like number of rubies of
extraordinary size, as many emerald wands, each half a foot long,
and with thirty strings or necklaces of pearl, consisting each of
ten feet. Sir, said he to the king of Persia, presenting him with
this box, when I was first summoned by the queen my sister, I knew
not what part of the earth she was in, or that she had the honour to
be married to so great a monarch. This made us come empty-handed. As
we cannot express how much we have been obliged to your majesty, I
beg you to accept this small token of gratitude in acknowledgment of
the many particular favours you have been pleased to show her,
wherein we take equal interest.

It is impossible to express how greatly the king of Persia was
surprised at the sight of so much riches, inclosed in so little
compass. What! prince, cried he, do you call so inestimable a
present a small token of your gratitude, when you never have been
indebted to me? I declare once more, you have never been in the
least obliged to me, neither the queen your mother, nor you. I
esteem myself but too happy in the consent you have given to the
alliance I have contracted with you. Madam, continued he, turning to
Gulnare, the king your brother has put me into the greatest
confusion; and I would beg of him to permit me to refuse his
present, were I not afraid of disobliging him: do you therefore
endeavour to obtain his leave that I may be excused accepting it.

Sir, replied king Saleh, I am not at all surprised that your majesty
thinks this present so extraordinary. I know you are not accustomed
upon earth to see precious stones of this quality and quantity; but
if you knew, as I do, the mines whence these jewels were taken, and
that it is in my power to form a treasure greater than those of all
the kings of the earth, you would wonder we should have the boldness
to make you a present of so small a value. I beseech you, therefore,
not to regard it in that respect, but on account of the sincere
friendship which obliges us to offer it to you, and not give us the
mortification of refusing it. These engaging expressions obliged the
king of Persia to accept the present; for which he returned many
thanks both to king Saleh and the queen his mother.

A few days after, king Saleh gave the king of Persia to understand,
that the queen his mother, the princesses his relations, and
himself, could have no greater pleasure than to spend their whole
lives at his court; but that having been so long absent from their
own kingdom, where their presence was absolutely necessary, he
begged of him not to take it ill if they took leave of him and queen
Gulnare. The king of Persia assured them he was very sorry that it
was not in his power to return their visit in their own dominions;
but added, As I am verily persuaded you will not forget queen
Gulnare, but come and see her now and then, I hope I shall have the
honour to see you again more than once.

Many tears were shed on both sides upon their separation. King Saleh
departed first, but the queen his mother, and the princesses his
relations, were fain to force themselves, in a manner, from the
embraces of queen Gulnare, who could not prevail with herself to let
them go. This royal company were no sooner out of sight, but the
king of Persia said to queen Gulnare, Madam, I should have looked
upon the person that had pretended to pass those upon me for true
wonders, of which I myself have been eye-witness from the time I
have been honoured with your illustrious family at my court, as one
who would have abused my credulity. But I cannot refuse to believe
my own eyes, and shall remember it as long as I live, and never
cease to bless heaven for directing you to me, in preference to any
other prince.

Young prince Beder was brought up and educated in the palace, under
the care of the king and queen of Persia, who both saw him grow and
increase in beauty, to their great satisfaction. He gave them yet
greater pleasure as he advanced in years, by his continual
sprightliness, by his agreeable manners, and by the justness and
vivacity of his wit in whatever he said; and this satisfaction was
the more sensible, because king Saleh his uncle, the queen his
grandmother, and the princesses his relations, came from time to
time to partake of it.

He was easily taught to read and write, and was instructed with the
same facility in all the sciences that became a prince of his rank.

When he arrived at the age of fifteen, he acquitted himself in all
his exercises with infinitely better address and grace than his
masters. He was withal very wise and prudent. The king, who had
almost from his cradle discovered in him these virtues, so necessary
for a monarch, and who moreover began to perceive the infirmities of
old age coming upon himself every day, would not stay till death
gave him possession of his throne, but purposed to resign it to him.
He had no great difficulty to make his council consent to it; and
the people heard this resolution with so much the more joy, as they
conceived prince Beder worthy to govern them. In a word, as the king
had not for a long time appeared in public, they had all the
opportunity to observe he had not that disdainful, proud, and
crabbed air, which most princes have, who look upon all below them
with scorn and contempt. They saw, on the contrary, that he treated
all mankind with that goodness which invited them to approach him;
that he heard favourably all who had any thing to say to him; that
he answered every body with a goodness that was peculiar to him; and
that he refused nobody any thing that had the least appearance of
justice.

The day for the ceremony was appointed; when, in the midst of the
whole assembly, which was then more numerous than ordinary, the king
of Persia then sitting on his throne, came down from it, took the
crown from off his head, put it on that of prince Beder, and having
seated him in his place, kissed his hand, as a token that he
resigned his authority to him. After which he took his place among
the crowd of viziers and emirs below the throne.

Hereupon the viziers, emirs, and other principal officers, came
immediately and threw themselves at the new king’s feet, taking
each the oath of fidelity according to their rank. Then the grand
vizier made a report of divers important matters, on which the young
king gave judgment with that admirable prudence and sagacity, that
surprised all the council. He next turned out several governors
convicted of mal-administration, and put others in their room, with
that wonderful and just discernment, as exacted the acclamations of
every body; which were so much the more honourable, as flattery had
no share in them. He at length left the council, accompanied by the
late king his father, and went to wait on his mother, queen Gulnare,
at her apartment. The queen no sooner saw him coming with his crown
upon his head, but she ran to him, and embraced him with a great
deal of tenderness, wishing him a long and prosperous reign.

The first year of his reign king Beder acquitted himself of all his
royal functions with great assiduity. Above all, he took care to
inform himself of the state of his affairs, and all that might in
any way contribute towards the happiness of his people. Next year,
having left the administration to his council, under the direction
of the old king his father, he went out of his capital city, under
pretence of diverting himself with hunting; but his real intention
was to visit all the provinces of his kingdom, that he might reform
all abuses there, establish good order and discipline every where,
and take from all ill-minded princes, his neighbours, any
opportunities of attempting any thing against the security and
tranquillity of his subjects, by showing himself on his frontiers.

It required no less than a whole year for this young king to execute
a design so worthy of him. Soon after his return, the old king his
father fell so dangerously ill, that he knew at once he should never
recover. He waited for his last moment with great tranquillity, and
his only care was to recommend to the ministers, and other lords of
his son’s court, to persevere in the fidelity they had sworn to
him; and there was not one but willingly renewed his oath as freely
as at first. He died, at length, to the great grief of king Beder
and queen Gulnare, who caused his corpse to be borne to a stately
mausoleum, worthy of his rank and dignity.

The funeral obsequies ended, king Beder found no difficulty to
comply with that ancient custom in Persia to mourn for the dead a
whole month, and not to be seen by any body during all that time. He
had mourned the death of his father his whole life, had he hearkened
to his excessive affliction, and had it been right for a great
prince thus to abandon himself to it. During this interval, the
queen, mother to queen Gulnare, and king Saleh, together with the
princesses their relations, arrived at the Persian court, and took a
great part of their affliction, before they offered any consolation.

When the month was expired, the king could not refuse admittance to
the grand vizier and the other lords of his court, who besought him
to lay aside his mourning, to show himself to his subjects, and take
upon him the administration of affairs as before.

He showed so great reluctance to their request, that the grand
vizier was forced to take upon him to say to him, Sir, it were
needless to represent to your majesty, that it belongs only to women
to persist in perpetual mourning. We doubt not but you are fully
convinced of that, and that it is not your intention to follow their
example. Neither our tears nor yours are capable of restoring life
to the good king your father, though we should lament him all our
days. He has undergone the common law of all men, which subjects
them to pay the indispensable tribute of death. Yet we cannot say
absolutely that he is dead, since we see him in your sacred person.
He did not himself doubt, when he was dying, but he should revive in
you; and to your majesty it belongs to show that he was not deceived.

King Beder could no longer oppose such pressing instances: he laid
aside his mourning habit immediately; and, after he had resumed the
royal habit and ornaments, he began to provide for the necessities
of his kingdom and subjects with the same assiduity as before his
father’s death. He acquitted himself with universal approbation;
and as he was exact in maintaining the ordinances of his
predecessor, the people did not perceive they had changed their
sovereign.

King Saleh, who was returned to his dominions in the sea with the
queen his mother and the princesses, no sooner saw that king Beder
had resumed the government, but he, at the end of the year, came
alone to visit him; and king Beder and queen Gulnare were overjoyed
to see him. One evening, when they rose from table, they talked of
various matters.

King Saleh fell insensibly on the praises of the king his nephew,
and expressed to the queen his sister how glad he was to see him
govern so prudently, which had acquired him so great reputation, not
only among his neighbours, but more remote princes. King Beder, who
could not bear to hear himself so well spoken of, and not being
willing, through good manners, to interrupt the king his uncle,
turned on one side, and feigned to be asleep, leaning his head
against a cushion that was behind him.

From these commendations, which regarded only the wonderful conduct
and surprising genius of king Beder, king Saleh came to speak of the
perfections of his body, which he extolled as prodigies, having
nothing equal to them upon earth, or in all the kingdoms under the
waters, with which he was acquainted.

Sister, said he, in an ecstacy, he is so handsome, as you well know,
I wonder you have not thought of marrying him ere this: if I mistake
not, he is in his twentieth year; and, at that age, no prince like
him ought to be suffered to be without a wife. I will think of a
match for him myself, since you will not, and marry him to some
princess of our lower world, that may be worthy of him.

Brother, replied queen Gulnare, you call to my remembrance a thing,
which I must own I have never thought of to this very moment. As he
never discovered any inclination for marriage, I never thought of
mentioning it to him; and I am glad you have spoken of it to me. I
like your proposing one of our princesses; and I desire you to name
one so beautiful and accomplished, that the king my son may be
obliged to love her.

I know one that will suit, replied king Saleh, softly; but before I
tell you who she is, let us see if the king my nephew be asleep or
not, and I will tell you afterwards why it is necessary we should
take that precaution. Queen Gulnare turned about and looked upon her
son, and thought she had no reason to doubt but he was in a profound
sleep. King Beder, nevertheless, far from sleeping, redoubled his
attention, unwilling to lose any thing the king his uncle said with
so much secrecy. There is no necessity for your speaking so low,
said the queen to the king her brother; you may speak out with
freedom, without fear of being heard.

It is by no means proper, replied king Saleh, that the king my
nephew should as yet have any knowledge of what I am going to say.
Love, you know, sometimes enters at the ear; and it is not necessary
he should thus conceive a passion for this lady I am about to name.
Indeed I see many difficulties to be surmounted, not on the lady’s
part, as I hope, but on that of her father. --I need only mention to
you the princess Giauhara, [91] daughter of the king of Samandal.

How! brother, replied queen Gulnare, is not the princess Giauhara
yet married? I remember to have seen her a little before I left your
palace; she was then about eighteen months old, and surprisingly
beautiful, and must needs be the wonder of the world, if her charms
have increased equally with her years. The few years she is older
than the king my son ought not to prevent us from doing our utmost
to bring the match about. Let me but know the difficulties that are
to be surmounted, and we will surmount them.

Sister, replied king Saleh, the greatest difficulty is, that the
king of Samandal is insupportably vain, looking upon all others as
his inferiors; it is not likely we shall easily get him to enter
into this alliance. For my part, I will go to him in person, and
demand of him the princess his daughter; and, in case he refuses
her, we will address ourselves elsewhere, where we shall be more
favourably heard. For this reason, as you may perceive, added he, it
is as well for the king my nephew not to know any thing of our
design, till we have got the consent of the king of Samandal, lest
he should fall in love with the princess Giauhara, and we afterwards
not be able to obtain her for him. They discoursed a little longer
upon this point, and before they parted, agreed that king Saleh
should forthwith return to his own dominions, and demand the
princess Giauhara of the king of Samandal her father, for the king
of Persia his nephew.

This done, queen Gulnare and king Saleh, who verily believed king
Beder asleep, agreed to awake him before they retired; and he
dissembled so well, that he seemed to wake from a profound sleep. He
had heard every word they said, and the character they gave of the
princess Giauhara had inflamed his heart with a new passion. He had
conceived such an idea of her beauty, that the desire of possessing
her made him pass the night very uneasy, without closing his eyes.

Next day king Saleh would take leave of queen Gulnare and the king
his nephew. The young king, who knew the king his uncle would not
have departed so soon but to go and promote without loss of time his
happiness, changed colour when he heard him mention his departure.
His passion was become so violent, it would not suffer him to wait
so long time for the sight of his mistress as would be required to
accomplish the marriage. He more than once resolved to desire his
uncle to bring her away with him: but as he did not care to let the
queen his mother understand he knew any thing of what had passed, he
desired him only to stay with him one day more, that they might hunt
together, intending to take an opportunity to discover his mind to
him.

The day for hunting was set, and king Beder had many opportunities
of being alone with his uncle to declare his mind to him; but he had
not the courage to open his mouth to acquaint him with his design.

In the heat of the chase, when king Saleh was separated from him,
and not one of his officers and attendants were near him, he
alighted near a rivulet; and having tied his horse to a tree, which,
with several others growing along the banks, afforded a very
pleasing shade, he laid himself down on the grass, and gave free
course to his tears, which flowed in great abundance, accompanied
with many sighs. He remained a good while in this condition,
absorbed in thought, without speaking a word.

King Saleh, in the mean time, missing the king his nephew, began to
be much concerned to know what was become of him; but could meet no
one who could give any tidings of him. He therefore left his company
to go in search of him, and at length perceived him at a distance.
He had observed the day before, and more plainly that day, that he
was not so lively as he used to be; that he was more pensive than
ordinary; and that, if he was asked a question, he either answered
not at all, or nothing to the purpose; but he never in the least
suspected the cause of all this alteration. As soon as he saw him
lying in that disconsolate posture, he immediately guessed he had
not only heard what passed between him and queen Gulnare, but was
become passionately in love. He hereupon alighted at some distance
from him, and having tied his horse to a tree, took a compass, and
came upon him so softly, that he heard him pronounce the following
words:

Amiable princess of the kingdom of Samandal, cried he aloud, I have
no doubt had but an imperfect sketch of your incomparable beauty; I
hold you to be still more beautiful in preference to all the
princesses in the world, and to excel them as much as the sun does
the moon and stars. I would this moment go and offer you my heart,
if I knew where to find you: it belongs to you, and no princess
shall be possessor of it but you.

King Saleh would hear no more; he advanced immediately, and
discovered himself to king Beder. From what I see, nephew, said he,
you heard what the queen your mother and I said the other day of the
princess Giauhara. It was not our intention you should have known
any thing, and we thought you were asleep. My dear uncle, replied
king Beder, I heard every word, and have sufficiently experienced
the effect you foretold; which it was not in your power to prevent.
I detained you on purpose to acquaint you with my love before your
departure; but the shame to disclose to you my weakness, if it be
any to love a princess so worthy of my love, sealed up my mouth. I
beseech you, then, by the friendship you profess for a prince who
has the honour to be so nearly allied to you, that you would pity
me, and not wait to procure me the consent of the divine Giauhara,
till you have gained the consent of the king of Samandal that I may
marry his daughter, unless you had rather see me die with love for
her, before I have a sight of her.

These words of the king of Persia greatly embarrassed king Saleh. He
represented to him how difficult it was to give him the satisfaction
he desired, and that he could not well do it without carrying him
along with him; which might be of dangerous consequence, since his
presence was so absolutely necessary in his kingdom. He conjured
him, therefore, to moderate his passion, till such time as he had
put things into a train to satisfy him, assuring him he would use
his utmost diligence, and would come to acquaint him in a few days.
But these reasons were not sufficient to satisfy the king of Persia.
Cruel uncle, said he, I find you do not love me so much as you
pretended, and that you had rather see me die than grant the first
request I ever made you.

I am ready to convince your majesty, replied king Saleh, that I
would do any thing to serve you; but as for carrying you along with
me, I cannot do that till I have spoken to the queen your mother.
What would she say of you and me? If she consents, I am ready to do
all you would have me, and I will join my entreaties to yours. You
cannot be ignorant, replied the king of Persia, that the queen my
mother would never willingly part with me; and therefore, this
excuse of yours does but farther convince me of your unkindness. If
you do realty love me, as you would have me to believe you do, you
must return to your kingdom immediately, and carry me along with you.

King Saleh, finding himself obliged to yield to his nephew’s
importunity, drew from his finger a ring, on which were engraven the
same mysterious names of God that were upon Solomon’s seal, that
had wrought so many wonders by their virtue. Here, take this ring,
said he, put it upon your finger, and fear neither the waters of the
sea, nor their depth. The king of Persia took the ring, and when he
had put it on his finger, king Saleh said to him, Do as I do. At the
same time they both mounted lightly up into the air, and made
towards the sea, which was not far distant, whereinto they plunged.

The sea-king was not long getting to his palace, with the king of
Persia, whom he immediately carried to the queen’s apartment, and
presented him to her. The king of Persia kissed the queen his
grandmother’s hands, and she embraced him with great
demonstrations of joy. I do not ask you how you do, said she to him;
I see you are very well, and I am rejoiced at it; but I desire to
know how my daughter, your mother, queen Gulnare, does? The king of
Persia took great care not to let her know he came away without
taking leave of her; on the contrary, he told her the queen his
mother was in perfect health, and had enjoined him to pay her duty
to her. Then the queen presented him to the princesses; and while he
was in conversation with them, she left him and went with king Saleh
into a closet, who told her how the king of Persia had fallen in
love with the princess Giauhara, upon the bare relation of her
beauty, and contrary to his intention; that he had brought him along
with him, without being able to hinder it; and that he was going to
concert measures to procure the princess for him in marriage.

Although king Saleh was, to do him justice, perfectly innocent of
the king of Persia’s passion, yet the queen could hardly forgive
his indiscretion in mentioning the princess Giauhara before him.
Your imprudence is not to be forgiven, said she to him: can you
think that the king of Samandal, whose character is so well known,
will have greater consideration for you, than the many kings he has
refused his daughter to, with such evident contempt? would you have
him send you away with the same confusion?

Madam, replied king Saleh, I have already told you it was contrary
to my intention that the king my nephew heard what I related of the
beauty of the princess Giauhara to the queen my sister. The fault is
committed, and we must consider what a violent passion he has for
this princess, and that he will die with grief and affliction, if we
do not speedily use every possible means to obtain her for him. For
my part, I shall omit nothing that can contribute to it, since I
was, though innocently, the cause of the malady; I will therefore do
all that I can to remedy it. I hope, madam, you will approve of my
resolution, to go myself and wait upon the king of Samandal, with a
rich present of precious stones, and demand the princess his
daughter of him for the king of Persia your grandson. I have some
reason to believe he will not refuse me, but will be pleased at an
alliance with one of the greatest potentates of the earth.

It were to have been wished, replied the queen, that we had not been
under a necessity of making this demand, since the success of our
attempt is not so certain as we could desire; but since my
grandson’s peace and content depend upon it, I freely give my
consent to it. But, above all, I charge you, since you well know the
humour of the king of Samandal, that you take care to speak to him
with due respect and in a manner that cannot possibly offend him.

The queen prepared the present herself, composing it of diamonds,
rubies, emeralds, and strings of pearls; all which she put into a
very neat and very rich box. Next morning king Saleh took leave of
her majesty and the king of Persia, and departed with a chosen and
small troop of officers, and other attendants. He soon arrived at
the kingdom and the palace of the king of Samandal, who delayed not
to give him audience immediately upon his arrival. He rose from his
throne as soon as he perceived him; and king Saleh, forgetting his
character for some moments, knowing whom he had to deal with,
prostrated himself at his feet, wishing him the accomplishment of
all his desires. The king of Samandal immediately stooped to take
him up, and after he had placed him by him on his left hand, he told
him he was welcome, and asked him if there was any thing he could do
to serve him.

Sir, answered king Saleh, though I should have no other motive than
that of paying my respects to the most potent, most prudent, and
most valiant prince in the world, feeble would be my expressions how
much I honour your majesty. Could you penetrate into my inmost soul,
you would be convinced of the great veneration I have for you, and
the ardent desire to testify my attachment. Having spoke these
words, he took the box of jewels from one of his servants, and
having opened it, presented it to the king, imploring him to accept
of it for his sake.

Prince, replied the king of Samandal, you would not make me such a
present without you had a request proportionable to it to propose.
If there be any thing in my power, you may freely command it, and I
shall feel the greatest pleasure in granting it. Speak, and tell me
frankly wherein I can serve you.

I must own ingenuously, replied king Saleh, I have a boon to ask of
your majesty; and I shall take care to ask nothing but what is in
your power to grant. The thing depends so absolutely on yourself,
that it would be to no purpose to ask it of any other. I ask it then
with all possible earnestness, and I beg of you not to refuse it me.
If it be so, replied the king of Samandal, you have nothing to do
but acquaint me what it is, and you shall see after what manner I
can oblige when it is in my power.

Sir, said king Saleh, after the confidence your majesty has been
pleased to encourage me to put in your good-will, I will not
dissemble any longer, that I came to beg of you to honour our house
with your alliance by the marriage of your honourable daughter the
princess Giauhara, and to strengthen the good understanding that has
so long subsisted between our two crowns.

At these words the king of Samandal burst out a laughing, falling
back in his throne against a cushion that supported him, and with an
imperious and scornful air, said to king Saleh, King Saleh, I have
always hitherto thought you a prince of great sense, wisdom, and
prudence; but what you say convinces me how much I was mistaken.
Tell me, I beseech you, where was your wit or discretion, when you
formed to yourself so great a chimera as you have but now proposed
to me? Could you conceive a thought only of aspiring in marriage to
a princess, the daughter of so great and powerful a king as I am?
You ought to have considered better beforehand the great distance
between us, and not run the risk of losing in a moment the esteem I
always had for your person.

King Saleh was extremely nettled at this affronting answer, and had
much ado to restrain his resentment; however, he replied with all
possible moderation, God reward your majesty as you deserve! I have
the honour to inform you, I do not demand the princess your daughter
in marriage for myself: had I done so, your majesty and the princess
ought to have been so far from being offended, that you should have
thought it an honour done to both. Your majesty well knows I am one
of the kings of the sea as well as yourself; that the kings my
ancestors yield not in antiquity to any other royal families; and
that the kingdom I inherit from them is no less potent and
flourishing than it has ever been. If your majesty had not
interrupted me, you had soon understood that the favour I ask of you
was not for myself, but for the young king of Persia my nephew,
whose power and grandeur, no less than his personal good qualities,
cannot be unknown to you. Every body acknowledges the princess
Giauhara to be the most beautiful person under heaven: but it is no
less true, that the young king of Persia my nephew, is the best made
and most accomplished prince on the land. Thus the favour that is
asked being likely to redound both to the honour of your majesty and
the princess your daughter, you ought not to doubt that your consent
to an alliance so equal will be unanimously approved in all the
kingdoms of the sea. The princess is worthy of the king of Persia,
and the king of Persia is no less worthy of her. No king or prince
in the world can dispute her with him.

The king of Samandal had not let king Saleh go on so long after this
rate, had not the rage he put him in deprived him of all power of
speech. He was some time longer before he could find his tongue, so
much was he transported with passion. At length, however, he broke
out into outrageous and injurious expressions, unworthy of a great
king. Dog! cried he, dare you talk to me after this manner, and so
much as mention my daughter’s name in my presence? Can you think
the son of your sister Gulnare worthy to come in competition with my
daughter? Who are you? Who was your father? Who is your sister? And
who your nephew? Was not his father a dog, and a son of a dog, like
you? Guards, seize the insolent wretch, and cut off his head!

The few officers that were about the king of Samandal were
immediately going to obey his orders, when king Saleh, who was in
the flower of his age, nimble and vigorous, got from them, before
they could draw their sabres; and having reached the palace-gate, he
there found a thousand men of his relations and friends, well armed
and equipped, who were just arrived. The queen his mother having
considered the small number of attendants he took with him, and
moreover foreseeing the bad reception he would probably have from
the king of Samandal, had sent these troops to protect and defend
him in case of danger, ordering them to make haste. Those of his
relations who were at the head of this troop had reason to rejoice
at their seasonable arrival, when they beheld him and his attendants
come running in great disorder, and pursued. Sire, cried his
friends, the moment he joined them, what is the matter? We are ready
to revenge you: you need only command us.

King Saleh related his case to them in as few words as he could, and
putting himself at the head of a large troop, he, while some seized
on the gates, re-entered the palace as before. The few officers and
guards who had pursued him, being soon dispersed, he re-entered the
king of Samandal’s apartment, who, being abandoned by his
attendants, was soon seized. King Saleh left sufficient guards to
secure his person, and then went from apartment to apartment, to
search after the princess Giauhara. But that princess, on the first
alarm, had, together with her women, sprung up to the surface of the
sea, and escaped to the desert island.

While this passed in the palace of the king of Samandal, those of
king Saleh’s attendants who had fled at the first menaces of that
king, put the queen mother into terrible consternation, upon
relating the danger her son was in. King Beder, who was by at that
time, was the more concerned, in that he looked upon himself as the
principal author of all the mischief that might ensue: therefore,
not caring to abide the queen’s presence any longer, he, while she
was giving the orders necessary at that conjuncture, darted up from
the bottom of the sea; and, not knowing how to find his way to the
kingdom of Persia, he happened to light on the same island where the
princess Giauhara had saved herself.

The prince, not a little disturbed in mind, went and seated himself
under the shade of a large tree, surrounded with divers others.
Whilst he was endeavouring to recover himself, he heard somebody
talking, but was too far off to understand what was said. He arose,
and advanced softly towards the place whence the sound came, where,
among the branches, he perceived a beauty that dazzled him.
Doubtless, said he, within himself, stopping and considering her
with great attention, this must be the princess Giauhara, whom fear
has obliged to abandon her father’s palace; or, if it be not, she
no less deserves my hearty love. This said, he came forward, and
discovering himself approached the princess with profound reverence.
Madam, said he, I can never sufficiently thank Heaven for the favour
it has done me in presenting to my eyes this day so much beauty. A
greater happiness could not have befallen me, than this opportunity
to offer you my most humble services. I beseech you, therefore,
madam, to accept them, it being impossible that a lady in this
solitude should not want assistance.

True, my lord, replied Giauhara very sorrowfully; it is not a little
extraordinary for a lady of my quality to be in this situation. I am
a princess, daughter of the king of Samandal, and my name is
Giauhara. I was at ease in my father’s palace, and my apartment,
when all of a sudden I heard a dreadful noise: news was immediately
brought me, that king Saleh, I know not for what reason, had forced
the palace, seized the king my father, and murdered all the guards
that made any resistance. I had only time to save myself, and escape
hither from his violence.

At these words of the princess, king Beder began to be concerned
that he had quitted his grandmother so hastily, without staying to
hear from her an explanation of the news that had been brought her.
But he was on the other hand, overjoyed to find that the king his
uncle had rendered himself master of the king of Samandal’s
person, not doubting but he would consent to give up the princess
for his liberty. Adorable princess, continued he, your concern is
most just, but it is easy to put an end both to that and your
father’s captivity. You will agree with me, when I shall tell you
that I am Beder king of Persia, and king Saleh is my uncle: I assure
you, madam, he has no design to seize upon the king your father’s
dominions; his only intent is to obtain of him that I may have the
honour and happiness of being his son-in-law. I had already given my
heart to you, upon the bare relation of your beauty and charms; and
now, far from repenting of what I have done, I beg of you to accept
it, and to be assured that I will love you as long as I live. I dare
flatter myself you will not refuse this favour, but be ready to
acknowledge that a king, that quitted his dominions purely on your
account, deserves some acknowledgment. Permit me, then, beauteous
princess, to have the honour to go and present you to the king my
uncle; and the king your father shall no sooner have consented to
our marriage, but king Saleh will leave him sovereign of his
dominions as before.

This declaration of king Beder did not produce the effect he
expected. It is true, the princess no sooner saw him, than his
person and air, and the good grace wherewith he accosted her, led
her to look on him as one who would not have been disagreeable to
her; but when she heard from his own mouth that he had been the
occasion of the ill treatment her father had suffered, of the grief
and fright she had endured, and especially the necessity she was
reduced to of flying her country; she looked upon him as an enemy
with whom she ought to have no manner of converse. Whatever
inclination she might have to consent to this marriage, which he
desired, she determined never to yield to it, in consideration that
one of the reasons that her father might have had against this match
might be, that king Beder was son of a king of the earth; and
therefore she resolved to submit entirely to his will in that
particular.

She would not, however, let king Beder know her resentment, and only
sought an occasion to deliver herself dexterously out of his hands;
and seeming in the mean time to have a great kindness for him: Are
you then, sir, said she, with all possible civility, son of the
queen Gulnare, so famous for her wit and beauty? I am glad of it,
and rejoice that you are the son of so worthy a mother. The king my
father was much in the wrong so strongly to oppose our union: he
could not have seen you, but he must have consented to make us both
happy. Saying so, she reached forth her hand to him as a token of
friendship.

King Beder, believing himself arrived at the very pinnacle of
happiness, held forth his hand and taking that of the princess,
stooped down to kiss it, when she, pushing him back, and spitting in
his face for want of water to throw at him, said, ‘Wretch, quit
that form of a man, and take that of a white bird, with a red bill
and feet.’ Upon her pronouncing these words, king Beder was
immediately changed into a bird of that sort, to his great surprise
and mortification. Take him, said she, to one of her women, and
carry him to the Dry Island. This island was only one frightful
rock, where there was not a drop of water to be had.

The waiting-woman took the bird, and in executing her princess’s
orders, had compassion on king Beder’s destiny. It would be great
pity, said she to herself, to let a prince, so worthy to live, die
of hunger and thirst. The princess, so good and gentle, will, it may
be, repent of this cruel order when she comes to herself: it were
better that I carried him to a place where he may die a natural
death. She accordingly carried him to a well-frequented island, and
left him in a charming plain, planted with all sorts of fruit-trees,
and watered by divers rivulets.

Let us return to king Saleh. After he had sought a good while for
the princess Giauhara, and ordered others to seek for her to no
purpose, he caused the king of Samandal to be shut up in his own
palace, under a strong guard; and having given the necessary orders
for governing the kingdom in his absence, he returned to give the
queen his mother an account of what he had done. The first thing he
asked upon his arrival was, Where the king his nephew was? and he
learned with great surprise and vexation that he had disappeared.
News being brought me, said the queen, of the danger you was in at
the palace of the king of Samandal, whilst I was giving orders to
send you other troops to avenge you, he disappeared. He must have
been frightened at hearing of your being in so great danger, and did
not think himself in sufficient security with us.

This news exceedingly afflicted king Saleh, who now repented of his
being so easily wrought upon by king Beder as to carry him away with
him without his mother’s consent. He sent every where after him,
but whatever diligence was used, he could hear no tidings of him;
and instead of the joy he conceived at having carried on so far the
marriage, which he looked upon as his own work, his grief for this
accident was more mortifying. Whilst he was under this suspense
about his nephew, he left his kingdom under the administration of
his mother, and went to govern that of the king of Samandal, whom he
continued to keep with great vigilance, though with all due respect
to his character.

The same day that king Saleh returned to the kingdom of Samandal,
queen Gulnara, mother to king Beder, arrived at the court of the
queen her mother. The princess was not at all surprised to find her
son did not return the same day he set out; it being not uncommon
for him to go farther than he proposed in the heat of the chase; but
when she saw he neither returned the next day, nor the day after,
she began to be alarmed, as may easily be imagined from her
affection for him. This alarm was augmented, when the officers, who
had accompanied the king, and were obliged to return after they had
for a long time sought in vain both for him and his uncle, came and
told her majesty they must of necessity have come to some harm, or
must be together in some place which they could not guess, since,
whatever diligence they had used, they could hear no tidings of
them. Their horses indeed they had found, but as for their persons,
they knew not where to look for them. The queen, hearing this, had
resolved to dissemble and conceal her affliction, bidding the
officers to search once more with their utmost diligence; but in the
mean time, saying nothing to any body, she plunged into the sea, to
satisfy herself as to the suspicion she had that king Saleh must
have carried away his nephew along with him.

This great queen would have been more affectionately received by the
queen her mother, had she not, upon first sight of her, guessed the
occasion of her coming. Daughter, said she, I plainly perceive you
are not come hither to visit me; you come to inquire after the king
your son; and the only news I can tell you will augment both your
grief and mine. I no sooner saw him arrive in our territories, but I
rejoiced; yet, when I came to understand he had come away without
your knowledge, I began to participate with you in the concern you
must needs suffer. Then she related to her with what zeal king Saleh
went to demand the princess Giauhara in marriage for king Beder, and
what happened upon it, till her son disappeared. I have sent
diligently after him, added she, and the king my son, who is but
just gone to govern the kingdom of Samandal, has done all that lay
in his power. All our endeavours have hitherto proved unsuccessful,
but we must hope nevertheless to see him again, perhaps when we
least expect it.

Queen Gulnare was not satisfied with this hope: she looked upon the
king her dear son as lost, and she lamented him bitterly, laying all
the blame upon the king his uncle. The queen her mother made her
consider the necessity of her not yielding too much to her grief.
The king your brother, said she, ought not, it is true, to have
talked to you so inconsiderately about that marriage, nor ever have
consented to carry away the king my grandson, without acquainting
you before; yet since it is not certain that the king of Persia is
absolutely lost you ought to neglect nothing to preserve his kingdom
for him: lose, then, no more time, but return to your capital; your
presence there will be necessary, and it will not be hard for you to
preserve the public peace, by causing it to be published that the
king of Persia was gone to visit his grandmother.

This was sufficient to oblige queen Gulnare to yield to it. She took
leave of the queen her mother, and got back to the palace of the
capital of Persia before she had been missed. She despatched
immediately persons to recall the officers she had sent after the
king, and to tell them she knew where his majesty was, and that they
should soon see him again. She also caused the same report to be
spread throughout the city; and governed, in concert with the prime
minister and council, with the same tranquillity as if the king had
been present.

To return to king Beder, whom the princess Giauhara’s
waiting-woman had taken and left in the island before mentioned;
that monarch was not a little surprised when he found himself alone,
and under the form of a bird. He esteemed himself yet more unhappy,
in that he knew not where he was, nor in what part of the world the
kingdom of Persia lay. But if he had known, and sufficiently knew
the force of his wings, to hazard the traversing so extensive watery
regions, and had reached it, what could he have gained, but the
mortification to continue still in the same ill plight, not to be
accounted so much as a man, in lieu of being acknowledged for king
of Persia. He was forced to remain where he was, and live upon such
food as birds of his kind were wont to have, and to pass the night
on a tree.

A few days after, a peasant that was skilled in taking birds with
nets chanced to come to the place where he was; when perceiving so
fine a bird, the like of which he had never seen, though he had
followed that sport for a long while, he began greatly to rejoice.
He employed all his art to become master of him; and at length
succeeded and took him. Overjoyed at so great a prize, which he
looked upon to be of more worth than all the other birds he commonly
took, by reason of its being so great a rarity, he shut it up in a
cage, and carried it to the city. As soon as he was come into the
market, a citizen stopt him, and asked him how much he would have
for that bird.

Instead of answering, the peasant demanded of the citizen, what he
would do with him in case he should buy him? What wouldst thou have
me to do with him, answered the citizen, but roast and eat him? If
that be the case, replied the peasant, I suppose you would think me
very well paid, if you should give me the smallest piece of silver
for him. I set a much higher value upon him, and you should not have
him for a piece of gold. Although I am advanced in years, I never
saw such a bird in my life. I intend to make a present of him to the
king; he will know the value of him better than you.

Without staying any longer in the market the peasant went directly
to the palace, and placed himself exactly before the king’s
apartment. His majesty being at a window where he could see all that
passed in the court, no sooner cast his eyes on this beautiful bird,
than he sent an officer of his eunuchs to buy it for him. The
officer going to the peasant, demanded of him how much he would have
for that bird? If it is for his majesty, answered the peasant, I
humbly beg of him to accept it of me as a present and I desire you
to carry it to him. The officer took the bird to the king, who found
it so great a rarity, that he ordered the same officer to take ten
pieces of gold, and carry them to the peasant, who departed very
well satisfied. The king ordered the bird to be put into a
magnificent cage, and gave it corn and water in rich vessels.

His majesty being then ready to mount on horseback to go a hunting,
had not time to consider the bird, therefore had it brought to him
as soon as he came back. The officer brought the cage, and the king,
that he might the better view the bird, took it out himself, and
perched it upon his hand. Looking earnestly upon it, he demanded of
the officer, if he had seen it eat. Sir, replied the officer, your
majesty may observe the vessel with his food is still full, and I
have not observed that he has touched any of it. Then the king
ordered him meat of divers sorts, that he might take what he liked
best.

The table being spread, and dinner served up just as the king had
given these orders, as soon as the plates were placed, the bird
clapping his wings, leaped off the king’s hand, flew upon the
table, where he began to peck the bread and victuals, sometimes on
one plate, and sometimes on another. The king was so surprised, that
he immediately sent the officer of the eunuchs to desire the queen
to come and see this wonder. The officer related it to her majesty,
and she came forthwith: but she no sooner saw the bird, than she
covered her face with her veil, and would have retired. The king,
surprised at her proceeding, as there were none present in the
chamber but the eunuchs and the women that followed her, asked the
reason of it.

Sir, answered the queen, your majesty will no longer be surprised,
when you understand this bird is not, as you take it, a bird, but a
man. Madam, said the king, more astonished than before, you mean to
banter me; but you shall never persuade me that a bird can be a man.
Sir, replied the queen, far be it from me to banter your majesty;
nothing is more certain than what I have had the honour to tell you.
I can assure your majesty, it is the king of Persia, named Beder,
son of the celebrated Gulnare, princess of one of the largest
kingdoms of the sea, nephew of Saleh, king of that kingdom, and
grandson of queen Farasche, mother of Gulnare and Saleh: and it was
the princess Giauhara, daughter of the king of Samandal, who thus
metamorphosed him into a bird. That the king might no longer doubt
of what she affirmed, she told him the whole story, how and for what
reason the princess Giauhara had thus revenged herself for the ill
treatment which king Saleh had used towards the king of Samandal her
father.

The king had the less difficulty to believe this assertion of the
queen, in that he knew her to be a skilful magician, one of the
greatest in the world. And as she knew every thing which passed in
it, he was always by her means timely informed of the designs of the
kings his neighbours against him, and prevented them. His majesty
had compassion on the king of Persia, and earnestly besought his
queen to break the enchantment, that he might return to his own form.

The queen consented to it with great willingness. Sir, said she to
the king, be pleased to take the bird into your closet, and I will
show you a king worthy of the consideration you have for him. The
bird, which had ceased eating, and attended to what the king and
queen said, would not give his majesty the trouble to take him, but
hopped into the closet before him; and the queen came in soon after,
with a vessel full of water in her hand. She pronounced over the
vessel some words unknown to the king, till the water began to boil;
when she took some of it in her hand, and sprinkling a little upon
the bird, said, ‘By virtue of these holy and mysterious words I
have just pronounced, and in the name of the Creator of heaven and
earth, who raises the dead, and supports the universe, quit that
form of a bird, and re-assume that which thou hast received from thy
Creator.’

The words were scarce out of the queen’s mouth, but, instead of a
bird, the king saw a young prince of good shape, air, and mien. King
Beder immediately fell upon his knees, and thanked God for the
favour that had been bestowed upon him. Then he took the king’s
hand, who helped him up, and kissed it in token of gratitude; but
the king embraced him with great joy, and testified to him the
satisfaction he had to see him. He would then have made his
acknowledgments to the queen, but she was already retired to her
apartment. The king made him sit at the table with him, and after
dinner was over, he prayed him to relate to him how the princess
Giauhara could have the inhumanity to transform into a bird so
amiable a prince as he was; and the king of Persia immediately
satisfied him. When he had done, the king, provoked at the
proceeding of the princess, could not help blaming her. It was
commendable, said he, in the princess of Samandal not to be
insensible of the king her father’s ill treatment; but to carry
her vengeance so far, and especially against a prince who was not
culpable, was what she could never be able to justify herself for.
But let us have done with this discourse, and tell me, I beseech
you, in what I can farther serve you.

Sir, answered king Beder, my obligation to your majesty is so great,
that I ought to remain with you all my life to testify my gratitude;
but since your majesty sets no limits to your generosity, I entreat
you to grant me one of your ships to transport me to Persia; where I
fear my absence, which has been but too long, may have occasioned
some disorder, and that the queen my mother, from whom I concealed
my departure, may be dead of grief, under the uncertainty whether I
am alive or dead.

The king granted what he desired with the best grace imaginable, and
immediately gave orders for equipping one of his largest ships, and
the best sailer in his numerous fleet. The ship was soon furnished
with all its complement of men, provisions, and ammunition; and as
soon as the wind became fair, King Beder embarked, after having
taken leave of the king, and thanked him for all his favours.

The ship sailed before the wind for ten days together, which made it
advance considerably without interruption: the eleventh day the wind
changed, and, becoming very violent, there followed a furious
tempest. The ship was not only driven out of its course, but so
violently tossed, that all its masts were brought by the board; and
driving along at the pleasure of the wind, it at length struck
against a rock and bulged.

The greatest part of the people were instantly drowned. Some few
were saved by swimming, and others by getting on pieces of the
wreck. King Beder was among the latter, when after having been
tossed about for some time by the waves and currents, under great
uncertainty of his fate, he at length perceived himself near the
shore, and not far from a city that seemed large. He exerted his
remaining strength to reach the land, and was at length so fortunate
to come so near as to be able to touch the ground with his feet. He
immediately abandoned his piece of wood, which had been of so great
service to him; but when he came pretty near the shore, he was
greatly surprised to see horses, camels, mules, asses, oxen, cows,
bulls, and other animals crowding to the shore, and putting
themselves in a posture to oppose his landing. He had the utmost
difficulty to conquer their obstinacy and force his way; but at
length he succeeded, and sheltered himself among the rocks till he
had recovered his breath, and dried his clothes in the sun.

When the prince advanced to enter the city, he met with the same
opposition from these animals, who seemed to intend to make him
forego his design, and give him to understand it was dangerous to
proceed.

King Beder, however, got into the city soon after, and saw many fair
and spacious streets, but was surprised to find no man there. This
made him think it was not without cause that so many animals had
opposed his passage. Going forward, nevertheless, he observed divers
shops open; which gave him reason to believe the place was not so
destitute of inhabitants as he imagined. He approached one of these
shops, where several sorts of fruits were exposed to sale, and
saluted very courteously an old man that was sitting there.

The old man, who was busy about something, lifted up his head, and
seeing a youth who had an appearance of grandeur in his air,
started, and asked him whence he came, and what business had brought
him there. King Beder satisfied him in a few words; and the old man
further asked him if he had met any body on the road. You are the
first person I have seen, answered the king; and I cannot comprehend
how so fine and large a city comes to be without inhabitants. Come
in, sir; stay no longer upon the threshold, replied the old man, or
peradventure some misfortune may happen to you. I will satisfy your
curiosity at leisure, and give you a reason why it is necessary you
should take this precaution.

King Beder would not be bid twice: he entered the shop, and sat down
by the old man. The latter, who had learnt from him an account of
his misfortunes, knew he must want nourishment, therefore
immediately presented him what was necessary to recover his
strength; and although king Beder was very earnest to know why he
had taken the precaution to make him enter the shop, he would
nevertheless not be prevailed upon to tell him any thing till he had
done eating, for fear the sad things he had to relate might balk his
appetite. In a word, when he found he eat no longer, he said to him,
You have great reason to thank God you got hither without any ill
accident. Alas! why? replied king Beder, very much surprised and
alarmed.

Because, answered he, this city is called the _City of
Enchantments_, and governed not by a king but a queen; who is not
only one of the finest of her sex, but likewise a notorious and
dangerous sorceress. You will be convinced of this, added he, when
you know that these horses, mules, and other animals that you have
seen, are so many men, like you and me, whom she has transformed by
her diabolical art. And when young men like you enter the city, she
has persons planted to stop and bring them, either by fair means or
force, before her. She receives them in the most obliging manner;
she caresses them, regales them, and lodges them magnificently, and
gives them so many reasons to believe that she loves them, that she
never fails of success. But she does not suffer them long to enjoy
this happiness. There is not one of them but she has transformed
into some animal or bird at the end of forty days. You told me all
these animals presented themselves to oppose your landing, and
hinder your entering the city. This was the only way they could make
you comprehend the danger you were going to expose yourself to, and
they did all in their power to divert you.

This account exceedingly afflicted the young king of Persia. Alas!
cried he, to what extremities has my ill fortune reduced me! I am
hardly freed from one enchantment, which I look back upon with
horror, but I find myself exposed to another much more terrible.
This gave him occasion to relate his story to the old man more at
length, and to acquaint him of his birth, quality, his passion for
the princess of Samandal, and her cruelty in changing him into a
bird the very moment he had seen her and declared his love to her.

When the prince came to speak of his good fortune in finding a queen
who broke the enchantment, the old man, to encourage him, said,
Notwithstanding all I have told you of the magic queen be true, that
ought not to give you the least disquiet, since I am generally
beloved throughout the city, and am not unknown to the queen
herself, who has much respect for me; therefore it was your peculiar
happiness led you to address yourself to me rather than elsewhere.
You are secure in my house, where I advise you to continue, if you
think fit; and provided you do not stray from hence, I dare assure
you, you will have no just cause to complain of my insincerity; so
that you are under no sort of constraint whatsoever.

King Beder thanked the old man for his kind reception, and the
protection he was pleased so readily to afford him. He sat down at
the entrance of the shop; where he no sooner appeared, but his youth
and good person drew the eyes of all that passed that way. Many
stopped and complimented the old man on his having acquired so fine
a slave, as they imagined the king to be; and they were the more
surprised, as they could not comprehend how so beautiful a youth
could escape the queen’s knowledge. Believe not, said the old man,
this is a slave; you all know that I am not rich enough, nor of rank
to have one of this consequence. He is my nephew, son of a brother
of mine that is dead; and as I had no children of my own, I sent for
him to keep me company. They congratulated his good fortune in
having so fine a young man for his relation; but could not help
telling him they feared the queen would take him from him. You know
her well, said they to him, and you cannot be ignorant of the danger
to which you are exposed, after all the examples you have seen. How
grieved would you be, if she should serve him as she has done so
many others that we know of!

I am obliged to you, replied the old man, for your good-will towards
me, and I heartily thank you for the care you seem to take of my
interest; but I shall never entertain the least thought that the
queen will do me any injury, after all the kindness she has
professed for me. In case she happens to hear of this young man, and
speaks to me about him, I doubt not she will cease to think of him,
as soon as she comes to know he is my nephew.

The old man was exceedingly glad to hear the commendations they
bestowed on the young king of Persia. He was as much affected with
them as if he had been his own son; and he conceived such a kindness
for him, as augmented every day during the stay he made with him.
They had lived about a month together, when king Beder sitting at
the shop door, after his ordinary manner, queen Labe (so was this
magic queen named) happened to come by with great pomp. The young
king no sooner perceived the guards coming before her, but he arose,
and going into the shop, asked the old man what all that show meant.
The queen is coming by, answered he; but stand still, and fear
nothing.

The queen’s guards, clothed in purple uniform, and well armed and
mounted, marched in four files, with their sabres drawn, to the
number of a thousand, and every one of their officers, as they
passed by the shop, saluted the old man: then followed a like number
of eunuchs, habited in brocaded silk, and better mounted, whose
officers did the old man the like honours. Next came as many young
ladies on foot, equally beautiful, richly dressed, and set off with
precious stones. They marched gravely, with half pikes in their
hands; and in the midst of them appeared queen Labe, on a horse
glittering with diamonds, with a golden saddle, and a housing of
inestimable value. All the young ladies saluted the old man as they
passed by him; and the queen, struck with the good mien of king
Beder, stopped as soon as she came before the shop. Abdallah, (so
was the old man named,) said she to him, tell me, I beseech thee,
does that beautiful and charming slave belong to thee? and is it
long that thou hast been in possession of him?

Abdallah, before he answered the queen, threw himself on the ground,
and rising again, said, Madam, it is my nephew, son of a brother I
had, who has not long been dead. Having no children, I look upon him
as my son, and sent for him to come and comfort me, intending to
leave him what I have when I die.

Queen Labe who had never yet seen any one to compare with king
Beder, and began to conceive a mighty passion for him, thought
immediately of getting the old man to abandon him to her. Father,
quoth she, will you not oblige me so far as to make me a present of
this young man? Do not refuse me, I conjure you; and I swear by the
fire and the light, I will make him so great and powerful, that no
individual in the world ever arrived at such good fortune. Although
my purpose were to do evil to all mankind, yet he shall be the sole
exception. I trust you will grant me what I desire, more on the
account of the friendship I know you have for me, than for the
esteem you know I always had, and shall ever have, for your person.

Madam, replied the good Abdallah, I am infinitely obliged to your
majesty for all the kindness you have for me, and the honours you
propose to do my nephew. He is not worthy to approach so great a
queen, and I humbly beseech your majesty to excuse him.

Abdallah, replied the queen, I all along flattered myself you loved
me; and I could never have thought you would have given me so
evident a token of your slighting my request. But I here swear once
more by the fire and light, and even by whatsoever is most sacred in
my religion, that I will pass on no farther till I have conquered
your obstinacy. I understand very well what raises your
apprehensions; but I promise you shall never have occasion to repent
having obliged me in so sensible a manner.

Old Abdallah was exceedingly grieved, both on his own account and
king Beder’s, for being in a manner forced to obey the queen.
Madam, replied he, I would not willingly have your majesty entertain
an ill opinion of the respect I have for you, and my zeal always to
contribute whatever I can to oblige you. I put an entire confidence
in your royal word, and I do not in the least doubt but you will
keep it. I only beg of your majesty to delay doing this great honour
to my nephew till you shall again pass this way. That shall be
to-morrow, said the queen; who inclined her head, as a token of her
being pleased, and so went forward towards her palace.

When queen Labe and all her attendants were out of sight, the good
Abdallah said to king Beder, Son (for so he was wont to call him,
for fear of some time or other discovering him when he spoke of him
in public,) it has not been in my power, as you may have observed,
to refuse the queen what she demanded of me with so great
earnestness, to the end I might not force her to employ her magic
both against you and myself openly or secretly, and treat you, as
much from resentment to you as to me, with more signal cruelty than
all those she has had in her power till now, as I have already told
you. But I have some reason to believe she will use you well, as she
promised me, on account of that particular esteem she professes for
me. This you may have seen by the respect shewn, and the honours
paid me by all her court. She would be a cursed creature indeed, if
she should deceive me; but she shall not deceive me unrevenged, for
I know how to be even with her.

These assurances, which appeared very doubtful, were not sufficient
to support king Beder’s spirits. After all you have told me of
this queen’s wickedness, replied he, you cannot wonder if I am
somewhat fearful to approach her: I should, it may be, slight all
you could tell me of her, and suffer myself to be dazzled by the
lustre of grandeur that surrounds her, did I not know by experience
what it is to be at the mercy of a sorceress. The condition I was
in, through the enchantment of the princess Giauhara, and from
whence I was delivered only to enter almost immediately into
another, has made me look upon such a fate with horror. His tears
hindered him from going on, and sufficiently showed with what
repugnance he beheld himself in a manner under a fatal necessity of
being delivered to queen Labe.

Son, replied old Abdallah, do not afflict yourself; for though I
must own there is no great stress to be laid upon the promises and
oaths of so perfidious a queen, yet I must withal acquaint you, her
power extends not to me. She knows it full well herself; and that is
the reason, and no other, that she pays me so great respect. I can
quickly hinder her from doing you the least harm, if she should be
perfidious enough to attempt it. You may depend upon me; and,
provided you follow exactly the advice I shall give you, before I
abandon you to her, she shall have no more power over you than she
has over me.

The magic queen did not fail to pass by the old man’s shop the
next day, with the same pomp as the day before, and Abdallah waited
for her with great respect. Father, cried she, stopping just against
him, you may judge of my impatience to have your nephew with me, by
my punctual coming to put you in mind of your promise. I know you
are a man of your word, and I cannot think you will break it with me.

Abdallah, who fell on his face as soon as he saw the queen
approaching, rose up when she had done speaking; and as he would
have nobody hear what he had a mind to say to her, he advanced with
great respect as far as her horse’s head and then said softly,
Puissant queen! I am persuaded your majesty will not be offended at
my seeming unwillingness to trust my nephew with you yesterday,
since you cannot be ignorant of the reasons I had for it; but I
conjure you to lay aside the secrets of that art which you possess
in so wonderful a degree. I regard my nephew as my own son; and your
majesty would reduce me to despair, if you should deal with him as
you have done with others.

I promise you I will not, replied the queen; and I once more repeat
the oath I made yesterday, that neither you nor your nephew shall
have any cause to be offended at me. I see plainly, added she, you
are not yet well enough acquainted with me: you never saw me yet but
through a veil; but as I find your nephew worthy of my friendship, I
will show you I am not any way unworthy of his. With that she threw
on her veil, and discovered to king Beder, who came near her with
Abdallah, an incomparable beauty. But king Beder was little charmed.
It is not enough, said he within himself, to be beautiful; one’s
actions ought to correspond in regularity with one’s features.

Whilst king Beder was making these reflections, with his eyes fixed
on queen Labe, the old man turned towards him, and taking him by the
arm, presented him to her majesty. Here he is, madam, said he; and I
beg of your majesty once more to remember he is my nephew, and to
let him come and see me sometimes. The queen promised he should; and
to give a farther mark of her gratitude, she caused a bag of a
thousand pieces of gold to be given him. He excused himself at first
from receiving them, but she insisted absolutely upon it, and he
could not refuse her. She had caused a horse to be brought as richly
harnessed as her own, for the king of Persia. Whilst he was mounting
him, I forgot, said the queen to Abdallah, to ask you your
nephew’s name: pray how is he called? He answered, his name was
Beder (the full moon:) her majesty replied, Sure your ancestors were
mistaken; they ought to have given you the name of Shems (the sun.)

When king Beder was mounted, he would have taken his post behind the
queen, but she would not suffer him, and made him ride on her left
hand. She looked upon Abdallah, and after having made him an
inclination with her head, she set forward on her march.

Instead of observing a satisfaction in the people’s faces at the
sight of their sovereign, king Beder took notice that they looked at
her with contempt, and even cursed her. The sorceress, said some,
has got a new subject to exercise her wickedness upon: will Heaven
never deliver the world from her tyranny? Poor stranger! cried out
others, thou art much deceived if thou thinkest thine happiness will
last long. It is only to render thy fall more terrible, that thou
art raised so high. This talk gave king Beder to understand Abdallah
had told him nothing but the truth of queen Labe: but as it now
depended no longer on himself to escape the mischief, he committed
himself to divine Providence, and the will of Heaven respecting his
fate.

The magic queen arrived at her palace; whither she was no sooner
come, out she alighted, and giving her hand to king Beder, entered
with him, accompanied by her women and the officers of her eunuchs.
She herself showed him all her apartments, where there was nothing
to be seen but massy gold, precious stones, and furniture of
wonderful magnificence. When she had carried him into her closet,
she led him out into a balcony, from whence he observed a garden of
surprising beauty. King Beder commended all he saw with a great deal
of wit, but nevertheless so that he might not be discovered to be
any other than old Abdallah’s nephew. They discoursed of
indifferent matters, till the queen was informed that dinner was
upon table.

The queen and king Beder arose, and went to place themselves at the
table, which was of massy gold, and the dishes of the same metal.
They began to eat, but drank hardly at all till the dessert came,
when the queen caused a cup to be filled for her with excellent
wine. She took it and drank to king Beder’s health; and then,
without putting it out of her hand, caused it to be filled again,
and presented it to him. King Beder received it with profound
respect, and by a very low bow signified to her majesty that he in
return drank to her health.

At the same time ten of queen Labe’s women entered with musical
instruments, with which and their voices they made an agreeable
concert, while they continued drinking till late at night. At length
both began so to be heated with wine, that king Beder insensibly
forgot he had to do with a magic queen, and looked upon her only as
the most beautiful queen he ever saw. As soon as the queen perceived
she had wrought him to the pitch she desired, she made a sign to her
eunuchs and women to retire. They obeyed, and king Beder and she lay
together.

Next morning the queen and king Beder, as soon as they rose, went to
the bath; and when they came out, the women who had served the king
there presented him with fine linen and a magnificent habit. The
queen likewise, who was more splendidly dressed than the day before,
came to receive him; and they went together to her apartments, where
they had a good repast brought them, and spent the remainder of the
day in walking in the garden, and in various other amusements.

Queen Labe treated king Beder after this manner for forty days, as
she had been accustomed to do all her lovers. The fortieth night, as
they were in bed together, she, believing he was really asleep,
arose without making any noise; but he was awake, and, perceiving
she had some design upon him, watched all her motions. Being up, she
opened a chest, from whence she took a little box full of a certain
yellow powder; taking some of the powder, she laid a train of it
across the chamber, and it immediately flowed in a rivulet of water,
to the great astonishment of king Beder. He trembled with fear, but
still pretended to sleep, that he might not discover to the
sorceress he was awake.

Queen Labe next took up some of the water in a vessel, and poured it
into a basin, where there was flour; with which she made a paste,
and kneaded it for a long time; then she mixed with it certain
drugs, which she took from different boxes, and made a cake, which
she put into a covered baking-pan. --As she had taken care first of
all to make a good fire, she took some of the coals and set the pan
upon them; and while the cake was baking, she put up the vessels and
boxes in their places again; and on her pronouncing certain words,
the rivulet, which run along the end of the room, appeared no more.
When the cake was baked, she took it off the coals, and carried it
into her closet, and afterwards returned to bed again to king Beder,
who dissembled so well, that she had not the least suspicion that he
had seen any thing of what she had done.

King Beder, whom the pleasures and amusements of a court had made to
forget his good host Abdallah, began now to think of him again, and
believed he had more than ordinary occasion for his advice, after
all he had seen the queen do that night. As soon as he was up,
therefore, he expressed a great desire to go up and see his uncle,
and begged of her majesty to permit him. What! my dear Beder, cried
the queen, are you then already tired, I will not say with living in
so superb a palace as mine is, where you must find so many
pleasures, but with the company of a queen, who loves you so
passionately as I do, and has given you many marks of affection?

Great queen, answered king Beder, how can I be tired of so many
favours and graces as your majesty perpetually heaps upon me? So far
from it, that I desire this permission, madam, purely to go and give
my uncle an account of the mighty obligations I have to your
majesty. I must own likewise, it is partly for this farther reason,
that my uncle, loving me so tenderly, as I well know he does, and I
having been absent from him now forty days, without once seeing him,
I would not give him reason to think that I consent to remaining
longer without seeing him. Go, said the queen, you have my consent;
but you will not be long before you return, if you consider I cannot
possibly live without you. This said, she ordered him a horse richly
caparisoned, and he departed.

Old Abdallah was overjoyed to see king Beder. Without regard to his
quality, he embraced him tenderly, and king Beder returned the like,
that nobody might doubt but that he was his nephew. As soon as they
were sat down, Well, said Abdallah to the king, how have you done,
and how have you passed your time with that infidel sorceress?

Hitherto, answered king Beder, I must needs own she has been
extraordinary kind to me, and has done all she could to persuade me
that she loves me entirely; but I observed something last night,
which gives me just reason to suspect that all her kindness hitherto
is but dissimulation. Whilst she thought me asleep, although I was
really awake, she stole from me with a great deal of precaution,
which made me suspect her intention, and therefore I resolved to
watch her, still feigning myself asleep. Going on with his
discourse, he related to Abdallah how and after what manner he had
seen her make the cake; and then added, Hitherto, said he, I must
needs confess, I had almost forgotten, not only you, but all the
advice you gave me concerning the wickedness of this queen; but this
last action of hers gives me reason to fear she neither intends to
observe any of her promises or solemn oaths to you. I thought of you
immediately, and I esteem myself happy in that I have obtained
permission to come to you.

You are not mistaken, replied old Abdallah, with a smile, which
showed he did not himself believe she would have acted otherwise;
nothing is capable of obliging a perfidious woman to amend. But fear
nothing; I know the way to make the mischief she intends you fall
upon herself. You are alarmed in time; and you could not have done
better than to have recourse to me. It is her ordinary practice to
keep her lovers only forty days; and after that time, instead of
sending them home, to turn them into animals, to stock her forests
and parks; but I thought of measures yesterday to prevent her doing
you the same harm. The earth has borne this monster long enough, and
it is now high time she should be treated as she deserves.

So saying, Abdallah put two cakes into king Beder’s hands, bidding
him to keep them to make use of as he should direct. You told me,
continued he, the sorceress made a cake last night; it was for you
to eat, depend upon it; but take great care you do not touch it.
Nevertheless, do not refuse to receive it when she offers it to you;
but, instead of tasting it, break off part of one of the two I shall
give you unobserved, and eat that. As soon as she thinks you have
swallowed it, she will not fail to attempt transforming you into
some animal, but she shall not succeed; which when she sees, she
will immediately turn the thing into pleasantry, as if what she had
done was only out of joke to frighten you; but she will conceal a
mortal grief in her heart, and think she omitted something in the
composition of her cake. As for the other cake, you shall make a
present of it to her, and press her to eat it; which she will not
refuse to do, were it only to convince you she does not mistrust
you, though she has given you so much reason to mistrust her. When
she has eat of it, take a little water in the hollow of your hand,
and throwing it in her face, say, ‘Quit that form you now wear,
and take that of such or such animal,’ as you shall think fit;
which done, come to me with the animal, and I will tell you what you
shall do afterward.

King Beder told Abdallah, in the most expressive terms, the great
obligations he had to him, for his endeavours to defend him from the
power of a pestilent sorceress; and after some farther discourse,
took his leave of him, and returned to the palace. --Upon his
arrival, he understood that the queen waited for him with great
impatience in the garden. He went to her, and she no sooner
perceived him, but she came in great haste to meet him. My dear
Beder, said she, it is said, with a great deal of reason, that
nothing shows more the force and excess of love than absence from
the object beloved. I have had no quiet since I saw you, and it
seems ages since I have been separated from you. If you had stayed
ever so little longer, I was preparing to come and fetch you once
more to my arms.

Madam, replied king Beder, I can assure your majesty I was no less
impatient to rejoin you; but I could not refuse to stay a little
longer with an uncle that loves me, and had not seen me for so long
time. He would have kept me still longer, but I tore myself away
from him, to come where love calls me. Of all the collations he
prepared for me, I have only brought away this cake, which I desire
your majesty to accept. --King Beder had wrapped up one of the two
cakes in a handkerchief very neatly, took it out and presented it to
the queen, saying, I beg your majesty to accept of it.

I do accept it with all my heart, replied the queen, receiving it,
and will eat it with pleasure for yours and your good uncle’s
sake; but before I taste of it, I desire you for my sake will eat a
piece of this, which I have made for you during your absence. Fair
queen, answered king Beder, receiving it with great respect, such
hands as your majesty’s can never make any thing but what is
excellent; and I cannot sufficiently acknowledge the favour you do
me.

King Beder then artfully substituted in the place of the queen’s
cake the other which old Abdallah had given him; and having broken
off a piece, he put it in his mouth, and cried while he was eating,
Ah! queen, I never tasted any thing so charming in my life. They
being near a cascade, the sorceress seeing him swallow one bit of
the cake, and ready to eat another, took a little water in the palm
of her hand, and throwing it in the king’s face, said, ‘Wretch!
quit that form of a man, and take that of a vile horse, blind and
lame.’

These words not having the desired effect, the sorceress was
strangely surprised to find king Beder still in the same form, and
that he only started for fear. Her cheeks reddened; and as she saw
that she had missed her aim, Dear Beder, cried she, this is nothing,
recover yourself. I did not intend you any harm; I only did it to
see what you would say. I should be the most miserable and most
execrable of women, should I attempt so black a deed; I do not only
say, after all the oaths I have sworn, but even after so many
testimonies of love as I have given you.

Puissant queen, replied king Beder, persuaded as I am that what your
majesty did was only to divert yourself, yet I could not help being
surprised. What could hinder me from being a little moved at the
pronouncing of so strange a transformation? But, madam, continued
he, let us drop this discourse; and since I have eat of your cake,
would you do me the favour to taste mine?

Queen Labe, who could not better justify herself than by showing
this mark of confidence in the king of Persia, broke off a piece of
his cake, and eat it. She had no sooner swallowed it, but she
appeared much troubled, and remained, as it were, motionless. King
Beder lost no time, but took water out of the same basin, and
throwing it in her face, cried, ‘Abominable sorceress! quit that
form of a woman, and be turned instantly into a mare.’

The same instant queen Labe was transformed into a very beautiful
mare; and her confusion was so great to find herself in that
condition, that she shed tears in great abundance, which perhaps no
mare before had ever been known to do. She bowed her head to the
feet of king Beder, thinking to move him to compassion; but though
he could have been so moved, it was absolutely out of his power to
repair the mischief he had done. He led her into the stable
belonging to the palace, and put her into the hands of a groom, to
bridle and saddle; but of all the bridles which the groom tried upon
her, not one would fit her. This made him cause two horses to be
saddled, one for the groom, and the other for himself; and the groom
led the mare after him to old Abdullah’s.

Abdallah, seeing at a distance king Beder coming with the mare,
doubted not but he had done what he advised him. Cursed sorceress!
said he immediately to himself, in a transport of joy, Heaven has at
length punished thee as thou deservest. King Beder alighted at
Abdallah’s door, and entered with him into the shop, embracing and
thanking him for all the signal services he had done him. He related
to him the whole matter, with all its circumstances, and moreover
told him he could find no bridle fit for the mare. Abdallah, who had
one for every horse, bridled the mare himself; and as soon as king
Beder had sent back the groom with the two horses, he said to him,
My lord, you have no reason to stay any longer in this city; mount
the mare, and return to your kingdom. I have but one thing more to
recommend to you, and that is, if you should ever happen to part
with the mare, be sure not to give up the bridle. King Beder
promised to remember it; and having taken leave of the good old man,
he departed.

The young king of Persia no sooner got out of the city, but he began
to reflect with joy on the deliverance he had had, and that he had
the sorceress in his power, who had given him so much cause to
tremble. Three days after he arrived at a great city, where,
entering the suburbs, he met a venerable old man, walking on foot
towards a pleasure house he had there. Sir, said the old man,
stopping him, may I presume to ask from what part of the world you
come? The king stopped to satisfy him; and as they were discoursing
together, an old woman came up, who, stopping likewise, wept and
sighed bitterly at the sight of the mare.

King Beder and the old man left off discoursing to look on the old
woman, whom the king asked what cause she had to lament so much?
Alas! sir, replied she, it is because your mare resembles so
perfectly one my son had, and which I still mourn the loss of on his
account, and should think your’s were the same, did I not know she
was dead. Sell her to me, I beseech you; I will give you more than
she is worth, and thank you too.

Good woman, replied king Beder, I am heartily sorry I cannot comply
with your request; my mare is not to be sold. Alas! sir, continued
the old woman, do not refuse me this favour for the love of God. My
son and I shall certainly die with grief if you do not grant it.
Good woman, replied the king, I would grant it with all my heart,
ill was disposed to part with so good a beast; but if I were so
disposed, I believe you would hardly give a thousand pieces of gold
for her, and I could not sell her for less. Why should I not give so
much? replied the old woman; if that be the lowest price, you need
only say you will take it, and I will fetch you the money.

King Beder, seeing the old woman so poorly dressed, could not
imagine she could find the money; therefore to try her, he said, Go
fetch the money, and the mare is yours. The old woman immediately
unloosed a purse she had fastened to her girdle, and desiring him to
alight, bid him tell over the money; and in case he found it came
short of the sum demanded, she said her house was not far off, and
she could quickly fetch the rest.

The surprise king Beder was in at the sight of this purse was not
small. Good woman, said he, do you not perceive I have bantered you
all this while? I will assure you the mare is not to be sold.

The old man who had been witness to all that was said, now began to
speak. Son, quoth he to king Beder, it is necessary you should know
one thing, which I find you are ignorant of, and that is, that in
this city it is not permitted to any one to tell a lie, on any
account whatsoever, on pain of death. You cannot refuse taking this
good woman’s money, and delivering your mare, when she gives you
the sum according to the agreement; and this you had better do
without any noise, than expose yourself to what may ensue.

King Beder, sorely afflicted to find himself thus trapped by his
rash proffer, alighted with great regret. The old woman stood ready
to seize the bridle, and immediately unbridled the mare; and taking
some water in her hand from the stream that ran in the middle of the
street, she threw it in the mare’s face, uttering these words:
‘Daughter, quit that strange shape, and re-assume thy own.’ The
transformation was effected in a moment; and king Beder, who swooned
as soon as he saw queen Labe appear, would have fallen to the
ground, if the old man had not hindered him.

The old woman, who was mother to queen Labe, and had instructed her
in all her magic secrets, had no sooner embraced her daughter, but
to show her fury, in an instant she, by whistling, caused to rise a
genie of a gigantic form and stature. This genie immediately took
king Beder on one shoulder, and the old woman with the magic queen
on the other, and transported them in a few minutes to the palace of
queen Labe in the city of Enchantments.

The magic queen immediately fell upon king Beder, reproaching him
grievously in the following manner: is it thus, ungrateful wretch,
that thy unworthy uncle and thou repay me for all the kindnesses I
have done for you? I shall soon make you both feel what you deserve.
She said no more, but taking water in her hand, threw it in his face
with these words: ‘Come out of that shape, and take that of a vile
owl.’ These words were soon followed by the effect; and
immediately she commanded one of her women to shut up the owl in a
cage, and give him neither meat nor drink.

The woman took the cage, and, without regarding what the queen
ordered, gave him both meat and drink; and being old Abdallah’s
friend, she sent him word privately how the queen had treated his
nephew, and her design to destroy both him and king Beder, that he
might give orders to prevent it, and secure himself.

Abdallah knew no common measures would do with queen Labe: he
therefore did but whistle after a certain manner, and there
immediately arose a vast giant, with four wings, who, presenting
himself before him, asked what he would have with him? Lightning,
said Abdallah to him, (for so was the genie called,) I command you
to preserve the life of king Beder, son of queen Gulnare. Go to the
palace of the magic queen, and transport immediately to the capital
of Persia the compassionate woman who has the cage in custody, to
the end she may inform queen Gulnare of the danger the king her son
is in, and the occasion he has for her assistance. Take care not to
frighten her when you come before her, and acquaint her from me what
she ought to do.

Lightning immediately disappeared, and got in an instant to the
palace of the magic queen. He instructed the woman, lifted her up
into the air, and transported her to the capital of Persia, where he
placed her on the terrace that was near the apartment where queen
Gulnare was. She went down stairs to the apartment, and she there
found queen Gulnare and queen Farasche, her mother, lamenting their
mutual misfortunes. She made them a profound reverence; and by the
relation she gave them, they soon understood the great need king
Beder was in of their assistance.

Queen Gulnare was so overjoyed at the news, that, rising from her
seat, she went and embraced the good woman, telling her how much she
was obliged to her for the service she had done her.

Then going immediately out, she commanded the trumpets to sound and
the drums to beat, to acquaint the city that the king of Persia
would suddenly return safe to his kingdom. She then went again, and
found king Saleh her brother, whom Farasche had caused to come
speedily thither by a certain fumigation. Brother, said she to him,
the king your nephew, my dear son, is in the city of Enchantments,
under the power of queen Labe. Both you and I must go to deliver
him, for there is no time to be lost.

King Saleh forthwith assembled a puissant body of his marine troops,
who soon rose out of the sea. He also called to his assistance the
genies his allies, who appeared with a much more numerous army than
his own. As soon as the two armies were joined, he put himself at
the head of them with queen Farasche, queen Gulnare, and the
princesses, who would all have their share in this action. They then
lifted themselves up into the air, and soon poured down on the
palace and city of Enchantments, where the magic queen, her mother,
and all the adorers of fire, were destroyed in an instant.

Queen Gulnare had ordered the woman who brought her the news of
queen Labe’s transforming and imprisoning her son to follow her
close, and bid her, in the confusion, only go and seize the cage,
and bring it to her. This order was executed as she wished; and
queen Gulnare was no sooner in possession of the cage, but she
opened it, and took out the owl, saying, as she sprinkled a little
water upon him, ‘My dear son, quit that strange form, and resume
thy natural one of a man.’

In a moment, queen Gulnare no more saw the hideous owl, but king
Beder her son. She immediately embraced him with an excess of joy,
her tears supplying more forcibly the place of words. She could not
find in her heart to let him go; and queen Farasche was obliged to
force him from her in her turn. After her, he was likewise embraced
by the king his uncle and his relations.

Queen Gulnare’s first care was to look out for old Abdallah, to
whom she had been obliged for the recovery of the king of Persia,
and who being brought to her, she said to him, My obligations to
you, sir, have been so great, that there is nothing within my power
but I would freely do for you as a token of my acknowledgment. Do
but satisfy me in what I can serve you. Great queen, replied
Abdallah, if the lady whom I sent to your majesty will but consent
to the marriage I offer her, and the king of Persia will give me
leave to reside at his court, I will spend the remainder of my days
in his service. Then the queen turned to the lady, who was present,
and finding by her modest shame that she was not averse to the match
proposed, she caused them to join hands, and the king of Persia and
she took care of their fortune.

This marriage occasioned the king of Persia to speak thus to the
queen: Madam, said he, I am heartily glad of this match which his
majesty has just made. There remains one more which I desire you to
think of. Queen Gulnare did not at first comprehend what marriage he
meant; but after a little considering, she said, Of yours, you mean,
son? I consent to it with all my heart. Then turning, and looking on
her brother’s sea attendants, and the genies who were still
present, Go, said she, and traverse both sea and land, to find out
the most lovely and amiable princess, worthy of the king my son, and
come and tell us.

Madam, replied king Beder, it is to no purpose for them to take all
that pains. You have no doubt heard that I have already given my
heart to the princess of Samandal, upon the bare relation of her
beauty. I have seen her, and do not repent of the present I then
made her. In a word, neither earth nor sea, in my opinion, can
furnish a princess like her. It is true, upon my declaring my love
to her, she treated me in a way that would have extinguished any
flame less strong than mine. But I hold her excused; she could not
treat me with less rigour, after imprisoning the king her father, of
which I was the innocent cause. But, it may be, the king of Samandal
may have changed his resolution; and his daughter the princess may
consent to love me, when she sees her father has agreed to it.

Son, replied queen Gulnare, if only the princess Giauhara can make
you happy, it is not my design to oppose you. The king your uncle,
need only have the king of Samandal brought, and we shall soon see
whether he be still of the same untractable temper.

Strictly as the king of Samandal had been kept during his captivity
by king Saleh’s orders, yet he always had great respect shown him,
and was become very familiar with the officers who guarded him. King
Saleh caused a chafing-dish of coals to be brought, into which he
threw a certain composition, uttering at the same time some
mysterious words. As soon as the smoke began to arise, the palace
shook, and immediately the king of Samandal, with king Saleh’s
officers, appeared. The king of Persia cast himself at the king of
Samandal’s feet, and kneeling said, It is no longer king Saleh
that demands of your majesty the honour of your alliance for the
king of Persia; it is the king of Persia himself that humbly begs
that boon; and I persuade myself your majesty will not persist in
being the cause of the death of a king, who can no longer live if he
does not share life with the amiable princess Giauhara.

The king of Samandal did not long suffer the king of Persia to
remain at his feet. He embraced him, and obliging him to rise, said,
I should be very sorry to have contributed in the least to the death
of a monarch who is so worthy to live. If it be true that so
precious a life cannot be preserved without the possession of my
daughter, live, sir, said he; she is yours. She has always been
obedient to my will, and I cannot think she will now oppose it.
Speaking these words, he ordered one of his officers, whom king
Saleh had permitted to be about him, to go and look for the princess
Giauhara, and bring her to him immediately.

The princess continued where the king of Persia had left her. The
officer perceived her, and brought her soon with her women. The king
of Samandal embraced her, and said, Daughter, I have provided a
husband for you; it is the king of Persia you see there, the most
accomplished monarch at present in the universe. The preference he
has given you to all other princesses, obliges us both to express
our gratitude.

Sir, replied the princess Giauhara, your majesty well knows I never
have presumed to disobey your will in any thing: I shall always be
ready to obey you; and I hope the king of Persia will forget my
ill-treatment of him, and consider it was duty, not inclination,
that forced me to it.

The nuptials were celebrated in the palace of the City of
Enchantments, with the greater solemnity, that all the lovers of the
magic queen, who resumed their pristine forms, as soon as ever that
queen ceased to live, assisted at them, and came to return their
thanks to the king of Persia, queen Gulnare, and king Saleh. They
were all sons of kings or princes, or persons of high rank.

King Saleh at length conducted the king of Samandal to his
dominions, and put him in possession of them. The king of Persia, at
the height of his wishes, returned to his capital with queen
Gulnare, queen Farasche, and the princesses; and queen Farasche and
the princesses continued there till king Saleh came to re-conduct
them to his kingdom under the waves of the sea.




The History of Ganem, Son to Abou Ayoub, and known by the surname of
Love’s Slave.


Sir, said Scheherazade to the sultan of the Indies, there was
formerly at Damascus a merchant, who had by care and industry
acquired great wealth, on which he lived in a very honourable
manner. His name was Abou Ayoub, and he had one son and a daughter.
The son was at first called Ganem, but afterwards surnamed _Love’s
Slave_. His person was graceful, and the excellent natural qualities
of his mind had been improved by able masters, whom his father had
taken care to provide him. The daughter’s name was Alcolomb,
signifying _Ravisher of Hearts_, because her beauty was so perfect,
that whoever saw her could not but love her.

Abou Ayoub died, and left immense riches: a hundred loads of
brocades and other silks that lay in his warehouse were the least
part of it. The loads were ready made up, and on every bale was
written in large characters, ‘For Bagdad.’

Mahommed, the son of Soliman, surnamed Zinebi, reigned at that time
at Damascus, the capital of Syria. His kinsman Haroun Alraschid,
whose residence was at Bagdad, had bestowed that kingdom on him as
his tributary.

Soon after the death of Abou Ayoub, Ganem discoursing with his
mother about their domestic affairs, and amongst the rest concerning
the loads of merchandize in the warehouse, asked her the meaning of
what was written upon each bale. My son, answered his mother, your
father used to travel sometimes into one province, and sometimes
into another; and it was customary with him, before he set out, to
write the name of the city he designed to repair to on every bale.
He had provided all things to take a journey to Bagdad, and was upon
the point of setting out, when death --She had not power to finish;
the lively remembrance of the loss of her husband would not permit
her to say more, and drew from her a shower of tears.

Ganem could not see his mother so sensibly affected, without being
himself equally so. They continued some time silent: but at length
he recovered himself, and as soon as he found his mother calm enough
to listen to him, he directed his discourse to her; and said, Since
my father designed these goods for Bagdad, and is no longer in
being, to put his design into execution, I will prepare myself to
perform that journey; and I am of opinion it will be proper for me
to hasten my departure, for fear those commodities should perish, or
that we lose the opportunity of selling them to the best advantage.

Abou Ayoub’s widow, who tenderly loved her son, was much surprised
at this resolution, and replied, My dear child, I cannot but commend
you for designing to follow your father’s example; but consider
that you are too young, inexperienced, and unaccustomed to the
fatigue of travelling. Besides, can you think of leaving me, and
adding to that sorrow with which I am already oppressed? Is it not
better to sell those goods to the merchants of Damascus, and take up
with a moderate profit, than to expose yourself to the danger of
perishing?

It was in vain for her to oppose Ganem’s resolution by the
strongest arguments; they had no weight with him. An inclination to
travel, and to accomplish himself by a thorough knowledge of the
world, urged him to set out, and prevailed over all his mother’s
remonstrances, her entreaties, and even her tears. He went to the
market where the slaves are sold, and bought such as were
able-bodied, hired a hundred camels, and having provided all other
necessaries, he entered upon his journey with five or six merchants
of Damascus, who were going to trade at Bagdad.

Those merchants, attended by all their slaves, and accompanied by
several other travellers, made up such a considerable caravan, that
they had nothing to fear from the Bedouin Arabs, who make it their
only profession to range the country, and to attack and plunder the
caravans when they are not strong enough to repulse them. They had
no other difficulty to encounter, but the usual fatigues of a long
journey, which were easily forgotten when they came in sight of the
city of Bagdad, where they arrived in safety.

They alighted at the most magnificent and most frequented khan in
the city; but Ganem, who chose to be lodged conveniently, and by
himself took no apartment there. He only left his goods there in a
warehouse for their greater security, and hired a very fine house in
the neighbourhood, richly furnished, having a garden which was very
delightful, on account of the many water-works and shady groves that
were in it.

Some days after this young merchant had been settled in his house,
and perfectly recovered of the fatigue of his journey, he dressed
himself genteelly, and repaired to the public place, where the
merchants met to buy and sell. A slave followed him, carrying a
parcel of fine stuffs and silks.

The merchants received Ganem very courteously, and their syndic, or
chief, to whom he first made application, took and bought all his
parcel, at the price set down in the ticket annexed to every piece
of stuff. Ganem continued his trade so successfully, that he sold
all the goods he exposed daily.

He had but one bale left, which he had caused to be carried from the
warehouse to his own house, and then went to the public rendezvous,
where he found all the shops shut. This seemed somewhat
extraordinary to him, and having asked the cause of it, was told
that one of the first merchants whom he knew, was dead, and that all
his brother traders were gone to his funeral.

Ganem inquired for the mosque where the prayer was to be made, and
whence the body was to be conducted to the grave; and having been
told, sent back his slave with the goods, and walked towards the
mosque. He got thither before the prayers were ended, which were
said in a hall hung with black satin. The corpse was taken up, and
followed by the kindred, the merchants, and Ganem, to the place of
burial, which was at a great distance without the city. It was a
stone structure, in form of a dome, purposely built to receive the
bodies of all the family of the deceased; and being very small, they
had pitched tents all about it, that all the company might be
sheltered during the ceremony. The monument was opened, and the
corpse laid into it, after which it was shut up again. Then the
iman, and other ministers of the mosque, sat down in a ring on
carpets, in the largest tent, and said the rest of the prayers. They
also read the chapter of the Koran appointed for the burial of the
dead. The kindred and merchants sat round, in the same manner,
behind the ministers.

It was near night before all was ended: Ganem, who had not expected
such a long ceremony, began to be uneasy, and the more so, when he
saw meat served up in memory of the deceased, according to the
custom of Bagdad. He was also told that the tents had not been set
up only against the heat of the sun, but also against the evening
dew, because they should not return to the city before the next
morning. Those words perplexed Ganem; I am a stranger, said he to
himself, and have the reputation of being a rich merchant; thieves
may take the opportunity of my absence, and go rob my house. My
slaves may be tempted by so favourable an opportunity; they may run
away with all the gold I have received for my goods, and whither
shall I go to look for them? Full of these thoughts, he eat a few
mouthfuls hastily, and dexterously slipped away from the company.

He made all possible haste; but, as it often happens that the more a
man puts on, the less he advances, he mistook his way, and went
astray in the dark, so that it was near midnight when he came to the
city gate; which, to add to his misfortune, was shut. That
disappointment was a fresh affliction to him, and he was obliged to
look for some convenient place to pass the rest of the night in, and
wait till the gate was opened. He went into a burial-place, so
spacious, that it reached from the city to the very place he was
come from. He advanced to some high walls, which enclosed a small
field, being the peculiar burial-place of a family, and in which
there was a palm-tree. There was an infinite number of other
particular burial-places, the doors whereof they did not take care
to fasten. Ganem, finding that the burial-place where the palm-tree
grew was open, went into it, and shut the door after him. He lay
down on the grass, and did all he could to sleep; but the uneasiness
at being absent from home would not permit him. He got up, and after
having passed before the door several times, he opened it, without
knowing why, and immediately perceived at a distance a light, which
seemed to come towards him. He was startled at that sight, put to
the door, which had nothing to secure it but a latch, and got up as
fast as he could to the top of the palm-tree; looking upon that as
the safest retreat under his present apprehensions.

No sooner was he got up, than by the help of the light, which had
frightened him, he plainly perceived three men, whom, by their
habit, he knew to be slaves, come into the burial-place. One of them
went foremost with a lanthorn, and the two others followed him,
being loaded with a chest, between five and six feet long, which
they carried on their shoulders. They set it down, and then one of
the three slaves said to his comrades, Brothers, if you will be
advised by me, we will leave the chest here, and return to the city.
--No, no, replied another, that is not executing our mistress’s
orders; we may have cause to repent not doing as we were commanded.
Let us bury the chest, since we are so enjoined to do. The two other
slaves complied. They began to break ground with the tools they had
brought for that purpose. When they had made a deep trench, they put
the chest into it, and covered it with the earth they had taken out;
then departed, and returned home.

Ganem, who from the top of the palm-tree had heard every word the
slaves had spoken, could not tell what to think of that adventure.
He concluded that the chest must contain something of value, and
that the person to whom it belonged had some particular reasons for
causing it to be buried in that cemetery. He resolved immediately to
satisfy his curiosity, came down from the palm-tree, the departure
of the slaves having dissipated his fear, and fell to work upon the
pit, plying his hands and feet so well, that in a short time he
uncovered the chest, but found it secured with a great padlock. This
new obstacle to the satisfying of his curiosity was no small
mortification to him, yet he was not discouraged; but the day
beginning then to appear, he saw several great pebbles about the
burial-place. He picked out one, with which he easily knocked off
the padlock, and then with much impatience opened the chest. Ganem
was strangely surprised, when, instead of finding money in it, he
discovered a young lady of incomparable beauty. Her fresh and rosy
complexion, and her gentle regular breathing, satisfied him she was
alive; but he could not conceive why, if she were only asleep, she
had not waked at the noise he made in forcing off the padlock. Her
habit was so costly, with bracelets and pendants of diamonds, and a
necklace of true pearl, so large, that he made not the least doubt
of her being one of the principal ladies about the court. At the
sight of so beautiful an object, not only compassion and natural
inclination to relieve persons in danger, but something more
powerful, which Ganem could not then account for, prevailed on him
to afford that young beauty all the assistance in his power.

He first shut the gate of the burial-place, which the slaves had
left open; then returning, took the lady in his arms out of the
chest, and laid her on the soft earth he had thrown off the said
chest. As soon as the lady was laid down, and exposed to the air,
she sneezed, and by the motion in turning her head, there came from
her mouth a liquor, with which her stomach seemed to have been
loaded; then opening and rubbing her eyes, she with such a voice as
charmed Ganem, whom she did not see, cried out, Zohoreb Bostan,
Schagrom Margian, Casabos Souccar, Nouron Nihar, Naginatos Sohi,
Nouzetos Zaman, why do you not answer? where are you? These were the
names of six female slaves, that used to wait on her, and signified,
Flower of the Garden, Branch of Coral, Sugar Cane, Light of the Day,
Morning Star, and Delight of the Season. She called them, and
wondered that nobody answered; but at length looking about, and
perceiving she was in a burial-place, she was seized with fear.
What! cried she, much louder than before, are the dead raised? Is
the day of judgment come? What a wonderful change is this from
evening to morning!

Ganem did not think fit to leave the lady any longer in her
perplexity, but presented himself before her with all possible
respect, and in the most courteous manner. Madam, said he, I am not
able to express my joy for having happened to be here to do you the
service I have done, and to offer you all the assistance you may
stand in need of under your present circumstances.

In order to persuade the lady to repose a confidence in him, he, in
the first place, told her who he was, and what accident had brought
him into that place. Next he acquainted her with the coming of the
three slaves, and how they had buried the chest. The lady, who had
covered her face with her veil as soon as Ganem appeared, was
extremely sensible of the obligations she owed him. I return thanks
to God, said she, for having sent so worthy a person as you are to
deliver me from death, but since you have begun so charitable a
work, I conjure you not to leave it imperfect. Let me beg of you to
go into the city, and provide a muleteer, to come with his mule, and
carry me to your house in this chest; for, should I go with you on
foot, my dress being different from that of the city ladies, some
one might take notice of it, and follow me, which it highly concerns
me to prevent. When I shall be in your house, I will give you an
account of myself; and in the mean time be assured that you have not
obliged an ungrateful person.

Before the young merchant left the lady, he drew the chest out of
the pit, which he filled up with earth, laid her again in the chest,
and shut it in such a manner, that it did not look as if the padlock
had been forced off; but for fear of stifling her, he did not put it
quite close, leaving room for the air to get in. Going out of the
burial-place, he drew the door after him; and the city gate being
then open, soon found what he sought for. He returned with speed to
the burial-place, and helped the muleteer to lay the chest across
his mule, telling him, to remove all cause of suspicion, that he
came to that place the night before, with another muleteer, who,
being in haste to return home, had laid down the chest in the
burial-place.

Ganem, who, since his arrival at Bagdad, had minded nothing but his
business, was still unacquainted with the power of love, and now
felt the first attacks of it. It had not been in his power to look
upon the young lady without being dazzled; and the uneasiness he
felt at following the muleteer at a distance, and the fear lest any
accident might happen by the way, that should deprive him of his
conquest, taught him to unravel his thoughts. It was an
extraordinary satisfaction to him, when, being arrived safe at home,
he saw the chest unloaded. He dismissed the muleteer, and having
caused a slave to shut the door of his house, he opened the chest,
helped the lady out, gave her his hand, and conducted her to his
apartment, lamenting how much she must have endured in that close
confinement. If I have suffered, said she, I have satisfaction
sufficient in what you have done for me, and in the pleasure of
seeing myself out of danger.

Though Ganem’s apartment was very richly furnished, the lady did
not so much regard that as she did the handsome presence and
engaging mien of her deliverer, whose politeness and obliging
behaviour heightened her gratitude. She sat down on a sofa, and to
begin to give the merchant to understand how sensible she was of the
service done her, she took off her veil. Ganem, on his part, was
sensible of the favour so lovely a lady did in uncovering her face
to him, or rather felt he had already a most violent passion for
her. Whatever obligations she owed him, he thought himself more than
requited by so singular a favour.

The lady dived into Ganem’s thoughts, yet was not at all alarmed,
because he appeared very respectful. He, judging she might have
occasion to eat, and not willing to trust any but himself with the
care of entertaining so charming a guest, went out with a slave to
an eating-house, to give directions for a treat. From thence he went
to a fruiterer, where he chose the finest and best fruit; buying
also the choicest wine, and the same bread that was eaten at the
caliph’s table.

As soon as he returned home, he, with his own hands, made a pyramid
of the fruit he had bought, and serving it up himself to the lady in
a large dish of the finest china-ware. Madam, said he, be pleased to
make choice of some of this fruit, while a more solid entertainment,
and more worthy yourself, is made ready. He would have continued
standing before her, but she declared she would not touch any thing,
unless he sat down and eat with her. He obeyed; and when they had
eaten some small matter, Ganem observing that the lady’s veil,
which she laid down by her on a sofa, was embroidered along the edge
with golden letters, begged her leave to look on that embroidery.
The lady immediately took up the veil, and delivered it to him,
asking him whether he could read. Madam, replied he, with a modest
air, a merchant would be ill qualified to manage his business if he
could not at least read and write. Well, then, said she, read the
words which are embroidered on that veil, which gives me an
opportunity of telling you my story.

Ganem took the veil, and read these words, ‘I am yours, and you
are mine, thou descendant from the prophet’s uncle.’ That
descendant from the prophet’s uncle was the caliph Haroun
Alraschid, who then reigned, and was descended from Abbas,
Mahomet’s uncle.

When Ganem perceived the meaning of these words, Alas! madam, said
he in a melancholy tone, I have just saved your life, and this
writing is my death! I do not comprehend all the mystery; but it
convinces me I am the most unfortunate of men. Pardon, madam, the
liberty I take of telling you this. It was impossible for me to see
you without giving you my heart. You are not ignorant yourself, that
it was not in my power to refuse it you, and that makes my
presumption excusable. I proposed to myself to touch your heart by
my respectful behaviour, my care, my complaisance, my assiduity, my
submission, my constancy; and no sooner had I formed the flattering
design, than I am robbed of all my hopes. I cannot long survive so
great a misfortune. But, be that as it will, I shall have the
satisfaction of dying entirely yours. Proceed, madam, I conjure you,
and give me full information of my unhappy fate.

He could not utter those words without letting fall some tears. The
lady was moved, but was so far from being displeased at the
declaration he made, that she felt secret joy; for her heart began
to yield. However, she concealed it, and as if she had not regarded
what Ganem said, I should have been very cautious, answered she, of
showing you my veil, had I thought it would have given you so much
uneasiness; and I do not perceive that what I have to say to you can
make your condition so deplorable as you imagine.

You must understand, proceeded she, in order to acquaint you with my
story, that my name is Fetnah (which signifies _torments_,) which
was given me at my birth, because it was judged that the sight of me
would one day occasion many calamities. You cannot be a stranger to
it, since there is nobody in Bagdad but knows that the caliph Haroun
Alraschid, my sovereign lord and yours, had a favourite so called.

I was carried into his palace in my tenderest years, and I have been
brought up there with all the care that is usually taken with such
persons of my sex as are destined to reside there. I made no little
progress in all they took the pains to teach me; and that, with some
share of beauty, gained me the affection of the caliph, who allotted
me a particular apartment adjoining to his own. That prince was not
satisfied with such a mark of distinction; he appointed twenty women
to wait on me, and as many eunuchs; and ever since he has made me
such considerable presents, that I saw myself richer than any queen
in the world. You may judge by what I have said, that Zobeide, the
caliph’s wife and kinswoman, could not but be jealous of my
happiness. Though Haroun has all the regard imaginable for her, she
has taken every possible opportunity to ruin me.

Hitherto I had secured myself against all her snares, but at length
I fell under the last effort of her jealousy, and, were it not for
you, I had now been exposed to inevitable death. I question not but
she had corrupted one of my slaves, who last night, in some
lemonade, gave me a drug, which causes such a dead sleep, that it is
easy to dispose of those who have taken it; for that sleep is so
profound, that nothing can dispel it for the space of seven or eight
hours. I have the more reason to judge so, because naturally I am a
very bad sleeper, and apt to wake at the least noise.

Zobeide, the better to put her design in execution, has laid hold of
the opportunity of the absence of the caliph, who went lately to put
himself at the head of his troops, to chastise some neighbouring
kings, who have formed a league to make war on him. Were it not for
this opportunity, my rival, outrageous as she is, durst not have
presumed to attempt any thing against my life. I know not what she
will do to conceal this action from the caliph, but you see it
highly concerns me that you should keep my secret. My life depends
on it I shall be safe in your house, as long as the caliph is from
Bagdad. It concerns you to keep my adventure private; for should
Zobeide know the obligation I owe you, she would punish you for
having saved me.

When the caliph returns I shall not need to be so much upon my
guard. I shall find means to acquaint him with all that has
happened, and I am fully persuaded he will be more earnest than
myself to requite a service which restores me to his love.

As soon as Haroun Alraschid’s beautiful favourite had done
speaking, Ganem began, and said, Madam, I return you a thousand
thanks for having given me the information I took the liberty to
desire of you; and I beg of you to believe, that you are here in
safety; the sentiments you have inspired in me are a pledge of my
secrecy.

As for my slaves, I own there is cause to suspect them; they may
perhaps fail of the fidelity they owe me, should they know by what
accident, and in what place I had the happiness to find you; but it
is impossible they should guess at that. Nay, I dare assure you,
that they will not have the curiosity to inquire after it. It is so
natural for young men to purchase beautiful slaves, that it will be
no way surprising to them to see you here, as believing you to be
one, and that I have bought you. They will also believe that I had
some particular reasons for bringing you home as they saw I did. Set
your heart, therefore, at rest, as to that point, and remain
satisfied that you shall be served with all the respect that is due
to the favourite of so great a monarch as ours is. But how great
soever he is, give me leave, madam, to declare, that nothing will be
capable of making me recall the present I have made you of my heart.
I know, and shall never forget, that ‘what belongs to the master
is forbidden to the slave,’ but I loved you before you told me
that you were engaged to the caliph; it is not in my power to
overcome a passion which, though now in its infancy, has all the
force of a love strengthened by a perfect correspondence. I wish
your august and most fortunate lover may avenge you of the malice of
Zobeide, by calling you back to him; and when you shall be restored
to his wishes, that you may remember the unfortunate Ganem, who is
no less your conquest than the caliph. Powerful as that prince is, I
flatter myself he will not be able to blot me out of your
remembrance. He cannot love you more passionately than I do; and I
shall never cease to sigh for you, into whatever part of the world I
go to expire, after having lost you.

Fetnah perceived that Ganem was under the greatest of afflictions,
and it affected her; but considering the uneasiness she was likely
to bring upon herself, by prosecuting the discourse upon that
subject, which might insensibly lead her to discover the inclination
she felt in herself for him; I perceive, said she, that this
conversation gives you too much uneasiness; let us change the
discourse, and talk of the infinite obligation I owe you. I can
never sufficiently express my satisfaction, when I reflect that,
without your assistance, I should never again have beheld the light
of the sun.

It was happy for them both that somebody just then knocked at the
door: Ganem went to see who it was, and found it was one of his
slaves, to acquaint him that the entertainment was ready. Ganem, who
by way of precaution, would have none of his slaves come into the
room where Fetnah was, took what was brought, and served it up
himself to his beautiful guest, whose soul was ravished to behold
what attention he paid her.

When they had eaten, Ganem took away as he covered the table; and
having delivered all things at the chamber-door to his slaves,
Madam, said he to Fetnah, you may now perhaps desire to take some
rest; I will leave you, and when you have reposed yourself, you
shall find me ready to receive your commands.

Having spoken these words, he left her, and went to purchase two
women-slaves. He also bought two parcels, one of fine linen, and the
other of all such things as were proper to make up a toilet fit for
the caliph’s favourite. Having conducted home the two
women-slaves, he presented them to Fetnah, saying, Madam, a person
of your quality cannot be without two waiting maids, at least, to
serve you; be pleased to accept of these.

Fetnah admiring Ganem’s attention, My lord, said she, I perceive
you are not one that will do things by halves: you add by your
courtesy, to the obligations I owe you already: but I hope I shall
not die ungrateful, and that Heaven will soon put me into a
condition to return all your acts of generosity.

When the women-slaves were withdrawn into a chamber adjoining, where
the young merchant sent them, he sat down on the sofa where Fetnah
was, but at some distance from her, in token of the greater respect.
He then began again to discourse of his passion, and said very
moving things on the invincible obstacles which robbed him of all
his hopes. I dare not so much as hope, said he, by my passion, to
excite the least sensibility in a heart like yours, destined for the
greatest prince in the world. Alas! it would be a comfort to me in
my misfortunes, if I could flatter myself that you have not looked
upon the excess of my love with indifference. My lord, answered
Fetnah --Alas! madam, said Ganem, interrupting her at the word lord,
this is the second time you have done me the honour to call me lord:
the presence of the women-slaves hindered me the first time from
taking notice of it to you: in the name of God, madam, do not give
me this title of honour; it does not belong to me: treat me, I
beseech you, as your slave: I am, and shall never cease to be so.

No, no, replied Fetnah, interrupting him in her turn, I shall be
cautious how I treat after that manner a man to whom I owe my life.
I should be ungrateful, could I say or do any thing that did not
become you. Leave me, therefore, to follow the dictates of my
gratitude, and do not require it of me that I misbehave myself
towards you, in return for the benefits I have received. I shall
never be guilty of it; I am too sensible of your respectful
behaviour to abuse it; and I will not hesitate to own, that I do not
look upon all your care with indifference. You know the reasons that
condemn me to silence.

Ganem was ravished at that declaration; he wept for joy, and not
being able to find expressions significant enough, in his own
opinion, to return Fetnah thanks, was satisfied with telling her,
that as she knew what she owed to the caliph, he, on his part, was
not ignorant that ‘what belongs to the master is forbidden to the
servant.’

Night drawing on, he rose up to fetch a light, which he brought in
himself, as also some collation, as is the custom in the city of
Bagdad, where, having made a good meal at noon, they passed the
evening with eating some fruit, and drinking a glass of wine, and
agreeable conversation till bed-time.

They both sat down at table, and at first complimented each other on
the fruit as they presented it reciprocally. The excellency of the
wine insensibly drew them both on to drink; and having drank two or
three glasses, they agreed that neither should take another glass
without singing some air first. Ganem sung verses he composed
_extempore_, expressive of the vehemence of his passion; and Fetnah,
encouraged by his example, composed and sung verses relating to her
adventure, and always containing something which Ganem might take in
a sense favourable to him; except this, she most exactly observed
the fidelity due to the caliph. The collation held till very late,
and the night was far advanced before they thought of parting. Ganem
then withdrew to another apartment, leaving Fetnah where she was,
the women-slaves he had bought coming in to wait upon her.

They lived together after this manner several days. The young
merchant went not abroad, unless upon business of the utmost
consequence, and even for that took the time when the lady was at
her rest; for he could not prevail upon himself to lose a moment
that might be spent in her company. All his thoughts were taken up
with his dear Fetnah, who, on her side, giving way to her
inclination, confessed she had no less affection for him than he had
for her. However, fond as they were of each other, their respect for
the caliph kept them within due bounds, which still heightened their
passion.

Whilst Fetnah, thus snatched from the jaws of death, passed her time
so agreeably with Ganem, Zobeide was not without some apprehensions
in Haroun Alraschid’s palace.

No sooner had the three slaves, entrusted with the execution of her
revenge, carried away the chest, without knowing what was in it, or
having the least curiosity to inquire into it (as being used to pay
a blind obedience to her commands), than she was seized with a
tormenting uneasiness; a thousand perplexing thoughts disturbed her
rest; sleep fled from her eyes, and she spent the night in
contriving how to conceal her crime. My consort, said she, loves
Fetnah more than ever he did any of his favourites. What shall I say
to him at his return, when he inquires of me after her? Many
contrivances occured to her, but none were satisfactory. Still she
met with difficulties, and knew not where to fix. There lived with
her an ancient lady, who had bred her up from her infancy. As soon
as it was day she sent for her, and having entrusted her with the
secret, said, My good mother, you have always assisted me with your
advice; if ever I stood in need of it, it is now, when the business
before you is to still my thoughts, distracted by a mortal anxiety,
and to show me some way to satisfy the caliph.

My dear mistress, replied the old woman, it had been much better not
to have run yourself into the difficulties you labour under; but
since the thing is done, the best is to say no more of it. All that
must now be thought of is how to deceive the commander of the
believers; and I am of opinion, that you immediately cause a wooden
image resembling a dead body to be carved. We will shroud it up in
old linen, and when shut up in a coffin, it shall be buried in some
part of the palace; then shall you immediately cause a marble
monument to be built, in the form of a dome, over the burial-place,
and erect a figure, which shall be covered with a black cloth, and
set about with great candlesticks and large wax tapers. There is
another thing, added the old lady, which ought not to be forgot: you
must put on mourning, and cause the same to be done by all your own
and Fetnah’s women, your eunuchs, and all the officers of the
palace. When the caliph returns, and sees you all and the palace in
mourning, he will not fail to ask the occasion of it. Then will you
have an opportunity of insinuating yourself into his favour, by
saying it was out of respect to him that you paid the last honours
to Fetnah, snatched away by sudden death. You may tell him you have
caused a mausoleum to be built, and in short, that you have paid all
the last honours to his favourite, as he would have done himself had
he been present. His passion for her being extraordinary, he will
certainly go to shed tears upon her grave; and perhaps, added the
old woman, he will not believe she is really dead. He may, perhaps,
suspect you have turned her out of the palace through jealousy, and
look upon all the mourning as an artifice to deceive him, and
prevent his making search after her. It is likely he will cause the
coffin to be taken up and opened, and it is certain he will be
convinced of her death, as soon as he shall see the figure of a dead
body buried. He will be pleased with all you shall have done, and
express his gratitude. As for the wooden image, I will undertake to
have it cut myself by a carver in the city, who shall not know what
use it is to be put to. As for your part, madam, order Fetnah’s
woman, who yesterday gave her the lemonade, to give out, among her
companions, that she has just found her mistress dead in her bed;
and to the end that they may only think of lamenting, without
offering to go into her chamber, let her add, she has already
acquainted you with it, and that you have ordered Mesrour to cause
her to be buried.

As soon as the old lady had spoken these words, Zobeide took a rich
diamond ring out of her casket, and putting it on her finger, and
embracing her in a transport of joy, said, How infinitely am I
beholden to you, my good mother! I should never have thought of so
ingenious a contrivance. It cannot fail of success, and I begin to
recover my peace of mind. I leave the care of the wooden figure to
you, and will go myself to order the rest.

The wooden image was got ready with as much expedition as Zobeide
could have wished, and then conveyed by the old lady herself into
Fetnah’s bed-chamber, where she dressed it like a dead body, and
put it into a coffin. Then Mesrour, who was himself deceived by it,
caused the coffin and the representation of Fetnah to be carried
away, and buried with the usual ceremonies, in the place appointed
by Zobeide, the favourite’s women weeping and lamenting, she who
had given her the lemonade setting them an example by her cries and
howlings.

That very day Zobeide sent for the architect of the palace and of
the caliph’s other houses, and, according to the orders he
received from her, the mausoleum was finished in a very short time.
Such potent princesses as the consort of a monarch, whose power
extended from east to west, are always punctually obeyed in
whatsoever they command. She soon put on mourning with all the
court; so that the news of Fetnah’s death was quickly spread all
over the city.

Ganem was one of the last who heard of it, for, as I have before
observed, he hardly ever went abroad. Being, however, at length
informed of it, Madam, said he to the caliph’s fair favourite, you
are believed in Bagdad to be dead, and I do not question but that
Zobeide herself believes it. I bless Heaven that I am the cause, and
the happy witness of your being alive: and would to God, that,
taking the advantage of this false report, you would share my
fortune, and go far from hence to reign in my heart! But whither
does this pleasing transport carry me? I do not consider that you
are born to make the greatest prince in the world happy; and that
only Haroun Alraschid is worthy of you. Supposing you could resolve
to give him up for me, and that you would follow me, ought I to
consent to it? No, it is my part always to remember, that ‘what
belongs to the master is forbidden to the slave.’

The lovely Fetnah, though moved by the tenderness of the passion he
expressed, yet prevailed with herself not to answer it. My lord,
said she to him, we cannot obstruct Zobeide’s triumphing. I am not
at all surprised at the artifice she makes use of to conceal her
guilt: but let her go on; I flatter myself that sorrow will soon
follow her triumph. The caliph will return, and we shall find the
means privately to inform him of all that has happened. In the mean
time, let us be more cautious than ever, that she may not know I am
alive. I have already told you the consequences.

At the end of three months the caliph returned to Bagdad with glory,
having vanquished all his enemies. He entered the palace with
impatience to see Fetnah, and to lay all his new laurels at her
feet; but was amazed to see all the officers he had left behind him
in mourning. He was struck without knowing the cause; and his
concern was redoubled, when coming into the apartment of Zobeide, he
espied that princess coming to meet him in mourning, with all her
women. He immediately asked her the cause of it with much agitation.
Commander of the believers, answered Zobeide, I am in mourning for
your slave Fetnah; who died so suddenly, that it was impossible to
apply any remedy for her distemper. She would have proceeded, but
the caliph did not give her time, being so surprised at the news,
that he cried out, and fainted in the arms of Giafar, his grand
vizier, who attended him. But soon recovering himself, he with a
feeble voice, which sufficiently expressed his extreme grief, asked
where his dear Fetnah had been buried. Sir, said Zobeide, I myself
took care of her funeral, and spared no cost to make it magnificent.
I have caused a marble mausoleum to be built over her grave, and
will attend you thither, if you desire it.

The caliph would not permit Zobeide to take that trouble, but
contented himself to have Mesrour conduct him. He went thither just
as he was, that is, in his camp dress. When he saw the figure
covered with a black cloth, the wax lights round it, and the
magnificence of the mausoleum, he was amazed that Zobeide should
have performed the obsequies of her rival with so much pomp; and
being naturally of a jealous temper, he suspected his wife’s
generosity, and fancied his mistress might perhaps be yet alive;
that Zobeide, taxing the advantage of his long absence, might have
turned her out of the palace, ordering those she had entrusted to
conduct her, to convey her so far off that she might never more be
heard of. This was all he suspected; for he did not think Zobeide
wicked enough to have attempted the life of his favourite.

The better to discover the truth himself, this prince ordered the
figure to be removed, and caused the grave and the coffin to be
opened in his presence; but when he saw the linen wrapped round the
wooden image, he durst not proceed any farther. This religious
caliph thought it would be an irreligious act to suffer the body of
the dead lady to be touched; and this scrupulous fear prevailed over
his love and curiosity. He doubted not of Fetnah’s death. He
caused the coffin to be shut up again, the grave to be filled, and
the figure to be placed as it was before.

The caliph, thinking himself obliged to pay some respect to the tomb
of his favourite, sent for the ministers of religion, the officers
of the palace, and the readers of the Koran; and, whilst they were
collecting together, he remained in the mausoleum, moistening with
his tears the earth that covered the phantom of his mistress. When
all the persons he had sent for were come, he stood before the
figure, and they about it recited long prayers; after which, the
readers of the Koran read several chapters.

The same ceremony was performed every day for a whole month, morning
and evening, the caliph being always present, with Giafar the grand
vizier, and the principal officers of the court, all of them in
mourning, as well as the caliph himself, who all the time ceased not
to honour the memory of Fetnah with his tears, and would not hear of
any business.

The last day of the month, the prayers and reading of the Koran
lasted from morning till break of day the next morning; and at
length, when all was done, every man returned home. Haroun
Alraschid, being tired with sitting up so long, went to take some
rest in his apartment, and fell asleep on a sofa, between two of the
court ladies, one of them sitting at the bed’s head, and the other
at the feet, who, whilst he slept, were working some embroidery, and
observed a profound silence.

She who sat at the bed’s head, and whose name was Nouron-Nihar
(that is, Dawn of the Day,) perceiving the caliph was asleep,
whispered to the other, called Negmatos Sohi (signifying
Morning-Star,) There is great news! The commander of the believers,
our master, will be overjoyed when he awakes, and hears what I have
to tell him: Fetnah is not dead; she is in perfect health. O
heavens! cried Morning-Star, in a transport of joy, is it possible
that the beautiful, the charming, the incomparable Fetnah, should be
still among the living? Morning Star uttered these words with so
much vivacity, and so loud, that the caliph awaked. He asked why
they had disturbed his rest? Alas! my sovereign lord, answered
Morning-Star, pardon me this indiscretion; I could not without
transport hear that Fetnah is still alive; it caused such emotion in
me, that I could not conceal it. What then is become of her, said
the caliph, if she is not dead? Chief of the believers, replied Dawn
of the Day, I this evening received a note, not signed, from a
person unknown, but written with Fetnah’s own hand, who gives me
an account of her melancholy adventure, and orders me to acquaint
you with it. I thought fit, before I fulfilled my commission, to let
you take some few moments’ rest, believing you must stand in need
of it, after your fatigue; and-- Give me that note, said the caliph,
interrupting her eagerly; you were wrong to defer delivering it to
me.

Dawn of the Day immediately presented to him the note, which he
opened with much impatience, and in it Fetnah gave a particular
account of all that had befallen her, but enlarged a little too much
on the care Ganem took of her. The caliph, who was naturally
jealous, instead of being provoked at the inhumanity of Zobeide, was
more concerned at the infidelity he fancied Fetnah had been guilty
of towards him. Is it so? said he, after reading the note; the
perfidious wretch has been four months with a young merchant, and
has the effrontery to boast of his attention to her. Thirty days are
past since my return to Bagdad, and she now bethinks herself of
sending me news of herself. Ungrateful creature! whilst I spend the
days in bewailing her, she passes them in betraying me. Go to; let
us take vengeance of a false woman, and that bold youth who affronts
me. Having spoken these words, that prince rose up, and went into a
great hall where he used to appear in public, and give audience to
the great men of his court. The first gate was opened, and
immediately all the courtiers, who were waiting without, entered.
The grand vizier came in, and prostrated himself before the throne
the caliph sat on. Then rising, he stood before his master, who, in
a tone which denoted he would be instantly obeyed, said to him,
Giafar, your presence is requisite for putting in execution an
important affair I am about to commit to you. Take four hundred men
of my guards along with you, and first inquire where a merchant of
Damascus lives, whose name is Ganem, the son of Ayoub. When you have
learnt it, repair to his house, and cause it to be razed to the
foundation; but first secure Ganem, and bring him hither, with my
slave Fetnah, who has lived with him these four months. I will
punish her, and make an example of that insolent man, who has
presumed to fail in respect to me.

The grand vizier having received this positive command, made a low
bow to the caliph, having his hand on his head, in token that he
would rather lose it than disobey him, and departed. The first thing
he did was to send to the syndic of the dealers in foreign stuffs
and fine silks for the new ones bought of Ganem, with strict orders,
above all things, to find out the street and house he lived in. The
officer he sent with these orders brought him back word, that he had
scarce been seen for some months, and no man knew what could keep
him at home, if he was there. The same officer likewise told Giafar
where Ganem lived, and the name of the widow who had let him the
house.

Upon this exact information, that minister, without losing time,
marched with the soldiers the caliph had ordered him to take, went
to the judge of the police, whom he caused to bear him company, and
attended by a great number of carpenters and masons, with the
necessary tools for razing a house, came to that where Ganem lived;
and finding it stood single, he posted his soldiers round it, to
prevent the young merchant’s making his escape.

Fetnah and Ganem had just dined: the lady was sitting at a window
next the street; hearing a noise, she looked out through the
lattice, and seeing the grand vizier draw near, with all his
attendants, she concluded she was their object as well as Ganem. She
perceived her note had been received, but had not expected such an
answer, having hoped that the caliph would have taken the matter in
a different light. She knew not how long that prince had been come
home; and though she was acquainted with his jealous temper, yet she
apprehended nothing on that account. However, the sight of the grand
vizier and the soldiers made her tremble, not indeed for herself,
but for Ganem; she did not question clearing herself, provided the
caliph would but hear her. As for Ganem, whom she loved less out of
gratitude than inclination, she plainly foresaw that his incensed
rival would see, and might be apt to condemn him, upon account of
his youth and person. Full of that thought, she turned to the young
merchant, and said, Alas! Ganem, we are undone! it is you and I that
are sought after. He presently looked through the lattice, and was
seized with dread when he beheld the caliph’s guards, with their
naked scimitars, and the grand vizier, with the civil magistrate, at
the head of them. At that sight he stood motionless, and had not
power to utter one word. Ganem, said the favourite, there is no time
to be lost; if you love me, put on the habit of one of your slaves
immediately, and daub your face and arms with soot; --then put some
of these dishes on your head, you may be taken for a servant
belonging to the eating-house, and they will let you pass. If they
happen to ask you where the master of the house is, answer, without
any hesitation, that he is within. Alas! madam, answered Ganem, less
concerned for himself than for Fetnah, you only take care of me
--what will become of you? Let not that trouble you, replied Fetnah;
it is my part to look to that. As for what you leave in this house,
I will take care of it, and I hope it will be one day faithfully
restored to you, when the caliph’s anger shall be over; but do you
avoid his fury. The orders he gives in the heat of passion are
always fatal. The young merchant’s affliction was so great, that
he knew not what course to fix upon, and would certainly have
suffered himself to have been seized by the caliph’s soldiers, had
not Fetnah pressed him to disguise himself. He submitted to her
persuasions, put on the habit of a slave, daubed himself with soot;
and it was high time, for they were knocking at the door, and all
they could do was to embrace each other tenderly. They were both so
overwhelmed with sorrow, that they could not utter one word. Thus
they parted. Ganem went out with some dishes on his head; he was
taken for the servant of an eating house, and nobody offered to stop
him. On the contrary, the grand vizier, who was the first that met
him, gave way and let him pass, little thinking that he was the man
he looked for. Those who were behind the grand vizier made way as he
had done, and thus favoured his escape. He got speedily to one of
the city gates, and so clear away.

Whilst he was making the best of his way from the grand vizier
Giafar, that minister came into the room where Fetnah was sitting on
a sofa, and where there were many chests full of Ganem’s clothes,
and of the money he had made of his goods.

As soon as Fetnah saw the grand vizier come into the room, she fell
flat on her face, and continuing in that posture, as it were, ready
to receive her death, My lord, said she, I am ready to undergo the
sentence passed against me by the commander of the believers; you
need only make it known to me. Madam, answered Giafar, falling also
down till she had raised herself, God forbid any man should presume
to lay profane hands on you. I do not intend to offer you the least
harm. I have no farther orders than to entreat you will be pleased
to go with me to the palace, and to conduct you thither, with the
merchant that lives in this house. My lord, replied the favourite,
let us go; I am ready to follow you. As for the young merchant, to
whom I am indebted for my life, he is not here; he has been gone
about a month since to Damascus, whither his business called him,
and he has left these chests you see under my care till he returns.
I conjure you to cause them to be carried to the palace, and order
them to be secured, that I may perform the promise I made him to
take all possible care of them.

You shall be obeyed, said Giafar; and immediately sent for porters,
whom he commanded to take up the chests, and carry them to Mesrour.

As soon as the porters were gone, he whispered the civil magistrate,
committing to him the care of seeing the house razed, but first to
cause diligent search to be made for Ganem, who, he suspected, might
be hid, notwithstanding what Fetnah had told him. Then he went out,
taking this young lady with him, attended by the two slaves that
waited on her. As for Ganem’s slaves, they were not regarded; they
ran in among the crowd, and it was not known what became of them.

No sooner was Giafar out of the house, than the masons and
carpenters began to raze it, and did their business so effectually,
that, in a few hours, none of it remained. But the civil magistrate,
not finding Ganem, after the strictest search, sent to acquaint the
grand vizier with it, before that minister reached the palace. Well,
said Haroun Alraschid, seeing him come into his closet, have you
executed my orders? Yes, sir, answered Giafar; the house Ganem lived
in is levelled with the ground, and I have brought you your
favourite Fetnah; she is at your closet door, and I will call her
in, if you command me. As for the young merchant, we could not find
him, though every place has been searched; and Fetnah affirms that
he has been gone a month to Damascus.

Never was any man in such a passion as the caliph, when he heard
that Ganem had made his escape. As for his favourite, being
possessed that she had been false to him, he would neither see nor
speak to her. Mesrour, said he to the chief of the eunuchs, who was
then present, take the ungrateful, the perfidious Fetnah, and go
shut her up in the dark tower. That tower was within the precinct of
the palace, and commonly served as a prison for the favourites who
any way offended the caliph.

Mesrour being used to execute his sovereign’s orders, though never
so unjust, without making any answer, obeyed this with some
reluctance. He signified his concern to Fetnah, who was the more
grieved at it, because she had reckoned that the caliph would not
refuse to speak to her. She was obliged to submit to her hard fate,
and to follow Mesrour, who conducted her to the dark tower, and
there left her.

In the mean time, the enraged caliph dismissed his grand vizier,
and, only hearkening to his passion, writ the following letter with
his own hand to the king of Syria, his cousin and tributary who
resided at Damascus:--




The Letter from the Caliph Haroun Alraschid to Mohammed Zinebi, King
of Syria.


‘Cousin,

‘This letter is to inform you, that a merchant of Damascus, whose
name is Ganem, the son of Abou Ayoub, has seduced the most amiable
of my women slaves, called Fetnah, and is fled. It is my will, that
when you have read my letter, you cause search to be made for Ganem,
and secure him. When he is in your power, you shall cause him to be
loaded with irons, and, for three days successively, let him receive
fifty strokes with a bull’s pizzle. Then let him be led through
all parts of the city, with a crier, crying, This is the smallest
punishment the commander of the believers inflicts on him that
offends his lord, and debauches one of his slaves. After that, you
shall send him to me under a strong guard. It is my will that you
cause his house to be plundered; and when it shall be razed, order
the materials to be carried out of the city into the middle of the
plain. Besides this, if he has father, mother, sister, wives,
daughters, or other kindred, cause them to be stripped; and when
they are naked, expose them three days to the whole city, forbidding
any person, on pain of death, to afford them any shelter. I expect
you will without delay execute my command.

    ‘Haroun Alraschid.’

The caliph having written this letter, sent it away by an express,
ordering him to make all possible speed, and to take pigeons along
with him, that he might the sooner hear what had been done by
Mohammed Zinebi.

The pigeons of Bagdad have this peculiar quality, that, though they
be carried never so far, they return to Bagdad as soon as they are
turned loose, especially when they have young ones. A letter rolled
up is made fast under their wing, and by that means, advice is
speedily received from such places as it is desired.

The caliph’s courier travelled night and day, as his master’s
impatience required; and being come to Damascus, went directly to
king Zinebi’s palace, who sat upon his throne to receive the
caliph’s letter. The courier having delivered it, Mohammed,
looking upon it, and knowing the hand, stood up to show his respect,
kissed the letter, and laid it on his head, to denote he was ready
submissively to obey the orders contained in it. He opened it, and
having read it, immediately descended from his throne, and, without
losing time, mounted on horseback, with the principal officers of
his household. He also sent for the civil magistrate, who came to
him; and then he went directly to Ganem’s house, attended by all
his guards.

That young merchant’s mother had never heard or received any
letter from him since he left Damascus; but the other merchants with
whom he went to Bagdad were returned, and all of them told her they
had left her son in perfect health. However, seeing he did not
return himself, and neglecting to write, the tender mother could not
but be persuaded that he was dead, and was so fully convinced of it
in her imagination, that she went into mourning. She bewailed Ganem
as if she had seen him die, and had herself closed his eyes; never
mother expressed greater sorrow; and so far was she from seeking any
comfort, that she delighted in indulging her sorrow. She caused a
dome to be built in the middle of the court belonging to her house,
in which she placed a figure representing her son, and covered it
with black cloth. She spent the greatest part of the days and nights
in weeping under that dome, as if her son had been buried there; the
beautiful Alcolomb, or Ravisher of Hearts, her daughter, bore her
company, and mixed her tears with hers.

It was now some time since they had thus devoted themselves to
sorrow, and since the neighbourhood, hearing their cries and
lamentations, pitied such tender relations, when king Mohammed
Zinebi knocked at the door, which being opened by a slave belonging
to the family, he went briskly into the house, inquiring for Ganem,
the son of Abou Ayoub.

Though the slave had never seen king Zinebi, she easily guessed by
his retinue that this must be one of the principal officers in
Damascus. My lord, said she, that Ganem you inquire for is dead; my
mistress, his mother, is in that monument you see there, actually
lamenting the loss of him. The king, not regarding what was said by
the slave, caused all the house to be diligently searched by his
guards for Ganem. Then he advanced towards the monument, where he
saw the mother and daughter sitting on a mat by the figure which
represented Ganem, and their faces appeared to him bathed in tears.
These poor women immediately veiled themselves as soon as they
beheld a man at the door of the dome; but the mother, knowing the
king of Damascus, got up, and ran to cast herself at his feet. My
good lady, said he, I was looking for your son Ganem; is he here?
Alas! sir, cried the mother, it is a long time since he has ceased
to be; would to God I had at least put him into his coffin with my
own hands, and had the comfort of having his bones in this monument!
O my son, my dear son! She would have said more, but was oppressed
with so violent sorrow, that she was not able.

Zinebi was moved, for he was a prince of a mild nature, and had much
compassion for the sufferings of the unfortunate. If Ganem alone is
guilty, thought he to himself, why should the mother and the
daughter, who are innocent, be punished? Ah! cruel Haroun Alraschid!
what a mortification do you put upon me, in making me the
executioner of your vengeance, obliging me to persecute persons who
have not offended you!

The guards whom the king had ordered to search for Ganem came and
told him their search was without any success. He was fully
convinced of this --the tears of those two women would not leave him
any room to doubt. It distracted him to be obliged to execute the
caliph’s order. My good lady, said he to Ganem’s mother, come
out of this monument with your daughter; it is no place of safety
for you. They went out, and he, to secure them against any insult,
took off his own robe, which was very large, and covered them both
with it, bidding them keep close to him. Then he ordered the
populace to be let in to plunder, which was performed with the
utmost rapaciousness, and with shouts, which terrified Ganem’s
mother and sister the more, because they knew not the reason of it.
The rabble carried off the richest goods, chests full of wealth, the
fine Persian and Indian carpets, cushions covered with cloth of gold
and silver, fine china ware; in short, all was taken away; nothing
was left but the bare walls of the house; and it was a dismal
spectacle for the unhappy ladies to see all their goods plundered,
without knowing why they were so cruelly treated.

When the house was plundered, Mohammed ordered the civil magistrate
to raze the house and monument; and while that was doing, he carried
away Alcolomb and her mother to his palace. There it was he
redoubled their affliction, acquainting them with the caliph’s
will. He commands me, said he to them, to cause you to be stripped,
and exposed stark naked for three days to the view of the people. It
is with the utmost reluctance that I execute that cruel and
ignominous sentence. The king delivered these words with such an
air, as plainly made it appear his heart was really pierced with
grief and compassion. Though the fear of being dethroned prevented
his following the dictates of his pity, yet he in some measure
moderated the rigour of Haroun Alraschid’s orders, causing large
shifts, without sleeves, to be made of coarse horsehair for
Ganem’s mother and his sister Alcolomb.

The next day, these two victims of the caliph’s rage were stripped
of their clothes, and their horse-hair shifts put upon them; their
head-dress was also taken away, so that their dishevelled hair hung
floating on their backs. Alcolomb had the finest hair in the world,
and it hung down to the ground. In that condition they were exposed
to the people. The civil magistrate, attended by his officers, went
along with them, and they were conducted through the city. A crier
went before them, who every now and then cried, ‘This is the
punishment due to those who have drawn on themselves the indignation
of the commander of the believers.’

Whilst they walked in this manner along the streets of Damascus,
with their arms and feet naked, clad in such a strange garment, and
endeavouring to hide their confusion under their hair, with which
they covered their faces, all the people were dissolved in tears;
more especially the ladies, looking on them as innocent persons,
through their lattice-windows, and being particularly moved by
Alcolomb’s youth and beauty, made the air ring with their dreadful
shrieks as they passed before their houses. The very children,
frightened at those shrieks, and at the spectacle that occasioned
them, mixed their cries with that general lamentation, and added new
horror to it. In short, had an enemy been in Damascus, putting all
to fire and sword, the consternation could not have been greater.

It was near night when that dismal scene concluded. The mother and
daughter were both conducted back to king Mohammed’s palace. Not
being used to walk barefoot, they were so spent, that they lay a
long time in a swoon. The queen of Damascus, highly afflicted at
their misfortune, notwithstanding the caliph’s prohibition to
relieve them, sent some of her women to comfort them, with all sorts
of refreshments and wine to recover their spirits.

The queen’s women found them still in a swoon, and almost past
receiving any benefit by what they offered them. However, with much
difficulty, they were brought to themselves. Ganem’s mother
immediately returned them thanks for their courtesy. --My good
ladies, said one of the queen’s ladies to her, we are highly
concerned at your affliction, and the queen of Syria, our mistress,
has done us a favour in employing us to assist you. We can assure
you, that princess is much afflicted at your misfortunes, as well as
the king her consort. Ganem’s mother entreated the queen’s women
to return her majesty a thousand thanks from her and her daughter
Alcolomb; and then directing her discourse to the lady that spoke to
her, Madam, said she to her, the king has not told me why the chief
of the believers inflicts so many outrages on us; pray be pleased to
tell us what crimes we have been guilty of. My good lady, answered
the other, the origin of your misfortunes proceeds from your son
Ganem. He is not dead, as you imagine. He is accused of having
stolen the beautiful Fetnah, the best beloved of all the king’s
favourites; and he having, by timely flight, withdrawn himself from
that prince’s indignation, the punishment is fallen on you. All
the world condemns the caliph’s resentment, but all the world
fears him; and you see king Zinebi himself dares not resist his
orders, for fear of incurring his displeasure. All we can do is to
pity you, and exhort you to have patience.

I know my son, answered Ganem’s mother; I have educated him very
carefully and in that respect which is due to the commander of the
believers. He has not committed the crime he is accused of: I dare
answer for his innocence. But I will give over murmuring and
complaining, since it is for him that I suffer, and he is not dead.
O Ganem! added she, in a transport of love and joy, my dear son
Ganem! is it possible that you are still alive? I am no longer
concerned for the loss of my goods; and how extravagant soever the
caliph’s orders may be, I forgive him all the severity of them,
provided Heaven has preserved my son. I am only concerned for my
daughter; her sufferings alone afflict me: yet I believe her to be
so good a sister as to follow my example.

At hearing these words, Alcolomb, who, till then, had appeared
insensible, turned to her mother, and clasping her arms about her
neck, Yes, dear mother, said she, I will always follow your example,
whatever extremity your love for my brother brings you to.

The mother and daughter thus interchanging their sighs and tears,
continued a considerable time in such moving embraces. In the mean
time the queen’s women, who were much moved at that spectacle,
omitted no persuasions to prevail with Ganem’s mother to take some
sustenance. She eat a morsel out of complaisance, and Alcolomb did
the like.

The caliph having ordered that Ganem’s kindred should be exposed
three days successively to the sight of the people in the condition
already mentioned, Alcolomb and her mother afforded the same
spectacle the second time next day, from morning till night. But
that day and the following, things did not pass after the same
manner: the streets, which at first had been full of people, were
now quite empty. All the merchants, incensed at the ill usage of
Abou Ayoub’s widow and daughter, shut up their shops and kept
themselves close within their houses. The ladies, instead of looking
through their lattice windows, withdrew into the back parts of their
houses. There was not a soul to be seen in the public places those
unfortunate women were carried through. It looked as if all the
inhabitants of Damascus had abandoned their city.

On the fourth day, king Mahommed Zinebi, who was resolved punctually
to obey the caliph’s orders, though he did not approve of them,
sent criers into all quarters of the city to make proclamation,
strictly forbidding all the inhabitants of Damascus, and strangers,
of what condition soever, upon pain of death, and having their
bodies cast to the dogs to be devoured, to receive Ganem’s mother
and sister into their houses, or to give them a morsel of bread or a
drop of water, and, in a word, to afford them the least support, or
hold the least correspondence with them.

When the criers had performed what the king had enjoined them, that
prince ordered the mother and the daughter to be turned out of the
palace, and left to their choice to go where they thought fit. As
soon as they appeared, all persons fled from them, so great an
impression had the late prohibition made upon them all. They easily
perceived that every body shunned them; but not knowing the reason
of it, were much surprised; and their amazement was the greater,
when coming into any street, or among many persons, they recollected
some of their best friends, who presently vanished with as much
haste as the rest. What is the meaning of this? said Ganem’s
mother; do we carry the plague about us? Must the unjust and
barbarous usage we have received render us odious to our
fellow-citizens? Come, my child, added she, let us depart from
Damascus with all speed; let us not stay any longer in a city where
we are become frightful to our very friends.

The two wretched ladies, discoursing after this manner, came to one
of the extremities of the city, and retired to a ruined house, there
to pass the night. Thither some Musselmen, out of charity and
compassion, resorted to them after the day was shut in. They carried
them provisions, but durst not stay to comfort them, for fear of
being discovered, and punished for disobeying the caliph’s orders.

In the mean time king Zinebi had let fly a pigeon to give Haroun
Alraschid an account of his exact obedience. He informed him of all
that had been done, and conjured him to direct what he would have
done with Ganem’s mother and sister. He soon received the
caliph’s answer the same way, which was, that he banish them from
Damascus for ever. Immediately the king of Syria sent men to the old
house, with orders to take the mother and daughter, and to conduct
them three days journey from Damascus, and there to leave them,
forbidding them ever to return to the city.

Zinebi’s men executed their commission, but being less exact than
their master, in the strict performance of every tittle of Haroun
Alraschid’s orders, they in pity gave Alcolomb and her mother some
small pieces of money to buy them some subsistence, and each of them
a bag, which they hung about their necks, to carry their provisions.

In this miserable condition they came to the first village. The
peasants’ wives flocked about them, and as it appeared through
their disguise that they were people of some fashion, they asked
them what was the occasion of their travelling after that manner, in
a habit that did not seem to belong to them. Instead of answering
the question put to them, they fell to weeping, which only served to
heighten the curiosity of the peasants, and to move their
compassion. Ganem’s mother told them what she and her daughter had
endured; at which the good countrywomen were sensibly afflicted, and
endeavoured to comfort them. They treated them as well as their
poverty would permit, took off their horse-hair shifts, which were
very uneasy to them, and put on them others which they gave them,
with shoes, and something to cover their heads, and save their hair.

Having expressed their gratitude to those charitable women, Alcolomb
and her mother departed from that village, taking short journeys
towards Aleppo. They used at night to retire near or into the
mosques, where they passed the night on the mat, if there was any,
or else on the bare pavement; and sometimes put up in the public
places appointed for the use of travellers. As for sustenance, they
did not want it, for they often came to places where bread, boiled
rice, and other provisions, are distributed to all travellers who
desire it.

At length they came to Aleppo, but would not stay there, and
continuing their journey towards the Euphrates, crossed that river,
and entered into Mesopotamia, which they traversed as far as
Moussoul. Thence, notwithstanding all they had endured, they
proceeded to Bagdad. That was the place they had fixed their
thoughts upon, hoping to find Ganem there, though they ought not to
have fancied that he was in the city where the caliph resided: but
they hoped, because they wished it; their affection for him
increasing instead of diminishing, in spite of their misfortunes.
Their conversation was generally about him, and they inquired for
him of all they met. But let us leave Alcolomb and her mother, and
return to Fetnah.

She was still confined close in the dark tower, ever since the day
that had been so fatal to Ganem and her. However, as disagreeable as
her prison was to her, it was much less grievous than the thoughts
of Ganem’s misfortune, the uncertainty of whose fate was a killing
affliction to her. There was scarce a moment in which she did not
lament him.

The caliph was accustomed to walk frequently at night within the
enclosure of his palace, for he was the most inquisitive prince in
the world, and sometimes by those night-walks, he came to the
knowledge of things that happened in his palace, which would
otherwise never have come to his ear: one of those nights, in his
walk, he happened to pass by the dark tower, and fancying he heard
somebody talk, he stopt, and drew near the door to listen, and
distinctly heard these words, which Fetnah, whose thoughts were
always on Ganem, uttered with a loud voice: O Ganem, too unfortunate
Ganem! where are you at this time? whither has thy cruel fate led
thee? Alas! it is I that have made you wretched! Why did you not let
me perish miserably, rather than afford me your generous relief?
What melancholy reward have you received for your care and respect!
The commander of the faithful, who ought to have rewarded,
persecutes you; and in return for having always regarded me as a
person reserved for his bed, you lose all your goods, and are
obliged to seek for safety in flight. O caliph, barbarous caliph,
what will you say for yourself, when you shall appear with Ganem
before the tribunal of the Supreme Judge, and the angels shall
testify the truth before your face? All the power you are now
invested with, and which makes almost the whole world tremble, will
not prevent your being condemned and punished for your violent and
unjust proceedings. Here Fetnah ceased her complaints, her sighs and
tears putting a stop to her utterance.

This was enough to make the caliph reflect. He plainly perceived,
that if what he heard was true, his favourite must be innocent, and
that he had been too hasty in giving such orders against Ganem and
his family. Being resolved to be rightly informed in an affair which
so nearly concerned him in point of equity, on which he valued
himself, he immediately returned to his apartment, and that moment
ordered Mesrour to repair to the dark tower, and bring Fetnah to him.

By this command, and much more by the caliph’s manner of speaking,
the chief of the eunuchs guessed that his master designed to pardon
his favourite, and take her to himself again. He was overjoyed at
it, for he loved Fetnah, and had been much concerned at her
disgrace; and therefore flying instantly to the tower, Madam, said
he to the favourite, with such an air as expressed his satisfaction,
be pleased to follow me; I hope you will never more return to this
vile dark tower: the commander of the faithful wishes to speak with
you, and I draw from it a happy omen.

Fetnah followed Mesrour, who conducted her into the caliph’s
closet. She prostrated herself before that prince, and so continued,
her face bathed in tears. Fetnah, said the caliph, without bidding
her rise, I think you charge me with violence and injustice. Who is
he, that notwithstanding the regard and respect he had for me, is in
a miserable condition? Speak freely; you know the natural goodness
of my disposition, and that I love to do justice.

By these words the favourite saw plainly that the caliph had heard
what she had said, and laying hold on so favourable an opportunity
to clear her dear Ganem, Commander of the true believers, said she,
if I have let fall any word that is not agreeable to your majesty, I
most humbly beseech you to forgive me; but he whose innocence and
wretched state you desire to be informed of, is Ganem, the unhappy
son of Abou Ayoub, merchant of Damascus. He is the man that saved my
life, and afforded me a safe sanctuary in his house. I must own,
that, from the first moment he saw me, he perhaps designed to devote
himself to me, and conceived hopes of engaging me to admit his
services. I guessed at this, by the eagerness he showed in
entertaining me, and doing me all the good offices which I wanted
under the circumstances I was then in; but as soon as he heard that
I had the honour to belong to you, Ah, madam, said he, that which
belongs to the master is forbidden to the slave. From that moment, I
owe this justice to his virtue, his behaviour was always suitable to
his words. However, you, commander of the true believers, well know
with what rigour you have treated him, and you will answer for it
before the tribunal of God.

The caliph was not displeased with Fetnah for the freedom of those
words; but may I, answered he, rely on the assurance you give me of
Ganem’s virtue? Yes, replied Fetnah, you may. I would not for the
world conceal the truth from you: and to prove to you that I am
sincere, I must make a confession to you, which perhaps may
displease you; but I beg pardon of your majesty beforehand. Speak,
daughter, said Haroun Alraschid; I forgive you all, provided you
conceal nothing from me. Well, then, replied Fetnah, let me inform
you, that Ganem’s respectful behaviour, joined to all the good
offices he did me, gained him my esteem. I went farther yet: you
know the tyranny of love. I felt some tender inclination rising in
my breast. He perceived it, but far from availing himself of my
frailty, and notwithstanding the flame which consumed him, he still
remained steady in his duty; and all that his passion could force
from him was those words I have already told your majesty; ‘That
which belongs to the master is forbidden to the slave.’

This ingenuous confession might have provoked any other man than the
caliph; but it completely appeased that prince. He commanded her to
rise, and making her sit by him, Tell me your story, said he, from
the beginning to the end. She did so with much art and spirit,
passing slightly over what regarded Zobeide and enlarging on the
obligation she owed to Ganem; the expense he had been at for her;
and above all, she highly extolled his discretion, endeavouring by
that means to make the caliph sensible that she had been under the
necessity of remaining concealed in Ganem’s house, to deceive
Zobeide. She concluded with the young merchant’s escape, which she
plainly told the caliph she had compelled him to, that he might
avoid his indignation.

When she had done speaking, that prince said to her, I believe all
you have told me; but why was it so long before you let me hear from
you? Was there any need of staying a whole month after my return,
before you sent me word where you were? Commander of the true
believers, answered Fetnah, Ganem went abroad so very seldom, that
you need not wonder we were not the first that heard of your return.
Besides that, Ganem, who took upon him to deliver the letter I wrote
to Nouron Nihar, was a long time before he could find an opportunity
of putting it into her own hands.

It is enough, Fetnah, replied the caliph; I acknowledge my fault,
and would willingly make amends for it, by heaping favours on that
young merchant of Damascus. Consider, therefore, what I can do for
him. Ask what you think fit, and I will grant it. Hereupon the
favourite fell down at the caliph’s feet, with her face to the
ground; and rising again, said, Commander of the true believers,
after returning your majesty thanks for Ganem, I most humbly intreat
you to cause it to be published throughout your dominions, that you
pardon the son of Abou Ayoub, and that he may safely come to you. I
will do more, rejoined that prince; in requital for having saved
your life, and the respect he has shown me, to make amends for the
loss of his goods, and in short, to repair the wrong I have done to
his family, I give him to you for a husband. Fetnah had not words
expressive enough to thank the caliph for his generosity: she then
withdrew into the apartment she had occupied before her melancholy
adventure. The same furniture was still in it; nothing had been
removed: but that which pleased her most, was to find there
Ganem’s chests and packs, which Mesrour had taken care to convey
thither.

The next day Haroun Alraschid ordered the grand vizier to cause
proclamation to be made throughout all his dominions, that he
pardoned Ganem, the son of Abou Ayoub; but this proved of no effect,
for a long time elapsed without any news of that young merchant
Fetnah concluded, that he had not been able to survive the pain of
losing her. A dreadful uneasiness seized her mind; but as hope is
the last thing which forsakes lovers, she entreated the caliph to
give her leave to seek for Ganem herself; which being granted, she
took a purse with a thousand pieces of gold out of her casket, and
went one morning out of the palace, mounted on a mule she had out of
the caliph’s stables, very richly accoutred. Black eunuchs
attended her, with their hands on each side upon the mule’s rump.

Thus she went from mosque to mosque, bestowing her alms among the
devotees of the Mahometan religion, desiring their prayers for the
accomplishment of an affair, on which the happiness of two persons,
she told them, depended. She spent the whole day and the thousand
pieces of gold in giving alms at the mosques, and returned to the
palace in the evening.

The next day she took another purse of the same value, and, in the
like equipage as the day before, went to the place where all the
jewellers’ shops were, and stopping at the door without alighting,
sent one of her black eunuchs for the syndic or chief of them. That
syndic, who was a most charitable man, and spent above two-thirds of
his income in relieving poor strangers, whether they happened to be
sick or in distress, did not make Fetnah wait, knowing by her dress
that she was a lady belonging to the palace. I apply myself to you,
said she, putting the purse into his hands, as a person whose piety
is cried up throughout the city. I desire you to distribute that
gold among the poor strangers you relieve; for I know you make it
your business to assist poor strangers who apply to your charity. I
am also satisfied that you prevent their wants, and that nothing is
more agreeable to you than to have an opportunity of relieving their
misery. Madam, answered the syndic, I shall obey your commands with
pleasure, but if you desire to exercise your charity in person, and
will be pleased to step to my house, you will there see two women
worthy of your compassion: I met them yesterday as they were coming
into the city; they were in a deplorable condition, and it moved me
the more, because I thought they were persons of rank. --Through all
the rags that covered them, notwithstanding the impression the sun
has made on their faces, I discovered a noble air, not to be
commonly found in those poor people I relieve. I carried them both
to my house, and delivered them to my wife, who was of the same
opinion with me. She caused her slaves to provide them good beds,
whilst she herself washed their faces, and gave them clean linen. We
know not as yet who they are, because we wish to let them take some
rest before we trouble them with our questions.

Fetnah, without knowing why, felt a curiosity to see them. The
syndic would have conducted her to his house, but she would not give
him the trouble, and was satisfied that a slave of his should show
her the way. She alighted at the door, and followed the syndic’s
slave, who was gone before to give notice to his mistress, she being
then in the chamber with Alcolomb and her mother; for they were the
persons the syndic had been speaking of to Fetnah.

The syndic’s wife, being informed by the slave that a lady from
the palace was in her house, was going out of the room to meet her;
but Fetnah, who had followed the slave close, did not give her time:
and coming into the chamber, the syndic’s wife prostrated herself
before her, to express the respect she had for all that belonged to
the caliph. Fetnah took her up, and said, My good lady, I desire you
will let me speak with those two strangers that arrived at Bagdad
last night. Madam, answered the syndic’s wife, they lie in those
two little beds you see close by each other. The favourite
immediately drew near the mother’s, and viewing her carefully,
Good woman, said she, I come to offer you my assistance: I have a
considerable interest in this city, and may be of service to you and
your companion. Madam, answered Ganem’s mother, I perceive by your
obliging offers, that Heaven has not quite forsaken us, though we
had cause to believe it, after so many misfortunes as have befallen
us. Having uttered these words, she wept so bitterly that Fetnah and
the syndic’s wife could not forbear letting fall some tears.

The caliph’s favourite having dried up here, said to Ganem’s
mother, Be so kind as to tell us your misfortune, and recount your
story. You cannot give the relation to any persons better disposed
than we are to use all possible means to comfort you. Madam, replied
Abou Ayoub’s disconsolate widow, a favourite of the commander of
the true believers, a lady whose name is Fetnah, is the occasion of
all our misfortunes. These words were like a thunderbolt to the
favourite; but suppressing her agitation and concern, she suffered
Ganem’s mother to proceed in the following manner:-- I am the
widow of Abou Ayoub, a merchant of Damascus: I had a son called
Ganem, who coming to trade at Bagdad, has been accused of having
carried off that Fetnah. The caliph has caused search to be made for
him every where, to put him to death; and not finding him, has
written to the king of Damascus, to cause our house to be plundered
and razed, and to expose my daughter and me three days successively
stark-naked to the populace, and then to banish us out of Syria for
ever. But how unworthy soever our usage has been, I should still be
comforted, were my son alive, and I could meet with him. What a
pleasure would it be for his sister and me to see him again!
Embracing him, we should forget the loss of our goods, and all the
evils we have suffered for him. Alas! I am fully persuaded he is
only the innocent cause of them, and that he is no more guilty
towards the caliph than his sister and I.

No doubt of it, said Fetnah, interrupting her there, he is no more
guilty than you are: I can assure you of his innocence; for I am
that very Fetnah you so much complain of; who, through some fatality
in my stars, have occasioned you so many misfortunes. To me you must
impute the loss of your son, if he is no more; but if I have
occasioned your misfortune, I can in some measure relieve it. I have
already justified Ganem to the caliph; that prince has caused it to
be proclaimed throughout his dominions, that he pardons the son of
Abou Ayoub; and doubt not he will do you as much good as he has done
you harm. You are no longer his enemies. He waits for Ganem to
requite the service he has done me, by uniting our fortunes; he
gives me to him for his consort; therefore look on me as your
daughter, and permit me to vow eternal friendship to you. Having so
said, she bowed down on Ganem’s mother, who was so astonished,
that she could return no answer. Fetnah held her a long time in her
arms, and only left her to run to the other bed to embrace Alcolomb,
who sitting up, held out her arms to receive her.

When the caliph’s charming favourite had given the mother and
daughter all the tokens of affection they could expect from
Ganem’s wife, she said to them, Cease both of you to afflict
yourselves: the wealth Ganem had in this city is not lost; it is in
my apartment in the palace: I know all the treasure of the world
cannot comfort you without Ganem: I judge so of his mother and
sister, if I may judge of them by myself. Blood is no less powerful
than love in great minds; but why should we despair of seeing him
again? We shall find him; the happiness of meeting with you makes me
conceive fresh hopes. Perhaps this is the last day of your
sufferings, and the beginning of a greater felicity than you enjoyed
in Damascus, when Ganem was with you.

Fetnah would have gone on, when the syndic of the jewellers came in:
Madam, said he to her, I come from seeing a very moving object; it
is a young man, whom a camel-driver has just carried to the hospital
at Bagdad: he was bound with cords on a camel, because he had not
strength enough to sit on him. They had already unbound him, and
were carrying him into the hospital, when I happened to pass by. I
went up to the young man, viewed him attentively, and fancied his
countenance was not altogether unknown to me. I asked him some
questions concerning his family and his country; but all the answers
I could get were only sighs and tears. I took pity on him, and by
being so much used to sick people, perceived that he had need to
have particular care taken of him. I would not permit him to be put
into the hospital; for I am too well acquainted with their way of
managing the sick, and am sensible of the incapacity of the
physicians. I have caused him to be brought home to my house, by my
slaves; and they are now, by my orders, in a private room where I
placed him, putting on some of my own linen, and treating him as
they would do me.

Fetnah’s heart leaped at these words of the jeweller, and she felt
a sudden emotion, for which she could not account: Show me, said she
to the syndic, into that sick man’s room; I should be glad to see
him. The syndic conducted her, and whilst she was going thither,
Ganem’s mother said to Alcolomb, Alas! daughter, wretched as that
sick stranger is, your brother, if he be living, is not perhaps in a
more happy condition.

The caliph’s favourite, coming into the chamber where the sick man
was, drew near the bed, in which the syndic’s slaves had already
laid him. She saw a young man, whose eyes were closed, his
countenance pale, disfigured, and bathed in tears. She gazed
earnestly on him, her heart beat, and she fancied she beheld Ganem;
but yet she would not believe her eyes. Though she found something
of Ganem in the object she beheld, yet in other respects he appeared
so different, that she durst not imagine it was he that lay before
her. Unable, however, to withstand the earnest desire of being
satisfied, Ganem, said she, with a trembling voice, is it you I
behold? Having spoken these words, she stopped to give the young man
time to answer; but observing that he seemed insensible, Alas!
Ganem, added she, it is not you that I talk to. My imagination being
overcharged with your image, has given this stranger a deceitful
resemblance. The son of Abou Ayoub, though never so sick, would know
the voice of Fetnah. At the name of Fetnah, Ganem (for it was really
he) opened his eyes, and turned his face towards the person that
spoke to him; and knowing the caliph’s favourite, Ah! madam, said
he, by what miracle --He could say no more; such a sudden transport
of joy seized him, that he fainted away. Fetnah and the syndic did
all they could to bring him to himself; but as soon as they
perceived he began to revive, the syndic desired the lady to
withdraw, for fear lest the sight of her should heighten Ganem’s
distemper.

The young man, having recovered his senses, looked all around, and
not seeing what he looked for, cried out, What is become of you,
charming Fetnah? Did you really appear before my eyes, or was it
only an illusion? No, sir, said the syndic, it was no illusion. It
was I that caused that lady to withdraw, but you shall see her
again, as soon as you are in a condition to bear her sight. You now
stand in need of rest, and nothing ought to obstruct your taking it.
The situation of your affairs is altered, since you are, as I
suppose, that Ganem, in favour of whom the commander of the true
believers has caused a proclamation to be made in Bagdad, declaring
that he forgives him what is passed. Be satisfied for the present
with knowing so much; the lady who just now spoke to you will
acquaint you with the rest, therefore think of nothing but
recovering your health; I will contribute all in my power towards
it. Having spoken these words, he left Ganem to take his rest, and
went himself to provide for him all such medicines as were proper to
recover his strength, exhausted by hard living and toil.

During that time Fetnah was in the room with Alcolomb and her
mother, where almost the same scene was acted over again; for when
Ganem’s mother understood that the sick stranger whom the syndic
had just brought into his house was Ganem himself, she was so
overjoyed, that she also swooned away; and when, with the assistance
of Fetnah and the syndic’s wife, she was again come to herself,
she would have got up, to go and see her son; but the syndic coming
in, hindered her, representing that Ganem was so weak and emaciated,
that it would endanger his life to excite in him those emotions
which must be the consequence of the unexpected sight of a beloved
mother and sister. There was no occasion for the syndic’s saying
any more to Ganem’s mother; as soon as she was told that she could
not converse with her son, without hazarding his life, she ceased
insisting to go and see him. Then Fetnah said, Let us bless Heaven
for having brought us all together into one place. I will return to
the palace to give the caliph an account of all these adventures,
and to-morrow morning I will return to you. This said, she embraced
the mother and the daughter, and went away. As soon as she came to
the palace, she sent Mesrour to request a private audience of the
caliph, which was immediately granted; and being brought into that
prince’s closet, where he was alone, she prostrated herself at his
feet, with her hands on the ground, according to custom. He
commanded her to rise, and having made her sit down, asked whether
she had heard any news of Ganem? Commander of the true believers,
said she, I have been so successful, that I have found him, as also
his mother and sister. The caliph was curious to know how she could
find them in so short a time, and she satisfied his curiosity,
saying so many things in commendation of Ganem’s mother and
sister, that he desired to see them, as well as the young merchant.

Though Haroun Alraschid was passionate, and in his heat sometimes
guilty of cruel actions; yet in return, he was just, and the most
generous prince in the world, as soon as his anger was over, and he
was made sensible of the wrong he had done. Having therefore no
longer cause to doubt but that he had unjustly persecuted Ganem and
his family, and having publicly wronged them, he resolved to make
them public satisfaction. I am overjoyed, said he to Fetnah, that
your search has proved so successful; it is a mighty satisfaction to
me, not so much for your sake as for my own. I will keep the promise
I have made you. You shall marry Ganem, and I here declare you are
no longer my slave; you are free. Go back to that young merchant,
and as soon as he has recovered his health, you shall bring him to
me, with his mother and sister.

The next morning early Fetnah repaired to the syndic of the
jewellers, being impatient to hear of Ganem’s health, and to tell
the mother and daughter the good news she had for them. The first
person she met with was the syndic, who told her that Ganem had
rested very well that night; and that his distemper proceeded
altogether from melancholy, and the cause being removed, he would
soon recover his health.

Accordingly the son of Abou Ayoub was much amended. Rest, and the
good medicines he had taken, but, above all, the different situation
of his mind, had wrought so good an effect, that the syndic thought
he might without danger see his mother, his sister, and his
mistress, provided he was prepared to receive them; because there
was ground to fear, that, not knowing his mother and sister were at
Bagdad, the sight of them might occasion too great surprise and joy.
It was therefore resolved, that Fetnah should first go alone into
Ganem’s chamber, and then make a sign to the two other ladies to
appear, when she thought it was proper.

Matters being so ordered, the syndic announced Fetnah’s coming to
the sick man, who was so transported to see her, that he was again
near fainting away. Well, Ganem, said she, drawing near to his bed,
you have again found your Fetnah, whom you thought you had lost for
ever. Ah, madam, eagerly interrupting her, what miracle has restored
you to my sight? I thought you were in the caliph’s palace; that
prince has doubtless listened to you. You have dispelled his
jealousy, and he has restored you to his favour.

Yes, my dear Ganem, answered Fetnah, I have cleared myself before
the commander of the true believers, who, to make amends for the
wrong he has done you, bestows me on you for a wife. These last
words occasioned such an excess of joy in Ganem, that he knew not
for a while how to express himself, otherwise than by that
passionate silence so well known to lovers. At length he broke out
in these words: Beautiful Fetnah, cried he, may I give credit to
what you tell me? May I believe that the caliph really resigns you
to Abou Ayoub’s son? Nothing is more certain, answered the lady.
That prince, who before caused search to be made for you, to take
away your life, and who in his fury caused your mother and your
sister to suffer a thousand indignities, desires now to see you,
that he may reward the respect you had for him; and there is no
question to be made but that he will load your family with his
favours.

Ganem asked what the caliph had done to his mother and sister, which
Fetnah told him; and he could not forbear letting fall some tears at
that relation, notwithstanding the thoughts which arose in his mind
at the news of being married to his mistress. But when Fetnah
informed him that they were actually in Bagdad, and in the same
house with him, he appeared so impatient to see them, that the
favourite could no longer defer giving him that satisfaction; and
accordingly called them in. They were at the door, only waiting for
that moment. They came in, went up to Ganem, and embracing him in
their turns, kissed him a thousand times. What tears were shed
amidst those embraces! Ganem’s face was bathed with them, as well
as his mother’s and sister’s; and Fetnah let fall abundance. The
syndic himself and his wife were so moved at the spectacle, that
they could not forbear weeping, nor sufficiently admire the secret
workings of Providence, which brought together into their house four
persons, whom fortune had so cruelly parted.

When they had all dried up their tears, Ganem drew fresh torrents,
by the recital of all he had suffered from the day he left Fetnah
till the moment the syndic brought him to his house. He told them,
that having taken refuge in a small village, he there fell sick;
that some charitable peasants had taken care of him, but finding he
did not recover, a camel-driver had undertaken to carry him to the
hospital at Bagdad. Fetnah also told them all the uneasiness of her
imprisonment; how the caliph, having heard her talk in the tower,
had sent for her into his closet, and how she had cleared herself.
In conclusion, when they had related what accidents had befallen
them, Fetnah said, Let us bless Heaven, which has brought us all
together again, and let us think of nothing but the happiness that
attends us. As soon as Ganem has recovered his health, he must
appear before the caliph, with his mother and sister; but as they
are not in a condition to be seen, I will make some provision for
them. I desire you to stay a moment.

This said, she went away to the palace, and soon returned to the
syndic’s with a purse containing a thousand pieces of gold, which
she delivered to the syndic, desiring him to buy clothes for the
mother and daughter. The syndic, who was a man of good taste, chose
such as were very handsome, and had them made up with all speed.
They were finished in three days, and Ganem finding himself strong
enough to go abroad, prepared for it; but on the day he had
appointed to pay his respects to the caliph, when he was making
ready, with his mother and sister, the grand vizier Giafar came to
the syndic’s house.

That minister came on horseback, attended by a great number of
officers. Sir, said he to Ganem, as soon as he came in, I am come
from the commander of the true believers, my master and yours; the
orders I have differ very much from those which I do not care to
revive in your memory; I am to bear you company, and to present you
to the caliph, who is desirous to see you. Ganem returned no other
answer to the vizier’s compliment, than by profoundly bowing his
head, and then mounted a horse brought from the caliph’s stables,
which he managed very gracefully. The mother and daughter were
mounted on mules belonging to the palace, and whilst Fetnah on
another mule led them a by-way to the prince’s court, Giafar
conducted Ganem another way, and brought him into the hall of
audience. The caliph was there sitting on his throne, encompassed
with emirs, viziers, and other attendants and courtiers, Arabs,
Persians, Egyptians, Africans, and Syrians, of his own dominions,
not to mention strangers.

When the vizier had conducted Ganem to the foot of the throne, that
young merchant paid his obeisance, prostrating himself with his face
to the ground, and then rising, made a handsome compliment in verse,
which, though _extempore_, met with the approbation of the whole
court. After his compliment, the caliph caused him to draw near, and
said to him, I am glad to see you, and desire to hear from your own
mouth where you found my favourite, and all that you have done for
her. Ganem obeyed, and appeared so sincere, that the caliph was
convinced of his sincerity. That prince ordered a very rich vest to
be given him, according to the custom observed with those who are
admitted to audience. After which he said to him, Ganem, I will have
you live in my court. Commander of the true believers, answered the
young merchant, a slave has no will but his master’s, on whom his
life and fortune depend. The caliph was highly pleased with
Ganem’s answer, and assigned him a considerable pension. Then the
prince came down from his throne, and causing only Ganem and the
grand vizier to follow him, went into his own apartment.

Not questioning but that Fetnah was there, with Abou Ayoub’s widow
and daughter, he caused them to be called in. They prostrated
themselves before him; he made them rise; and was so taken with
Alcolomb’s beauty, that after viewing her very attentively, he
said, I am so sorry for having treated your charms so unworthily,
that I owe them such a satisfaction as may surpass the injury I have
done them. I take you to wife; and by that means shall punish
Zobeide, who shall become the first cause of your good fortune, as
she was of your past sufferings. This is not all, added he, turning
towards Ganem’s mother: you are still young; I believe you will
not disdain to be allied to my grand vizier: I give you to Giafar,
and you, Fetnah, to Ganem. Let a cadi and witnesses be called, and
the three contracts be drawn up and signed immediately. Ganem would
have represented to the caliph, that it would be honour enough for
his sister to be one of his favourites; but that prince was resolved
to marry her.

He thought this such an extraordinary story, that he ordered a
famous historian to commit it to writing with all its circumstances.
It was afterwards laid up in his library, and many copies being
transcribed from that original, it became public.

After Scheherazade had finished the history of Ganem, son of Abou
Ayoub, the sultan of the Indies expressed his satisfaction: Sir,
said the sultaness, since this story has pleased you, I humbly
intreat your majesty to be pleased to hear that of Zeyn Alasnam and
the King of the Genii, which will afford you equal pleasure:
Schahriar consented; but as day began to appear, it was deferred
till the following night, when she began as follows:




The History of Prince Zeyn Alasnam and the King of the Genii.


A king of Balsora, who possessed great wealth, and was well beloved
by his subjects, had no children, which was a great affliction to
him; and therefore he made presents to all the holy persons in his
dominions, to engage them to beg a son for him of heaven: and their
prayers being effectual, the queen proved with child, and was
happily delivered of a prince, who was named Zeyn Alasnam, which
signifies Ornament of the Statues.

The king caused all the astrologers in his kingdom to be assembled,
and ordered them to calculate the infant’s nativity. They found by
their observations that he would live long, and be very brave; but
that all his courage would be little enough to carry him through the
misfortunes that threatened him. The king was not daunted at this
prediction: My son, said he, is not to be pitied, since he will be
brave: it is fit that princes should have a taste of misfortunes;
for adversity tries virtue, and they are the better qualified to
reign.

He rewarded the astrologers, and dismissed them; and caused Zeyn to
be educated with the greatest care imaginable, appointing him able
masters as soon as he was of age to receive their instructions. In
short, he proposed to make him an accomplished prince, when on a
sudden this good king fell sick of a distemper, which all the skill
of his physicians could not cure. Perceiving his disease was mortal,
he sent for his son, and among other things advised him rather to
endeavour to be beloved than to be feared by his people; not to give
ear to flatterers; to be as slow in rewarding as in punishing,
because it often happens that monarchs, misled by false appearances,
load wicked men with favours, and oppress the innocent.

As soon as the king was dead, prince Zeyn went into mourning, which
he wore seven days, and the eighth he ascended the throne, taking
his father’s seal off the royal treasury, and putting on his own,
beginning thus to taste the sweets of ruling, the pleasure of seeing
all his courtiers bow down before him, and make it their whole study
to show their zeal and obedience. In a word, the sovereign power was
too agreeable to him. He only regarded what his subjects owed to
him, without considering what was his duty towards them, and
consequently took little care to govern them well. He wallowed in
all sorts of debauchery among the voluptuous youth, on whom he
conferred the prime employments of the kingdom. He lost all command
of his power. Being naturally prodigal, he set no bounds to his
grants, so that his women and his favourites insensibly drained his
treasury.

The queen his mother was still living, a discreet wise princess. She
had several times unsuccessfully tried to check her son’s
prodigality and debauchery, giving him to understand, that, if he
did not soon take another course, he would not only squander his
wealth, but would also alienate the minds of his people, and
occasion some revolution, which perhaps might cost him his crown and
his life. What she had foretold was very near falling out: the
people began to murmur against the government, and their murmurs had
certainly been followed by a general revolt, had not the queen had
the address to prevent it. But that princess being acquainted with
the ill posture of affairs, informed the king, who at last suffered
himself to be prevailed upon. He committed the government to
discreet aged men, who knew how to keep the people within the bounds
of duty.

Zeyn, seeing all his wealth consumed, repented that he had made no
better use of it. He fell into a deadly melancholy, and nothing
could comfort him. One night he saw in a dream a venerable old man
coming towards him, who with a smiling countenance said, Know, Zeyn,
that there is no sorrow but what is followed by mirth, no misfortune
but what in the end brings some happiness. If you desire to see the
end of your affliction, get up, set out for Egypt, go to Grand
Cairo; a great fortune attends you there.

The prince, when he awaked in the morning, was struck with this
dream, and spoke of it very seriously to his mother, who only
laughed at it. My son, said she to him, would you now go into Egypt
on the faith of that fine dream? Why not, madam? answered Zeyn: do
you imagine all dreams are chimerical? No, no, some of them are
mysterious. My preceptors have told me a thousand stories, which
will not permit me to doubt of it. Besides, though I were not
otherwise convinced, I could not forbear giving some credit to my
dreams. The old man that appeared to me had something supernatural:
he was not one of those men whom nothing but age makes venerable;
there appeared a divine air about his person. In short, he was such
a one as our great prophet is represented; and it you will have me
tell you what I think, I believe it was he, who, pitying my
affliction, designs to relieve it. I rely on the confidence he has
inspired me with. I am full of his promises, and have resolved to
follow his advice. The queen endeavoured to dissuade him, but in
vain. The prince committed to her the government of the kingdom, set
out one night very privately from his palace, and took the road to
Cairo, without suffering any person to attend him.

After much trouble and fatigue, he arrived at that famous city, like
which there are few in the world, either for extent or beauty. He
alighted at the gate of a mosque, where, being spent by weariness,
he lay down. No sooner was he fallen asleep, than he saw the same
old man, who said to him, I am pleased with you, my son; you have
given credit to my words. You have come hither without being
deterred by the length or the difficulties of the way: but know I
have not put you upon undertaking such a long journey with any other
design than to try you. I find you have courage and resolution. You
deserve I should make you the richest and happiest prince in the
world. Return to Balsora, and you shall find immense wealth in your
palace. No king ever possessed so much as there is.

The prince was not pleased with that dream. Alas! thought he to
himself, when he awaked, how much was I mistaken? That old man, whom
I took for our prophet, is no other than the production of my
disturbed imagination. My fancy was so full of him, that it is no
wonder I have seen him again. I had best return to Balsora: what
should I do here any longer? It is very happy that I told none but
my mother the motive of my journey: I should become a jest to my
people, if they knew it.

Accordingly, he set out again for his kingdom, and as soon as he
arrived there, the queen asked him whether he returned well pleased?
He told her all that had happened, and was so much concerned for
having been so credulous, that the queen, instead of adding to his
vexation, by reproving or laughing at him, comforted him. Forbear
afflicting yourself, my son, said she: if God has appointed you
riches, you will have them without any trouble. Be easy; all that I
recommend to you is, to be virtuous; renounce the delights of
dancing, music, and high coloured wine: shun all these pleasures;
they have already almost ruined you; apply yourself to make your
subjects happy; by securing their happiness, you will establish your
own.

Prince Zeyn swore he would for the future follow his mother’s
advice, and be directed by the wise viziers she had made choice of
to assist him in supporting the weight of the government. But the
very night after he returned to his palace, he saw the old man the
third time in a dream, who said to him, The time of your prosperity
is come, brave Zeyn: to-morrow morning, as soon as you are up, take
a little pick-axe, and go dig in the late king’s closet; you will
there find a mighty treasure.

As soon as the prince awaked, he got up, ran to the queen’s
apartment, and with much eagerness told her the new dream of that
night. Really, my son, said the queen, smiling, that is a very
positive old man; he is not satisfied with having deceived you
twice; have you a mind to believe him again? No, madam, answered
Zeyn, I give no credit to what he has said; but I will, for my own
satisfaction, search my father’s closet. I really fancied so,
cried the queen, laughing heartily; go, my son, satisfy yourself; my
comfort is, that work is not so fatiguing as the journey to Egypt.

Well, madam, answered the king, I must own that this third dream has
restored my confidence, for it is connected with the two others: let
us examine the old man’s words. He first directed me to go into
Egypt; there he told me he had put me upon taking that journey only
to try me. Return to Balsora, said he; that is the place where you
are to find treasures: this night he has exactly pointed out to me
the place where they are: these three dreams, in my opinion, are
connected. After all, they may be chimerical: but I would rather
search in vain than blame myself as long as I live, for having
perhaps missed of great riches by being unseasonably incredulous.

Having spoken these words, he left the queen’s apartment, caused a
pick-axe to be brought him, and went alone into the late king’s
closet. He fell to breaking up the ground, and took up above half
the square stones it was paved with, and yet saw not the least
appearance of what he sought after. He ceased working to take a
little rest, thinking within himself, I am much afraid my mother had
cause enough to laugh at me. However, he took heart, and went on
with his labour, nor had he cause to repent; for on a sudden he
discovered a white stone, which he took up, and under it found a
door, made fast with a steel padlock; this he broke with the
pick-axe, and opened the door, which covered a staircase of white
marble. He immediately lighted a candle, and went down those stairs
into a room, the floor whereof was laid with tiles of china-ware,
and the roof and walls were of crystal; but he particularly fixed
his eyes upon four shelves, a little raised above the rest of the
floor, on each of which there were ten urns of porphyry. He fancied
they were full of wine: Well, said he, that wine must be very old; I
do not question but it is excellent. He went up to one of the urns,
took off the cover, and with no less joy than surprise perceived it
was full of pieces of gold. [92] He searched all the forty, one
after another, and found them full of the same coin, took out a
handful, and carried it to the queen.

That princess, it may be imagined, was amazed when the king gave her
an account of what he had seen. O! my son, said she, take heed you
do not lavish away all that treasure foolishly, as you have already
done the royal treasure. Let not your enemies have so much occasion
to rejoice. No, madam, answered Zeyn, I will from henceforward live
after such a manner as shall be pleasing to you.

The queen desired the king her son to conduct her to that wonderful
subterraneous place, which the late king her husband had made with
such secrecy, that she had never heard the least of it. Zeyn led her
to the closet, down the marble stairs, and into the chamber where
the urns were. She observed every thing with the eye of curiosity,
and in a corner spied a little urn of the same sort of stone as the
others. The prince had not before taken notice of it, but opening,
found in it a golden key. My son, said the queen, this key certainly
belongs to some other treasure: let us look all about; perhaps we
may discover the use it is designed for.

They examined the chamber with the utmost exactness, and at length
found a key-hole in one of the pannels of the wall, and guessed it
to be that to which the key belonged. The king immediately tried,
and as readily opened the door, which led into a chamber, in the
midst of which were nine pedestals of massy gold, on eight of which
stood as many statues, each of them made of a single diamond, and
from them came such a brightness, that the whole room was perfectly
light.

O Heavens! cried Zeyn, in astonishment, where could my father find
such rarities? The ninth pedestal redoubled this amazement, for it
was covered with a piece of white satin, on which were written these
words, ‘Dear son, it cost me much toil to get these eight statues;
but though they are extraordinarily beautiful, you must understand
that there is a ninth in the world, which surpasses them all: that
alone is worth more than a thousand such as these: if you desire to
be master of it, go to the city of Cairo in Egypt: one of my old
slaves, whose name is Mobarec, [93] lives there; you will easily
find him; the first person you meet will show you his house; find
him out, and tell him all that has befallen you: he will know you to
be my son, and he will conduct you to the place where that wonderful
statue is, which you will get with safety.’

The prince having read these words, said to the queen, I should be
sorry to be without that ninth statue; it must certainly be a very
rare piece, since all these together are not of so great value. I
will set out for Grand Cairo; nor do I believe, madam, that you will
oppose my design. No, my son, answered the queen, I am not against
it: you are certainly under the special protection of our great
prophet; he will not suffer you to perish in this journey. Set out
when you think fit: your viziers and I will take care of the
government during your absence. The prince made ready his equipage,
but would take only a small number of slaves with him.

Nothing remarkable befell him by the way, but arriving at Cairo, he
inquired for Mobarec. The people told him he was one of the
wealthiest inhabitants of the city; that he lived like a great lord;
and that his house was open, especially for strangers. Zeyn was
conducted thither, knocked at the gate, which a slave opened, and
said, What is it you want, and who are you? I am a stranger,
answered the prince, and having heard much of the lord Mobarec’s
generosity, am come to take up my lodging with him. The slave
desired Zeyn to stay awhile, and went to acquaint his master, who
ordered him to desire the stranger to walk in. The slave returned to
the gate, and told the prince he was welcome.

Zeyn went in, crossed a large court, and entered into a hall
magnificently furnished, where Mobarec expected him, and received
him very courteously, returning thanks for the honour he did him in
accepting a lodging in his house. The prince, having answered his
compliment, said to Mobarec, I am son to the late king of Balsora,
and my name is Zeyn Alasnam. That king, said Mobarec, was formerly
my master; but, my lord, I never knew of any children he had: what
is your age? I am twenty years old, answered the prince. How long is
it since you left my father’s court? Almost two and twenty years,
replied Mobarec: but how can you convince me that you are his son?
My father, rejoined Zeyn, had a subterraneous place under his
closet, in which I have found forty porphyry urns of gold. And what
more is there? said Mobarec. There are, answered the prince, nine
pedestals of massive gold; on eight whereof there are eight diamond
statues; and on the ninth is a piece of white satin, on which my
father has written what I am to do to get another statue, more
valuable than all those together. You know where that statue is; for
it is mentioned on the satin that you will conduct me to it.

As soon as he had spoke these words, Mobarec fell down at his feet,
and kissing one of his hands several times, said, I bless God for
having brought you hither: I know you to be the king of Balsora’s
son. If you will go to the place where the wonderful statue is, I
will conduct you; but you must first rest here a few days. This day
I treat the great men of the court; we were at table when word was
brought me of your being at the door. Will you vouchsafe to come and
be merry with us? I shall be very glad, replied Zeyn, to be admitted
to your feast. Mobarec immediately led him under a dome where the
company was, seated him at the table, and served him on the knee.
The great men of Cairo were surprised, and whispered to one another,
Who is this stranger, to whom Mobarec pays so much respect?

When they had dined, Mobarec, directing his discourse to the
company, said, Great men of Cairo, do not think much to see me serve
this young stranger after this manner; know that he is the son of
the king of Balsora, my master. His father purchased me with his
money, and died without making me free; so that I am still a slave,
and consequently all I have of right belongs to this young prince,
his sole heir. Here Zeyn interrupted him: Mobarec, said he, I
declare, before all these lords, that I make you free from this
moment, and that I renounce all right to your person, and all you
possess. Consider what you would have me do more for you. Mobarec
then kissed the ground, and returned the prince most hearty thanks.
Wine was then brought in; they drank all day; and towards the
evening presents were distributed among the guests, who then went
away.

The next day Zeyn said to Mobarec, I have taken rest enough. I came
not to Cairo to take my pleasure: my design is to get the ninth
statue; it is time for us to set out in search of it. Sir, said
Mobarec, I am ready to comply with your desires; but you know not
what dangers you must encounter to make this precious conquest.
Whatsoever the danger may be, answered the prince, I have resolved
to undertake it: I will either perish or succeed. All that happens
in this world is by God’s direction. Do you but bear me company,
and let your resolution be equal to mine.

Mobarec, finding him determined to set out, called his servants, and
ordered them to make ready his equipage. Then the prince and he
performed the ablution, or washing, and the prayer enjoined, which
is called Farz; and that done, they set out. By the way they took
notice of abundance of strange and wonderful things, and travelled
many days; at the end whereof, being come to a delightful spot, they
alighted from their horses. Then Mobarec said to all the servants
that attended them, Do you stay in this place, and take care of our
equipage till we return. Then he said to Zeyn, Now, sir, let us two
go on by ourselves. We are near the dreadful place, where the ninth
statue is kept. You will stand in need of all your courage.

They soon came to a lake: Mobarec sat down on the brink of it,
saying to the prince, We must cross this sea. How can we cross it,
answered Zeyn, when we have no boat? You will see one appear in a
moment, replied Mobarec; the enchanted boat of the king of the genii
will come for us. But do not forget what I am going to say to you:
you must observe a profound silence: do not speak to the boatman,
though his figure seem never so strange to you: whatsoever
extraordinary circumstance you observe, say nothing; for I tell you
beforehand, that if you utter the least word, when we are embarked,
the boat will sink down. I shall take care to hold my peace, said
the prince, you need only tell me what I am to do, and I will
strictly observe it.

While they were talking, he spied on a sudden a boat in the lake,
and it was made of red sandal wood. It had a mast of fine amber, and
a blue satin flag: there was only one boatman in it, whose head was
like an elephant’s, and his body like a tiger’s. When the boat
was come up to the prince and Mobarec, the monstrous boatman took
them up one after another with his trunk, and put them into his
boat, and carried them over the lake in a moment. He then again took
them up with his trunk, set them on shore, and immediately vanished
with his boat.

Now we may talk, said Mobarec: the island we are on belongs to the
king of the genii; there are no more such in the world. Look round
you, prince: can there be a more delightful place? It is certainly a
lively representation of the charming place God has appointed for
the faithful observers of our law. Behold the fields adorned with
all sorts of flowers and odoriferous plants; admire those beautiful
trees, whose delicious fruit makes the branches bend down to the
ground; enjoy the pleasures of those harmonious songs formed in the
air, by a thousand birds of as many various sorts unknown in other
countries. Zeyn could not sufficiently admire the beauties of those
with which he was surrounded, and still found something new, as he
advanced farther into the island.

At length they came before a palace made of fine emeralds,
encompassed with a ditch, on the banks whereof at certain distances,
were planted such tall trees, that they shaded the whole palace.
Before the gate, which was of massy gold, was a bridge, made of one
single shell of a fish, though it was at least six fathoms long, and
three in breadth. At the head of the bridge stood a company of
genii, of a prodigious height, who guarded the entrance into the
castle with great clubs of China steel.

Let us go no farther, said Mobarec; these genii will knock us down:
and in order to prevent their coming to us, we must perform a
magical ceremony. He then drew out of a purse, which he had under
his garment, four long slips of yellow taffety; one he put about his
middle, and laid the other on his back, giving the other two to the
prince, who did the like. Then Mobarec laid on the ground two large
table-cloths, on the edges whereof he scattered some precious
stones, musk, and amber. Then he sat down on one of those cloths,
and Zeyn on the other; and Mobarec said to the prince, I shall now,
sir, conjure the king of the genii, who lives in the palace that is
before us: may he come in a peaceable mood to us! I confess I am not
without apprehension about the reception he may give us. If our
coming into this island is displeasing to him, he will appear in the
shape of a dreadful monster; but if he approves of your design, he
will show himself in the shape of a handsome man. As soon as he
appears before us, you must rise and salute him, without going off
your cloth; for you would certainly perish should you stir off it.
You must say to him, Sovereign lord of the genii, my father, who was
your servant, has been taken away by the angel of death: I wish your
majesty may protect me, as you always protected my father. If the
king of the genii, added Mobarec, ask you what favour you desire of
him, you must answer, Sir, I must humbly beg of you to give me the
ninth statue.

Mobarec, having thus instructed prince Zeyn, began his conjuration.
Immediately their eyes were dazzled with a long flash of lightning,
which was followed by a clap of thunder. The whole island was
covered with a thick darkness, a furious storm of wind blew, a
dreadful cry was heard, the island felt a shock, and there was such
an earthquake as that which Asrayel is to cause on the day of
judgment.

Zeyn was startled, and began to look upon that noise as a very ill
omen; when Mobarec, who knew better than he what to think of it,
began to smile, and said, Take courage, my prince; all goes well. In
short, that very moment the king of the genii appeared in the shape
of a very handsome man, yet there was something of a sternness in
his air.

As soon as prince Zeyn had made him the compliment he had been
taught by Mobarec, the king of the genii smiling, answered, My son,
I loved your father, and every time he came to pay me his respects,
I presented him with a statue, which he carried away with him. I
have no less kindness for you. I obliged your father some days
before he died, to write that which you read on the piece of white
satin. I promised him to receive you under my protection, and to
give you the ninth statue, which in beauty surpasses those you have
already. I have begun to perform my promise to him. It was I whom
you saw in a dream, in the shape of an old man: I caused you to open
the subterraneous place, where the urns and the statues are: I have
a great share in all that has befallen you, or rather am the
occasion of it. I know the motive that brought you hither: you shall
obtain what you desire. Though I had not promised your father to
give it, I would willingly grant it to you: but you must first swear
to me by all that is sacred, that you will return to this island,
and that you will bring a maid that is in her fifteenth year, and
who has never known man, nor desired to know any. She must also be
perfectly beautiful; and you so much a master of yourself, as not
even to desire to enjoy her, as you are conducting her hither.

Zeyn took the rash oath that was required of him. But, my lord, said
he then, suppose I should be so fortunate as to meet with such a
maid as you require, how shall I know that I have found her? I own,
answered the king of the genii, smiling, that you might be mistaken
in her appearance: that knowledge is above the sons of Adam, and
therefore I do not mean to depend upon your judgment in that
particular: I will give you a looking-glass, which will be more
certain than your conjectures. When you shall have seen a maiden
fifteen years of age, perfectly beautiful, you shall only need look
into the glass, in which you shall see her figure. If she be chaste,
the glass will remain clean and unsullied; but if, on the contrary,
it sullies, that will be a certain sign that she has not always been
prudent, or at least that she has desired to cease to be so. Do not
forget the oath you have taken: keep it like a man of honour;
otherwise I will take away your life, as much kindness as I have for
you. Prince Zeyn Alasnam protested again that he would faithfully
keep his word.

Then the king of the genii delivered to him a looking-glass, saying,
My son, you may return when you please; there is the glass you are
to make use of. Zeyn and Mobarec took leave of the king of the
genii, and went towards the lake. The boatman with the elephant’s
head brought the boat, and carried them over the lake as he had done
before. They joined their servants, and returned with them again to
Cairo.

Prince Alasnam rested a few days at Mobarec’s house, and then said
to him, Let us go to Bagdad to seek a maiden for the king of the
genii. Why, are we not at Grand Cairo? said Mobarec: shall we not
there find beautiful maidens enough? You are in the right, answered
the prince; but how shall we do to find where they are? Do not
trouble yourself about that, sir, answered Mobarec; I know a very
shrewd old woman, whom I will entrust with that affair, and she will
acquit herself well.

[Illustration: ZEYN ALASNAM & THE KING OF THE GENII.]

Accordingly the old woman found means to show the prince a
considerable number of beautiful maidens of fifteen years of age;
but when he had viewed them, and came to consult his looking-glass,
the faithful touchstone of their virtue, the glass always appeared
sullied. All the maidens in the court and city, that were in their
fifteenth year, underwent the trial one after another, and the glass
never remained bright and clear.

When they saw there were no chaste maids to be found in Cairo, they
went to Bagdad, where they hired a magnificent palace in one of the
chief quarters of the city, and began to live splendidly. They kept
open house; and after all people had eaten in the palace, the
fragments were carried to the dervises, who by that means had
comfortable subsistence.

There lived in that quarter an iman, whose name was Boubekir Muezin,
a vain, haughty, and envious person: he hated the rich, only because
he was poor, his misery making him angry at his neighbour’s
prosperity. He heard talk of Zeyn Alasnam, and of the plenty his
house afforded. This was enough for him to take an aversion to that
prince; and it proceeded so far, that one day after the evening
prayer in the mosque, he said to the people, Brethren, I have been
told there is come to live in our ward a stranger, who every day
gives away immense sums. How do we know but that this unknown person
is some villain, who has committed a great robbery in his own
country, and comes hitherto enjoy himself? Let us take care,
brethren: if the caliph should be informed that such a man is in our
ward, it is to be feared he will punish us for not acquainting him
with it. I declare, for my part, I wash my hands of it; and if any
thing should happen amiss, it shall not lie at my door. The
multitude, who are easily led away, with one voice cried to
Boubekir, It is your business, doctor: do you acquaint the council
with it. The iman went home well pleased, and drew up a memorial,
resolving to present it to the caliph next day.

But Mobarec, who had been at prayers, and heard all that was said by
the doctor, as well as the rest of the company, put five hundred
pieces of gold into a handkerchief, made up with a parcel of several
silks, and went away to Boubekir’s house. The doctor asked him in
a harsh tone, what he wanted. Doctor, answered Mobarec, with an
obliging air, and at the same time putting into his hand the gold
and the silk, I am your neighbour and your servant: I come from
prince Zeyn, who lives in this ward: he has heard of your worth, and
has ordered me to come and tell you that he desires to be acquainted
with you, and in the mean time desires you to accept of this small
present. Boubekir was transported with joy, and answered Mobarec
thus: Be pleased, sir, to beg the prince’s pardon for me: I am
ashamed I have not yet been to see him, but I will atone for my
fault, and wait on him to-morrow.

Accordingly the next day, after morning prayer, he said to the
people, You must understand, brethren, that no man is without some
enemies: envy pursues those chiefly who are very rich. The stranger
I spoke to you about yesterday in the evening is no ill man, as some
ill-designing persons would have persuaded me: he is a young prince
endowed with every virtue. It behoves us to take care how we go and
give any ill account of him to the caliph.

Boubekir having thus wiped off the ill impression he had the day
before given the people concerning Zeyn, returned home, put on his
best apparel, and went to visit that young prince, who gave him a
courteous reception. After several compliments had passed on both
sides, Boubekir said to the prince, sir, do you design to stay long
at Bagdad? I shall stay, answered Zeyn, till I can find a maid,
fifteen years of age, perfectly beautiful, and so chaste, that she
has not only never known a man, but even never desired to know him.
You seek after a great rarity, replied the iman; and I should be apt
to fear your search would prove unsuccessful, did I not know where
there is a maid of that character. Her father was formerly vizier;
but he has left the court; and lived a long time in a house by
itself, where he applies himself solely to the education of his
daughter. If you please, I will go ask her of him for you: I do not
question but he will be overjoyed to have a son-in-law of your
quality. Not so fast, said the prince, I shall not marry that maid
before I know whether I like her. As for her beauty, I can depend on
you: but what assurance can you give me in relation to her virtue?
What assurance do you require? said Boubekir. I must see her face,
answered Zeyn; that is enough for me to form a resolution. You are
skilful then in physiognomy? replied the iman, smiling. Well, come
along with me to her father’s: I will desire him to let you see
her one moment in his presence.

Muezin conducted the prince to the vizier’s; who, as soon as he
was acquainted with the prince’s birth and design, called his
daughter, and made her take off her veil. Never had the young king
of Balsora beheld such a perfect and striking beauty. He stood
amazed, and since he could then try whether the maid was as chaste
as fair, he pulled out his glass, which remained bright and
unsullied.

When he perceived he had at length found such a person as he
desired, he entreated the vizier to grant her to him. Immediately
the lady was sent for, and came; the contract was signed, and the
marriage prayer said. After which ceremony, Zeyn carried the vizier
to his house, where he treated him magnificently, and gave him
considerable presents. Next he sent a prodigious quantity of jewels
to the bride by Mobarec, who brought her to his house, where the
wedding was kept with all the pomp that became Zeyn’s quality.
When all the company was dismissed, Mobarec said to his master, Let
us begone, sir; let us not stay any longer at Bagdad, but return to
Cairo; remember the promise you made the king of the genii. Let us
go, answered the prince; I must take care to perform it exactly: yet
I must confess, my dear Mobarec, that if I obey the king of the
genii, it is not without reluctance. The person I have married is
charming, and I am tempted to carry her to Balsora, and place her on
the throne. Alas! sir, answered Mobarec, take heed how you give way
to your inclination: make yourself master of your passions, and
whatsoever it cost you, be as good as your word to the king of the
genii. Well, then, Mobarec, said the prince, do you take care to
conceal that lovely maid from me; let her never appear in my sight;
perhaps, I have already seen too much of her.

Mobarec made all ready for their departure; they returned to Cairo,
and thence set out for the island of the king of the genii. When
they were there, the maid who had performed the journey in a
horse-litter, and whom the prince had never seen since his
wedding-day, said to Mobarec, where are we? Shall we be soon in the
dominions of the prince, my husband? Madam, answered Mobarec, it is
time to undeceive you. Prince Zeyn married you only in order to get
you from your father: he did not engage his faith to you, to make
you sovereign of Balsora, but to deliver you to the king of the
genii, who asked of him a virgin of your character. At these words
she began to weep bitterly, which moved the prince and Mobarec. Take
pity on me, said she; I am a stranger; you will be accountable to
God for your treachery towards me.

Her tears and complaints were of no effect, for she was presented to
the king of the genii, who having gazed on her with attention, said
to Zeyn, Prince, I am satisfied with your behaviour; the virgin you
have brought me is beautiful and chaste, and I am pleased with the
force you have put upon yourself to be as good as your word to me.
Return to your dominions, and when you shall enter the subterraneous
room, where the eight statues are, you shall find the ninth which I
promised you. I will make my genii carry it thither. Zeyn thanked
the king, and returned to Cairo with Mobarec, but did not stay long
there; his impatience to see the ninth statue made him hasten his
departure. However, he could not but often think of the young virgin
he married; and blaming himself for having deceived her, he looked
upon himself as the cause and instrument of her misfortune. Alas,
said he to himself, I have taken her from a tender father, to
sacrifice her to a genie. Oh, incomparable beauty! you deserve a
better fate.

Prince Zeyn, disturbed with these thoughts, at length reached
Balsora, where his subjects made extraordinary rejoicings for his
return. He went directly to give an account of his journey to his
mother, who was in a rapture to hear he had obtained the ninth
statue. Let us go, my son, said she, let us go see it, for it is
certainly in the chamber under ground, since the king of the genii
told you you should find it there. The young king and his mother,
being both impatient to see that wonderful statue, went down to the
subterraneous place, and into the room of the statues; but how great
was their surprise, when, instead of a statue of diamonds, they
espied on the ninth pedestal a most beautiful virgin, whom the
prince knew to be the same he had conducted to the island of the
genii! Prince, said the young maid, you are surprised to see me
here; you expected to have found something more precious than me,
and I question not but that you now repent having taken so much
trouble: you expected a better reward. Madam, answered Zeyn, Heaven
is my witness, that I more than once was like to have broken my word
with the king of the genii, to keep you to myself. Whatsoever be the
value of a diamond statue, is it worthy the satisfaction of enjoying
you? I love you above all the diamonds and wealth in the world.

Just as he was done speaking, a clap of thunder was heard, which
shook that subterraneous place. Zeyn’s mother was frightened, but
the king of the genii immediately appearing, dispelled her fear,
Madam, said he to her, I protect and love your son: I had a mind to
try whether, at his age, he could subdue his passions. I know the
charms of this young lady have wrought on him, and that he did not
punctually keep the promise he had made me, not to desire to enjoy
her; but I am too well acquainted with the frailty of the human
nature. This is the ninth statue I designed for him; it is more rare
and precious than the others. Live, said he, directing his discourse
to the young prince, live happy, Zeyn, with this young lady, who is
your wife; and if you would have her true and constant to you, love
her always, and love her only. Give her no rival, and I will answer
for her fidelity. Having spoke these words, the king of the genii
vanished, and Zeyn, enchanted with that young lady, consummated the
marriage the same day, and caused her to be proclaimed queen of
Balsora. Those two ever-faithful and loving consorts lived together
many years.




The History of Codadad and his Brothers.


Those who have written the history of the kingdom of Diarbekir
inform us, that there formerly reigned in the city of Harran a most
magnificent and potent king, who loved his subjects, and was equally
beloved by them. He was endued with all virtues, and wanted nothing
to complete his happiness but an heir. Though he had the finest
women in the world in his seraglio, yet was he destitute of
children. He continually prayed to heaven for them; and one night in
his sleep, a comely person, or rather a prophet, appeared to him,
and said, Your prayers are heard; you have obtained what you
desired: rise as soon as you awake, go to your prayers, and make two
genuflexions; then walk into the garden of your palace, call your
gardener, and bid him bring you a pomegranate; eat as many of the
seeds as you please, and your wishes shall be accomplished.

The king calling to mind his dream when he awaked, returned thanks
to heaven, got up, went to prayers, made two genuflexions, and then
went down into his garden, where he took fifty pomegranate seeds,
which he counted, and eat. He had fifty wives who shared his bed;
they all proved with child; but there was one called Pirouze, who
did not appear to be pregnant. He took an aversion to that lady, and
would have her put to death. Her barrenness, said he, is a certain
token that Heaven does not judge Pirouze worthy to bear a prince; it
is my duty to deliver the world from an object that is odious to the
Lord. He had taken this cruel resolution, but his vizier diverted
him from putting it in execution; representing to him, that all
women were not of the same constitution, and that it was not
impossible but that Pirouze might be with child, though it did not
yet appear. Well, answered the king, let her live; but let her
depart my court, for I cannot endure her. Your majesty, replied the
vizier, may send her to prince Samer, your cousin. The king approved
of his advice; he sent Pirouze to Samaria, with a letter, in which
he ordered his cousin to treat her well, and in case she proved with
child, to give him notice of her being brought to bed.

No sooner was Pirouze arrived in that country, but it appeared that
she was with child, and at length she was delivered of a most
beautiful prince. The prince of Samaria wrote immediately to the
king of Harran, to acquaint him with the birth of that son, and to
congratulate him on that occasion. The king was much rejoiced at it,
and answered prince Samer as follows: ‘Cousin, all my other wives
have each been delivered of a prince; so that we have a great number
of children here. I desire you to breed up that of Pirouze, to give
him the name of Codadad, [94] and to send him to me when I send for
him.’

The prince of Samaria spared nothing that might improve the
education of his nephew. He taught him to ride, draw the bow, and
all the other things becoming the son of a king: so that Codadad, at
eighteen years of age, was looked upon as a prodigy. The young
prince being inspired with a courage worthy his birth, said one day
to his mother, Madam, I begin to grow weary of Samaria; I feel a
passion for glory; give me leave to go seek it amidst the perils of
war. My father, the king of Harran, has many enemies: some
neighbouring princes wish to disturb his repose. Why does he not
call me to his assistance? Why does he leave me here so long in
infancy! Must I spend my life here in sloth, when all my brothers
have the happiness to be fighting by his side? --My son, answered
Pirouze, I am no less impatient to have your name become famous; I
could wish you had already signalized yourself against your
father’s enemies; but we must wait till he requires it. No, madam,
replied Codadad; I have already waited but too long. I long to see
the king, and am tempted to go offer him my service, as a young
stranger: no doubt but he will accept of it, and I will not discover
myself till I have performed a thousand glorious actions: I desire
to merit his esteem before he knows who I am. Pirouze approved of
his generous resolution, and Codadad one day departed from Samaria,
as if he had been going a hunting, without acquainting prince Samer,
for fear he should thwart his design.

He was mounted on a white horse, who had a gold bit and shoes; his
housing was of blue satin embroidered with pearls; the hilt of his
scimitar was of one single diamond, and the scabbard of sandal-wood,
all adorned with emeralds and rubies, and on his shoulder he carried
his bow and quiver. In this equipage, which greatly set off his good
person, he arrived at the city of Harran, and soon found means to
offer his service to the king; who, being charmed with his beauty
and advantageous presence, and perhaps, indeed by natural sympathy,
gave him a favourable reception, and asked his name and quality.
Sir, answered Codadad, I am son to an emir of Grand Cairo: an
inclination to travel has made me quit my country, and
understanding, in my passage through your dominions, that you were
engaged in war with some of your neighbours, I am come to your court
to offer your majesty my service. The king showed him extraordinary
kindness, and gave him an employment in his troop.

The young prince soon signalized his bravery. He gained the esteem
of the officers, and was admired by the soldiers. And having no less
wit than courage, he so far advanced himself in the king’s
affection, as to become his favourite. All the ministers and other
courtiers daily resorted to Codadad, and were so eager to purchase
his friendship, that they neglected the king’s other sons. Those
princes could not but resent it; and imputing it to the stranger,
they all conceived an implacable hatred against him; but the
king’s affection daily increasing, he was never weary of giving
him fresh testimonies of it. He always would have him near him; he
admired his discourse, ever full of wit and discretion; and to show
his high opinion of his wisdom and prudence, he committed to his
care the other princes, though he was of the same age as they; so
that Codadad was made governor of his brothers.

This only served to heighten their hatred. Is it come to this, said
they, that the king, not satisfied with loving a stranger more than
us, will have him to be our governor, and not allow us to do any
thing without his leave? This is not to be endured. We must rid
ourselves of this stranger. Let us go together, said one of them,
and despatch him. No, no, answered another; we had better be
cautious how we sacrifice ourselves. His death would render us
odious to the king, who in return would declare us all unworthy to
reign. Let us destroy the stranger artfully. We will ask his leave
to go hunting, and when at a distance from the palace, we will
proceed to some other city, and stay there some time. The king will
wonder at our absence, and perceiving we do not return, he may
perhaps put the stranger to death, or at least will turn him out of
the court, for suffering us to leave the palace.

All the princes applauded this artifice. They went together to
Codadad, and desired him to give them leave to take the diversion of
hunting, promising to return the same day. Pirouze’s son was taken
in the snare, and granted the leave his brothers desired. They set
out, but never returned. They had been three days absent, when the
king asked Codadad where the princes were, for it was long since he
had seen them. Sir, answered Codadad, after making a profound
reverence, they have been hunting these three days, but they
promised me they would return sooner. The king grew uneasy, and his
uneasiness increased when he perceived the princes did not return
the next day. He could not check his anger: Indiscreet stranger,
said he to Codadad, why did you let my sons go without bearing them
company? Is it thus you discharge the trust I have reposed in you?
Go seek them immediately, and bring them to me, or you are a dead
man.

These words chilled with fear Pirouze’s unfortunate son. He armed
himself, went out of the city, and, like a shepherd who had lost his
flock, searched all the country for his brothers, inquiring at every
village whether they had been seen: and hearing no news of them,
abandoned himself to the most lively grief. Alas! my brothers, said
he, what is become of you? Are you fallen into the hands of our
enemies? Am I come to the court of Harran to be the occasion of
giving the king so much anxiety? He was inconsolable for having
given the princes leave to go a hunting, or for not having borne
them company.

After some days spent in fruitless search, he came to a plain of
prodigious extent, in the midst whereof was a palace built of black
marble. He drew near, and at one of the windows spied a most
beautiful lady, but set off with no other ornament than her own
beauty; for her hair was dishevelled, her garments torn, and on her
countenance appeared all the marks of the greatest affliction. As
soon as she saw Codadad, and judged he might hear her, she directed
her discourse to him, saying, Young man, get away from this fatal
place, or you will soon fall into the hands of the monster that
inhabits it: a black, who feeds only on human blood, resides in this
palace; he seizes all persons whom their ill fate conducts to this
plain, and shuts them up in his dark dungeons, whence they are never
released but to be devoured by him.

Madam, answered Codadad, tell me who you are, and be not concerned
for any more. I am a young woman of quality of Grand Cairo, replied
the lady; I was passing by this castle yesterday, in my way to
Bagdad, and met with the black, who killed all my servants, and
brought me hither: I wish I had nothing but death to fear; but to
add to my calamity, this monster would persuade me to love him, and,
in case I do not yield to-morrow to his brutality, I must expect the
last violence. Once more, added she, make your escape: the black
will soon return; he is gone out to pursue some travellers he espied
at a distance on the plain. Lose no time; I know not whether you can
escape him by a speedy flight.

She had scarce done speaking these words, before the black appeared.
He was a man of monstrous bulk, and of a dreadful aspect, mounted on
a mighty Tartar horse, and bore such a large and heavy scimitar,
that none but himself could make use of it. The prince seeing him,
was amazed at his monstrous stature, directed his prayers to Heaven
to assist him, then drew his scimitar, and firmly awaited the black;
who, despising so inconsiderable an enemy, called to him to yield
himself without fighting: but Codadad by his countenance showed that
he was resolved to defend his life; for he drew near, and gave him a
great cut on the knee. The black, feeling himself wounded, uttered
such a dreadful shriek as made all the plain resound. He grew
furious, and foamed with rage, and raising himself in his stirrups,
made at Codadad with his dreadful scimitar. The blow was so violent,
that it would have put an end to the young prince, had not he
avoided it by a sudden spring which he made his horse take. The
scimitar made a horrible hissing in the air: but before the black
could have time to make a second blow, Codadad let fall one on his
right arm with such fury, that he cut it off. The dreadful scimitar
fell with the hand that held it, and the black, yielding under the
violence of the stroke, lost his stirrups, and made the earth shake
with the noise of his fall. The prince alighted at the same time,
and cut off his enemy’s head. Just then the lady, who had been a
spectator of that combat, and was still offering up her earnest
prayers to Heaven for that young hero, whom she admired, gave a
shriek of joy, and said to Codadad, Prince (for the dangerous
victory you have obtained convinces me, as well as your noble air,
that you are of no common rank,) finish the work you have begun: the
black has the keys of this castle; take them, and deliver me out of
prison. The prince searched the wretch’s pockets, as he lay
stretched on the ground, and found several keys.

He opened the first door, and went into a court, where he met the
lady coming to meet him: she would have cast herself at his feet,
the better to express her gratitude; but he would not permit it. She
commended his valour, and extolled him above all the heroes in the
world. He returned her compliments, and she appeared still more
lovely to him near at hand than at a distance. I know not whether
she felt more joy at being delivered from the desperate danger she
had been in, than he for having done so considerable a service to so
beautiful a person.

Their discourse was interrupted by dismal cries and groans. What do
I hear? said Codadad: Whence come those miserable cries, which
pierce my ears? My lord, said the lady to him, pointing to a little
door in the court, they come from thence. There are I know not how
many wretched persons whom fate has made to fall into the hands of
the black. They are all chained, and the monster drew out one every
day to devour.

It is an addition to my joy, answered the young prince, to
understand that my victory will save the lives of those unfortunate
persons. Come along with me, madam, to partake in the satisfaction
of giving them their liberty. You may judge by yourself how welcome
we shall be to them. Having so said, they advanced towards the door
of the dungeon, and the nearer they drew, the more distinctly they
heard the complaints of the prisoners. Codadad pitying them, and
impatient to put an end to their sufferings, presently put one of
the keys into the lock. He did not take the right at first, and
therefore he took another; which noise made all those unfortunate
creatures, concluding it was the black who came, according to
custom, to bring them some meat, and at the same time to seize one
of them to eat himself, redoubled their cries and groans. Lamentable
voices were heard, which seemed to come from the centre of the earth.

In the mean time, the prince had opened the door, and went down a
very steep staircase into a large and deep vault, which received
some feeble light from a little window, and in which there were
above a hundred persons, bound to stakes, and their hands tied.
Unfortunate travellers, said he, to them, wretched victims, who only
expected the moment of an approaching cruel death, give thanks to
Heaven, which has this day delivered you by my means. I have slain
the black by whom you were to be devoured, and am come to knock off
your irons. The prisoners hearing these words, all together gave a
shout mingled with joy and surprise. Codadad and the lady began to
unbind them; and as soon as any of them were loose, they helped to
take off the fetters from the rest; so that in a short time they
were all at liberty.

They then kneeled down, and having returned thanks to Codadad for
what he had done for them, went out of that dungeon; and when they
were come into the court, how was the prince surprised to see among
the prisoners those he was in search of, and almost without hopes to
find! Princes, cried he, am I not deceived? Is it you whom I behold?
May I flatter myself that it will be in my power to restore you to
the king your father, who is inconsolable for the loss of you? But
will he not have some one to lament? Are you all here alive? Alas!
the death of one of you will suffice to damp the joy I feel for
having delivered you.

The forty-nine princes all made themselves known to Codadad, who
embraced them one after another, and told them how uneasy their
father was on account of their absence. They gave their deliverer
all the commendations he deserved, as did the other prisoners, who
could not find words expressive enough to declare their gratitude.
Codadad, with them, took a view of the whole castle, where was
immense wealth; curious silks, gold brocades, Persian carpets, China
satins, and an infinite quantity of other goods, which the black had
taken from the caravans he had plundered; a considerable part
whereof belonged to the prisoners Codadad had then set free. Every
man knew and claimed his property. The prince restored them their
own, and divided the rest of the merchandize among them. Then he
said to them, How will you do to carry away your goods? We are here
in a desert place, and there is no likelihood of your getting
horses. My lord, answered one of the prisoners, the black robbed us
of our camels as well as our goods, and perhaps they may be in the
stables of this castle. This is not unlikely, replied Codadad; let
us see. Accordingly they went to the stables, where they not only
found the camels, but also the horses belonging to the king of
Harran’s sons. There were some black slaves in the stables, who,
seeing all the prisoners released, and guessing thereby that their
master had been killed, fled through by-ways well known to them.
Nobody minded to pursue them. All the merchants, overjoyed that they
had recovered their goods and camels, together with their liberty,
thought of nothing but prosecuting their journey; but first repeated
their thanks to their deliverer.

When they were gone, Codadad, directing his discourse to the lady,
said, What place, madam, do you desire to go to? Whither were you
bound when you were seized by the black? I intend to bear you
company to the place you shall choose for your retreat, and I
question not but that all these princes will do the same. The king
of Harran’s sons protested to the lady that they would not leave
her till she was restored to her friends.

Princes, said she, I am of a country too remote from hence; and,
besides that, it would be abusing your generosity to oblige you to
travel so far. I must confess that I have left my native country for
ever. I told you awhile ago that I was a lady of Grand Cairo; but
since you have shown me so much favour, and I am so highly obliged
to you, added she, looking upon Codadad, I should be much in the
wrong in concealing the truth from you. I am a king’s daughter. An
usurper has possessed himself of my father’s throne, after having
murdered him, and I have been forced to fly to save my life.

Then Codadad and his brothers desired the princess to tell them her
story, assuring her they felt a particular interest in her
misfortunes, and were determined to spare for nothing that might
contribute to render her more happy. After thanking them for their
repeated protestations of readiness to serve her, she could not
refuse to satisfy their curiosity, and began the recital of her
adventures in the following manner:--




History of the Princess of Deryabar.


There is in a certain island a great city called Deryabar; it has
been long governed by a potent, magnificent, and virtuous king. That
prince had no children, which was the only thing wanting to make him
happy. He continually addressed his prayers to Heaven, but Heaven
granted his requests by halves; for the queen his wife, after a long
expectation, brought forth a daughter.

I am the unfortunate princess: my father was rather troubled than
pleased at my birth; but he submitted to the will of God, and caused
me to be educated with all possible care, being resolved, since he
had no son, to teach me the art of ruling, that I might supply his
place after his death.

One day, when he was taking the diversion of hunting, he espied a
wild ass, which he chased, lost his company, and was carried away so
far by his eagerness, as to ride on till night. He then alighted,
and sat down at the entrance of a wood, into which he observed the
ass had taken. No sooner was the day shut in than he discovered
among the trees a light, which made him conclude that he was not far
from some village. He rejoiced at it, hoping that he might pass the
night there, and find some person to send to his followers to
acquaint them where he was; and accordingly he got up and walked
towards the light, which served to guide him.

He soon found he had been deceived, that light being no other than a
fire lighted in a hut; however, he drew near, and, with amazement,
beheld a great black man, or rather a dreadful giant, sitting on a
sofa. Before the monster was a great pitcher of wine, and he was
roasting an ox he had newly killed. Sometimes he drank out of the
pitcher, and sometimes he cut slices off the ox, and eat them. But
that which most drew the king my father’s attention was a
beautiful woman whom he saw in the hut. She seemed overwhelmed with
grief; her hands were bound, and at her feet was a little child,
about two or three years old, who, as if he was sensible of his
mother’s misfortunes, wept without ceasing, and rent the air with
his cries.

My father, moved with that pitiable object, thought at first to have
gone into the hut, and attacked the giant; but considering how
unequal the combat would be, he stopped, and resolved, since he had
not strength enough to prevail by open force, to use art. In the
mean time, the giant having emptied the pitcher, and devoured above
half the ox, turned to the woman, and said, Beautiful princess, why
do you oblige me by your obstinacy to treat you with severity? It is
in your own power to be happy. You need only to resolve to love and
be true to me, and I shall treat you with more mildness. Thou
hideous satyr, answered the lady, never expect that time should wear
away my abhorrence of thee. Thou wilt ever be a monster in my eyes.
To these words she added so many reproaches, that the giant grew
enraged. This is too much, cried he, in a furious tone; my love
despised is turning into rage. Your hatred has at last excited mine;
I find it triumphs over my desires, and that I now wish your death
more ardently than your enjoyment. Having spoken these words, he
took the wretched lady by the hair, held her up with one hand in the
air, and drawing his scimitar with the other, was just going to
strike off her head, when the king my father let fly an arrow which
pierced the giant’s breast, so that he staggered and dropped down
dead.

My father entered the hut, unbound the lady’s hands, inquired who
she was, and how she came thither. My lord, said she, there are
along the sea-coast some families of Saracens, who live under a
prince, who is my husband: this giant you have killed was one of his
principal officers. The wretch fell desperately in love with me, but
took especial care to conceal his passion till he could put in
execution the design he had formed of stealing me away. Fortune
oftener favours wicked designs than virtuous resolutions. The giant
one day surprised me and my child in a by-place. He seized us both,
and, to disappoint the search he well knew my husband would cause to
be made for me, he removed from the country inhabited by those
Saracens, and brought us into this wood, where he has kept me some
days. Deplorable as my condition is, it is still a great
satisfaction to me to think that the giant, though so brutal and
amorous, never used force to obtain what I always refused to his
entreaties. Not but that he has a hundred times threatened that he
would have recourse to the worst of extremities, in case he could
not otherwise prevail upon me; and I must confess to you, that
awhile ago, when I provoked his anger by my words, I was less
concerned for my life than for my honour.

This, my lord, said the prince of the Saracens’ wife, is the
faithful account of my misfortunes; and I question not but you will
think me worthy of your compassion, and that you will not repent
having so generously relieved me. Madam, answered my father, be
assured your troubles have affected me, and I will do all in my
power to make you happy again. To-morrow, as soon as day appears, we
will quit this wood, and endeavour to fall into the road which leads
to the great city of Deryabar, of which I am sovereign; and if you
think fit, you shall be lodged in my palace, till the prince your
husband comes to claim you.

The Saracen lady accepted the offer, and the next day followed the
king my father, who found all his retinue upon the skirts of the
wood, they having spent the night in searching after him, and being
very uneasy because they could not find him. They were no less
rejoiced to meet with than amazed to see him with a lady, whose
beauty surprised them. He told them how he had found her, and the
risk he run in approaching the hut, where he must certainly have
lost his life had the giant spied him. One of his servants took up
the lady behind him, and another carried the child.

Thus they arrived at the palace of the king my father, who assigned
the beautiful Saracen lady an apartment, and caused her child to be
carefully educated. The lady was not insensible of the king’s
goodness to her, and expressed as much gratitude as he could desire.
She had at first appeared very uneasy, and impatient that her
husband did not claim her; but by degrees she lost that uneasiness.
The respect my father paid her dispelled her impatience; and I am of
opinion she would at last have blamed fortune more for restoring her
to her kindred than she did for removing her from them.

In the mean time, the lady’s son grew up; he was very handsome,
and not wanting wit, found means to please the king my father, who
conceived a great friendship for him. All the courtiers perceived
it, and guessed that that young man might in the end be my husband.
In this idea, and looking on him already as heir to the crown, they
made their court to him, and every one endeavoured to gain his
favour. He soon saw into their designs, grew conceited of himself,
and, forgetting the distance there was between our conditions,
flattered himself with the hopes that my father was fond enough of
him to prefer him before all the princes in the world. He went
farther; for the king not being forward enough in offering me to him
as soon as he could have wished, he had the boldness to ask me of
him. Whatsoever punishment his insolence deserved, my father was
satisfied with telling him he had other thoughts in relation to me,
and showed him no farther resentment. The youth was incensed at this
refusal; the vain fellow resented the contempt, as if he had asked
some maid of ordinary extraction, or as if his birth had been equal
to mine. Nor did he stop here, but resolved to be revenged on the
king, and, with unparalleled ingratitude, conspired against him. In
short, he murdered him, and caused himself to be proclaimed king of
Deryabar, by a great number of malecontents, whom he encouraged. The
first thing he did, after ridding himself of my father, was to come
into my apartment, at the head of a party of the conspirators. His
design was either to take my life, or oblige me to marry him. Whilst
he was busy murdering my father, the grand vizier, who had been
always loyal to his master, came to carry me away from the palace,
and secured me in a friend’s house, till a vessel he had provided
was ready to sail. I then left the island, attended only by a
governess and that generous minister, who chose rather to follow his
master’s daughter, and share in her misfortunes, than to submit to
a tyrant.

The grand vizier designed to carry me to the courts of the
neighbouring kings to implore their assistance, and excite them to
revenge my father’s death; but Heaven did not approve a resolution
we thought so just. When we had been but a few days at sea, there
arose such a furious storm, that, in spite of all the mariners’
art, our vessel, carried away by the violence of the winds and
waves, was dashed in pieces against a rock. I will not spend time in
describing our shipwreck. I can but faintly represent to you how my
governess, the grand vizier, and all that attended me, were
swallowed up by the sea. The dread I was seized with did not permit
me to observe all the horror of our condition. I lost my senses; and
whether I was thrown upon the coast upon any part of the wreck of
our ship, or whether Heaven, which reserved me for other
misfortunes, wrought a miracle for my deliverance, I found myself on
shore when my senses returned.

Misfortunes very often make us forget our duty. Instead of returning
thanks to God for so singular a favour shewn me, I only lifted up my
eyes to Heaven, to complain because I had been preserved. I was so
far from bewailing the vizier and my governess, that I envied their
fate; and dreadful imaginations by degrees prevailing over my
reason, I resolved to cast myself into the sea: I was upon the point
of doing so, when I heard behind me a great noise of men and horses.
I looked about to see what it might be, and espied several armed
horsemen, among whom was one mounted on an Arabian horse. He had on
a garment embroidered with silver, a girdle set with precious
stones, and a crown of gold on his head. Though his habit had not
convinced me that he was chief of the company, I should have judged
it by the air of grandeur which appeared in his person. He was a
young man extraordinarily well shaped, and perfectly beautiful.
Surprised to see a young lady alone in that place, he sent some of
his officers to ask who I was. I answered only by weeping. The shore
being covered with the wreck of our ship, they concluded some vessel
had been cast away there, and that I was certainly some person that
had escaped with my life. This conjecture, and my inconsolable
condition, excited the curiosity of those officers; who began to ask
me a thousand questions, with assurances that their king was a
generous prince, and that I should receive consolation in his court.

The king, impatient to know who I was, grew weary of expecting the
return of his officers, and drew near to me. He gazed on me very
earnestly, and observing that I did not give over weeping and
afflicting myself, without being able to return an answer to their
questions, he forbid them troubling me any more: and directing his
discourse to me, Madam, said he, I conjure you to moderate your
excessive affliction. Though Heaven in its wrath has laid this
calamity upon you, it does not behove you to despair. I beseech you
show more resolution. Fortune, which has hitherto persecuted you, is
inconstant, and may soon change. I dare assure you, that if your
misfortunes are capable of receiving any relief, you shall find it
in my dominions. My palace is at your service. You shall live with
the queen my mother, who will endeavour by her kindness to ease your
affliction. I know not yet who you are; but I find I already take an
interest in you.

I thanked the young king for his goodness to me, accepted the
obliging offers he made me; and to convince him that I was not
unworthy of them, told him my condition. I described to him the
insolence of the young Saracen, and found it was enough to recount
my misfortunes, to excite compassion in him, and all his officers
who heard me. When I had done speaking, the prince began again,
assuring me that he was deeply concerned at my misfortunes. Then he
conducted me to his palace, and presented me to the queen his
mother, to whom I was obliged again to repeat my misfortunes, and to
renew my tears. The queen seemed very sensible of my trouble, and
conceived extreme affection for me. On the other hand, the king her
son fell desperately in love with me, and soon offered me his person
and his crown. I was so taken up with the thoughts of my calamities,
that the prince, though so lovely a person, did not make so great an
impression on me as he might have done at another time. However,
gratitude prevailed on me, I did not refuse to make him happy, and
our wedding was kept with all imaginable splendour.

When all the people were taken up with the celebration of their
sovereign’s nuptials, a neighbouring prince, his enemy, made a
descent by night on the island with a great number of troops. That
formidable enemy was the king of Zanguebar. He surprised those
people, and cut to pieces all the king my husband’s subjects. He
was very near taking us both. We escaped very narrowly, for he had
already entered the palace with some of his followers; but we found
means to slip away, and to get to the sea-coast, where we threw
ourselves into a fishing-boat we had the good fortune to meet with.
Two days we were driven about by the winds, without knowing what
would become of us. The third day we espied a vessel making towards
us under sail. We rejoiced at first, believing it had been a
merchant ship which might take us aboard; but what was our
astonishment, when, as it drew near, we saw ten or twelve armed
pirates appear on the deck. Having boarded, five or six of them
leaped into our boat, seized us, bound the prince, and conveyed us
into their ship, where they immediately took off my veil. My youth
and features touched them, and they all declared how much they were
charmed at the sight of me. Instead of casting lots, each of them
claimed the preference, and me as his right. The dispute grew warm,
and they came to blows about me, and fought like madmen. The deck
was soon covered with dead bodies, and they were all killed but one,
who being left sole possessor of me, said, You are mine. I will
carry you to Grand Cairo, to deliver you to a friend of mine, to
whom I have promised a beautiful slave. But who, added he, looking
upon the king my husband, is that man? What relation does he bear to
you? Are you allied by blood or love? Sir, answered I, he is my
husband. If so, replied the pirate, in pity I must rid myself of
him: it would be too great an affliction to him to see you in my
friend’s arms. Having spoken these words, he took up the unhappy
prince, who was bound, and threw him into the sea, notwithstanding
all my endeavours to hinder him.

I shrieked in a dreadful manner at the sight of that cruel action,
and had certainly cast myself headlong into the sea, but that the
pirate held me. He plainly saw that was my design, and therefore
bound me with cords to the main-mast, and then hoisting sail, made
towards the land, and got ashore. He unbound me, and led me to a
little town, where he bought camels, tents, and slaves, and then set
out for Grand Cairo, designing, as he still said, to present me to
his friend, according to his promise.

We had been several days upon the road, when, as we were crossing
this plain yesterday, we espied the black who inhabited this castle.
At a distance we took him for a tower, and when near us could scarce
believe him to be a man. He drew his vast scimitar, and summoned the
pirate to yield himself prisoner, with all his slaves, and the lady
he was conducting. The pirate was daring, and being seconded by all
his slaves, who promised to stand by him, he attacked the black. The
combat lasted a considerable time; but at length the pirate fell
under his enemy’s deadly blows, as did all his slaves, who chose
rather to die than to forsake him. The black then conducted me to
the castle, whither he also brought the pirate’s body, which he
eat that night for his supper. After that inhuman meal, perceiving
that I ceased not weeping, he said to me, Young lady, prepare to
satisfy my desires, rather than continue thus to afflict yourself.
Make a virtue of necessity, and comply: I will give you till
to-morrow to consider. Let me then find you comforted for all your
misfortunes, and overjoyed for having been reserved for my bed.
Having spoke these words, he conducted me to a chamber, and went to
bed in his own, after locking up all the castle doors. He opened
them this morning, and presently locked them again, to pursue some
travellers he perceived at a distance; but it is likely they made
their escape, since he was coming alone, and without any booty, when
you attacked him.

As soon as the princess had put an end to the recital of her
adventures, Codadad declared to her that he was deeply concerned at
her misfortunes. But, madam, added he, it shall be your own fault if
you do not live at ease for the future. The king of Harran’s sons
offer you a safe retreat in the court of the king their father; be
pleased to accept of it. You will be there cherished by that prince,
and respected by all; and if you do not disdain the affection of
your deliverer, permit me to make you a present of it, and to marry
you before all these princes; let them be witnesses to our contract.
The princess consented to it, and the marriage was concluded that
very day in the castle, where they found all sorts of provisions.
The kitchens were full of flesh and other eatables the black used to
feed on when he was weary of feeding on human bodies. There was also
a variety of fruits excellent in their kinds; and to complete their
pleasure, abundance of delicious wine and other liquors.

They all sat down at table; and after having eaten and drank
plentifully, they took along with them the rest of the provisions,
and set out for the king of Harran’s court; they travelled several
days, encamping in the pleasantest places they could find, and they
were within one day’s journey of Harran, when, having halted and
drank all their wine, being no longer under concern to make it hold
out, Codadad directing his discourse to all his company, Princes,
said he, I have too long concealed from you who I am. Behold your
brother Codadad! I have received my being, as well as you, from the
king of Harran; the prince of Samaria has brought me up, and the
princess Pirouze is my mother. Madam, added he, addressing himself
to the princes, of Deryabar, do you also forgive me for having
concealed my birth from you? Perhaps, by discovering it sooner, I
might have prevented some disagreeable reflections, which may have
been occasioned by a match you may have thought unequal. No, sir,
answered the princess, the opinion I at first conceived of you
heightened every moment, and you did not stand in need of the
extraction you now discover to make me happy.

The princes congratulated Codadad on his birth, and expressed much
satisfaction at the knowledge of it. But in reality, instead of
rejoicing, their hatred of so amiable a brother was increased. They
met together at night in a by-place, whilst Codadad and the princess
his wife lay last asleep in their tent. Those ungrateful, those
envious brothers, forgetting that, had it not been for the brave son
of Pirouze, they must have been devoured by the black, agreed among
themselves to murder him. We have no other course to choose, said
one of those wicked brethren; for the moment our father shall come
to understand that this stranger he is already so fond of, is our
brother, and that he alone has been able to destroy a giant, whom we
could not all of us together conquer, he will heap favours and a
thousand praises on him, and declare him his heir, to the prejudice
of all his brothers, who will be obliged to obey and fall down
before him. Besides those, he added many other words, which made
such an impression on their jealous minds, that they immediately
repaired to Codadad, then fast asleep, stabbed him in a thousand
places, and leaving him for dead in the arms of the princess of
Deryabar, proceeded on their journey for the city of Harran, where
they arrived the next day.

The king, their father, conceived the greater joy at their return,
because he had despaired of ever seeing them again: he asked what
had been the occasion of their stay? But they took care not to
acquaint him with it, making no mention either of the black or of
Codadad; and only said, that being curious to see different
countries, they had spent some time in the neighbouring cities.

In the mean time Codadad lay in his tent drowned in his own blood,
and little differing from a dead man, with the princess his wife,
who seemed to be in not much better condition than he. She rent the
air with her dismal shrieks, tore her hair, and bathing her
husband’s body with her tears, --Alas! Codadad, my dear Codadad,
cried she, is it you whom I behold just departing this life? What
cruel hands have put you into this condition? Can I believe these
are your brothers who have treated you so unmercifully, these
brothers whom thy valour has saved? No, they are rather devils, who
under the characters so dear, came to murder you. O barbarous
wretches! whosoever you are, how could you make so ungrateful a
return for the service he has done you? But why should I complain of
your brothers, unfortunate Codadad! I alone am to blame for your
death. You would join your fate with mine, and all the ill-fortune
that attends me since I left my father’s palace, has fallen upon
you. O Heaven! which has condemned me to lead a life full of
adventures and calamities, if you will not permit me to have a
consort, why do you permit me to find one? Behold, you have now
robbed me of two, just as I began to be attached to them.

By these and other moving expressions, the wretched princess of
Deryabar vented her sorrow, fixing her eyes on the deplorable
Codadad, who could not hear her; but he was not dead, and his
consort observing that he still breathed, ran to a large town she
espied in the plain, to inquire for a surgeon. She was directed to
one, who went immediately with her; but when they came to the tent
they could not find Codadad, which made them conclude he had been
dragged away by some wild beast to devour him. The princess renewed
her complaints and lamentations in a most dismal manner. The surgeon
was moved, and being unwilling to leave her in that frightful
condition, proposed to her to return to the town, offering her his
house and service.

She suffered herself to be prevailed on. The surgeon conducted her
to his house, and without knowing, as yet, who she was, treated her
with all imaginable courtesy, and respect. He used all his rhetoric
to comfort her, but it was in vain to think of removing her sorrow,
which was rather heightened than diminished. Madam, said he to her
one day, be pleased to recount to me your misfortunes; tell me your
country and your condition. Perhaps I may give you some advice, when
I am acquainted with all the circumstances of your calamity. You do
nothing but afflict yourself, without considering that remedies may
be found for the most desperate diseases.

The surgeon’s words were so efficacious that they wrought on the
princess, who recounted to him all her adventures; and when she had
done, the surgeon directed his discourse to her: Madam, said he,
since they are so, give me leave to tell you that you ought not thus
to give way to your sorrow; you ought rather to arm yourself with
resolution, and perform what the name and the duty of a wife require
of you. You are bound to avenge your husband. If you please, I will
wait on you as your squire. Let us go to the king of Harran’s
court; he is a good and a just prince. You need only represent to
him in lively colours, how prince Codadad has been treated by his
brothers; I am persuaded he will do you justice. I submit to your
reasons, answered the princess; it is my duty to endeavour to avenge
Codadad; and since you are so obliging and so generous as to offer
to bear me company, I am ready to set out. No sooner had she fixed
this resolution, than the surgeon ordered two camels to be made
ready, on which the princess and he mounted and repaired to Harran.

They alighted at the first caravansera they found, and inquiring of
the host what news at court: It is, said he, in very great
perplexity. The king had a son, who lived a long time with him as a
stranger, and none can tell what is become of that young prince. One
of the king’s wives, called Pirouze, is his mother; she has made
all possible inquiry, but to no purpose. All men are concerned at
the loss of that prince, because he had great merit. The king has
forty-nine other sons, all by different mothers, but not one of them
has virtue enough to comfort the king for the death of Codadad; I
say his death, because it is impossible he should be still alive,
since no news has been heard of him, notwithstanding so much search
has been made after him.

The surgeon having heard this account from the host, concluded that
the best course the princess of Deryabar could take was to wait upon
Pirouze: but that step was not without some danger, and required
much precaution; for it was to be feared, that if the king of
Harran’s sons should happen to hear of the arrival of their
sister-in-law, and her design, they might cause her to be conveyed
away before she could speak to Codadad’s mother. The surgeon
weighed all these circumstances, and considered what risk he might
run himself; and therefore that he might manage matters with
discretion, he desired the princess to stay in the caravansera,
whilst he went to the palace, to observe which might be the safest
way to conduct her to Pirouze.

He went accordingly into the city, and was walking towards the
palace, like one led only by curiosity to see the court, when he
espied a lady mounted on a mule richly accoutred. She was followed
by several ladies mounted also on mules, with a great number of
guards and black slaves. All the people made a lane to see her pass
along, and saluted her by prostrating themselves on the ground. The
surgeon paid her the same respect, and then asked a calendar, who
happened to stand by him, whether that lady was one of the king’s
wives? Yes, brother, answered the calender, she is one of the
king’s wives, and the most honoured and beloved by the people,
because she is mother to prince Codadad, of whom you must have heard.

The surgeon asked no more questions, but followed Pirouze to a
mosque, into which she went to distribute alms, and assist at the
public prayers the king had ordered to be made for the safe return
of Codadad. The people, who were highly concerned for that young
prince, ran in crowds to join their vows to the prayers of the
priests, so that the mosque was quite full. The surgeon broke the
throng, and advanced towards Pirouze’s guards. He stayed out the
prayers and when that princess went out he stepped up to one of her
slaves, and whispered him in the ear, Brother, I have a secret of
moment to impart to the princess Pirouze; may not I, by your means,
be introduced into her apartment? If that secret, answered the
slave, relates to prince Codadad, I dare promise you shall have
audience of her this very day; but if it concerns not him, it is
needless for you to endeavour to be introduced to her; for her
thoughts are all engrossed by her son, and she will not hear talk of
any other subject. It is only about that dear son, replied the
surgeon, that I wish to speak to her. If so, said the slave, you
need only follow us to the palace, and you shall soon speak to her.

Accordingly, as soon as Pirouze was returned to her apartment, that
slave acquainted her that a person unknown had some important matter
to communicate to her, and that it related to prince Codadad. No
sooner had he uttered these words, than Pirouze expressed her
impatience to see that stranger. The slave immediately conducted him
into the princess’s closet, who ordered all her women to withdraw,
except two, from whom she concealed nothing. As soon as she saw the
surgeon, she asked him eagerly what news he had to tell her of
Codadad? Madam, answered the surgeon, after having prostrated
himself on the ground, I have a long account to give you, and such
as will surprise you. Then he told her all the particulars of what
had passed between Codadad and his brothers, which she listened to
with eager attention; but when he came to speak of the murder, that
tender mother fainted away on the sofa, as if she had herself been
stabbed like her son. Her two women used proper means, and soon
brought her to herself. The surgeon continued his relation; and when
he had ended it, Pirouze said to him. Go back to the princess of
Deryabar, and assure her from me that the king shall soon own her
for his daughter-in-law; and as for yourself be assured that your
services shall be well rewarded.

When the surgeon was gone, Pirouze remained on the sofa, in such a
state of affliction as may easily be imagined; and yielding to her
tenderness at the recollection of Codadad, O! my son, said she, I
must never then expect to see you more! Alas! when I gave you leave
to depart from Samaria, and you took leave of me, I did not imagine
that so unfortunate a death awaited you at such a distance from me.
Unfortunate Codadad! Why did you leave me! You would not, it is
true, have acquired so much renown; but you had been still alive,
and not have cost your mother so many tears. While she uttered these
words, she wept bitterly; and her two confidants, moved by her
grief, mingled their tears with hers.

Whilst they were all three, as it were, vying in affliction, the
king came into the closet, and seeing them in that condition, asked
Pirouze whether she had received any bad news concerning Codadad?
Alas! sir, said she, all is over; my son has lost his life, and to
add to my sorrow, I cannot pay him the funeral rites; for, in all
appearance, the wild beasts have devoured him. Then she told him all
that she had heard from the surgeon, and did not fail to enlarge on
the inhuman manner in which Codadad had been murdered by his
brothers.

The king did not give Pirouze time to finish her relation, but
transported with anger, and giving way to his passion, Madam, said
he, to the princess, those perfidious wretches who cause you to shed
these tears, and are the occasion of mortal grief to their father,
shall soon feel the punishment due to their guilt. The king having
spoken these words, with indignation in his countenance, went
directly to the presence-chamber, where all his courtiers attended,
and such of the people as had any petitions to present to him. They
were all astonished to see him in that passion, and thought his
anger had been kindled against his people. Their hearts were chilled
with fear. He ascended the throne, and causing his grand vizier to
draw near, Hassan, said he, I have some orders for you: go
immediately, take a thousand of my guards, and seize all the
princes, my sons; shut them up in the tower appointed as a prison
for murderers, and let this be done in a moment. All who were
present trembled at hearing this extraordinary command; and the
grand vizier, without answering one word, laid his hand on his head,
to express his obedience, and went out of the hall to execute his
orders, which very much surprised him. In the mean time the king
dismissed those who attended for audience, and declared he would not
hear of any business for a month to come. He was still in the hall
when the vizier returned. Are all my sons, said that prince, in the
tower? They are, sir, answered the vizier: I have obeyed your
orders. This is not all, replied the king, I have farther commands
for you; and so saying, he went out of the hall of audience, and
returned to Pirouze’s apartment, with the vizier following him. He
asked that princess where Codadad’s widow had taken up her
lodging? Pirouze’s women told him, for the surgeon had not forgot
that in his relation. Then the king turning to his minister, Go,
said he, to that caravansera, and bring a young princess, who lodges
there, but treat her with all the respect due to her quality.

The vizier was not long in performing what he was ordered. He
mounted on horseback with all the emirs and courtiers, and repaired
to the caravansera, where the princess of Deryabar was, whom he
acquainted with his orders; and presented her from the king a fine
white mule, whose saddle and bridle were adorned with gold, rubies,
and diamonds. She mounted it, and went to the palace, attended by
all those great men. The surgeon bore her company, mounted on a
beautiful Tartar horse, which the vizier had provided for him. All
the people were at their windows, or in the streets, to see that
noble cavalcade; and it being given out that the princess, whom they
conducted in such state to court, was Codadad’s wife, the city
resounded with acclamations, the air rung with shouts of joy, which
would have been turned into lamentations, had that prince’s fatal
adventure been known; so much was he beloved by all.

The princess of Deryabar found the king at the palace gate, waiting
to receive her. He took her by the hand, and led her to Pirouze’s
apartment, where a very moving scene took place. Codadad’s wife
found her affliction redouble upon her at the sight of her
husband’s father and mother: as, on the other hand, those parents
could not look on their son’s wife without being much affected.
She cast herself at the king’s feet, and having bathed them with
tears, was so overcome with grief that she was not able to speak one
word. Pirouze was in no better state. She seemed to be penetrated
with sorrow; and the king, moved by those affecting objects, gave
way to his own weakness. Those three persons, mingling their tears
and sighs, for some time observed a silence, which appeared equally
tender and pitiful. At length the princess of Deryabar, being
somewhat recovered, recounted the adventure of the castle, and
Codadad’s disaster. Then she demanded justice for the treachery of
the princes. --Yes, madam, said the king to her, those ungrateful
wretches shall perish; but Codadad’s death must first be made
public, that the punishment of his brothers may not cause my
subjects to rebel; and though we have not my son’s body, we will
not omit paying him the last duties. This said, he directed his
discourse to the vizier, and ordered him to build a dome of white
marble, in a delightful plain, in the midst of which the city of
Harran stands. Then he appointed the princess of Deryabar a handsome
apartment in his palace, acknowledging her for his daughter-in-law.

Hassan caused the work to be carried on with such diligence, and
employed so many workmen, that the dome was soon finished. Within it
was erected a tomb, on which was placed a figure representing
Codadad. When all was completed, the king ordered prayers to be
said, and appointed a day for the obsequies of his son.

On that day all the inhabitants of the city went out upon the plain
to see the ceremony performed, which was after the following manner.
The king, attended by his vizier and the principal lords of the
court, proceeded towards the dome, and being come to it, he went in
and sat down with them on carpets made of black satin with gold
flowers. A great body of horse-guards, hanging their heads and
looking down, drew up close about the dome, and marched round it
twice, observing a profound silence; but at the third round they
halted before the door, and all of them with a loud voice pronounced
these words: O prince! son to the king, could we by dint of sword,
and human valour, relieve your misfortune, we would bring you back
to life; but the King of kings has commanded, and the angel of death
has obeyed. Having uttered these words, they drew off to make way
for a hundred old men, all of them mounted on black mules, and
wearing long grey beards. These were anchorites, who lived all their
days concealed in caves. They never appeared in the sight of the
world but when they were to assist at the obsequies of the kings of
Harran, and of the princes of their family. Each of these venerable
persons carried on his head a book, which he held with one hand.
They took three turns round the dome without uttering one word; then
stopping before the door, one of them said, O prince! what can we do
for thee? If thou couldst be restored to life by prayer or learning,
we would rub our grey beards at thy feet, and recite prayers; but
the King of the universe has taken thee away for ever.

This said, the old men moved to a distance from the dome, and
immediately fifty beautiful young maidens drew near to it: each of
them was mounted on a little white horse; they wore no veils, and
carried gold baskets, full of all sorts of precious stones. They
also rode thrice round the dome, and halting at the same place as
the others had done, the youngest of them spoke in the name of all,
as follows: O prince! once so beautiful, what relief can you expect
from us? If we could restore you to life by our charms, we would
become your slaves. But you are no longer sensible to beauty, and
have no more occasion for us.

When the young maids were withdrawn, the king and his courtiers
arose, and having walked thrice round the figure representing
Codadad, the king spoke as follows: O my dear son, light of my eyes,
I have then lost thee for ever! He accompanied these words with
sighs, and watered the tomb with his tears; his courtiers weeping
with him. Then the gate of the dome was shut, and all the people
returned to the city. Next day there were public prayers in all the
mosques, and the same was continued for eight days successively. On
the ninth the king resolved to cause the princes his sons to be
beheaded. All the people, incensed at their cruelty towards Codadad,
impatiently expected to see them executed. The scaffolds were
erecting, but the execution was respited, because, on a sudden, news
was brought that the neighbouring princes, who had before made war
on the king of Harran, were advancing with more numerous forces than
the first time, and were not then far from the city. It had been
long known that they were preparing for war, but their preparations
caused no alarm. This news occasioned a general consternation, and
gave new cause to lament the loss of Codadad, who had signalized
himself in the former war against those enemies. Alas! said they,
were the brave Codadad alive, we should little regard those princes
who are coming to surprise us. The king, nothing dismayed, raised
men with all possible speed, formed a considerable army, and being
too brave to await the enemy’s coming to attack him within his
walls, marched out to meet them. They, on their side, being informed
by their advanced parties, that the king of Harran was marching to
engage them, halted in the plain and formed their army.

As soon as the king discovered them, he also drew up his forces, and
ranged them in order of battle. The signal was given, and he
attacked them with extraordinary vigour; nor was the opposition
inferior. Much blood was shed on both sides, and the victory
remained long dubious; but at length it seemed to incline to the
king of Harran’s enemies, who, being more numerous, were upon the
point of surrounding him, when a great body of horse appeared on the
plain, and drew near the two armies in good order. The sight of that
fresh party daunted both sides, not knowing what to think of them;
but their doubts were soon cleared; for those horsemen flew upon the
flank of the king of Harran’s enemies with such a furious charge,
that they soon broke and routed them. Nor did they stop here; they
pursued them, and cut most of them in pieces.

The king of Harran, who had attentively observed all that passed,
admired the bravery of those horsemen, whose unexpected arrival had
given the victory to his side. But, above all, he was charmed with
their chief, whom he had seen fighting with more than ordinary
valour. He longed to know the name of that generous hero. Impatient
to see and thank him, he advanced towards him, but perceived he was
coming to prevent him. The two princes drew near, and the king of
Harran discovering Codadad in that brave warrior, who had just
assisted him, or rather defeated his enemies, became motionless with
joy and surprise. Sir, said Codadad, to him, you have sufficient
cause to be astonished at the sudden appearance before your majesty
of a man whom perhaps you concluded to be dead. I should have been
so had not Heaven preserved me still to serve you against your
enemies. O! my son, cried the king, is it possible that you are
restored to me? Alas! I despaired of seeing you any more. So saying,
he stretched out his arms to the young prince, who flew to such a
tender embrace.

I know all, my son, said the king again, after having long held him
in his arms. I know what return my sons have made you for the
service you did in delivering them out of the hands of the black;
but you shall be revenged to-morrow. Let us now go to the palace:
your mother, whom you have cost so many tears, expects me, to
rejoice with us for the defeat of our enemies. What a joy will it be
to her to be informed that my victory is your work! Sir, said
Codadad, give me leave to ask you, how you could know the adventure
of the castle? Have any of my brothers, repenting, owned it to you?
No, answered the king; the princess of Deryabar has given us an
account of every thing, for she is in my palace, and came thither to
demand justice against your brothers. Codadad was transported with
joy to understand that the princess his wife was at the court. Let
us go, sir, cried he to his father in a rapture; let us go see my
mother, who waits for us. I am impatient to dry up her tears, as
well as those of the princess of Deryabar.

The king immediately returned to the city with his army, which he
dismissed, and re-entered his palace victorious, amidst the
acclamations of the people, who followed him in crowds, praying to
Heaven to prolong his life, and extolling Codadad to the skies.
These two princes found Pirouze and her daughter-in-law waiting for
the king to congratulate him; but words cannot express the
transports of joy they felt when they saw the young prince come with
him: their embraces were mingled with tears of a very different kind
from those they had before shed for him. When these four persons had
sufficiently yielded to all the emotions that the ties of blood and
love inspired, they asked Pirouze’s son by what miracle he came to
be still alive?

He answered, that a peasant mounted on a mule happening accidentally
to come into the tent, where he lay senseless, and perceiving him
alone, and stabbed in several places, had made him fast on his mule
and carried him to his house, where he applied to his wounds certain
herbs chewed, which recovered him in a few days. When I found myself
well, added he, I returned thanks to the peasant, and gave him all
the diamonds I had. Then I drew near to the city of Harran; but
being informed by the way that some neighbouring princes had
gathered forces, and were coming to fall upon the king’s subjects,
I made myself known to the villagers, and stirred up those people to
undertake his defence. I armed a great number of young men, and
heading them, happened to come in at that time when the two armies
were engaged.

When he had done speaking, the king said, Let us return thanks to
God for having preserved Codadad; but it is requisite that the
traitors, who would have destroyed him, should perish this day. Sir,
answered the generous son of Pirouze, though they are wicked and
ungrateful, consider they are your own flesh and blood: they are my
brothers; I forgive their offence, and beg you to pardon them. This
generosity drew tears from the king, who caused the people to be
assembled, and declared Codadad his heir. Then he ordered the
princes, who were prisoners, to be brought loaded with irons.
Pirouze’s son struck off their chains, and embraced them all
successively, with as much sincerity as he had done in the court of
the black castle. The people were charmed with Codadad’s good
disposition, and loaded him with applause. The surgeon was next
nobly rewarded, in requital of the services he had done the princess
of Deryabar.

The sultaness Scheherazade, having related the previous stories with
so much address, and in so agreeable a manner, that the sultan of
the Indies could not forbear showing the pleasure that relation gave
him, said to that monarch, I doubt not but your majesty is very well
satisfied to find the caliph Haroun Alraschid change his sentiments
in favour of Ganem, his mother and sister; and I believe you may be
sensibly affected with their misfortunes, and the ill treatment they
received: but I am persuaded, if your majesty would hear the story
of the Sleeper awakened, it would, instead of exciting all those
emotions of indignation and compassion in your breast, on the
contrary, afford you much mirth and diversion. The sultan, who
promised himself some new adventures from the title of this story,
would have heard it that morning, but perceiving day approach,
deferred it till the next; when Dinarzade called upon her sister,
who began her story in these words.




The Story of the Sleeper awakened.


In the reign of the caliph Haroun Alraschid, there lived at Bagdad a
very rich merchant, who, having married a woman advanced in years,
had but one son, whom he named Abon Hassan, and educated with great
restraint: when his son was thirty years old, the merchant died, and
left him his sole heir, and master of great riches, which his father
had amassed together by much frugality and close application to
business.

Abon Hassan, whose views and inclinations were very different from
those of his father, determined to make another use of his wealth;
for as his father had never allowed him any money but what was just
necessary for subsistence, and he had always envied those young
persons of his age who wanted for nothing, and who debarred
themselves from none of those pleasures to which youth are too much
addicted, he resolved in his turn to distinguish himself by
extravagances proportionable to his fortune. To this end he divided
his riches into two parts: with one half he bought houses in town,
and land in the country, with a promise to himself, never to touch
the income of his estate which was considerable enough to live upon
very handsomely, but lay it all by as he received it: with the other
half, which consisted in ready money, he designed to make himself
amends for the time he had lost in the severe restraint in which his
father had always kept him.

With this intent, Abon Hassan formed a society in a few days with
people of his age and condition, and thought of nothing but how to
make their time pass agreeably. Every day he gave them splendid
entertainments, at which the most delicate meats were served up, and
the most exquisite wines flowed in plenty, while concerts of the
best vocal and instrumental music by performers of both sexes
heightened their pleasures, and this young band of debauchees, with
the glasses in their hands, joined their songs with the music, thus
forming a concert with the instruments; and these feasts generally
ended with balls, to which the best dancers of Bagdad of both sexes
were invited. These entertainments, renewed every day, were so
expensive to Abon Hassan, that he could not support the extravagance
above a year: and the great sum which he had consecrated to this
prodigality, and the year, ended together. As soon as he left off
keeping this table, his friends forsook him; whenever they saw him
they avoided him, and if by chance he met any of them, and went to
stop them, they always excused themselves on some pretence or other.

Abon Hassan was touched more by this strange behaviour of his
friends, who had forsaken him so basely and ungratefully, after all
the protestations of friendship they had made him, and their
inviolable attachment to his service, than for all the money he had
so foolishly squandered away: he went melancholy and thoughtful, his
head hanging down, and his countenance expressive of deep vexation,
into his mother’s apartment, and sat down at the end of a sofa at
a distance from her. What’s the matter with you, son? said his
mother, seeing him in this condition. Why are you so altered, so
dejected, and so different from yourself? You could not certainly be
more concerned, if you had lost all you had in the world. I know you
have lived very profusely, and believe all your money is spent; you
have yet a good estate; and the reason that I did not so very much
oppose your irregular way of living was, that I knew the wise
precaution you had taken to preserve half your substance. I do not,
therefore, see why you should plunge yourself into this deep
melancholy.

At these words Abon Hassan melted into tears; and in the midst of
his sighs, cried out, Ah! mother, I see at last, by sad experience,
how insupportable poverty is; I am sensible that it deprives us of
joy, as the setting of the sun does of light. As poverty makes us
forget all the commendations and fine things said of us before our
fall, it makes us endeavour to conceal ourselves, and spend our
nights in tears and sorrow. In short, a poor man is looked upon,
both by friends and relations, as a stranger. You know, mother, how
I have treated my friends for this year past; I have entertained
them with all imaginable generosity, till I have spent all my money,
and now they have left me, when I can treat them no longer. When I
tell them that I have no more means to continue their mirth, I mean
the money I laid by to employ in such purposes. For my estate, I
thank Heaven for having given me the grace to keep the oath I have
made, not to enter upon that, to spend it so foolishly: and now I
shall keep that oath, and know how to make good use of what is left.
But first I will try how far my friends, who deserve not that I
should call them so, will carry their ingratitude. I will go to them
one after another, and when I have represented to them what I have
done for their sakes, I will ask them among them to make me up a sum
of money, to relieve me out of the miserable condition I have
reduced myself, to please them; but as I have already said, I will
not take these steps, but to try if I can find any sentiment of
gratitude remaining in them.

I do not pretend, son, said Abon Hassan’s mother, to dissuade you
from executing your design; but I can tell you beforehand, that you
have no ground for hope. Believe me, you will find no relief but
from the estate you have reserved. I see you do not, but will soon
know those people, which among persons of your sort are generally
called friends, and I wish to Heaven you may know it in the manner I
desire; that is to say, for your own good. Mother, replied Abon
Hassan, I am persuaded of the truth of what you say, but shall be
more certain of a fact which concerns me so nearly, when I shall
inform myself better of their baseness and insensibility. Abon
Hassan went immediately to his friends, whom he found at home;
representing to them the great need he was in, and begged of them to
draw their purse-strings to assist him. He promised to give every
one bonds to pay them the money they lent him, as soon as his
affairs were made up; giving them to understand at the same time,
that it was, in a great measure, upon their accounts that he was so
distressed, that he might the more powerfully excite their
generosity; and forgot not to allure them with the hopes of being
once again entertained in the same manner as before.

Not one of his bottle companions was affected with the arguments
which the afflicted Abon Hassan made use of to persuade them; and he
had the mortification to find, that many of them told him plainly
they did not know him.

He returned home again full of grief and indignation; and going into
his mother’s apartment, said, Ah! madam, you were right; instead
of friends, I have found none but perfidious ungrateful wretches,
who deserve not my friendship, which I renounce, and promise you I
will never see them more. He resolved to be as good as his word, and
took every precaution to avoid falling into the same inconvenience;
taking an oath never to give an inhabitant of Bagdad any
entertainment again while he lived. He drew the strong box in which
he had put the rents he had received from his estate from the place
where he had placed it in reserve, and put it in the room of that he
had emptied, and resolved to take out every day no more than was
sufficient to defray the expense of a single person to sup with him,
who, according to the oath he had taken, was not to be any man of
Bagdad, but a stranger that came into Bagdad the same day, and must
take his leave of him the next morning after one night’s meal.

According to this project, Abon Hassan took care every morning to
provide whatever was necessary for this treat, and towards the close
of the evening went and sat at the end of Bagdad bridge; and as soon
as he saw a stranger, of whatever rank or condition he was, he
accosted him civilly, and invited him to sup and lodge with him that
night; and after having informed him of the law he had imposed upon
himself, took him home with him. The repast with which Abon Hassan
regaled his guests was not costly, but always sufficient, with
plenty of good wine, and generally lasted till the night was pretty
well advanced; when, instead of entertaining his guest with the
affairs of state, his family, or business, as is too frequent, he
affected to talk only of indifferent agreeable subjects. He was
naturally of so gay and so pleasant a temper, that he could give the
most agreeable turns to conversation on every subject, and make the
most melancholy persons merry. When he sent away his guests the next
morning, he always said, God preserve you from all sorrow wherever
you go; when I invited you yesterday to come and sup with me, I
informed you of the law I have imposed on myself; therefore do not
take it ill if I tell you, that we must never see one another again,
nor drink together, either at home or any other house, for reasons
best known to myself; so God conduct you.

Abon Hassan was very exact in the observation of this oath, and
never looked upon or spoke to the strangers he had once entertained;
wherever he met them in the streets, the squares, or any public
assemblies, he affected not to see them, and turned away to avoid
them, that they might not speak to him, or he have any communication
with them. He had acted for a long time after this manner, when, one
afternoon, a little before sun-set, as he sat upon the bridge
according to custom the caliph Haroun Alraschid came by, but so
disguised that it was impossible to know him; for that monarch,
though his chief ministers and officers of justice acquitted
themselves of their duty very punctually, would nevertheless inform
himself of every thing, and for that purpose often disguised himself
in different ways, and walked through the city and suburbs of
Bagdad, sometimes one way and sometimes another. That day, being the
first of the month, he was dressed like a merchant of Moussol, who
had but just embarked, and was followed by a tall stout black slave.

As the caliph had in his disguise a grave and respectful air, Abon
Hassan, who thought him to be a Moussol merchant, rose up, and,
after having saluted him with a graceful air, and kissed his hand,
said to him, Sir, I congratulate you on your happy arrival; I beg
you to do me the honour to go and sup with me, and repose yourself
at my house this night, after the fatigue of your voyage: and to
oblige him not to refuse him that favour, he told him his custom of
entertaining the first stranger he met with. The caliph found
something so odd and singular in Abon Hassan’s taste, that he was
very desirous to know the bottom of it; and without quitting the
character of a merchant, told him, that he could not better answer
that great civility, which he did not expect at his arrival at
Bagdad, than by accepting the obliging offer that he made him; that
he had only to lead the way, and he was ready to follow him.

Abon Hassan, who knew not that the guest which chance presented to
him was so very much above him, treated the caliph as his equal,
carried him home, and led him into a room very neatly furnished,
where he set him on a sofa, in the most honourable place. Supper was
ready, and the cloth laid. Abon Hassan’s mother, who took upon
herself the care of the kitchen, sent up three dishes; the first was
a capon and four large pullets, which was set in the middle; and the
second and third, placed on each side, were a fat roasted goose and
broiled pigeons. This was all; but they were good of the kind, and
well-flavoured, with proper sauces.

Abon Hassan sat down over-against his guest, and he and the caliph
began to eat heartily of what they liked best, without speaking or
drinking, according to the custom of the country. When they had done
eating, the caliph’s slave brought them water to wash their hands:
and in the mean time Abon Hassan’s mother cleared the table, and
brought up a dessert of all the various sorts of fruits then in
season; as grapes, peaches, apples, pears, and various pastes of
dried almonds, &c. As soon as it grew dark, wax candles were
lighted, and Abon Hassan, after charging his mother to take care of
the caliph’s slave, set on bottles and glasses.

Then Abon Hassan sitting down with the pretended Moussol merchant
again, filled out a glass of wine, before he touched the fruit; and
holding it out in his hand, said to the caliph, still taking him for
a merchant of Moussol, You know, sir, that the cock never drinks
before he calls to his hens to come and drink with him; I invite you
to follow my example. I do not know what you may think; but, for my
part, I cannot reckon him a wise man who does not love wine. Let us
leave those sort of people to their dull melancholy humours, and
seek for mirth, which is only to be found in a brimmer.

While Abon Hassan was drinking, the caliph taking the glass that was
set for him, said, You are an honest fellow; I like your pleasant
temper, and expect you will fill me as much. Abon Hassan, as soon as
he had drank, filled the caliph’s glass, and giving it to him,
Taste this wine, sir, said he; I will warrant it good. I am very
well persuaded of that, replied the caliph, laughing; you know how
to choose the best. O, replied Abon Hassan, (while the caliph was
taking off his glass,) one need only look in your face to see you
have seen the world, and know what good living is. If, added he in
Arabic verse, my house could think and express its joy, how happy
would it be to possess you, and, bowing before you, would cry, How
overjoyed am I to see myself honoured with the company of so
well-behaved and so polite a personage, and for meeting with a man
of your merit.

The caliph, who was naturally lively, was mightily diverted with
these sallies of Abon Hassan’s, and took great pleasure in
promoting drinking, often asking for wine, thinking that when it
began to work, he might, by his conversation, satisfy his curiosity.
In order, therefore, to enter into conversation, he asked him his
name, his business, and how he spent his life. My name, sir, replied
he, is Abon Hassan. I lost my father, who was a merchant of Bagdad
and though he was not the richest, yet he lived very comfortably.
When he died, he left me money enough for my station to live free
from ambition; but as he always kept a very strict hand over me in
his lifetime, I was willing, when he was gone, to make up the time I
thought I had lost. Notwithstanding this, continued Abon Hassan, I
was more prudent than most young people are, who give themselves up
to debauchery, without any thought, and pursue it till they reduce
themselves to the utmost poverty, and are forced to do penance all
the rest of their lives after. To avoid this misfortune, I divided
what I had left me into two parts, land and ready money. I destined
the ready money to supply the expenses of my acquaintance. I
meditated, and took a fixed resolution not to touch my rents. I
associated with young people of my own age, and with my ready money,
which I spent profusely, treated them splendidly every day; and in
short, spared for no sort of pleasure. But all this did not last
long; for by the time the year was out, I had got to the bottom of
my box, and then all my table friends vanished. I made a visit to
every one of them successively, and represented to them the
miserable condition I was in, but none of them made an offer to
relieve me. Upon this, I renounced their friendship, and retrenched
so far as to live within the compass of my income, and bound myself
to keep company with none but the first stranger I could meet with
coming that day into Bagdad, and to entertain him but one day and
one night. I have told you the rest before; and I thank my good
fortune this day for meeting with a stranger of so much worth.

The caliph was very well satisfied with this information, and said
to Abon Hassan, I cannot enough commend the measures you have taken,
and the prudence with which you have acted, by forsaking your
debauchery, --a conduct rarely to be met with in young persons; and
I esteem you the more for being so faithful to yourself. It was a
slippery path you trod in, and I cannot enough admire, how, after
having seen the end of your ready money, you had so great command
over yourself as not to enter upon your rents, or even your estate.
In short, I must own, I envy you your happiness. You are the
happiest man in the world, to enjoy every day the company of some
one honest man, with whom you can discourse freely and agreeably,
and to whom you give an opportunity to declare, wherever he goes,
how handsomely he was received by you. But, we talk too long without
drinking: come, drink, and pour out a glass for me.

In this manner the caliph and Abon Hassan conversed together,
drinking and talking of indifferent pleasant subjects, till the
night was pretty far advanced; when the caliph pretending to be
fatigued after his journey, told his host he stood in need of a
little rest. But, added he, as I would not deprive you of yours on
my account, before we part, (because to-morrow I may be gone before
you are stirring,) I should be glad to show you how sensible I am of
your civility, and the good cheer and hospitality you have shown me.
The only thing that troubles me is, that I know not which way to
make you any acknowledgement, I beg of you, therefore, to let me
understand how I may do it, and you shall see I will not be
ungrateful; for it is impossible but a man like you must have some
business, some want, or wish for something agreeable to you. Speak
freely, and open your mind; for though I am out a merchant, it may
be in my power to oblige you myself, or by some friend.

To these offers of the caliph, Abon Hassan, taking him still for a
Moussol merchant, replied, I am very well persuaded, my good sir,
that it is not out of compliment that you make me these generous
tenders; but upon the word of an honest man, I assure you, I have
nothing that troubles me, no business, nor desires, and I ask
nothing of any body. I have not the least ambition, as I told you
before; and am satisfied with my condition: therefore, I can only
thank you for your obliging proffers, and the honour you have done
me to come and take a slight repast with me. Yet I must tell you,
pursued Abon Hassan, there is one thing gives me uneasiness,
without, however, disturbing my rest. You must know the town of
Bagdad is divided into quarters, in each of which there is a mosque,
with an iman to perform prayers at certain hours, at the head of the
quarter which assembles there. The iman of the division I live in is
a grave old man, of an austere countenance, and the greatest
hypocrite in the world. Four old men of this neighbourhood, who are
people of the same stamp, meet regularly every day at this iman’s
house. There they vent their slander, calumny, and malice against
me, and the whole quarter, to the disturbance of the peace of a
neighbourhood, and the promotion of dissention. Some they threaten,
others they frighten; and, in short, would be lords paramount, and
have every one govern himself according to their caprice, though
they know not how to govern themselves. Indeed, I am sorry to see
that they meddle with any thing but their koran, and do not let the
world live quietly.

Well, I suppose, said the caliph, you wish to have a stop put to
this disorder? You have guessed right, answered Abon Hassan: and the
only thing I should pray for would be to be caliph but for one day,
in the stead of our sovereign lord and master Haroun Alraschid, the
commander of the faithful. What would you do if you was? said the
caliph. I would make examples of them, answered Abon Hassan, to the
satisfaction of all honest men. I would punish the four old men with
each a hundred bastinadoes on the soles of their feet, and the iman
with four hundred, to teach them not to disturb and abuse their
neighbours any more.

The caliph was extremely well pleased with this thought of Abon
Hassan’s; and as he loved adventures, he longed to make this a
very singular one. Indeed, said he, I approve very much of your
wish, which I see proceeds from an upright heart, that cannot bear
to see the malice of wicked people go unpunished; I could like to
see it take effect, and it is not so impossible a thing as you may
imagine. I am persuaded that the caliph would willingly put his
authority for twenty-four hours into your hands, if he knew your
good intentions, and the good use you would make of it. Though a
foreign merchant, I have credit enough to contribute in some degree
to the execution of this plan. I see, said Abon Hassan, you laugh at
my foolish fancy, and the caliph himself would laugh at my
extravagance too, if he knew it; yet it would be a means of
informing him of the behaviour of the iman and his companions, and
induce him to chastise them.

Heaven forbid, replied the caliph, that I, who have been so
handsomely entertained by you, should laugh at you; neither do I
believe, as much a stranger as I am to you, that the caliph would be
displeased: but let us leave off talking; it is almost midnight, and
time to go to bed. With all my heart, said Abon Hassan, I would not
be any hinderance to your going to rest; but there is still some
wine in the bottle, and if you please we will drink it off first,
and then retire. The only thing that I have to recommend to you is,
that when you go out in the morning, if I am not up, you will not
leave the door open, but give yourself the trouble of shutting it
after you. This the caliph promised to do; and while Abon Hassan was
talking, took the bottle and two glasses, and filled his own first,
saying, Here is a cup of thanks to you, and then filling the other,
put into it artfully a little powder, which he had about him, and
giving it to Abon Hassan, said, You have taken the pains to fill for
me all this night, and it is the least I can do to save you the
trouble once: I beg you to take this glass; drink it off for my sake.

Abon Hassan took the glass, and to show his guest with how much
pleasure he received the honour he did him, whipt it off at once,
but had scarcely set the glass upon the table, but the powder began
to work, and he fell into so sound a sleep, that his head knocked
against his knees so suddenly, that the caliph could not help
laughing. The caliph ordered the slave he had brought along with
him, and who came again into the room as soon as he had supped, and
had been there to receive his orders, to take him upon his back, and
follow him; but to be sure to observe the house, that he might know
it again when he was ordered to bring him back; and in this manner
the caliph, followed by the slave with Abon Hassan upon his back,
went out of the house, but without shutting the door after him as
Abon Hassan desired him, and went directly to his palace, and by a
private door into his own apartment, where all the officers of his
chamber were waiting for him, whom he ordered to undress Abon Hassan
and put him in his bed, which they immediately performed.

Then the caliph sent for all the officers and ladies of the palace,
and said to them, I would have all those, whose business it is to
attend my levee, wait to-morrow morning upon this man, who lies in
my bed, and pay the same respect to him as to myself, and obey him
in whatever he commands; let him be refused nothing that he asks
for, and be spoken to and answered in every thing he says or does,
as if he was the commander of the faithful. In short, I expect that
you look upon him as the true caliph and commander of the faithful,
without regarding me; and above all things, mistake not in the least
circumstance.

The officers and ladies, who presently understood that the caliph
had a mind to divert himself, answered him by low bows, and then
withdrew, every one preparing to contribute to the best of their
power to perform their respective parts adroitly.

The caliph returning to his palace, sent for the grand vizier:
Giafar, said he, I have sent for you to instruct you, and to prevent
your being surprised to-morrow when you come to audience, to see
this man that is laid here in my bed, seated on my throne in my
royal robes: accost him with the same reverence and respect you pay
to myself; observe and punctually execute whatever he bids you do,
the same as if I commanded you. He will exercise great liberality,
and commission you with the distribution of it. Do all he bids you,
even if his liberality should extend so far as to empty all the
coffers in my treasury; and remember to acquaint all my emirs, and
all the officers without the palace, to pay him the same honour at
audience as to myself, and to carry on the matter so well, that he
may not perceive the least thing that may interrupt this diversion
which I design myself.

After the grand vizier retired, the caliph went to bed in another
apartment, and gave Mesrour, the chief of his eunuchs, the orders
which he was to execute, that every thing might succeed as he
intended, to gratify the wish of Abon Hassan; that he might see how
Abon Hassan would use the power and authority of the caliph for the
short time he desired to have it. Above all, he charged him not fail
to awake him at the usual hour, before he awakened Abon Hassan,
because he had a mind to be present when he arose.

Mesrour failed not to do as the caliph had commanded, and as soon as
the caliph went into the room where Abon Hassan lay, he placed
himself in a little raised closet, from whence he could see all that
passed. All the officers and ladies, who were to attend Abon
Hassan’s levee, went in at the same time, and took their posts
according to their rank, with great silence, and ready to acquit
themselves of their respective duties, as if it was the caliph who
was going to rise.

As it was just daybreak, and time to rise to morning prayer before
sun-rise, the officer that stood nearest the head of the bed put a
sponge steeped in vinegar to Abon Hassan’s nose, who presently
turning his head about, without opening his eyes, with a little
effort discharged a kind of phlegm, which was received in a little
golden basin before it fell on the carpet. This was the usual effect
of the caliph’s powder, the sleep lasting longer or shorter, in
proportion to the dose. When Abon Hassan laid down his head on the
bolster, he opened his eyes; and by the small daylight that
appeared, he found himself in a large handsome room, magnificently
furnished, the ceiling of which was finely painted in the Arabesque
pattern, adorned with vases of gold and silver, and the floor
covered with a rich silk tapestry, and surrounded by a great many
young and handsome ladies, many of them having instruments of music
in their hands, and black eunuchs richly clothed, all standing with
great modesty and respect. After casting his eyes on the covering of
the bed, he perceived it was cloth of gold, richly embossed with
pearls and diamonds, and by the bed lay, on a cushion, a habit of
the same stuffs and trimmings, with a caliph’s turban.

At the sight of these glittering objects Abon Hassan was in most
inexpressible confusion and amazement, and looked upon all he saw as
a dream; yet such a dream as he wished it not to be. So, said he to
himself, I am caliph; but, added he, recollecting himself, it is
only a dream, the effect of the wish I entertained my guest with
last night; and then he turned himself about, and shut his eyes to
sleep again. At the same time the eunuch said, very respectfully,
Commander of the faithful, it is time for your majesty to rise to
prayers; the morning begins to advance.

These words very much surprised Abon Hassan. Am I awake, or do I
sleep? said he to himself: Ah, certainly I am asleep! continued he,
keeping his eyes shut; there is no reason to doubt of it.

Immediately the eunuch, who saw he gave him no answer, and had no
inclination to get up, said again, Your majesty must permit me to
repeat once more that it is time to rise to morning prayer, unless
you choose to let it pass; the sun is just rising, and you never
neglect this duty. I am mistaken, said Abon Hassan presently: I am
not asleep, but awake; for those that sleep do not hear, and I hear
somebody speak to me: then opening his eyes again, he saw plainly by
broad daylight, what he had seen but indistinctly before; and
started up, with a smiling countenance, like a man overjoyed at a
sudden promotion. The caliph, who saw him, penetrated his thoughts
with great delight.

Then the young ladies of the palace prostrated themselves with their
faces to the ground before Abon Hassan, and those who had the
instruments of music in their hands wished him a good morrow, by a
concert of soft flutes, hautboys, theorboes, and other harmonious
instruments, with which he was enchanted, and in such an ecstacy,
that he knew not where he was, nor whether he was himself; but
reverting to his first idea, he still doubted whether what he saw
and heard was a dream or reality. He clapt his hands before his
eyes, and lowering his head, said to himself, What means all this?
Where am I? and to whom does this palace belong? What can these
eunuchs, handsome well-dressed officers, beautiful ladies, and
musicians, mean? How is it possible for me not to distinguish
whether I am in my right senses, or in a dream?

When he took his hands from his eyes, opened them, and lifted up his
head, the sun shone full in at the chamber window; and at that
instant, Mesrour, the chief of the eunuchs, came in, prostrated
himself before Abon Hassan, and said, Commander of the faithful,
your majesty will excuse me for representing to you, that you used
not to rise so late, and that the time of prayer is over. If your
majesty has not had a bad night, and has been indisposed, it is time
to ascend your throne and hold council as usual; all your generals,
governors, and other great officers of state, wait your presence in
the council-hall.

At this discourse of Mesrour, Abon Hassan was verily persuaded that
he was neither asleep nor in a dream; but at the same time was not
less embarrassed and confused under this uncertainty what steps to
take: at last, looking earnestly at Mesrour, he said to him in a
serious tone, Who is it you speak to, and call the commander of the
faithful? I do not know you, and you must mistake me for somebody
else.

Any person but Mesrour would have been dashed at these questions of
Abon Hassan’s; but he had been so well instructed by the caliph,
that he played his part to a wonder. My worthy lord and master, said
he, your majesty only speaks thus to try me: Is not your majesty the
commander of the faithful, monarch of the world from East to West,
and vicar on earth [95] to the prophet sent of God? Mesrour, your
poor slave, has not forgotten you, after so many years that he has
had the honour and happiness to serve and pay his respects to your
majesty. He would think himself the most unhappy of men if he has
incurred your displeasure, and begs of you most humbly to remove his
fears; but had rather suppose that you have been disturbed by some
troublesome dream to-night.

Abon Hassan burst out a laughing at these words of Mesrour’s, and
fell backwards upon the bolster, which pleased the caliph so much
that he would have laughed as loud himself, if he had not been
afraid of putting a stop too soon to the pleasant scene he promised
himself.

Abon Hassan, when he had tired himself with laughing, sat up again,
and speaking to a little eunuch that stood by him, black as Mesrour,
said, Hark ye, tell me who I am? Sir, answered the little boy
modestly, your majesty is the commander of the believers, and
God’s vicar on earth. You are a little liar, black face, said Abon
Hassan. Then he called the lady that stood nearest to him: Come
hither, fair one, said he, holding out his hand, bite the end of my
finger, that I may feel whether I am asleep or awake.

The lady, who knew the caliph saw all that passed, was overjoyed to
have an opportunity of showing her power of diverting him, and went
with a grave countenance, and putting his finger between her teeth,
she bit it so hard that she put him to violent pain. Snatching his
hand quickly back again, he said, I find I am awake, and not asleep.
But by what miracle am I become caliph in a night’s time? this is
certainly the most strange and surprising thing in the world! then
addressing himself to the same lady, said, I conjure you, by the
protection of God, in whom you trust as well as I, not to hide the
truth from me; am I really the commander of the faithful? It is so
true, answered the lady, that we, who are your slaves, are amazed to
find that you will not believe yourself to be so. You are a
deceiver, replied Abon Hassan; I know very well who I am.

As the chief of the eunuchs perceived that Abon Hassan had a mind to
rise, he offered him his hand, and helped him to get out of bed. No
sooner were his feet set on the floor, but the chamber rang again
with the repeated acclamations of the officers and ladies, who cried
out altogether, Commander of the faithful, God give your majesty a
good day. O heaven! cried Abon Hassan, what a strange thing is this!
Last night I was Abon Hassan, and this morning I am the commander of
the believers! I cannot comprehend this sudden and surprising
change. Presently some of the officers began to dress him; and when
they had done, Mesrour led him through all the eunuchs and ladies,
who were ranged on both sides, quite to the council chamber door,
which was opened by one of the officers. Mesrour walked before him
to the foot of the throne, where he stopped, and putting one hand
under one arm, while another officer who followed did the same by
the other, they helped him to ascend the throne. Abon Hassan sat
down amidst the acclamations of the officers, who wished him all
happiness and prosperity, and turning to the right and left he saw
the officers of the guards ranged in good order, and making a fine
appearance.

The caliph in the mean time came out of the closet, where he was
hid, and went into another, which looked into the council-hall, from
whence he could see and hear all that passed in council, while his
grand vizier presided in his place, when he was prevented by illness
from attending in person. What pleased him highly, was to see Abon
Hassan fill his throne with almost as much gravity as himself.

As soon as Abon Hassan had seated himself, the grand vizier Giafar
prostrated himself at the foot of the throne, and rising and
addressing himself to him, said, Commander of the faithful, God
shower down blessings on your majesty in this life, receive you into
his paradise in the other world, and confound your enemies.

Abon Hassan, after all that had happened that morning, and these
words of the grand vizier, never doubted but that he was caliph, as
he wished to be; and so without examining any farther, how, or by
what adventure, or sudden change of fortune, he immediately began to
exercise his power, and looking very gravely upon the vizier, asked
him what he had to say? Commander of the faithful, replied the grand
vizier, the emirs, viziers, and other officers who are of your
majesty’s council, wait at the door till your majesty gives them
leave to come in and pay their accustomed respects to you. Abon
Hassan presently ordered the door to be opened, and the grand vizier
turning, and addressing himself to the officers who waited for
orders, said, Chief of the door-keepers, the commander of the
faithful orders you to do your duty.

When the door was opened, the viziers, emirs, and principal officers
of the court, all dressed magnificently in their habits of ceremony,
went in their order to the foot of the throne, and paid their
respects to Abon Hassan; and bowing their heads down to the carpet,
kneeling on one knee, saluted him with the title of the commander of
the faithful, according to the instructions of the grand vizier, and
afterwards took their seats.

When this ceremony was over, and they were all placed, there was a
profound silence. The grand vizier always standing before the
throne, began, according to the order of papers in his hand, to make
his report of affairs, which at that time were of very little
consequence. Nevertheless, the caliph could not but admire how Abon
Hassan acquitted himself in his great post without the least
hesitation or embarrassment, and decided so well in all matters, as
his own good sense suggested the request was or was not proper to be
granted. But before the grand vizier had finished his report, Abon
Hassan perceived the judge of the police, whom he knew by sight,
sitting in his place: Stop, said he to the grand vizier,
interrupting him; I have an order of consequence to give to the
judge of the police. The judge of the police perceiving that Abon
Hassan looked at him, and hearing his name mentioned, arose from off
his seat, and went gravely to the foot of the throne, where he
prostrated himself with his face to the ground. Judge of the police,
said Abon Hassan, go immediately to such a quarter, in such a
street, where you will find a mosque, and seize the iman of the
mosque and four old gray beards, and give each of the old men a
hundred bastinadoes with a bull’s pizzle, and the iman four
hundred. After that, mount them all five, clothed in rags, upon
camels, with their faces to the tails, and lead them through the
whole city, with a crier before them, who shall proclaim with a loud
voice, ‘This is the punishment of all those who trouble their
heads with other people’s affairs, and make it their business to
create disturbances and misunderstandings in families in their
neighbourhood, and do them all the mischief in their power.’ My
intention is also, that you enjoin them to leave that quarter, and
never to set foot in it more; and while your lieutenant is
conducting them through the town, return, and give me an account of
the execution of my orders. The judge of the police laid his hand
upon his head, to show his obedience to execute that order on pain
of losing his head if he failed, and prostrating himself a second
time, went away.

The caliph was extremely well pleased at the firmness with which
this order was given, and perceived that Abon Hassan was resolved
not to lose the opportunity of punishing the iman and the other four
old hypocrites of his quarter. In the mean time, the grand vizier
went on with his report, and had just finished, when the judge of
the police came back from executing his commission. He approached
the throne with the usual ceremony, and said, Commander of the
faithful, I found the iman and his four companions in the mosque,
which your majesty pointed out; and for a proof that I have
punctually obeyed your commands, I have brought an instrument signed
by the principal inhabitants of that quarter. At the same time he
pulled a paper out of his bosom, and presented it to the pretended
caliph.

Abon Hassan took the paper, and reading it over cautiously with the
names of the witnesses, who were all people that he knew very well,
said to the judge of the police, smiling, It is well; I am
satisfied; return to your seat. These old hypocrites, said he to
himself, with an air of satisfaction, who thought fit to censure my
actions, and find fault with my entertaining honest people, deserved
this punishment. The caliph all the time penetrated his thoughts,
and felt inconceivable joy in this pleasant exhibition.

Then Abon Hassan, addressing himself to the grand vizier, said, Go
to the high treasurer for a purse of a thousand pieces of gold, and
carry it to the mother of one Abon Hassan, who is known by the name
of the _debauchee_; she lives in the same quarter to which I sent
the judge of the police. Go, and return immediately.

The grand vizier, after laying his hand upon his head, and
prostrating himself before the throne, went to the high treasurer,
who gave him the money, which he ordered a slave to take, and to
follow him to Abon Hassan’s mother, to whom he gave it, saying
only, The caliph makes you this present. She received it with the
greatest surprise imaginable. She could not tell what to think of
this liberality of the caliph’s, and was totally ignorant of what
passed in the palace.

During the grand vizier’s absence, the judge of the police made
the usual report of his office, which lasted till the vizier
returned. As soon as he came into the council-chamber, and had
assured Abon Hassan he had executed his orders, Mesrour, the chief
of the eunuchs, who returned to the palace after he had conducted
Abon Hassan to the council, came again, and made a sign to the
viziers, the emirs, and other officers, that the council was over,
and that they might all retire; which they did, by making the same
prostration at the foot of the throne as when they entered.

Abon Hassan sat not long on the caliph’s throne, but came down
from it, supported in the same manner as he went up by Mesrour and
another officer of the eunuchs, who attended him back again to the
apartment from whence he came, preceded all the way by the grand
vizier. But he had scarce made a few steps, when he was taken with a
pressing occasion; upon which they showed him into a neat closet,
paved with marble; whereas the apartment where he was, was covered
with rich carpets, like the other apartments of the palace. They
gave him a pair of drawers of silk embroidered with gold, which it
was usual to put on before going in there. He took them, and as he
knew not the use of them, he put them into one of his sleeves, which
were very wide. As it often happens that a trifle excites laughter
sooner than a matter of consequence, the grand vizier, Mesrour, and
all the officers of the palace near him, had like to have burst into
laughter, and spoiled all the sport; but they contained themselves,
and the grand vizier was obliged at last to explain to him, that he
must put on the drawers before he went into the private closet.

While Abon Hassan was there, the grand vizier went to the caliph,
who had already taken another station to observe Abon Hassan without
being seen, and acquainted him with what had passed, which the
caliph enjoyed exceedingly.

When Abon Hassan came out of the closet, Mesrour went before him, to
show him the way into an inner apartment, where there was a table
spread: several eunuchs ran before to tell the musicians that the
sham caliph was coming, who immediately began a concert of vocal and
instrumental music, with which Abon Hassan was so charmed and
transported, that he could not tell what to think of all he saw and
heard. If this is a dream, said he, it is a long one. But certainly,
continued he, it is no dream; for I can see and feel, walk and hear,
and argue reasonably: whatever it is, I trust in God; yet I cannot
believe but I am the commander of the faithful, for no other person
could live in this splendour. The honour and respect that has been
shown me, and the obedience paid to my commands, are sufficient
proofs.

In short, Abon Hassan took it for granted that he was caliph and the
commander of the faithful; and was fully convinced of it, when he
entered that magnificent and spacious hall, which was finely painted
with the brightest colours intermixed with gold. Seven bands of
female musicians, more beautiful than the others, were placed round
the hall, and as many gold branches hung down from the ceiling,
which was painted with blue and gold, intermixed with wonderful
effect. In the middle of the hall was spread a table covered with
massy gold plates and dishes, which scented the hall with the spices
and amber wherewith the meat was seasoned; and seven young and most
beautiful ladies, dressed in the richest habits of the most vivid
colours, stood round this table, each with a fan in her hand, to fan
Abon Hassan when at dinner.

If ever mortal was charmed, Abon Hassan was when he entered that
stately hall. At every step he took, he could not help stopping to
contemplate at leisure all the wonders that regaled his eyes, and
turned first to one side, and then again on the other; which gave
the caliph, who viewed him with attention, very great pleasure. --At
last he went and sat down at the table, and presently all the ladies
that stood by it began to fan the new caliph. He looked first at
one, and then at another, and admired the grace with which they
acquitted themselves. He told them with a graceful smile, that he
believed one of them was enough to give him all the air he wanted,
and would have six of the ladies sit at table with him, three on his
right hand, and three on his left; and he placed them at it, so
that, as the table was round, which way soever he turned, his eyes
might be saluted with agreeable objects.

The six ladies obeyed, and sat down at the table; and Abon Hassan
taking notice, that out of respect they did not eat, helped them
himself, and invited them to eat in the most pressing and obliging
terms. Afterwards he asked their names, which they told him were
Alabaster Neck, Coral Lips, Moon Face, Sunshine, Eye’s Delight,
Heart’s Delight, and she who fanned him was Sugar-Cane. The many
soft things he said upon their names showed him to be a man of
sprightly wit, and it is not to be conceived how very much it
increased the esteem which the caliph (who saw every thing) had
already conceived for him.

When the ladies saw that Abon Hassan had done eating, one of them
said to the eunuchs who waited, The commander of the faithful will
go into the hall where the dessert is, --bring some water; upon
which they all arose from the table, and taking from the eunuch, one
a gold basin, another an ewer of the same metal, and a third a
towel, kneeled down before Abon Hassan, and presented them to him to
wash his hands, who, as soon as he had done, got up, and after an
eunuch had opened the door, went, preceded by Mesrour, who never
left him, into another hall, as large as the former, adorned with
paintings by the best masters, and furnished with gold and silver
vessels, carpets, and other rich furniture. There seven different
bands of music began a concert as soon as Abon Hassan appeared. In
this hall there were seven other large lustres, and a table in the
middle covered with dried sweetmeats and the choicest and most
exquisite fruits of the season, raised in pyramids, in seven gold
basins; and seven ladies, more beautiful than the others, standing
round it, each with a fan in her hand.

These new objects raised still greater admiration in Abon Hassan
than before; who, after he had made a full stop, and given the most
sensible marks of his surprise and astonishment, went directly to
the table, where sitting down, he gazed a considerable time at the
seven ladies, with an embarrassment that plainly showed he knew not
which to give the preference to. At last he ordered them all to lay
aside their fans and sit down, and eat with him, telling them, that
it was not so hot but he could spare them that trouble.

When the ladies were all placed about him, the first thing he did
was to ask their names, which were different from the other seven,
and expressed some perfection of mind or body, which distinguished
them from one another; upon which he took an opportunity, when he
presented them with fruit, &c. to say something smart. Eat this fig
for my sake, said he to Chain of Hearts, who sat on his right hand;
and render the fetters, with which you loaded me the first moment I
saw you, more supportable. Then presenting a bunch of grapes to
Soul’s Torment, Take this cluster of grapes, said he, on condition
you instantly abate the torments which I suffer for your sake; and
so on to the rest. By these words Abon Hassan more and more pleased
and diverted the caliph, who was delighted with his words and
actions, and pleased to think he had found in him a man who diverted
him so agreeably, and suggested to him a method of being better
acquainted with him.

After Abon Hassan had tasted of all the fruits in the basin, he got
up and followed Mesrour, who never left him, into a third hall, much
more magnificently furnished than the other two; where he was
received by the same number of musicians and ladies, who stood round
a table covered with all manner of wet sweetmeats. After he had
looked about him with new wonder, he advanced to the table, the
music playing all the time till he sat down. The seven ladies, by
his order, sat down with him, and as he could not but show them the
same civility as he had done to the rest, they helped themselves, as
he desired them, to what they liked best; and he afterwards informed
himself of their names, which pleased him as much as the others had
done, and led him to say as many soft things to them, to the great
diversion of the caliph, who lost not a word.

By this time the day beginning to close, Abon Hassan was conducted
into a fourth hall, much more superb and magnificently furnished,
lighted with wax candles in seven great gold lustres, which gave a
glorious light. The like was not seen in the other halls, because it
was not necessary. Abon Hassan found the same number of musicians
here as he had done in the other three halls, performing in concert
in the most lively manner, and seeming to inspire greater joy; and
he saw as many ladies standing round a table covered with seven gold
basins filled with cakes, dried sweetmeats, and all such things as
were proper to promote drinking. There he saw, which he had not
observed in any of the other halls, a beaufet, which was set out
with seven large silver flagons full of the choicest wines, and by
them seven crystal glasses of the finest workmanship.

Hitherto in the three first halls Abon Hassan drank nothing but
water, according to the custom observed at Bagdad, from the highest
to the lowest, and at the caliph’s court, never to drink wine till
the evening; all who transgress this rule being accounted
debauchees, and dare not show themselves in the daytime. This custom
is the more laudable, as it requires a clear head to apply to
business in the course of the day; and as no wine is drank till
evening, no drunken people are seen in the streets in open day
making disturbances in the city.

As soon as Abon Hassan entered the fourth hall, he went to the table
and sat down, and was a long time in a kind of ecstacy at the sight
of those seven ladies who surrounded him, and were much more
beautiful than all he beheld in the other halls. He was very
desirous to know all their names; but as the music played then so
very loud, and particularly the tambour, that he could not hear them
speak, he clapped his hands as a sign for them to leave off playing,
and a profound silence ensued. Then taking by the hand the lady who
stood on the right next to him, he made her sit down by him, and
presenting her with a cake, asked her name. Commander of the
faithful, said the lady, I am called Cluster of Pearls. No name,
replied Abon Hassan, could have more properly expressed your worth;
and indeed your teeth exceed the finest pearls. Cluster of Pearls,
added he, since that is your name, oblige me with a glass of wine
from your fair hand, and take another with me. The lady went
presently to the beaufet and brought him a glass of wine, which she
presented to him with a pleasant air. Abon Hassan took the glass
with a smile, and looking passionately upon her, said, Cluster of
Pearls, I drink your health; I desire you to fill out as much for
yourself, and pledge me. She ran to the beaufet, and returned with a
glass in her hand; but before she drank, she sung a song, which
charmed him as much by the sweetness of her voice as by its novelty.

After Abon Hassan had drank, he made another lady sit down, and
presenting her with what she chose in the basins, asked her name,
which she told him was Morning Star. Your bright eyes, said he,
shine with greater lustre than that star whose name you bear. Do me
the pleasure to bring me some wine; which she did with the best
grace in the world. Then turning to the third lady, whose name was
Daylight, he ordered her to do the same, and so on to the seventh,
to the extreme satisfaction of the caliph.

When they had all filled him a glass round, Cluster of Pearls, whom
he had just addressed, went to the beaufet, poured out a glass of
wine, and putting in a pinch of the same powder the caliph had used
the night before, presented it to Abon Hassan; Commander of the
faithful, said she, I beg of your majesty to take this glass of
wine, and before you drink it off do me the favour to hear a song I
have made to-day, and which I flatter myself may not displease you.
I never sung it before this evening. With all my heart, said Abon
Hassan, taking the glass, and as commander of the faithful, I
command you to sing it; for I am persuaded that so beautiful a lady
as yourself cannot make a song which does not abound with wit and
pleasantry. The lady took a lute, and tuning it to her voice, sung
with so much justness, grace and expression, that Abon Hassan was in
perfect ecstacy all the time, and was so much delighted, that he
ordered her to sing it again, and was as much charmed with it as at
first.

When the lady had done, Abon Hassan drank off his glass, and turning
his head towards her, to give her those praises which he thought due
to her, was prevented by the powder, which operated so suddenly,
that his mouth was wide open, and his eyes close shut, and dropping
his head on the table like a man overcome with sleep, he slept as
profoundly as the day before at the same time the caliph gave him
the powder. One of the ladies stood ready to catch the glass, which
fell out of his hand; and then the caliph, who took a greater
satisfaction in this scene than he had promised himself and was all
along a spectator of what had passed, came into the hall to them,
overjoyed at the success of his plan. He ordered Abon Hassan to be
dressed again in his own clothes, and to be carried back again to
his own house by the same slave that brought him, charging him to
lay him on a sofa in the same room, without making any noise, and to
leave the door open when he came away.

The slave took Abon Hassan upon his shoulders, and carried him home
by a back door of the palace, placed him in his own house as he was
ordered, and returned with speed, to acquaint the caliph what he had
done. Well, said the caliph, Abon Hassan wished only to be caliph
for one day, to punish the iman of the mosque of his quarter, and
the four scheiks or old men who had displeased him: I have procured
him the means of doing this, and he ought to be content.

In the mean time, Abon Hassan, who was laid upon his sofa by the
slave, slept till very late the next morning. When the powder was
worked off, Abon Hassan waked and opened his eyes, and finding
himself at home, was in the utmost surprise. Cluster of Pearls!
Morning Star! Coral Lips! Moon Face! cried he, calling the ladies of
the palace by their names, as he remembered them; where are you?
come hither.

Abon Hassan called so loud, that his mother, who was in her own
apartment, heard, and running to him upon the noise he made, said,
What ails you, son? what has happened to you? At these words Abon
Hassan lifted up his head, and looking haughtily at his mother,
said, Good woman! who is it you call son? --Why you, answered his
mother very mildly; are not you Abon Hassan, my son? It is strange
that you have forgot yourself so soon. I your son! old trull!
replied Abon Hassan; you are a liar, and know not what you say! I am
not Abon Hassan, I tell you, but the commander of the faithful!

Hold your tongue, son, answered the mother; one would think you are
a fool to hear you talk thus. You are an old fool yourself, replied
Abon Hassan; I tell you once more I am the commander of the
faithful, and God’s vicar on earth! Ah! child, cried the mother,
is it possible that I should hear you utter such words that show you
are distracted! What evil genius possesses you, to make you talk at
this rate? God bless you, and preserve you from the power of Satan.
You are my son Abon Hassan, and I am your mother.

After she had made use of all the arguments she could think of to
bring him to himself, and to show how great an error he was in, she
said, Do not you see, that the room you are now in is your own, and
is not like a chamber in a palace fit for the commander of the
believers, and that you have never left it since you was born, but
lived quietly at home with me? Think seriously of what I say, and do
not fancy things that are not, nor ever can be. Once more, my son,
think seriously of it.

Abon Hassan heard all these remonstrances of his mother very
patiently, holding down his eyes, and clapping his hands under his
chin, like a man recollecting himself, to examine the truth of what
he saw and heard. At last, he said to his mother, just as if he was
come out of a deep sleep, and with his hand in the same posture, I
believe you are right; methinks I am Abon Hassan, you are my mother,
and I am in my own room. Then looking at her again, and at every
object before him, he added, I am Abon Hassan, there is no doubt of
it, and I cannot comprehend how this fancy came into my head.

The mother really believed that her son was cured of that disorder
of his mind, which she ascribed to a dream, and began to laugh with
him, and ask him questions about this dream; when all on a sudden he
started up, and looking crossly at his mother, said, Old sorceress,
you know not what you say. I am not your son, nor you my mother. You
deceive yourself, and would deceive me. I tell you I am the
commander of the faithful, and you shall never persuade me to the
contrary! For Heaven’s sake, son, said the mother, let us leave
off this discourse; recommend yourself to God, for fear some
misfortune should happen to us: let us talk of something else. I
will tell you what happened yesterday in our quarter to the iman of
the mosque, and the four scheiks our neighbours; the judge of the
police came and seized them, and gave each of them I know not how
many strokes with a bull’s pizzle, while a crier proclaimed, That
was the punishment of all those who troubled themselves about other
people’s business, and employed themselves in setting their
neighbours at variance: he afterwards led them through all the
streets, and ordered them never to come into our quarter again. Abon
Hassan’s mother little thought her son had any share in this
adventure, and therefore turned the discourse on purpose to put him
out of the conceit of being the commander of the faithful; but
instead of effacing that idea, she rather recalled it, and impressed
it more deeply in his imagination that it was not imaginary, but
real.

Abon Hassan no sooner heard this relation, but he cried out, I am
neither thy son, nor Abon Hassan, but certainly the commander of the
believers. I cannot doubt of it after what you have told me. Know
then that it was by my order that the iman and the four scheiks were
punished; and I tell you I am certainly the commander of the
faithful: therefore tell me no more of its being a dream. I was not
asleep, but as much awake as I now am. You do me a pleasure to
confirm what the judge of the police told me he had executed
punctually according to my order; and I am overjoyed that the iman
and the four scheiks, those great hypocrites, were so chastised, and
I should be glad to know how I came here. God be praised for all
things! I am certainly commander of the faithful, and all thy
arguments shall not convince me of the contrary.

The mother, who could not divine or imagine why her son so
strenuously and positively maintained himself to be caliph, never
disputed but that he had lost his senses, when she found he insisted
so much upon a thing that was so incredible; and in this thought,
said, I pray God, son, to have mercy upon you! Pray do not talk so
madly. Beseech God to forgive you, and give you grace to talk more
reasonably. What would the world say to hear you rave in this
manner? Do you not know that ‘walls have ears?’

These remonstrances only enraged Abon Hassan the more; and he was so
provoked at his mother, that he said, Old woman, I have bid you once
already to hold your tongue. If you do not, I shall rise and give
you cause to repent it all your lifetime. I am the caliph and the
commander of the believers; and you ought to believe me when I say
so.

Then the good woman perceiving that he was more distracted than
ever, abandoned herself to tears, and beating her face and breast,
expressed the utmost grief and astonishment to see her son in that
terrible state. Abon Hassan, instead of being appeased, and being
moved by his mother’s tears, on the contrary lost all the respect
due from a son to his mother, and getting up hastily, and laying
hold of a cane, ran to his mother in great fury, and in a
threatening manner, that would have frightened every one but a
mother so partial to him, said, Tell me presently, wicked woman, who
I am. I do not believe, son, replied she, looking at him tenderly,
and void of fear, that you are so abandoned by God as not to know
your mother, who brought you into the world, and to mistake
yourself. You are indeed my son Abon Hassan, and are very much in
the wrong to arrogate to yourself the title which belongs only to
our sovereign lord the caliph Haroun Alraschid, after the noble and
generous present the monarch made us yesterday. In short, I forgot
to tell you, that the grand vizier Giafar came to me yesterday, and
putting a purse of a thousand pieces of gold into my hands, bid me
pray for the commander of the faithful, who made me that present;
and does not this liberality concern you more than me, who have but
a short time to live?

At these words Abon Hassan grew quite mad. The circumstance of the
caliph’s liberality his mother told him of, persuaded him more
than ever that he was caliph, remembering that he had sent the
vizier. Well, old hag, cried he, will you be convinced when I tell
you I sent you those thousand pieces of gold by my grand vizier
Giafar, who obeyed my commands, as I was commander of the faithful?
But instead of believing me you endeavour to distract me by your
contradictions, and maintain with obstinacy that I am your son, but
you shall not go long unpunished. After these words, he was so
unnatural, in the height of his frenzy, as to beat her cruelly with
his cane.

The poor mother, who could not have thought that her son would have
come so soon from words to blows, called out for help so loud, that
the neighbours ran in to her assistance. Abon Hassan continued to
beat her, at every stroke asking her if he was the commander of the
faithful? To which she always answered tenderly, that he was her son.

By that time the neighbours came in, Abon Hassan’s rage began to
abate. The first who entered the room got between him and his
mother, and taking the cane out of his hand, said to him, What are
you doing, Abon Hassan? have you lost all fear of God, and your
reason? Did ever a son so well brought up as you, dare to strike his
mother? Are you not ashamed so to treat yours, who loves you so
tenderly? Abon Hassan, still full of fury, looked at him that spoke
without returning an answer; and then staring on all the rest of his
neighbours that followed him, said, Who is that Abon Hassan you
speak of? Is it me you call by that name?

This question disconcerted the neighbours a little. How! said he who
spoke first, do not you know your mother, who brought you up, and
with whom you have always lived? Begone, you are impertinent people,
replied Abon Hassan; I neither know her nor you, and will not know
her. I am not Abon Hassan; I am the commander of the faithful, and
will make you know it to your cost.

At this discourse the neighbours no longer doubted that he was mad;
and to prevent his being guilty of the like actions, seized him,
notwithstanding his resistance, and bound him hand and foot. But
though apparently disabled from doing any mischief, they did not
choose to leave him alone with his mother. Two of them ran for the
keeper of the hospital for mad folks, who came presently with
chains, hand-cuffs, a bull’s pizzle, and a great many attendants.
When they entered the room, Abon Hassan, who little expected such
treatment, struggled to unloose himself; but after his keeper had
given him two or three smart strokes upon the shoulders with the
bull’s pizzle, he lay so quiet, that the keeper and his people did
what they would with him. As soon as they had bound and manacled
him, they took him with them to the hospital. When he was got out of
his house into the street, the people crowded round him; one
buffeted him, another boxed him, and others called him fool and
madman. To all this treatment he replied, There is no greatness and
power but in God most high and almighty. I am treated as a fool,
though I am in my right senses. I suffer all these injuries and
indignities for the love of God. He was conducted to the hospital,
where he was lodged in an iron cage; but before he was shut up, the
keeper, who was hardened to such terrible execution, regaled him
without pity with fifty strokes of the bull’s pizzle on his
shoulders, which he repeated every day for three weeks, bidding him
remember that he was not the commander of the faithful. I am not
mad; but if I did want your assistance, nothing would so effectually
make me mad, as your cruel treatment of me. I want not your advice,
said Abon Hassan.

Abon Hassan’s mother went every day to see her son, and could not
forbear crying to see him fall away daily, and to hear him sigh and
complain at the hardships he endured. In short his shoulders, back,
and sides, were so black and bruised, that he could not turn
himself. His mother would willingly have talked with him, to comfort
him, and to sound him whether he still retained the notion of being
caliph; but whenever she opened her mouth he stopped her with so
much fury, that she was forced to leave him, and return home
inconsolable at his obstinacy.

By degrees those strong and lively ideas which Abon Hassan
entertained, of having been clothed in the caliph’s habit, and
having exercised his authority, and been punctually obeyed and
treated like the true caliph, and which persuaded him when he awaked
that he was so, all began to wear away insensibly. Sometimes he
would say to himself, If I was the caliph and commander of the
believers, how came I, when I awaked, to find myself at home,
dressed in my own apparel? Why should I not have been attended by
eunuchs, and their chief, and a crowd of beautiful ladies? Why
should my grand vizier Giafar, and all those emirs and governors of
provinces, who prostrated themselves at my feet, forsake me?
Undoubtedly if I had any authority over them, they would have
delivered me long ago out of this miserable condition I am in;
certainly I ought to look upon all as a dream. It is true I
commanded the judge of the police to punish the iman and the four
old men his companions; I ordered Giafar the grand vizier to carry
my mother a thousand pieces of gold; and all my commands were
executed. All these things are obstacles to my believing it a dream,
and I cannot comprehend it; but there are so many things that I
cannot comprehend, nor ever shall, that I will put my trust in God,
who knows all things.

Abon Hassan was taken up with these thoughts and reflections when
his mother came to see him. She found him so much altered and
emaciated, that she let fall a torrent of tears; in the midst of
which she saluted him as she used to do, and he returned her salute,
which he had never done before, since he had been in the hospital.
This she looked upon to be a good sign. Well, my son, said she,
wiping her tears, how do you do, and how do you find yourself? Have
you renounced all those whims and fancies which the devil had put
into your head? Indeed, mother, replied Abon Hassan, very rationally
and calmly, and in a tone expressive of his grief for the excesses
he had been transported to against her, I acknowledge my error, and
beg of you to forgive the execrable crime which I have been guilty
of towards you, and which I detest. I ask pardon also of my
neighbours that I have abused. I have been deceived by a dream; but
by so extraordinary a one, and so like to truth, that I venture to
affirm any other person, to whom such a thing might have happened,
would have been guilty of as great or greater extravagancies; and I
am this instant so much perplexed about it, that while I am speaking
I can hardly persuade myself but that what has happened to me was a
matter of fact, so like was it to what happens to people who are
broad awake. But whatever it was, I do, and shall always look upon
it as a dream and an illusion. I am convinced that I am not that
shadow of a caliph and commander of the faithful, but Abon Hassan
your son, the son of a person whom I have always honoured till that
fatal day, the remembrance of which will cover me with confusion,
and whom I shall honour and respect all my life as I ought.

At these sensible words, the tears of sorrow and affliction which
the mother of Abon Hassan had so long shed were changed into those
of joy, to find her son so well recovered. My son! cried she,
transported with pleasure, my satisfaction and comfort to hear you
talk so reasonably is inexpressible; and it gives me as much joy as
if I had brought you into the world a second time; but I must tell
you my opinion upon this adventure, and observe one thing which you
may not have taken notice of; the stranger that you brought home
with you one evening to sup with you, went away without shutting
your chamber-door after him, as you desired him; which I believe
gave the devil an opportunity to enter, and throw you into that
horrible illusion you were in: and, therefore, my son, you ought to
return God thanks for your deliverance, and beseech him to keep you
from falling again into the snares of the evil spirit.

You have found out the source of my misfortunes, answered Abon
Hassan. It was that very night I had this dream which turned my
brain. I bid the merchant expressly to shut the door after him; and
now I find he did not do it. I am persuaded, as well as you, the
devil, finding it open, came in, and filled my head full of these
fancies. The people of Moussol, from whence this merchant came, may
not know how we at Bagdad are well convinced that the devil is the
cause of troublesome dreams when we leave our chamber-doors open.
But since, mother, you see I am, by the grace of God, so well
recovered, for God’s sake get me out of this hellish place, and
deliver me from the hand of this executioner, who will infallibly
shorten my days if I stay here any longer. The mother, glad to hear
her son was so well cured of his foolish imagination of being
caliph, went immediately to the keeper, and assuring him that he was
very sensible and well, he came and examined him, and released him
in her presence.

When Abon Hassan came home, he staid within doors some days, to
recover his health by better living than he had found in the
hospital. But when he had recovered his strength, and felt no more
effect of the harsh treatment he had suffered in his confinement, he
began to be weary of spending his evenings alone. He presently
entered again upon the same way of living as before; which was, to
provide enough every day to regale a new stranger at night.

The day on which Abon Hassan renewed his custom of going about
sunset to the foot of Bagdad bridge to stop the first stranger that
offered, and desire him to do him the honour of supping with him,
happened to be the first day of the month, which was the day that
the caliph always set apart to go in disguise out of some of the
city-gates to observe with his own eyes what was committed contrary
to the good government of the city, as he had established and
regulated it at the beginning of his reign. He had not been long
arrived at the bridge, and sat himself on a bench which was fixed to
the parapet, when, looking about him, he perceived the caliph
disguised again like a Moussol merchant, and followed by the same
slave. Persuaded that all his misfortunes were owing to the caliph
(whom he took for a merchant) leaving his door open, he shuddered at
the sight of him. God preserve me! said he to himself; if I am not
deceived, there is the magician again that enchanted me! and
thereupon got up, and looked over the parapet into the river, that
he might not see him till he was past.

The caliph, who had a mind to carry on the diversion he had received
by Abon Hassan, had taken care to inform himself of all that had
happened when Abon Hassan awaked at home, and conceived a great
pleasure at the relation given him, especially at his being sent to
a madhouse, and the treatment he received there. But as this monarch
was both just and generous, and had taken a great liking to Abon
Hassan, as capable of contributing further to his amusement, and had
doubted whether, after renouncing his pretended character of a
caliph, he would return to his usual manner of living, he designed,
with a view to get him nearer him, to dress himself again like a
merchant of Moussol, the better to execute his plan. He perceived
Abon Hassan at the same time that he saw him, and presently guessed
by his action that he was angry with him, and wanted to shun him.
This made him walk close to the parapet Abon Hassan leaned over; and
when he came nigh him, he put his head over to look him in the face.
Ho, brother Abon Hassan, said he, is it you? I greet you! Give me
leave to embrace you! Not I, replied Abon Hassan, briskly, without
looking at the pretended Moussol merchant; I do not greet you; I
will have neither your greeting nor your embraces. Go along!

What! answered the caliph, do you not know me? Do you not remember
the evening we spent together at your house this day month, where
you did me the honour to treat me very generously? No, replied Abon
Hassan in the same tone, I do not know you, nor what you talk about;
go, I say again, about your business.

The caliph was not to be dashed with this rude behaviour of Abon
Hassan. He knew very well the law he had imposed on himself, never
to have any commerce again with a stranger he had once entertained;
but though Abon Hassan had declared so much to him, he pretended to
be ignorant of it. I cannot believe, said he, but you must know me
again; it is not possible that you should have forgotten me in so
short a time. Certainly some misfortune has befallen you, which
inspires you with this aversion for me. However, you ought to
remember, that I showed my gratitude by my good wishes, and that I
offered you my interest, which is not to be slighted, in an affair
which you had very much at heart.

I do not know, replied Abon Hassan, what your interest may be, and I
have no desire to make use of it; but I am sensible the utmost of
your good wishes ended in making me mad. In God’s name, I say,
once more, go your way, and trouble me no more.

Ah! brother Abon Hassan, replied the caliph, embracing him, I do not
intend to part with you in this manner, since I have had the good
fortune to meet with you a second time; you must exercise the same
hospitality towards me again, that you showed me a month ago, when I
had the honour to drink with you.

I have protested against it, said Abon Hassan, and have so much
power over myself, not to receive a second time such an unlucky man
as you. You know the proverb, ‘Take up your drum and begone.’
Make the application to yourself. How often must I repeat it? God be
with you! You have been the cause of my misfortune, and I will not
venture myself with you again. My good friend Abon Hassan, said the
caliph, embracing him again, you treat me in a way I little
expected. I beg of you not to talk to me in this harsh manner, but
be persuaded of my friendship. Do me the favour to tell me what has
happened to you; for I assure you, I wished you well, and still do
so; and would be glad of an opportunity to make you any amends for
the trouble I have caused you, if it has been really my fault. Abon
Hassan yielded to the pressing instances of the caliph, and bid him
sit down by him. Your incredulity and importunity, said he, have
tired my patience; and what I am going to tell you will show you
that I do not accuse you wrongfully.

The caliph sat down by Abon Hassan, while he told him all that had
happened to him, from his waking in the palace to his waking again
in his own house, all as a mere dream, with all the circumstances
which the caliph knew as well as himself, and which renewed his
pleasure. He enlarged afterwards upon the impression that dream of
being caliph and commander of the faithful made upon him, which he
said, threw him into such extravagancies, that his neighbours were
obliged to bind him as a madman, and carry him to a madhouse, where
he was treated in a way that must seem very barbarous. But, said he,
what will surprise you, and what you little think of, is, that it
was altogether your fault that these things fell out; for, if you
remember, I desired you to shut the door after you, which you
neglected, and the devil, finding it open, put this dream into my
head, which, though it was very agreeable, was the cause of the
misfortune I complain of: you, therefore, for your negligence, are
answerable for the horrid and detestable crime I was guilty of in
lifting my hand against my mother, whom I might have killed, and
committed parricide (I blush for shame when I think of it,) only
because she said I was her son, and she would not acknowledge me for
the commander of the faithful, as I thought, and positively insisted
on to her that I was. You are the cause of the offence I have given
my neighbours, when, running in at the cries of my poor mother, they
surprised me bent on knocking her down; which would never have
happened, if you had taken care to shut my chamber door when you
went away, as I desired you. They would not have come into my house
without my leave; and, what troubles me most of all, they would not
have been witness of my folly. I should not have been obliged to
strike them in my own defence, and they would not have bound and
fettered me to carry me and shut me up in the hospital for madmen,
where I assure you every day that I remained confined in that hell,
I received a score of strokes with a bull’s pizzle. Abon Hassan
recounted his complaints with great heat and vehemence to the
caliph, who knew better than he what had passed, and was delighted
to find that he had succeeded so well in his plan to throw him into
the vagaries he still was in. He could not help bursting out a
laughing at the simplicity wherewith he related them.

Abon Hassan, who thought that his story should rather move
compassion, and that every one ought to be as much concerned at it
as himself, very much resented the pretended Moussol merchant’s
laughter: What! said he, do you make a jest of me, and laugh in my
face, or do you believe I laugh at you when I speak seriously? if
you want proof of what I advance, look here yourself and see whether
or no I tell you the truth: with that, stooping down and baring his
shoulders, he showed the caliph the scars and weals the bull’s
pizzle had made.

The caliph could not behold those objects without horror. He pitied
poor Abon Hassan, and was sorry he had carried the jest so far.
Come, rise, dear brother, said he to him very seriously, and
embracing Abon Hassan heartily in his arms; let us go to your house,
and enjoy the happiness of being merry with you to-night; and
to-morrow, if it please God, all things will go well.

Abon Hassan, notwithstanding his resolution and oath never to admit
the same stranger a second time, could not resist the caresses of
the caliph, whom he always took for a merchant of Moussol. I will
consent, said he, if you will swear to shut my door after you, that
the devil may not come in to distract my brain again. The caliph
promised that he would; upon which they both got up, walked towards
the city, and followed by the caliph’s slave, reached Abon
Hassan’s house by the time it was dark.

The caliph, the more to engage Abon Hassan, said to him, Place a
confidence in me; I promise you on my honour I will not break my
word. After this, you need not hesitate to trust in a person like
me, who wishes you all happiness and prosperity, of which you will
see the effects. I desire not that, said Abon Hassan, stopping him
short. I yield to your importunity; but I dispense with your good
wishes, and beg you in God’s name to form none for me. All the
mischief that has hitherto befallen me arose purely from those you
already expressed for me, and from your leaving the door open. Well,
replied the caliph, still laughing at the misguided imagination of
Abon Hassan, since you will have it so, be it so; I promise you I
will form none. You do me pleasure by speaking so, said Abon Hassan;
I desire no more; I shall be more than satisfied provided you keep
your word, and I shall forgive you all the rest.

As soon as Abon Hassan entered the doors, he called for his mother
and for candles, and desired his guest to sit down upon a sofa, and
then placed himself by him. A little time after, supper was brought
up, and they both fell to without ceremony. When they had done, Abon
Hassan’s mother cleared the table, set on a small dessert of
fruit, wine and glasses by her son, and withdrew, and appeared no
more. Abon Hassan first filled his own glass, and then the
caliph’s; and after they had drank some time, and talked of
indifferent matters, the caliph perceiving that his host grew warm
with liquor, began to talk of love, and asked him if he had ever
felt that passion.

Brother, replied Abon Hassan, familiarly, thinking his guest was his
equal, I never looked upon love or marriage but as a slavery, to
which I was always unwilling to submit; and must own to you, that I
never loved any thing but good cheer and good wine; in short, to
divert and entertain myself agreeably with my friends. Yet I do not
tell you that I am so indifferent to marriage or incapable of
attachment, if I could meet with a woman of such beauty and
sweetness of temper as her I saw in my dream on that fatal night I
first received you into my house, and you, to my misfortune, left my
door open, who would pass the whole night with me drinking, singing,
and playing on some instrument, and in agreeable conversation, and
who would study to please and divert me: I believe, on the contrary,
I should change all my indifference into a perfect attachment to
such a person, and, I think, should live very happily with her. But
where is such a woman to be found but in the caliph’s palace, or
in those of the grand vizier or some great lords of the court who
want no money to provide them? I choose therefore to stick close to
my bottle, which is a much cheaper pleasure, and which I can enjoy
as well as they. Saying these words, he filled out his own and the
caliph’s glass, and said, Come, take your glass, and let us pursue
this charming pleasure.

When they had drank off their wine, It is great pity, said the
caliph, that so gallant a man as you, who owns himself not
insensible of love, should lead so solitary a life. I prefer the
easy quiet life I live, replied Abon Hassan, before the company of a
wife, whose beauty might not please me, and who, besides, might
create me a great deal of trouble by her imperfections and
ill-humour. The conversation lasted a long time, and the caliph
seeing Abon Hassan had drank up to the pitch he desired, said, Let
me alone, since you have the same good taste as every other honest
man, I warrant you I will find you one that shall please you. Then
taking Abon Hassan’s glass, and putting a pinch of the same powder
into it again, filled him up a bumper and presenting it to him,
said, Come let us drink beforehand the fair lady’s health, who is
to make you happy. I am sure you will like her.

Abon Hassan took the glass laughing, and shaking his head, said, Be
it so; since you desire it, I cannot be guilty of so great a piece
of incivility, nor disoblige a guest of so much merit in such a
trifling matter. I will drink the lady’s health you promise me,
though I am very well contented as I am, and do not rely on your
promise. But no sooner had Abon Hassan drank off his bumper, than he
was seized with as deep a sleep as before, and the caliph ordered
the same slave to take him and carry him to the palace. The slave
did so, and the caliph, who did not intend to send back Abon Hassan
as before, shut the door after him, as he had promised, and followed
the slave carrying Abon Hassan.

When they arrived at the palace, the caliph ordered Abon Hassan to
be laid on a sofa, in the fourth hall, from whence he was carried
home fast asleep a month before; but first he bid them put him on
the same habit which he acted the caliph in, which was done
forthwith before him. He then sent every body to bed, and charged
all the eunuchs, officers, ladies, and musicians who were in the
hall, when he drank the last glass of wine which had put him to
sleep, to be there by daybreak, and to take care to act their parts
well when he should awake. He then went to bed, charging Mesrour to
awake him before they went into the hall, that he might conceal
himself in the closet as before.

Mesrour, at the hour appointed, awakened the caliph, who immediately
rose and went to the hall where Abon Hassan lay fast asleep, and
when he had placed himself in his closet, Mesrour and the other
officers, ladies and musicians, who waited for him, went in, and
placed themselves about the sofa, so as not to hinder the caliph
from seeing what passed, and noticing all his actions.

Things being thus disposed, and the caliph’s powder having had its
effect, Abon Hassan began to awake without opening his eyes, and
threw off the phlegm, which was received in a gold basin as before.
In that moment the seven bands of musicians joined their charming
voices to the sound of hautboys, fifes, flutes and other
instruments, forming a very agreeable concert. Abon Hassan was in
great surprise to hear that delightful harmony; but when he opened
his eyes, and saw the ladies and officers about him, whom he thought
he knew again, his amazement increased. The hall that he was in,
seemed to be the same he saw in his first dream, and he observed the
same lustres, and the same furniture and ornaments.

The concert ceased, to give the caliph an opportunity of attending
to the countenance of his new guest, and all that he might say in
his surprise. The ladies, Mesrour, and all the officers of the
chamber, waited in profound and respectful silence. Abon Hassan bit
his finger, and cried loud enough for the caliph to hear him, Alas!
I am fallen again into the same dream and illusion that happened to
me a month ago, and must expect again the bull’s pizzle and iron
cage at the madhouse. Almighty God, added he, I commit myself into
the hands of thy divine providence. He was a wicked man that I
entertained at my house last night, who has been the cause of this
illusion, and the hardships I must undergo. The base wretch swore to
shut the door after him, but did not, and the devil came in and has
turned my brain with this wicked dream of being commander of the
faithful, and other phantoms which bewitch my eyes. God confound
thee, Satan, and crush thee under some mountain of stones.

After these last words, Abon Hassan closed his eyes, and remained
sometime thoughtful and very much perplexed; then opening them
again, and looking about him, cried out a second time with less
surprise, and smiling at the various objects before him, Great God!
I commit myself into the hands of thy providence; preserve me from
the temptations of Satan. Then shutting them again, he said, I know
what I will do: I will go to sleep until Satan leaves me, and
returns as he came, were I to wait till noon. They did not give him
time to go to sleep again, as he had promised himself: for Strength
of Hearts, one of the ladies whom he had seen before, approached,
and sitting down on the sofa by him, said to him respectfully,
Commander of the faithful, I intreat your majesty to forgive me for
taking the liberty to tell you not to go to sleep; day appears, and
it is time to rise. Begone, Satan! answered Abon Hassan, raising his
voice: but looking upon the lady, he said, is it me you call the
commander of the faithful? Certainly you take me for somebody else.
It is to your majesty I give that title, replied the lady, to whom
it belongs, as you are sovereign of the Mussulman world, and I am
your most humble slave. Undoubtedly, added she, your majesty means
to divert yourself by pretending to have forgotten yourself, or this
is the effect of some troublesome dream; but if you would but open
your eyes, the mists which may disturb your imagination will soon be
dispelled, and you will find yourself in your own palace, surrounded
by your officers and slaves, who all wait your commands: and that
your majesty may not be surprised to find yourself in this hall, and
not in bed, I beg leave to tell you, that you fell so suddenly
asleep last night, that we were unwilling to wake you, to conduct
you to your chamber, but laid you carefully upon the sofa. In short,
she said to him so many things that appeared probable, that at last
he sat up, opened his eyes, and recollected her and all the ladies
again. They all drew near, and she who spoke first, resuming the
discourse, said, Commander of the faithful, and vicar of the prophet
on earth, be not displeased if I acquaint your majesty once more
that it is time to rise, for day appears.

You are very troublesome and importunate, replied Abon Hassan,
rubbing his eyes: I am not the commander of the faithful, but Abon
Hassan; I know it well, and you shall not persuade me otherwise. We
do not know that Abon Hassan your majesty speaks of, nor desire to
know him, answered the lady; but we know you to be commander of the
believers, and you cannot persuade us to the contrary.

Abon Hasan looking about and finding himself in the same hall,
attributed all he saw and heard to such a dream as he had before,
and very much feared the dreadful consequences. God have mercy on
me! said he, lifting up his hands and eyes, like a man who knew not
where he was; I commit myself into his hands. I cannot doubt, after
what I have seen, but that the devil, who came into my chamber,
possesses me, and fills my imagination full of all these visions.

The caliph, who saw him all the time, and heard these acclamations,
began laughing so heartily, that he had much ado to forbear bursting
into loud laughter.

Abon Hassan laying himself down again, and shutting his eyes, the
same lady again said, Commander of the faithful, since your majesty
does not rise, after we have, according to our duty, informed you it
was day, and the despatch of business requires your presence, we
shall use the liberty you give us in such cases. Then taking him by
one arm, and calling to one of the other ladies to do the same by
the other, they lifted him up, and carried him into the middle of
the hall, where they set him on his breech, and taking all hands,
danced and skipped round him while the music played and rattled in
his ears.

Abon Hassan was in an inexpressible perplexity of mind, and said,
What! am I indeed caliph, and commander of the faithful? And in the
uncertainty he was in, would have said something more, but the music
was so loud, that he could not be heard. At last he made a sign to
String of Pearls and Morning Star, two of the ladies who were
dancing, that he wanted to speak with them; upon which they forbore,
and went to him. Do not lie now, said he, but tell me truly who I am?

Commander of the faithful, replied Morning Star, your majesty means
either to surprise us, by asking this question, as if you did not
know that you are commander of the faithful, and the vicar on earth
of the prophet of God, master of both worlds, that whereon we now
are and that to come after death, or else you must have had some
very extraordinary dream to-night, which has made you forget who you
are; which may very well be, considering that your majesty has slept
longer to-night than ordinary: however, if you will give me leave, I
will refresh your memory with what passed yesterday. Then she told
him how he went to the council, punished the iman, and the four old
men, and sent a present by his grand vizier of a thousand pieces of
gold to the mother of one Abon Hassan; what he did in the inner part
of the palace, and what passed at the three meals which he took in
the three halls, and how in the fourth your majesty did us the
honour to make us sit down by you, to hear our songs, and receive
wine from our hands, until your majesty fell so fast asleep, as
Strength of Hearts has told you. From that time your majesty has
continued, contrary to custom, in a sound sleep until now.
--Strength of Hearts, all your other slaves, and the officers
present, can confirm what I say, and it is now time you should go to
prayers.

Very well, replied Abon Hassan, shaking his head, you would have me
believe all this; but I tell you, you are all fools, or mad, and
that is a great pity, for you are very pretty. Since I saw you I
have been at home, where I used my mother so ill that they sent me
to a mad-house, and kept me there three weeks against my will, and
beat me every day with a bull’s pizzle, and yet you would make me
believe all this to be a dream. Commander of the faithful, answered
Morning Star, you are mistaken; we are all ready to swear by all
that your majesty holds most dear that all you tell is a dream. You
never stirred out of this hall since yesterday, but slept here all
night long.

The confidence with which the lady assured Abon Hassan that all she
said was truth, and that he had never been out of the hall since
that time, made him not know what to believe, but bewildered his
senses. O Heaven! said he to himself, am I Abon Hassan, or the
commander of the faithful? Almighty God, enlighten my understanding,
and inform me of the truth, that I may know what to trust to. Then
he uncovered his shoulders, and shewed the ladies the livid weals of
the blows he had received. Look, said he; judge whether these
strokes could come to me in a dream, or when I was asleep. For my
part, I can affirm, that they were real blows; I feel the smart of
them yet, and that is a testimonial there is no room to doubt of.
Now if I received these strokes in my sleep, it is the most
extraordinary thing in the world, and surpasses my comprehension.

In this uncertainty Abon Hassan called to one of the officers that
stood round him: Come hither, said he, and bite the tip of my ear,
that I may know whether I am asleep or awake. The officer obeyed
him, and bit so hard that he made him cry out horridly; the music
struck up at the same time, and the officers and ladies all began to
sing, dance, and skip about Abon Hassan, and made such a noise, that
he was in perfect enthusiasm, and played a thousand merry tricks. He
tore off his caliph’s habit, threw off his turban, and jumped up
in his shirt and drawers, and taking hold of two of the ladies’
hands, fell a dancing and singing and jumping and cutting capers,
that the caliph could not contain himself, but burst into such
violent laughter at this sudden pleasantry of Abon Hassan, that he
fell backwards, and made a greater noise than all the musicians
together. He was so long before he could check himself, that it had
like to have hurt him. At last he got up, and opened the lattice,
and putting out his head, cried out, Abon Hassan, Abon Hassan, have
you a mind to kill me with laughing?

As soon as the caliph’s voice was heard, every body was silent,
and Abon Hassan, among the rest, who, turning his head to see from
whence the voice came, knew the caliph, and the Moussol merchant,
but was not in the least dashed; on the contrary, he found that he
was awake, and all that had happened to him was matter of fact, and
not a dream. He entered into the caliph’s pleasantry and
intention. Ha! ha! said he, looking at him with good assurance, you
are a merchant of Moussol, and complain that I would kill you; you
have been the occasion of my using my mother so ill, and being sent
to a mad-house. It was you who treated the iman and the four scheiks
in the manner they were used, and not me; I wash my hands of it. It
was you who have been the cause of all my disorders and sufferings:
in short, you are the aggressor, and I the injured person.

Indeed, you are in the right of it, Abon Hassan, answered the
caliph, laughing all the while; but to comfort you, and make you
amends for all your troubles, I call Heaven to witness, I am ready
and willing to make you what reparation you please to ask. After
these words, he came out of the closet into the hall, and ordered
one of his most magnificent habits to be brought, and commanded the
ladies to dress Abon Hassan in it; and when they had done so, he
said, embracing him, Thou art my brother; ask what thou wilt, and
thou shalt have it.

Commander of the faithful, replied Abon Hassan, I beg of your
majesty to do me the favour to tell me what you did to disturb my
brain in this manner, and what was your design; for it is a thing of
the greatest importance for me to know, that I may perfectly recover
my senses.

The caliph was ready to give him that satisfaction, and said, First
you are to know, that I often disguise myself, and particularly at
night, to observe if all goes right in Bagdad; and as I wish to know
what passes in its environs, I set apart the first day of every
month to make a tour about it, sometimes on one side, and sometimes
on another, and always return by the bridge. The evening that you
invited me to supper, I had been taking my rounds, and in our
conversation you told me, that the only thing you wished for was to
be caliph for four-and-twenty hours, to punish the iman of your
mosque and his four counsellors. I fancied that this desire of yours
would afford me a great deal of diversion, and thought immediately
how I might procure you that satisfaction. I had about me a certain
powder, which immediately throws the person who takes it into a
sound sleep for a certain time. I put a dose of it, without being
perceived by you, into the last glass I presented you, upon which
you fell fast asleep, and I ordered my slave to carry you to my
palace, and came away without shutting the door. I have no occasion
to repeat what happened at my palace when you awaked, and during the
whole day till evening; but after you had been regaled by my orders,
one of the slaves who waited on you put another dose of the same
powder at night into a glass she gave you; you fell asleep as
before, and the same slave carried you home, and left the door open.
You have told me all that happened to you afterwards. I never
imagined that you could have suffered so much as you have done. But
as I have a great regard for you, I will do every thing to comfort
you, and make you forget all your sufferings; think of what I can do
to please you, and ask me boldly what you wish.

Commander of the faithful, replied Abon Hassan, how great soever my
tortures may have been, they are all blotted out of my remembrance,
as soon as I understand my sovereign lord and master had any share
in them. I doubt not in the least of your majesty’s bounty; but as
interest never governed me, and you give me liberty to ask a favour,
I beg that it may be that of having access to your person, to have
the happiness of admiring, all my lifetime, your grandeur.

This last proof of disinterestedness in Abon Hassan completed the
esteem the caliph had entertained for him. I am pleased with your
request, said the caliph, and grant you free access to my person at
all times and all hours. At the same time, he assigned him an
apartment in the palace, and, in regard to his pension, told him
that he would not have him apply to his treasurer, but come always
to him for an order upon him; and immediately ordered his private
treasurer to give him a purse containing a thousand pieces of gold.
Abon Hassan made a low bow; and the caliph left him to go to council.

Abon Hassan took this opportunity to go and inform his mother of his
good fortune, and what had happened, which he told her was not a
dream; for that he had actually been caliph, and had acted as such,
and received all the honours, and that she had no reason to doubt
it, since he had it confirmed by the caliph himself.

It was not long before this story of Abon Hassan was spread over
Bagdad, and carried into all the provinces both far and near,
without the omission of a single circumstance.

The new favourite, Abon Hassan, was always with the caliph; for, as
he was a man of a pleasant temper, and created mirth wherever he
went by his wit and pleasantry, the caliph could not live without
him. He formed no party of diversion without him, and sometimes
carried him along with him to see his consort Zobiede, to whom he
had told his story, which so highly pleased him, as it did Zobiede;
who observed that every time he came with the caliph, he had his
eyes always fixed upon one of her slaves, called Nouzhatoul-aouadat,
(which is to say, _renewed pleasure_,) and resolved to tell the
caliph of it. Commander of the faithful, said that princess one day,
you do not observe so well as I, that every time Abon Hassan attends
you in your visits to me, he never keeps his eyes off
Nouzhatoul-aouadat, and makes her blush, which is almost a certain
sign that she entertains no aversion for him. If you approve of it,
we will make a match between them.

Madam, replied the caliph, you put me in mind of a thing which I
ought to have done before now. I know Abon Hassan’s opinion
respecting marriage from himself, and have always promised him a
wife that should please him. I am glad you mentioned it; for I know
not now I came to forget it. But it is better that Abon Hassan
should follow his own inclination, and choose for himself; and if
Nouzhatoul-aouadat is not averse to it, we ought not to hesitate
upon their marriage; and since they are both present, they have only
to say that they consent.

Abon Hassan threw himself at the caliph’s and Zobeide’s feet to
show the sense he had of their goodness to him; and, rising up,
said, I cannot receive a wife from better hands, but dare not hope
that Nouzhatoul-aouadat will give me her hand as readily as I give
her mine. At these words he looked upon the princess’s slave, who
showed by her respectful silence, and the sudden blush that arose in
her cheeks, that she was disposed to obey the caliph and her
mistress Zobiede.

The marriage was solemnized, and the nuptials celebrated in the
palace with great rejoicings, which lasted several days. Zobeide, in
pleasure to the caliph, made her slave considerable presents, and
the caliph did the same to Abon Hassan. The bride was conducted to
the apartment the caliph had assigned Abon Hassan, who waited for
her with all the impatience of a bridegroom, and received her with
the sound of all sorts of instruments, and musicians of both sexes,
who made the air echo again with their concert.

After these feasts and rejoicings, which lasted several days, the
new married couple were left to pursue their loves in peace. --Abon
Hassan and his spouse were charmed with each other, and lived
together in perfect union, and seldom were asunder, but when either
he paid his respects to the caliph, or she to Zobeide. Indeed,
Nouzhatoul-aouadat was endued with every qualification capable of
gaining Abon Hassan’s love and attachment, and was just such a
wife as he described to the caliph, and fit to sit at the head of
his table. With these dispositions they could not fail to pass their
lives agreeably. They kept a good table, covered with the nicest and
choicest rarities in season, by an excellent cook, who took upon him
to provide every thing. Their sideboard was always stored with
exquisite wines, placed within their reach when at table, where they
enjoyed themselves in an agreeable tete-a-tete, and afterwards
entertained each other with some pleasantry or other, which made
them laugh more or less, as they had in the day met with something
to divert them; and in the evenings, which they consecrated to
mirth, they had generally some slight repast of dried sweetmeats,
choice fruits, and cakes; and at each glass invited each other by
new songs to drink, and sometimes accompanied their voices with a
lute, or other instruments, which they could both touch.

Abon Hassan and Nouzhatoul-aouadat led this pleasant life a long
time, unattentive to expense, when the caterer, who disbursed all
the money for these expenses, brought them in a long bill, in hope
of having an advance of money. They found it, too late, to be so
considerable a sum, including the wedding clothes and jewels for the
bride, that all the presents that the caliph and the princess
Zobiede had given them at their marriage were but just enough to pay
him. This made them reflect seriously on what was passed, which,
however, was no remedy for the present evil. But they agreed to pay
the caterer; and having sent for him, paid him all they owed him,
without considering the difficulty they would be in immediately
after.

The caterer went away very well pleased to receive so large a sum of
ready money, though Abon Hassan and his wife were not so well
satisfied with seeing the bottom of their purse, but remained a long
time silent, and very much embarrassed to find themselves reduced to
that condition the very first year of their marriage. Abon Hassan
remembered that the caliph, when he took him into the palace,
promised never to let him want any thing; but when he considered how
prodigal he had been of his money in so short a time, he was
unwilling to expose himself to the shame of letting the caliph know
the ill use he had made of what he had given him, and that he wanted
more. Besides, he had made over his patrimony to his mother, as soon
as the caliph received him near his person, and was afraid to go to
her, lest she should find that he had returned to the same
extravagance he had been guilty of after his father’s death. His
wife, on the other hand, looked upon Zobeide’s generosity, and the
liberty she had given her to marry, as more than a sufficient
recompense for her service, and thought she had not a right to ask
more.

Abon Hassan at last broke silence, and, looking upon his wife, said,
I see you are in the same embarrassment as myself, and are thinking
what we must do in this unhappy juncture, when our money fails us so
unexpectedly. I do not know what your sentiments may be, but mine
are, let what will happen, not to retrench our expenses in the
least; and I believe you will come into my opinion. The point is,
how to support them without stooping to ask the caliph or Zobeide;
and I think I have fallen on the means; but we must both assist each
other.

This discourse of Abon Hassan very much pleased his wife, and gave
her some hopes. I was thinking so as well as you, said she, but
durst not explain my thoughts, because I did not know how to help
ourselves; and must confess, that what you tell me gives me a great
deal of pleasure. But since you say you have found out a way, and my
assistance is necessary, you need but to tell me, and I will do all
that lies in my power.

I was sure, replied Abon Hassan, that you would not fail in this
business, which concerns us both; and therefore I must tell you,
this want of money has made me think of a plan which will supply us
with some, at least for a time. It consists in a little trick we
will put, I upon the caliph, and you upon Zobeide, and at which, I
am sure, they will both be diverted, and it will answer very well to
us. You and I will both die. Not I, indeed, interrupted
Nouzhatoul-aouadat; you may die by yourself, if you will; I am not
so weary of this life, and, whether you are pleased or not, will not
die so soon. If you have nothing else to propose than that, you may
do it by yourself; for I assure you I shall not join you.

You are a woman, I mean of such vivacity and wonderful quickness,
replied Abon Hassan, that you scarce give me time to explain my
design. Have but a little patience, and you shall find that you will
be ready enough to die such a death as I mean; for surely you could
not think I meant a real death? Well, said his wife, if it is but a
sham death you design, I am at your service, and you may depend on
my zeal to second you in this manner of dying; for I must tell you
truly, I am very unwilling to die, as I apprehended you at first.

Be but easy a little, said Abon Hassan, and I will tell you what I
propose. I will feign myself dead, and you shall lay me out in a
white sheet, in the middle of my chamber, with my turban upon my
face, my feet towards Mecca, and just ready to be carried out to
burial. When you have done so, you must cry, and shed tears, as is
usual in such cases, and tear your clothes and hair, or pretend to
do it, and go all in tears, with your hair loose about your ears, to
Zobeide. The princess will ask you the cause of your grief; and when
you have told her, with words intermixed with sighs, she will pity
you, and give you some money to defray the expense of my funeral,
and a piece of good brocade to cover my body with, that my interment
may be the more magnificent, and to make you a habit in the room of
that she saw you had torn. As soon as you return with the money and
the brocade, I will get up and lay you in my place, and go and act
the same part with the caliph as you have done with Zobeide; and I
dare say the caliph will be as generous to me as Zobeide has been to
you.

When Abon Hassan had explained his plan, I think, replied
Nouzhatoul-aouadat, it will be a pleasant trick, and I am much
mistaken if the caliph and Zobeide will not like us for it. Let us
put it in execution. Leave me to myself; I will play my part at
least as well as I expect you will yours, and with as much zeal and
attention, as the benefit we expect from it is great.

Nouzhatoul-aouadat liked this project very well, and said to Abon
Hassan, Come, lose no time; strip to your shirt and breeches, while
I prepare a sheet. I know how to bury as well as any body; for while
I was in Zobeide’s service, and any of my fellow slaves died, I
had the conducting of the funeral. Abon Hassan did as his wife bid
him, and laid himself flat on his back on the sheet which his wife
had spread on the carpet in the middle of the room. As soon as he
had crossed his arms, his wife wrapped him up, turned his feet
towards Mecca, and put a piece of fine muslin and his turban upon
his face, so as to leave his breath free, so that nothing seemed
wanting but to put him in a coffin, and carry him out to be buried.
After this she pulled off her head-dress, and, with tears in her
eyes, and her hair dishevelled, and seeming to tear it off, with a
dismal cry and lamentation, beating her face and breast with all the
marks of the most lively grief, ran across the court to Zobeide’s
apartments; who, hearing the voice of a person crying very loud,
commanded some of her women to see who it was; who returned and told
her that it was Nouzhatoul-aouadat, who was coming in a deplorable
condition.

The princess, impatient to know what had happened to her, rose up
immediately, and went to meet her at the door of her ante-chamber.
Nouzhatoul-aouadat played her part to perfection. As soon as she saw
Zobeide, who held the door open, she redoubled her cries, tore her
hair off by handfuls, beat her face and breast, and threw herself at
her feet, bathing them with her tears.

Zobeide, amazed to see her slave in such extraordinary affliction,
asked what had happened to her; but instead of answering, she
continued her sighs and sobs, and, at last, feigning to strive to
check them, said, with words interrupted with sighs, Alas! my most
honoured lady and mistress, what greater misfortune could have
befell me than this, which obliges me to throw myself at your
highness’s feet? God prolong your days, my most respectable
princess, in perfect health, and grant you many happy years! --Abon
Hassan! poor Abon Hassan! whom you honoured with your esteem, and
gave me for a husband, is no more!

At these last words, Nouzhatoul-aouadat redoubled her tears and
sighs, and threw herself again at the princess’s feet. Zobeide was
extremely surprised at this news. Abon Hassan dead! cried she; that
healthy, agreeable, pleasant man! Indeed I did not in the least
expect his death so soon; he seemed to promise a long life, and well
deserved to enjoy it. Then she also burst into tears, as did all her
women, who had been often witnesses of Abon Hassan’s pleasantries,
when the caliph brought him to see the princess Zobeide; and all
together continued a long time bewailing the loss of him. At length
the princess Zobeide broke silence: Wicked woman! cried she,
addressing herself to the false widow, perhaps you have occasioned
his death! Your ill temper has given him so much vexation, that you
have at last brought him to his grave. Nouzhatoul-aoudat seemed much
hurt at the reproaches of Zobeide: Ah, madam, cried she, I do not
think I ever gave your majesty, all the time I was your slave, the
least reason to entertain so disadvantageous an opinion of my
conduct to a husband who was so dear to me. I should think myself
the most wretched of women if you were persuaded of this. I behaved
to Abon Hassan as a wife should do to a husband for whom she has a
sincere affection; and I may say, without vanity, that I had for him
the same regard he had for me, which proved he loved me with equal
affection. I am persuaded he would, were he alive, justify me fully
to your majesty; but, madam, added she, renewing her tears, his time
was come, and that was the only cause of his death.

Zobeide had really observed in her slave an uniformly equal temper
and mildness, great docility and zeal for her service, which showed
she was rather actuated by inclination than duty. She hesitated not
to believe her on her word, and ordered her treasurer to fetch a
hundred pieces of gold, and a piece of rich brocade.

The slave soon returned with the purse and piece of brocade, which,
by Zobeide’s order, she put into Nouzhatoul-aouadat’s hand, who
threw herself again at the princess’s feet, and thanked her with
great satisfaction, to think she had succeeded so well. Go, said
Zobeide, make use of that brocade to cover the corpse of your
husband, and with that money bury him handsomely, and as he
deserves. Moderate the transports of your afflictions; I will take
care of you.

As soon as Nouzhatoul-aouadat got out of the princess’s presence,
she dried up her tears, and returned with joy to Abon Hassan, to
give him an account of her good success. When she came home, she
burst out a laughing to see her husband still stretched out in the
middle of the floor; she ran to him, and bid him rise and see the
fruits of his trick. He rose, and rejoiced with his wife at the
sight of the purse and brocade. Unable to contain herself at the
success of her artifice, Come, husband, said she, laughing, let me
act the dead part, and see if you can manage the caliph as well as I
have done Zobeide.

That is the temper of all women, replied Abon Hassan, who, we may
well say, have always the vanity to believe they can do things
better than men, though, at the same time, what good they do is by
their advice. It would be odd indeed if I, who laid this plot
myself, could not carry it on as well as you. But let us lose no
time in idle discourse; lie down in my place, and see if I do not
come off with as much applause.

Abon Hassan wrapped up his wife as she had done him, and with his
turban unrolled, like a man in the greatest affliction, ran to the
caliph, who was holding a private council with the grand vizier
Giafar, and other confidential viziers. He presented himself at the
door, and the officer knowing he had free access, opened it. He
entered holding with one hand his handkerchief before his eyes, to
hide the feigned tears, which trickled down his cheeks, and striking
his breast with the other, with exclamations expressing
extraordinary grief.

The caliph, who was used to see Abon Hassan with a merry
countenance, was very much surprised to see him in that sorrowful
state. He interrupted the business of the council to ask him the
cause of his grief. Commander of the faithful, answered Abon Hassan,
with repeated sighs and sobs, God preserve your majesty on the
throne, which you fill so gloriously! a greater calamity could not
have befallen me than what I now lament. Alas! Nouzhatoul-aouadat,
whom you in your bounty gave me for a wife, to pass the rest of my
days with, alas! --at this exclamation Abon Hassan pretended to have
his heart so full, that he could not utter one syllable more, but
poured forth a flood of tears.

The caliph, who presently understood that Abon Hassan came to tell
him of the death of his wife, seemed very much concerned, and said
to him with an air which showed how much he regretted her loss, God
be merciful to her: she was a good slave, and we gave her to you
with an intention to make you happy: she deserved a longer life.
Then the tears ran down his face, so that he was obliged to pull out
his handkerchief to wipe them off. The grief of Abon Hassan, and the
tears of the caliph, excited those of Giafar and the other viziers.
They bewailed the death of Nouzhatoul-aouadat, who, on her part, was
impatient to hear how Abon Hassan succeeded.

The caliph had the same thought of the husband that Zobeide had of
the wife, and imagined that he had occasioned her death. Wretch!
said he, in a tone of indignation, have you not been the cause of
your wife’s death by your ill-treatment of her? Can I doubt it?
You ought at least to have had some regard for the princess my
consort, who loved her more than the rest of her slaves, and
consented to give her to you. What a return for her kindness!

Commander of the faithful, replied Abon Hassan, affecting to weep
more bitterly than before, can your majesty for a moment suppose
that Abon Hassan, whom you have loaded with your favours and
kindness, and on whom you have conferred honours he could never have
aspired to, can have been capable of such ingratitude? I loved
Nouzhatoul-aouadat my wife as much on these accounts, as for the
many good qualities she possessed, and which drew from me all the
attachment, tenderness, and love she deserved. But, my lord, added
he, she was to die, and God would no longer suffer me to enjoy a
happiness for which I was indebted to your majesty and your beloved
consort.

In short, Abon Hassan dissembled so well, that the caliph, who had
never heard how extravagantly he and his wife had lived, not in the
least doubting his sincerity, ordered his treasurer, who was
present, to give Abon Hassan a purse of a hundred pieces of gold,
and a piece of brocade. Abon Hassan immediately cast himself at the
caliph’s feet, and thanked him for his present. Follow the
treasurer, said that monarch; throw the brocade over the corpse, and
with the money show the last testimony of thy love for thy wife.

Abon Hassan made no reply to these obliging words of the caliph, but
retired with a low bow, and followed the treasurer; and as soon as
he had got the purse, and piece of brocade, went home very well
pleased with having found out so quick and easy a way of supplying
his necessity, which had given him so much uneasiness.

Nouzhatoul-aouadat, weary with lying so long in the posture, never
waited till Abon Hassan bid her rise; but as soon as she heard the
door open, got up and ran to her husband, and asked him if he had
imposed on the caliph as well as she did on Zobeide? You see, said
he, showing her the stuff, and shaking the purse, that I can act a
sorrowful husband for a living wife, as well as you can a weeping
widow for a husband not dead. Abon Hassan, however, was not without
his fears, that this double trick of theirs might be attended with
some ill consequences. He thought it would not be amiss to put his
wife on her guard as to what might happen, that they might act in
concert. For, added he, the better we succeed in embarrassing the
caliph and Zobeide, the more they will be pleased at last, and
perhaps may show their satisfaction by a greater liberality. And
this last consideration induced them to carry on this feint farther.

The caliph, though he had a great deal of business to transact in
council, was nevertheless so impatient to go and condole with the
princess upon the death of her slave, that he rose up as soon as
Abon Hassan was gone, and put off the council to another day. Follow
me, said he to Mesrour, who always attended him wherever he went and
was in all his councils; let us go and share with the princess the
grief which the death of her slave, Nouzhatoul-aouadat, causes her.

Accordingly they went to Zobeide’s apartment, whom the caliph
found sitting on a sofa, very much afflicted, and still in tears.
Madam, said the caliph, going up to her, it is unnecessary to tell
you how much I partake with you in your affliction; since you are
not insensible that what gives you pleasure or trouble has the same
effect on me. But we are all mortal, and must surrender up to God
that life which he has given us, when he requires it.
Nouzhatoul-aouadat, your faithful slave, was endued with
qualifications that deserved your esteem, and I cannot but approve
your expressing it after her death; but consider, all your grief
will not bring her to life again. Therefore, madam, if you love me,
and will take my advice, be comforted for this loss, and take more
care of a life which you know is precious to me, and constitutes all
the happiness of mine.

If the princess was charmed with these tender sentiments which the
caliph expressed in his compliments, she was amazed to hear of
Nouzhatoul-aouadat’s death. This news threw her into so great
surprise, that she was not able to return an answer for some time.
At last recovering, she replied, with an air expressive of surprise,
Commander of the faithful, I am very sensible of all your tender
sentiments; but give me leave to say, I cannot comprehend the news
you tell me of the death of my slave, who is in perfect health. My
affliction is for the death of Abon Hassan, her husband, your
favourite, whom I esteem, as much for the regard you have for him,
as because you were so kind to bring me acquainted with him, who has
so often diverted me very agreeably, and for whom I have as great a
value as yourself. But, sir, the little concern you show for his
death, and your so soon forgetting a man in whose company you have
so often told me you took so much pleasure, amazes and surprises me:
and this insensibility seems the greater, by the deception you put
upon me in changing his death for that of my slave.

The caliph, who thought that he was perfectly well informed of the
death of the slave, and had just reason to believe so, because he
had both seen and heard Abon Hassan, fell a laughing, and shrugging
up his shoulders, to hear Zobeide talk after this manner. Mesrour,
said he, turning himself about to that eunuch, what do you think of
the princess’s discourse? Do not women sometimes lose their
senses? For, in short, you have heard and seen all as well as
myself. Then turning about to Zobeide, Madam, said he, shed no more
tears for Abon Hassan, for I can assure you he is well: but rather
bewail the death of your dear slave. It is not many moments since
her husband came all in tears, and the most inexpressible
affliction, to tell me the death of his wife. I gave him a purse of
a hundred pieces of gold, and a piece of brocade, to comfort him,
and bury her with; and Mesrour here, who was by, can tell you the
same.

The princess took this discourse of the caliph’s to be all a jest,
and thought he had a mind to impose upon her. Commander of the
faithful, replied she, though you are used to banter, I must tell
you, this is not a proper time for it. What I tell you is very
serious; I do not talk of my slave’s death, but of Abon Hassan,
her husband, whose fate I bewail, and so ought you too. I, madam,
said the caliph, putting on a grave countenance, I tell you, without
raillery, that you are deceived: Nouzhatoul-aouadat is dead, and
Abon Hassan is alive and in perfect health.

Zobeide was very much piqued at this dry answer of the caliph.
Commander of the faithful, replied she smartly, God preserve you
from continuing longer in this mistake: surely you would make me
think your mind is not as usual. Give me leave to repeat to you once
more, that it is Abon Hassan who is dead, and that my slave
Nouzhatoul-aouadat, his widow, is living. It is not an hour ago
since she went from hence. She came here in so disconsolate a state,
that the sight of her was enough to have drawn tears from my eyes,
if she had not told me her affliction, accompanied with innumerable
sighs. All my women, who wept with me, can bear me witness, and tell
you also that I made her a present of a hundred pieces of gold, and
a piece of brocade; and the grief which you found me in was upon the
death of her husband; and just that instant that you came in, I was
going to send you a compliment of condolence.

At these words of Zobeide, the caliph cried out in a fit of
laughter, This, madam, is a strange piece of obstinacy; but,
continued he seriously, you may depend upon Nouzhatoul-aouadat’s
being dead. I tell you, no, sir, replied Zobeide instantly; it is
Abon Hassan that is dead, and you shall never make me believe
otherwise.

Upon this, the caliph’s anger rose in his countenance. He sat
himself upon the sofa, at some distance from the princess, and
speaking to Mesrour, said, Go immediately, and see which it is, and
bring me word; for though I am certain that it is
Nouzhatoul-aouadat, I would rather take this way than be any longer
obstinately positive about a matter which I am perfectly satisfied
of. No sooner had the caliph commanded than Mesrour was gone. You
will see, continued he, addressing himself to Zobeide, in a moment,
which of us is right. For my part, replied Zobeide, I know very well
that I am in the right, and you will find it to be Abon Hassan. And
for myself, replied the caliph, I am so sure that it is
Nouzhatoul-aouadat, that I will lay you what wager you will, that
Abon Hassan is well.

Do not think to come off so, said Zobeide; I accept your wager, and
I am so well persuaded of his death, that I would willingly lay the
dearest thing in the world against what you will, though it were of
less value. You know what I have at my disposal, and what I value
most; propose the bet, and I will stand to it.

Since it is come to that, said the caliph, I will lay my garden of
pleasures against your palace of paintings, though the one is worth
much more than the other. Is the question at present, replied
Zobeide, if your garden is more valuable than my palace? That is not
the point. You have made choice of what you thought fit belonging to
me as an equivalent against what you lay; I accept the wager, and
will not go back; I take God to witness. The caliph took the same
oath, and both waited till Mesrour returned.

While the caliph and Zobeide were disputing so earnestly, and with
so much warmth, Abon Hassan, who foresaw their difference, was very
attentive to whatever might happen. As soon as he perceived Mesrour
through a window, against which he sat talking with his wife, and
observed that he was coming directly to their apartment, he
presently guessed what he was coming about, and bid his wife make
haste to act the dead part once more, as they had agreed on, without
loss of time; in short, they were so pressed, that Abon Hassan had
much ado to wrap up the wife and lay the piece of brocade which the
caliph had given him upon her, before Mesrour came. As soon as he
had done that, he opened the door of his apartment, and with a
melancholy, dejected countenance, and his handkerchief before his
eyes, went and sat down at the head of the pretended deceased.

By that time he was seated, Mesrour came into the room. The dismal
sight which met his eyes gave him a secret joy, on account of the
errand the caliph sent him on. As soon as Abon Hassan perceived him,
he rose up to meet him, and kissing his hand out of respect, said,
sighing and groaning, You see me, sir, in the greatest affliction
that ever could befall me; the death of my dear wife,
Nouzhatoul-aouadat, whom you honoured with your favours.

Mesrour, affected by this discourse, could not refuse some tears to
the memory of the deceased. He lifted up the cloth a little at the
head, which was uncovered, and peeping under it, let it down again,
and said, with a deep sigh, There is no other God but God; we must
all submit to his will, and every creature must return to him.
--Nouzhatoul-aouadat, my good sister, added he, sighing, thy days
have been very few: God have mercy on thee. Then turning to Abon
Hassan, who was all the time in tears, We may well say, said he,
that women sometimes have whims, and lose their senses in a most
unpardonable manner; for Zobeide, good mistress as she is, is in
that situation at present: she will maintain to the caliph that you
are dead, and not your wife; and whatever the caliph can say to the
contrary, he cannot persuade her otherwise. He called me to witness
and confirm this truth; for you know I was by when you came and told
him the sorrowful news: but all signifies nothing. They are both
positive; and the caliph, to convince Zobeide, has sent me to know
the truth, but I fear I shall not be believed; for when women once
take up a thing, they are not to be beat out of it.

God keep the commander of the faithful in the possession and right
use of his senses, replied Abon Hassan, still sighing and crying:
you see how it is, and that I have not imposed upon his majesty. And
I wish to heaven, continued he, to dissemble the better, that I had
no occasion to tell him the melancholy and affecting news. Alas! I
cannot enough express my irreparable loss! That is true, replied
Mesrour, and I can assure you I take a great share in your
affliction; but you must be comforted, and not abandon yourself to
your grief. --I leave you with reluctance, to return to the caliph;
but I beg the favour of you not to bury the corpse till I come
again; for I will assist at the interment, and accompany it with my
prayers. Mesrour went to give an account of his message. Abon Hassan
waited on him to the door, and told him that he did not deserve the
honour that he intended him: and for fear Mesrour should return to
say something else to him, he followed him with his eyes for
sometime, and when he saw him at a distance, returned to his wife,
and released her. This is already, said he, a new scene of mirth,
but I fancy it will not be the last; for certainly the princess
Zobeide will not believe Mesrour, but will laugh at him, since she
has too substantial a reason to the contrary; therefore we must
expect some new event. While Abon Hassan was talking thus,
Nouzhatoul-aouadat had time to put on her clothes again, and both
went and sat down on a sofa opposite to the window, where they could
see all that passed.

In the mean time, Mesrour reached Zobeide’s apartment, and going
into her closet laughing, clapped his hands like one who had
something very agreeable to tell.

The caliph, who was naturally impatient, would presently be informed
of the truth of the matter, for he was piqued a little at the
princess’s diffidence; therefore as soon as he met Mesrour, Vile
slave, said he, is this a time to laugh? Why do not you tell me
which is dead, the husband or the wife?

Commander of the faithful, answered Mesrour, putting on a serious
countenance, it is Nouzhatoul-aouadat who is dead, for the loss of
whom Abon Hassan is as much afflicted as when he appeared before
your majesty. The caliph not giving him time to pursue his story,
interrupted him, and cried out, laughing heartily, Good news!
Zobeide, your mistress, was a moment ago possessed of the palace of
paintings, and now it is mine. She staked it against my garden of
pleasures, since you went; therefore you could not have done me a
greater pleasure. I will take care to reward you: but give me a true
account of what you saw.

Commander of the faithful, said Mesrour, when I came to Abon
Hassan’s apartment, I found the door open, and he was bewailing
the death of his wife Nouzhatoul-aouadat. He sat at the head of the
deceased, who was laid out in the middle of the room, with her feet
towards Mecca, and was covered with that piece of brocade which your
majesty made a present of to Abon Hassan. After I had expressed the
share I took in this grief, I went and lifted up the pall at the
head, and knew Nouzhatoul-aouadat, though her face was very much
swelled and changed. I exhorted Abon Hassan in the best manner I
could to be comforted; and when I came away, I told him I would
attend at his wife’s funeral, and desired him not to remove the
corpse till I came. This is all I can tell your majesty. I ask no
more, said the caliph, laughing heartily, and I am very well
satisfied with your exactness. Then addressing himself to Zobeide,
Well, madam, said he, have you yet any thing to say against so
certain a truth? Will you always believe that Nouzhatoul-aouadat is
alive, and that Abon Hassan is dead? And will you not own that you
have lost your wager?

How, sir replied Zobeide, who would not believe one word that
Mesrour said, do you think that I regard that impertinent follow of
a slave, who knows not what he says? I am not blind or mad. With
these eyes I saw Nouzhatoul-aouadat in the greatest affliction; I
spoke to her myself, and she told me that her husband was dead.
Madam, replied Mesrour, I swear to you by your own life, and that of
the commander of the faithful, which are both dear to me, that
Nouzhatoul-aouadat is dead, and Abon Hassan is living.

Thou liest, base despicable slave! said Zobeide in a rage, and I
will confound thee immediately; and thereupon, clapping her hands
together, she called her women, who all came in. Come hither, said
the princess to them, and speak the truth. Who was that who came and
spoke with me a little before the caliph came here? The women all
answered that it was poor afflicted Nouzhatoul-aouadat. And what,
added she, addressing herself to her that was treasurer, did I order
you to give her? Madam, answered the treasurer, I gave
Nouzhatoul-aouadat, by your orders, a purse of a hundred pieces of
gold, and a piece of brocade, which she carried away with her. Well,
then, sorry slave, said Zobeide to Mesrour, in a great passion, what
have you to say to all this? Whom do you think now I ought to
believe, you or my treasurer, my other women or myself.

Mesrour did not want for arguments to contradict the princess; but
as he was afraid of provoking her too much, he chose rather to be
silent, though he was satisfied within himself that the wife was
dead, and not the husband.

All the time of this dispute between Zobeide and Mesrour, the
caliph, who heard the evidence on both sides, which each party
insisted on, and was persuaded of the contrary of what the princess
said, because he had himself seen and spoken to Abon Hassan, and
because of what Mesrour had told him, laughed heartily to see
Zobeide so exasperated against Mesrour. Madam, said he to Zobeide,
once more I repeat, that I know not who was the author of that
saying, That women sometimes lose their wits, but I am sure you make
it good. Mesrour came just now from Abon Hassan’s, and tells us
that he saw Nouzhatoul-aouadat lying dead in the middle of the room,
Abon Hassan alive, and sitting by her; and yet you will not believe
this evidence, which nobody can reasonably refuse: I cannot
comprehend this conduct.

Zobeide would not hear what the caliph represented. Pardon me,
commander of the faithful, replied she, if I suspect you: I see very
well that you have contrived with Mesrour to vex me, and to try my
patience. And as I perceive that his report was concerted between
you, I beg leave to send a person to Abon Hassan’s, to know
whether or not I am in the wrong.

The caliph consented, and the princess charged with this important
commission an old nurse, who had lived with her from her infancy,
and was now present among the rest of her women. Hark ye, nurse,
said she; you see my dispute with the commander of the faithful, and
me and Mesrour; I need tell you no more. Go to Abon Hassan’s, or
rather to Nouzhatoul-aouadat’s, for Abon Hassan is dead, and clear
up this matter for me. If you bring me good news, a handsome present
is your reward; make haste, and return immediately.

The nurse set out, to the great joy of the caliph, who was delighted
to see Zobeide in this embarrassment; but Mesrour, extremely
mortified to find the princess so angry with him, did all he could
to appease her, and to make her and the caliph both satisfied with
him. He was overjoyed when Zobeide sent the nurse; because he was
persuaded that the report she would make would agree with his, and
serve to justify him, and restore him to her favour.

In the mean time, Abon Hassan, who watched the window, perceived the
nurse at a distance, and guessing that she was sent by Zobeide,
called his wife, and told her that the princess’s nurse was coming
to know the truth: therefore, said he, make haste and lay me out.
Accordingly Nouzhatoul-aouadat did so, and covered him with the
piece of brocade Zobeide had given her, and put his turban upon his
face. The nurse, eager to acquit herself of her commission, came at
a good round pace, and entering the room, perceived
Nouzhatoul-aouadat all in tears, her hair dishevelled, and set at
the head of her husband, beating her breast, and with all the
expressions of violent grief.

The good old nurse went directly to the false widow. My dear
Nouzhatoul-aouadat, said she with a sorrowful face, I come not to
interrupt your grief and tears for a husband whom you loved so
tenderly. Ah! good mother, replied the counterfeit widow, you see my
misfortune, and how unhappy I am by the loss of my beloved Abon
Hassan. Abon Hassan, my dear husband! cried she, what have I done
that you should leave me so soon? Have I not always preferred your
will to my own? Alas! what will become of poor Nouzhatoul-aouadat?

The nurse was in great surprise to see every thing quite the reverse
of what the chief of the eunuchs had told the caliph. This black
faced Mesrour, cried she, lifting up her hands, deserves to be
confounded for having made so great a difference between my good
mistress and the commander of the faithful, by the notorious lie he
told them. I must tell you, daughter, said she, the wickedness of
that villain Mesrour, who has asserted with an inconceivable
impudence before our good mistress, that you were dead, and Abon
Hassan was alive!

Alas! my good mother, cried Nouzhatoul-aouadat, I wish to heaven
that it was true! I should not be in this sorrowful state, nor
bewail a husband so dear to me! At these words she burst out into
tears, and by her redoubled tears and cries, feigned most desperate
sorrow.

The nurse was so much moved by her tears, that she sat down by her,
and cried too. Then gently lifting up the turban and cloth, looked
on the face of the corpse: Ah! poor Abon Hassan, she cried, covering
his face again, God have mercy upon thee! Adieu, child, said she to
Nouzhatoul-aouadat; if I could stay longer with you, I would with
all my heart; but I am obliged to return immediately, to deliver my
mistress from the uneasiness that black villain has occasioned her,
by his impudent lie, assuring her with an oath that you was dead.

As soon as the nurse was gone, and had pulled the door after her,
and Nouzhatoul-aouadat thought she would not come back again, she
wiped her eyes, and released Abon Hassan; and then they both went
and sat down on a sofa against the window, expecting what would be
the end of this trick, and to be ready to act according as things
should turn out.

The nurse, in the mean time, made all the haste she could to
Zobeide. The pleasure of carrying the princess good news, and still
more the hopes of a good reward, added wings to her feet, and
running into the princess’s closet quite out of breath, she gave
her a true account of all she had seen. Zobeide hearkened to the old
woman’s relation with a most sensible pleasure; and when she had
done, she said with a tone which showed she had won her cause,
Repeat it once more before the caliph, who looks upon us all to be
fools, and would make us believe we have no sense of religion, nor
fear of God; and tell your story to that wicked black slave, who had
the insolence to assert a falsity, though I knew it to be one.

Mesrour, who expected the nurse’s report would prove favourable on
his side, was very much mortified to find it so much the contrary.
He was also vexed at the anger Zobeide expressed against him, for a
thing which he thought himself surer of than any body, that he was
glad of having an opportunity of speaking his mind freely to the
nurse, which he durst not do to the princess. Old toothless, said he
to the nurse, you are a liar, and there is no truth in what you say;
for I saw with my own eyes Nouzhatoul-aouadat laid out in the middle
of the room.

You are a notorious liar yourself, replied the nurse with an
insulting air, to dare to maintain so great a falsity before my
face, who am just come from seeing Abon Hassan dead, and laid out,
and left his wife alive. I am not an impostor, replied Mesrour, it
is you who endeavour to lead us all into error.

What impudence, said the nurse, to dare to tell me I lie in the
presence of their majesties, when I saw just now with my own eyes
the fact I have had the honour to tell them. Indeed, nurse, answered
Mesrour again, you had better hold your tongue, for you certainly
doat.

Zobeide, who could not support this want of respect in Mesrour, who,
without any regard to her, treated her nurse so injuriously in her
presence, without giving the nurse time to reply to so gross an
affront, said to the caliph, Commander of the faithful, I demand
justice for this insolence to us both. She was so enraged she could
say no more, but burst into tears.

The caliph, who had heard all this dispute, thought it very
intricate. He mused some time, and could not tell what to think of
so many contradictions. The princess, for her part, as well as
Mesrour, the nurse, and all the women slaves, who were present, were
as much puzzled, and remained silent. At last the caliph resumed the
business, and addressing himself to Zobeide, said, I see very well
we are all liars, myself first, and then you, Mesrour, and you,
nurse; or at least it seems not one can be believed more than the
other; therefore, let us go ourselves to know the truth, for I can
see no other way to clear up these doubts.

So saying, the caliph rose up, the princess followed him, and
Mesrour went before to open the doors: Commander of the faithful,
said he, I am overjoyed that your majesty has taken this course; and
shall be much more, when I shall make it plainly appear to the
nurse, not that she doats, since the expression is unfortunately
displeasing to my good mistress, but that her report is not true.

The nurse wanted not a reply: Hold your tongue, black face, said
she; you doat yourself.

Zobeide, who was very much provoked at Mesrour, could not bear to
hear him attack her nurse again, without taking her part: Vile
slave, said she, say what you will, I maintain my nurse says the
truth, and look upon you as a mere liar. Madam, replied Mesrour, if
nurse is so very certain that Nouzhatoul-aouadat is alive, and Abon
Hassan is dead, I will lay her what she dares of it. The nurse was
as ready as he; I dare, said she, take you at your word; let us see
if you dare unsay it. Mesrour stood to his word; and they laid a
piece of gold brocade with silver flowers before the caliph and the
princess.

The apartment the caliph and Zobeide came out of, though distant
from Abon Hassan’s, was nevertheless just over against it, and
Abon Hassan could perceive them coming, and told his wife he was
very much mistaken if the caliph and Zobeide, preceded by Mesrour,
and followed by a great number of women, were not coming to do them
the honour of a visit. She looked through a lattice, and saw them.
Though her husband told her beforehand, she seemed frightened, and
cried out, What shall we do? We are ruined. Fear nothing, replied
Abon Hassan; have you forgot already what we agreed on? We will both
feign ourselves dead, and you shall see all will go well. At the
slow rate they come, we shall be ready before they get to the door.
Accordingly, Abon Hassan and his wife wrapped up and covered
themselves with the pieces of brocade, and waited patiently for
their visitors.

Mesrour, who came first, opened the door, and the caliph and
Zobeide, followed by their attendants, entered the room; but were
extremely surprised, and stood motionless, at the dismal sight which
presented itself to their view, not knowing what to make of it. At
last, Zobeide breaking silence, said to the caliph, Alas! they are
both dead! You have done so much, continued she, looking at the
caliph and Mesrour, to endeavour to make me believe that my dear
slave was dead, that I find it is true at last: grief for losing her
husband has certainly killed her. Say rather, madam, answered the
caliph, prepossessed to the contrary, that Nouzhatoul-aouadat died
first, and the afflicted Abon Hassan sunk under his grief, and could
not survive his dear wife; you ought, therefore, to agree that you
have lost your wager, and your palace of paintings is mine.

Hold there, answered Zobeide, warmed at being contradicted by the
caliph; I will maintain it, you have lost your garden of pleasures
to me. Abon Hassan died first; since my nurse told you as well as
me, that she saw her alive, and crying for the death of her husband.

The dispute of the caliph and Zobeide brought on another between
Mesrour and the nurse, who had wagered as well as they, and each
pretended to win, and came at last to abuse each other very grossly.

At last the caliph, reflecting on what had passed, began to think
that Zobeide had as much reason as himself to maintain that she had
won. In this embarrassment of not being able to find out the truth,
he advanced towards the two corpses, and sat down at the head,
searching after some expedient that might gain him the victory over
Zobeide. I swear, cried he, presently after, by the holy name of
God, that I will give a thousand pieces of gold to him that can tell
me which of these two died first.

No sooner were these words out of the caliph’s mouth, but he heard
a voice under Abon Hassan’s piece of brocade, say, Commander of
the faithful, I died first; give me the thousand pieces of gold. At
the same time he saw Abon Hassan throw off the piece of brocade, and
come and prostrate himself at his feet, while his wife did the same
to Zobeide, keeping on her piece of brocade out of decency. The
princess at first shrieked out, so that she frightened all about
her; but recovering herself at last, expressed great joy to see her
dear slave rise again, just when she was almost inconsolable at
having seen her dead. Ah! wicked Nouzhatoul-aouadat, cried she, what
have I suffered for your sake? However, I forgive you from my heart,
since you are not dead.

The caliph for his part was not so much surprised when he heard Abon
Hassan’s voice; but thought he should have died with laughing at
this unravelling of the mystery, and to hear Abon Hassan ask so
seriously for the thousand pieces of gold. What, Abon Hassan, said
he, continuing to laugh aloud, hast thou conspired against my life,
to kill me a second time with laughing? How came this thought into
your head, to surprise Zobeide and me thus, when we least thought of
such a trick?

Commander of the faithful, replied Abon Hassan, I will declare to
your majesty the whole truth without the least reserve. Your majesty
knows very well that I always loved to eat and drink well, and the
wife you gave me rather increased than restrained that inclination.
With these dispositions your majesty may easily suppose we might
spend a good estate; and to make short of my story, we were not in
the least sparing of what your majesty so generously gave us. This
morning, accounting with our caterer, who took care to provide every
thing for us, and paying what we owed him, we found we had nothing
left. Then reflections on what was past, and resolutions to manage
better for the future, crowded into our thoughts; we formed a
thousand projects, all which we rejected. At last, the shame of
seeing ourselves reduced to so low a condition, and not daring to
tell your majesty, made us contrive this trick to relieve our
necessities, and to divert you with it, which we hope your majesty
will be pleased to pardon us.

The caliph and Zobeide were very well satisfied with Abon Hassan’s
sincerity, and not sorry for what was done; and then Zobeide, who
had all along been very serious, began to laugh at the thoughts of
Abon Hassan’s scheme. The caliph, who had not ceased laughing at
the singularity of thus adventure, rising up, said to Abon Hassan
and his wife, Follow me; I will give you the thousand pieces of gold
I promised you, for joy to find you are not dead. Zobeide desired
him to let her make her slave a present of the same sum, for the
same reason. By this means Abon Hassan and his dear wife
Nouzhatoul-aouadat long preserved the favour of the caliph Haroun
Alraschid and the princess Zobeide, and by their liberality were
made capable of pursuing their pleasures.




The Story of Aladdin; or, the Wonderful Lamp.


In the capital of one of the large and rich provinces of the kingdom
of China, the name of which I do not recollect, there lived a
tailor, whose name was Mustapha, without any other distinction but
that which his profession afforded him, and so poor, that he could
hardly, by his daily labour, maintain himself and family, which
consisted of a wife and son.

His son, who was called Aladdin, had been brought up after a very
careless and idle manner, and by that means had contracted many
vicious habits. He was wicked, obstinate, and disobedient to his
father and mother, who, when he grew up, could not keep him within
doors; but he would go out early in the morning, and stay out all
day, playing in the streets and public places with little vagabonds
of his own age.

When he was old enough to learn a trade, his father not being able
to put him out to any other, took him into his own shop, and showed
him how to use his needle: but neither good words nor the fear of
chastisement were capable of fixing his lively genius. All that his
father could do to keep him at home to mind his work was in vain;
for no sooner was his back turned, but Aladdin was gone for that
day. Mustapha chastised him, but Aladdin was incorrigible; and his
father, to his great grief, was forced to abandon him to his
libertinism; and was so much troubled at not being able to reclaim
him, that it threw him into a fit of sickness, of which he died in a
few months.

The mother of Aladdin, finding that her son would not follow his
father’s business, shut up the shop, sold off the implements of
that trade, and with the money she got for them, and what she could
get by spinning cotton, thought to maintain herself and her son.

Aladdin, who was now no longer restrained by the fear of a father,
and who cared so little for his mother, that whenever she chid him
he would fly in her face, gave himself entirely over to dissipation,
and was never out of the streets from his companions. This course he
followed till he was fifteen years old, without giving his mind to
any thing whatever, or the least reflection on what would become of
him. In this situation, as he was one day playing according to
custom, in the street, with his vagabond troop, a stranger passing
by stood still to observe him.

This stranger was a famous magician, called by the writer of this
story the African Magician; and by that name I shall call him with
the more propriety, as he was a native of Africa, and had been but
two days come from thence.

Whether the African magician, who was a good physiognomist, had
observed in Aladdin’s countenance something which was absolutely
necessary for the execution of the design he came about, he inquired
artfully about his family, who he was, and what were his
inclinations; and when he had learned all he desired to know, he
went up to him, and taking him aside from his comrades, said to him,
Child, was not your father called Mustapha the tailor? --Yes, sir,
answered Aladdin, but he has been dead a long time.

At these words, the African magician threw his arms about
Aladdin’s neck, and kissed him several times with tears in his
eyes. Aladdin, who observed his tears, asked him, What made him
weep? Alas! my son, cried the African magician with a sigh, how can
I forbear? I am your uncle; your good father was my own brother. I
have been a great many years abroad travelling, and now I am come
home with the hopes of seeing him, you tell me he is dead. I assure
you it is a sensible grief to me to be deprived of the comfort I
expected. But it is some relief to my affliction, that as far as I
can remember him, I knew you at first sight, you are so like him;
and I see I am not deceived. Then he asked Aladdin, putting his hand
into his purse, where his mother lived; and as soon as Aladdin had
informed him, he gave him a handful of small money, saying to him,
Go, my son, to your mother, give my love to her, and tell her that I
will come and see her to-morrow, if I have time, that I may have the
satisfaction of seeing where my good brother lived so long, and
ended his days.

As soon as the African magician left his new-adopted nephew, Aladdin
ran to his mother, overjoyed at the money his uncle had given him.
Mother, said he, have I an uncle? No, child, replied his mother, you
have no uncle by your father’s side or mine. I am just now come,
answered Aladdin, from a man who says he is my uncle by my
father’s side, assuring me that he is his brother. He cried and
kissed me when I told him my father was dead; and to show you that
what I tell you is truth, added he, pulling out the money, see what
he has given me; he charged me to give his love to you, and to tell
you, if he has any time to-morrow, he will come and pay you a visit,
that he may see at the same time the house my father lived and died
in. Indeed, child, replied the mother, your father had a brother,
but he has been dead a long time, and I never heard of another.

The mother and son talked no more then of the African magician; but
the next day Aladdin’s uncle found him playing in another part of
the town with other children, and embracing him as before, put two
pieces of gold into his hand, and said to him, Carry this, child, to
your mother, and tell her that I will come and see her to-night, and
bid her get us something for supper; but first show me the house
where you live.

After Aladdin had showed the African magician the house, he carried
the two pieces of gold to his mother, and when he had told her of
his uncle’s intention, she went out and bought provisions; and
considering she wanted various vessels, she went and borrowed them
of her neighbours. She spent the whole day in preparing the supper;
and at night, when it was ready, she said to Aladdin, Perhaps your
uncle knows not how to find our house, go and see for him, and bring
him if you meet with him.

Though Aladdin had showed the magician the house, he was very ready
to go, when somebody knocked at the door, which Aladdin immediately
opened; and the magician came in, loaded with wine and all sorts of
fruits, which he brought for a dessert.

After the African magician had given what he brought into
Aladdin’s hands, he saluted his mother, and desired her to show
him the place where his brother Mustapha used to sit on the sofa;
and when she had so done, he presently fell down and kissed it
several times, crying out with tears in his eyes, My poor brother!
how unhappy am I, not to have come soon enough to give you one last
embrace! Aladdin’s mother desired him to sit down in the same
place, but he would not. No, said he, I shall take care how I do
that; but give me leave to sit here over against it, that if I am
deprived of the satisfaction of seeing the master of a family so
dear to me, I may at least have the pleasure of seeing the place
where he used to sit. Aladdin’s mother pressed him no farther, but
left him at his liberty to sit where he pleased.

When the magician had made choice of a place, and sat down, he began
to enter into discourse with Aladdin’s mother: My good sister,
said he, do not be surprised at your never having seen me all the
time you have been married to my brother Mustapha, of happy memory.
I have been forty years absent from this country, which is my native
place, as well as my late brother’s; and during that time have
travelled into the Indies, Persia, Arabia, Syria, and Egypt, and
have resided in the finest towns of those countries; and afterwards
crossed over into Africa, where I made a longer stay. At last, as it
is natural for a man, how distant soever it may be, to remember his
native country, relations and acquaintance, I was very desirous to
see mine again, and to embrace my dear brother; and finding I had
strength and courage enough to undertake so long a journey, I
immediately made the necessary preparations for it, and set out. I
will not tell you the length of time it took me, all the obstacles I
met with, and what fatigues I have endured, to come hither; but
nothing ever mortified and afflicted me so much as the hearing of my
brother’s death, for whom I always had a brotherly love and
friendship. I observed his features in the face of my nephew, your
son, and distinguished him from a number of children with whom he
was at play; he can tell you how I received the most melancholy news
that ever reached my ears. But God be praised for all things! it is
a comfort to me to find him again in a son, who has his most
remarkable features.

The African magician, perceiving that Aladdin’s mother began to
weep at the remembrance of her husband, changed the discourse, and
turning towards Aladdin, asked him his name. I am called Aladdin,
said he. Well, Aladdin, replied the magician, what business do you
follow? Are you of any trade?

At this question Aladdin hung down his head, and was not a little
dashed when his mother made answer, Aladdin is an idle fellow; his
father, when alive, strove all he could to teach him his trade, but
could not succeed; and since his death, notwithstanding all I can
say to him, he does nothing but idle away his time in the streets,
as you saw him, without considering he is no longer a child; and if
you do not make him ashamed of it, and make him leave it off, I
despair of his ever coming to any good. He knows that his father
left him no fortune, and sees me endeavour to get bread by spinning
cotton every day; for my part, I am resolved one of these days to
turn him out of doors, and let him provide for himself.

After these words, Aladdin’s mother burst out into tears; and the
magician said, This is not well, nephew; you must think of helping
yourself, and getting your livelihood. There are a great many sorts
of trades, consider if you have not an inclination to some of them;
perhaps you did not like your father’s trade, and would prefer
another; come, do not disguise your sentiments from me; I will
endeavour to help you. But finding that Aladdin returned no answer;
If you have no mind, continued he, to learn any trade, and prove an
honest man, I will take a shop for you, and furnish it with all
sorts of fine stuffs and linens, and set you to trade with them; and
with the money you make with them, lay in fresh goods, and then you
will live after an honourable way. Consult your own inclination, and
tell me freely what you think of it: you shall always find me ready
to keep my word.

This proposal greatly flattered Aladdin, who mortally hated work,
and had sense enough to know that such sort of shops were very much
esteemed and frequented, and the owners honoured and respected. He
told the magician he had a greater inclination to that business than
to any other, and that he should be very much obliged to him all his
life for his kindness. Since this profession is agreeable, to you,
said the African magician, I will carry you along with me to-morrow,
and clothe you as richly and handsomely as the best merchants in the
city, and after that we will think of opening such a shop as I mean.

Aladdin’s mother, who never till then could believe that the
magician was her husband’s brother, no longer doubted it after his
promises of kindness to her son. She thanked him for his good
intentions; and after having exhorted Aladdin to render himself
worthy of his uncle’s favour by his good behaviour, served up
supper, at which they talked of several indifferent matters: and
then the magician, who saw that the night was pretty far advanced,
took his leave of the mother and son, and retired.

He came again the next day as he promised, and took Aladdin along
with him to a great merchant, who sold all sorts of clothes for
different ages and ranks ready made, and a variety of fine stuffs.
He asked to see some that suited Aladdin in size; and after choosing
a suit which he liked best, and rejecting others which he did not
think handsome enough, he bid Aladdin choose those he preferred.
Aladdin, charmed with the liberality of his new uncle, made choice
of one, and the magician immediately bought it, and all things
proper to it, and paid for it without haggling.

When Aladdin found himself so handsomely equipped from top to toe,
he returned his uncle all imaginable thanks; who, on the other hand,
promised never to forsake him, but always to take him along with
him, which he did to the most frequented places in the city, and
particularly where the capital merchants kept their shops. When he
brought him into the street where they sold the richest stuffs and
finest linens, he said to Aladdin, As you are soon to be a merchant
as well as these, it is proper you should frequent these shops, and
be acquainted with them. Then he showed him the largest and finest
mosques, and carried him to the khans or inns where the merchants
and travellers lodged, and afterwards to the sultan’s palace,
where he had free access; and at last brought him to his own khan,
where meeting with some merchants he had got acquainted with since
his arrival, he gave them a treat, to bring them and his pretended
nephew acquainted.

This treat lasted till night, when Aladdin would have taken his
leave of his uncle to go home, but the magician would not let him go
by himself, but conducted him safe to his mother, who, as soon as
she saw him so finely dressed, was transported with joy, and
bestowed a thousand blessings upon the magician for being at so
great an expense upon her child. Generous relation, said she, I know
not how to thank you for your liberality. I know that my son is not
deserving of your favours; and was he ever so grateful, and answered
your good intentions, he would be unworthy of them. For my part,
added she, I thank you with all my soul, and wish you may live long
enough to be a witness of my son’s gratitude, which he cannot
better show than by regulating his conduct by your good advice.

Aladdin, replied the magician, is a good boy, and minds well enough,
and I believe we shall do very well; but I am sorry for one thing,
which is, that I cannot perform to-morrow what I promised, because
it is Friday, and the shops will be shut up, and therefore we cannot
hire or furnish one, but let it alone till Saturday. But I will call
on him to-morrow, and take him to walk in the gardens, where people
of the best fashion generally walk. Perhaps he has never seen these
amusements, he has only hitherto been among children; but now he
must see men. Then the African magician took his leave of the mother
and the son, and retired. Aladdin, who was overjoyed to be so well
clothed, anticipated the pleasure of walking in the gardens which
lay about the town. He had never been out of the town, nor seen the
environs, which were very beautiful and pleasant.

Aladdin rose early the next morning and dressed himself to be ready
against his uncle called on him; and after he had waited some time,
he began to be impatient, and stood watching for him at the door;
but as soon as he perceived him coming, he told his mother, took his
leave of her, and ran to meet him.

The magician caressed Aladdin when he came to him: Come along, my
dear child, said he, and I will show you fine things. Then he led
him out at one of the gates of the city, to some large fine houses,
or rather palaces, to each of which belonged beautiful gardens, into
which any body might go. At every house he came to, he asked Aladdin
if he did not think it fine; and Aladdin was ready to answer when
any one presented itself, crying out, Here is a finer house, uncle,
than any we have seen yet. By this artifice, the cunning magician
got Aladdin a pretty way in the country; and as he had a mind to
carry him farther, to execute his design, he took an opportunity to
sit down in one of the gardens by a fountain of clear water, which
discharged itself by a lion’s mouth of bronze into a great basin,
pretending to be tired, the better to rest Aladdin: Come, nephew,
said he, you must be weary as well as me; let us rest ourselves, and
we shall be better able to walk.

After they had sat down, the magician pulled from his girdle a
handkerchief with cakes and fruit, which he had provided on purpose,
and laid them on the edge of the basin. He broke a cake in two, gave
one half to Aladdin, and ate the other himself: and in regard to the
fruit, he left him at liberty to take which sort he liked best.
--During this short repast, he exhorted his nephew to leave off
keeping company with children, and seek that of wise and prudent
men, to improve by their conversation; for, said he, you will soon
be at man’s estate, and you cannot too early begin to imitate
their conversation. When they had eaten as much as they liked, they
got up, and pursued their walk through the gardens, which were
separated from one another only by small ditches, which only marked
out the limits without interrupting the communication; so great was
the confidence the inhabitants reposed in each other. By this means,
the African magician drew Aladdin insensibly beyond the gardens, and
crossed the country till they almost came to the mountains.

Aladdin, who had never been so far in his life before, began to find
himself much tired with so long a walk, and said to the magician,
where are we going, uncle? we have left the gardens a great way
behind us, and I see nothing but mountains; if we go much farther, I
do not know whether I shall be able to reach the town again. Never
fear, nephew, said the false uncle; I will show you another garden,
which surpasses all we have yet seen; it is not far off! it is but a
little step; and when we come there, you will say that you would
have been sorry to have been so nigh it, and not seen it. Aladdin
was soon persuaded; and the magician, to make the way seem shorter
and less fatiguing, told him a great many stories.

At last they came between two mountains of moderate height, and
equal size, divided by a narrow valley, which was the place where
the magician intended to bring Aladdin, to put into execution a
design that had brought him from Africa to China. We will go no
farther now, said he to Aladdin; I will show you here some very
extraordinary things, and what nobody ever saw before; which, when
you have seen, you will thank me for: but while I strike fire, do
you gather up all the loose sticks you can see, to kindle a fire
with.

Aladdin found there so many dried sticks, that before the magician
had lighted a match, he had gathered up a great heap. The magician
presently set them on fire, and when they were all in a blaze, the
magician threw in some incense he had about him, which raised a
great cloud of smoke, which he dispersed on each side, by
pronouncing several magical words which Aladdin did not understand.

At the same time the earth trembled a little, and opened just before
the magician and Aladdin, and discovered a stone about half a yard
square, laid horizontally, with a brass ring fixed into the middle
of it, to raise it up. Aladdin was so frightened at what he saw,
that he would have run away: but as he was to be serviceable to the
magician, he caught hold of him, scolded him, and gave him such a
box on the ear, that he knocked him down, and had like to have beat
his teeth down his throat. Poor Aladdin got up again trembling, and
with tears in his eyes, said to the magician, What have I done,
uncle, to be treated after this severe manner? I have my reasons for
it, replied the magician: I am your uncle, and supply the place of
your father, and you ought to make no reply. But, child, added he,
softening, do not be afraid of any thing; for I shall not ask any
thing of you, but that you obey me punctually, if you would reap the
advantages which I intended you should. These fair promises calmed
Aladdin’s fears and resentment; and when the magician saw that he
was come to himself, he said to him, You see what I have done by
virtue of my incense, and the words I pronounced. Know then, that
under this stone there is hid a treasure, which is destined to be
yours, and which will make you richer than the greatest monarch in
the world: this is so true, that no other person but yourself is
permitted to touch this stone, and to pull it up and go in; for I am
forbid even to touch it, or set foot in this treasure when it is
opened; so you must without fail punctually execute what I tell you,
for it is a matter of great consequence both to you and me.

Aladdin, amazed at all he saw and heard the magician say of the
treasure, which was to make him happy for ever, forgot what was
past, and rising up, said to the magician, Well, uncle, what is to
be done? command me, I am ready to obey you. I am overjoyed, child,
said the African magician, embracing him, to see you take the
resolution; come, take hold of the ring, and lift up that stone.
Indeed, uncle, replied Aladdin, I am not strong enough to lift it;
you must help me. You have no occasion for my assistance, answered
the magician, if I help you, we shall be able to do nothing; you
must lift it up yourself: take hold of the ring, only pronounce the
names of your father and grandfather, then lift it up, and you will
find it will come easily. Aladdin did as the magician bade him, and
raised the stone with a great deal of ease, and laid it on one side.

When the stone was pulled up there appeared a cavity of about three
or four feet deep, with a little door, and steps to go down lower.
Observe, my son, said the African magician, what I am going to say
to you: go down into that cave, and when you are at the bottom of
those steps, you will find a door open, which will lead you into a
large vaulted place, divided into three great halls, in each of
which you will see four large brass vessels placed on each side,
full of gold and silver, but take care you do not meddle with them.
Before you go into the first hall, be sure to tuck up your gown, and
wrap it well about you, and then go through the second into the
third without stopping. Above all things, have a care that you do
not touch the walls, so much as with your clothes; for if you do,
you will die instantly. At the end of the third hall, you will find
a door which leads into a garden planted with fine trees loaded with
fruit; walk directly across the garden by a path which will lead you
to five steps that will bring you upon a terrace, where you will see
a niche before you, and in that niche a lighted lamp. Take the lamp
down, and put it out; when you have thrown away the wick, and poured
out the liquor, put it in your breast, and bring it to me. Do not be
afraid that the liquor will spoil your clothes, for it is not oil,
and the lamp will be dry as soon as it is thrown out. If you have a
mind to any of the fruit of the garden, you may gather as much as
you please.

After these words, the magician drew a ring off his finger, and put
it upon one of Aladdin’s, telling him that it was a preservative
against all evil, while he observed what he had prescribed to him.
After this instruction he said, Go down boldly, child, and we shall
both be rich all our lives.

Aladdin jumped into the cave, went down the steps, and found the
three halls, just as the African magician had described them. He
went through them with all the precaution the fear of death could
inspire, if he failed to observe all that he was told very
carefully; crossed the garden without stopping, took down the lamp
from the niche, threw out the wick and the liquor, and, as the
magician told him, put it in his bosom. But as he came down from the
terrace, seeing it was perfectly dry, he stopped in the garden to
observe the fruit, which he only had a glimpse of in crossing it.
All the trees were loaded with extraordinary fruit, of different
colours on each tree: some bore fruit entirely white, and some clear
and transparent as crystal; some pale red, and others deeper; some
green, blue, and purple, and others yellow; in short, there was
fruit of all colours. The white were pearls; the clear and
transparent, diamonds; the deep red, rubies; the paler, ballas
rubies; [96] the green, emeralds; the blue, turquoises; the purple,
amethysts; and those that were of yellow cast, sapphires; and so of
the rest. All these fruits were so large and beautiful, that nothing
was ever seen like them. Aladdin was altogether ignorant of their
value, and would have preferred figs and grapes, or any other
fruits, before them; and though he took them only for coloured glass
of little value, yet he was so pleased with the variety of the
colours, and the beauty and extraordinary size of the fruit, that he
had a mind to gather some of every sort; and accordingly filled his
two pockets, and the two new purses his uncle had bought for him
with the clothes which he gave him; and as he could not put them in
his pockets, he fastened them to his girdle. Some he wrapped up in
the skirts of his gown, which was of silk, large and wrapping, and
crammed his breast as full as it could hold.

Aladdin, having thus loaded himself with riches he knew not the
value of, returned through the three halls with the same precaution,
and made all the haste he could, that he might not make his uncle
wait, and soon arrived at the mouth of the cave, where the African
magician expected him with the utmost impatience. As soon as Aladdin
saw him, he cried out, Pray, uncle, lend me your hand to help me
out. Give me the lamp first, replied the magician; it will be
troublesome to you. Indeed, uncle, answered Aladdin, I cannot now;
it is not troublesome to me; but I will as soon as I am up. The
African magician was so obstinate, that he would have the lamp
before he would help him up; and Aladdin, who had incumbered himself
so much with his fruit, that he could not well get at it, refused to
give him it till he was out of the cave. The African magician,
provoked at this obstinate refusal of the lad, flew into a terrible
passion, and threw a little of his incense into the fire, which he
had taken care to keep in, and no sooner pronounced two magical
words, but the stone which had closed the mouth of the cave, moved
into its place, with the earth over it, in the same manner as it lay
at the arrival of the magician and Aladdin.

This action of the African magician’s plainly showed him to be
neither Aladdin’s uncle, nor Mustapha, the tailor’s brother, but
a true African, a native of that part of the world. For as Africa is
a country whose inhabitants delight most in magic of any other in
the whole world, he had applied himself to it from his youth; and
after about forty years’ experience in enchantments, works of
geomancy, fumigations, and reading of magic books, he had found out
that there was in the world a wonderful lamp, the possession of
which would render him more powerful than any monarch in the world,
if he could obtain it; and by a late operation of geomancy, he found
out that this lamp lay concealed in a subterraneous place in the
midst of China, in the situation, with all the circumstances,
already described. Fully persuaded of the truth of this discovery,
he set out from the farthest part of Africa, and, after a long and
fatiguing journey, came to the town nearest to this treasure. But
though he had a certain knowledge of the place where the lamp was,
he was not permitted to take it himself, nor to enter the
subterraneous place where it was, but must receive it from the hands
of another person. For this reason he addressed himself to Aladdin,
whom he looked upon as a young lad of no consequence, and fit to
serve his purpose; resolving, as soon as he got the lamp into his
hands, to sacrifice poor Aladdin to his avarice and wickedness, by
making the fumigation mentioned before, and saying those two magical
words, the effect of which was to remove the stone into its place
again, that he might have no witness of the transaction.

The blow he gave Aladdin, and the authority he assumed over him, was
only to use him to fear him, and to make him obey him the more
readily, and give him the lamp as soon as he asked for it. But his
too great precipitation in executing his wicked intention on poor
Aladdin, and his fear lest somebody should come that way during
their dispute, and discover what he wished to keep secret, produced
an effect quite contrary to what he proposed to himself.

When the African magician saw that all his great hopes were
frustrated forever, he returned that same day for Africa; but went
quite round the town, and at some distance from it, for fear lest
some persons who had seen him walk out with the boy, seeing him come
back without him, should entertain any jealousy of him, and stop him.

According to all appearances, there was no prospect of Aladdin being
any more heard of. But the magician, when he contrived his death,
had forgotten the ring he put on his finger, which preserved him,
though he knew not its virtue; and it is amazing that the loss of
that, together with the lamp, did not drive the magician to despair;
but magicians are so much used to misfortunes, and events contrary
to their wishes, that they do not lay them to heart, but still feed
themselves all their lives with unsubstantial notions and chimeras.

As for Aladdin, who never suspected this bad usage from his
pretended uncle, after all his caresses, and what he had done for
him, his surprise is more easily to be imagined than expressed by
words. When he found himself buried alive, he cried, and called out
to his uncle to tell him he was ready to give him the lamp; but all
in vain, since his cries could not be heard by him, and he remained
in this dark abode. At last, when he had quite tired himself with
crying, he went to the bottom of the steps, with a design to get
into the garden, where it was light; but the door, which was opened
before by enchantment, was now shut by the same means. Then he
redoubled his cries and tears, and sat down on the steps, without
any hopes of ever seeing the light again, and in a melancholy
certainty of passing from the present darkness into that of a speedy
death.

Aladdin remained in this state two days, without eating or drinking,
and on the third day looked upon death as inevitable. Clasping his
hands with an entire resignation to the will of God, he said, There
is no strength or power but in the great and high God. In this
action of joining his hands, he rubbed the ring which the magician
put on his finger, and of which he knew not yet the virtue, and
immediately a genie of an enormous size and frightful look rose out
of the earth, his head reaching the vault, and said to him, What
wouldst thou have with me? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave, and
the slave of all who have the ring on thy finger; I, and the other
slaves of that ring.

At another time, Aladdin, who had not been used to such visions,
would have been so frightened, that he would not have been able to
speak at the sight of so extraordinary a figure; but the danger he
was in made him answer without hesitation, Whoever thou art, deliver
me from this place, if thou art able. He had no sooner made an end
of these words, but the earth opened, and he found himself on the
very spot the magician first brought him to.

It was some time before Aladdin’s eyes could bear the light, after
having been so long in total darkness; but after he had endeavoured
by degrees to support it, and began to look about him, he was very
much surprised not to find the earth open, and could not comprehend
how he had got so soon out of its bowels. There was nothing to be
seen but the place where the fire had been, by which he could nearly
judge whereabouts the cave was. Then turning himself about towards
the town, he perceived it in the midst of the gardens that
surrounded it, and knew the way back by which the magician had
brought him to it; then, returning God thanks to see himself once
more in the world, where he never more expected to be, he made the
best of his way home. When he got within his mother’s door, the
joy to see her, and his faintness for want of sustenance for three
days, made him faint, and he remained for a long time as dead. His
mother, who had given him over for lost or dead, seeing him in this
condition, omitted nothing to bring him to himself again. As soon as
he recovered, the first words he spake were, Pray, mother, give me
something to eat, for I have not put a morsel of any thing into my
mouth these three days. His mother brought what she had, and set it
before him. My son, said she, be not too eager, for it is dangerous;
eat but a little at a time, and take care of yourself. Besides, I
would not have you talk; you will have time enough to tell me what
has happened to you when you are recovered. It is a great comfort to
me to see you again, after the affliction I have been in since
Friday, and the pains I have taken to learn what had become of you,
ever since I found it was night, and you were not returned.

Aladdin took his mother’s advice, and eat and drank moderately.
When he had done, Mother, said he to her, I cannot help complaining
of you, for abandoning me so easily to the discretion of a man who
had a design to kill me, and who at this very moment thinks my death
certain. You believed he was my uncle, as well as I; and what other
thoughts could we entertain of a man who was so kind to me, and made
such advantageous proffers? But I must tell you, mother, he is a
rogue and a cheat, and only did what he did, and made me all those
promises, to accomplish my death; but for what reason neither you
nor I can guess. For my part, I can assure you I never gave him any
cause to deserve the least ill treatment from him. You shall judge
of it yourself, when you have heard all that passed from the time I
left you, till he came to the execution of his wicked design.

Then Aladdin began to tell his mother all that happened to him on
Friday, when the magician took him to see the palaces and gardens
about that town, and what fell out in the way, till they came to the
place between the two mountains, where the great prodigy was to be
performed; how, with incense which the magician threw into the fire,
and some magical words which he pronounced, the earth opened, and
discovered a cave, which led to an inestimable treasure. He forgot
not the blow the magician gave him, and in what manner he softened
again, and engaged him by great promises, and putting a ring on his
finger, to go down into the cave. He did not omit the least
circumstance of what he saw in crossing the three halls and the
garden, and his taking the wonderful lamp, which he pulled out of
his bosom and showed to his mother, as well as the transparent fruit
of different colours, which he had gathered in the garden as he
returned, two purses full of which he gave to his mother. But,
though these fruits were precious stones, brilliant as the sun, and
the reflection of a lamp which then lighted the room might have led
them to think they were of great value, she was as ignorant of their
worth as her son, and cared nothing for them. She had been bred in a
middling rank of life, and her husband’s poverty prevented her
being possessed of such things, nor had she, or her relations, or
neighbours, ever seen them, so that we must not wonder that she
looked on them as things of no value, and only pleasing to the eye
by the variety of their colours.

Aladdin put them behind one of the cushions of the sofa he sat upon,
and continued his story, telling his mother, that when he returned
and presented himself at the mouth of the cave, upon his refusal to
give the magician the lamp till he had got out, the stone, by his
throwing some incense into the fire, and using two or three magical
words, stopped it up, and the earth closed again. He could not help
bursting into tears at the representation of the miserable condition
he was in, to find himself buried alive in a dismal cave, till by
the touching of his ring, the virtue of which he was then an entire
stranger to, he, properly speaking, came to life again. When he had
made an end of his story, he said to his mother, I need say no more;
you know the rest. This is my adventure, and the danger I have been
exposed to since you saw me.

Aladdin’s mother heard with so much patience as not to interrupt
him, this surprising and wonderful relation, notwithstanding it
could be no small affliction to a mother, who loved her son
tenderly; but yet in the most moving part, which discovered the
perfidy of the African magician, she could not help showing, by
marks of the greatest indignation, how much she detested him; and
when Aladdin had finished his story, she broke out into a thousand
reproaches against that vile impostor. She called him perfidious
traitor, barbarian, assassin, deceiver, magician, and an enemy and
destroyer of mankind. Without doubt, child, added she, he is a
magician, and they are plagues to the world, and by their
enchantments and sorceries have commerce with the devil. Bless God
for preserving you from his wicked designs; for your death would
have been inevitable, if you had not called upon him and implored
his assistance.

She said a great deal more against the magician’s treachery; but
finding while she talked, her son Aladdin, who had not slept for
three days and nights, began to nod, she put him to bed, and soon
after went to bed herself.

Aladdin, who had not had one wink of sleep while he was in the
subterraneous abode, slept very heartily all that night, and never
waked till the next morning; when the first thing that he said to
his mother was, he wanted something to eat, and that she could not
do him a greater pleasure than to give him his breakfast. Alas!
child said she, I have not a bit of bread to give you, you ate up
all the provisions I had in the house yesterday; but have a little
patience, and it shall not be long before I will bring you some; I
have a little cotton which I have spun; I will go and sell it, and
buy bread, and something for our dinner. Mother, replied Aladdin,
keep your cotton against another time, and give me the lamp I
brought home yesterday; I will go and sell it, and the money I shall
get for it will serve both for breakfast and dinner, and perhaps
supper too.

Aladdin’s mother took the lamp, and said to her son, Here it is,
but it is very dirty: if it was a little cleaner, I believe it would
bring something more. She took a little fine sand and water to clean
it; but had no sooner begun to rub it, but in an instant a hideous
genie of gigantic size appeared before her, and said to her in a
voice like thunder, What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee
as thy slave, and the slave of all those who have that lamp in their
hands, I and the other slaves of the lamp.

[Illustration: THE GENIUS OF THE LAMP APPEARING TO ALADDIN AND HIS
MOTHER.]

Aladdin’s mother was not able to speak at the sight of this
frightful genie, but fainted away; when Aladdin, who had once before
seen such another genie in the cavern, without losing time or
reflection, snatched the lamp out of his mother’s hands, and said
to the genie boldly, I am hungry; bring me something to eat. The
genii disappeared immediately, and in an instant returned with a
large silver basin on his head, and twelve covered plates of the
same metal, which contained some excellent meats; six large white
loaves on two other plates, and two bottles of wine, and two silver
cups in each hand. All these things he placed upon a table and
disappeared; and all this was done before Aladdin’s mother came
out of her swoon.

Aladdin went presently and fetched some water, and threw it in her
face, to recover her: whether that or the smell of the meats the
genie procured, brought her to life again, it was not long before
she came to herself. Mother, said Aladdin, do not mind this; it is
nothing at all; get up, and come and eat; here is what will put you
in heart, and at the same time satisfy my extreme hunger: do not let
such fine meat be cold, but fall to.

His mother was very much surprised to see the great basin, twelve
plates, six loaves and the two bottles and cups, and to smell the
delicious odour which exhaled from the plates. Child, said she to
Aladdin, to whom are we obliged for this great plenty and
liberality? Has the sultan been made acquainted with our poverty,
and had compassion on us? It is no matter, mother, said Aladdin; let
us sit down and eat; for you have almost as much need of a good
breakfast as myself; when we have done, I will tell you. Accordingly
both mother and son sat down, and ate with the better stomach, as
the table was so well furnished. But at the time Aladdin’s mother
could not forbear looking at and admiring the basin and plates,
though she could not well tell whether they were silver or any other
metal, so little accustomed was she and her son to see such, and the
novelty more than the value attracted their attention.

In short, the mother and son sat at breakfast till it was
dinner-time, and then they thought it would be best to put the two
meals together; yet after this, they found they should have enough
left for supper, and two meals for the next day.

When Aladdin’s mother had taken away, and set by what was left,
she went and sat down by her son on the sofa. Aladdin, said she, I
expect now that you should satisfy my impatience, and tell me
exactly what passed between the genie and you while I was in a
swoon, which he presently complied with.

She was in as great amazement at what her son told her, as at the
appearance of the genie, and said to him, But son, what have we to
do with genies? I never in my life heard that any of my acquaintance
had ever seen one. How came that vile genie to address himself to
me, and not to you, to whom he had appeared before in the cave?
Mother, answered Aladdin, the genie you saw is not the same who
appeared to me, though he resembles him in size; no, they had quite
different persons and habits; they belong to different masters. If
you remember, he that I first saw called himself the slave of the
ring on my finger; and this you saw called himself the slave of the
lamp you had in your hand; but I believe you did not hear him, for I
think you fainted away as soon as he began to speak.

What! cried the mother, was your lamp then the occasion of that
cursed genie’s addressing himself rather to me than to you? Ah! my
son, take it out of my sight, and put it where you please. I will
never touch it. I had rather you would sell it than run the hazard
of being frightened to death again by touching it; and if you would
take my advice, you would part also with the ring, and not have any
thing to do with genies, who, as our prophet has told us, are only
devils.

With your leave, mother, replied Aladdin, I shall now take care how
I sell a lamp, as I was going to do, which may be so serviceable
both to you and me. Have not you been an eye-witness of what it hath
procured us, and it shall still continue to furnish us with
subsistence and maintenance. You may suppose, as I do, that my false
and wicked uncle would not have taken so much pains, and undertaken
so long and tedious a journey, if it had not been to get into his
possession this wonderful lamp, which he preferred before all the
gold and silver which he knew was in the halls, and which I have
seen with my own eyes. He knew too well the merit and worth of this
lamp, not to prefer it to so great a treasure; and since chance hath
discovered the virtue of it to us, let us make a profitable use of
it, without making any great stir, and drawing the envy and jealousy
of our neighbours upon us. However, since the genies fright you so
much, I will take it out of your sight, and put it where I may find
it when I want it. As for the ring, I cannot resolve to part with
that neither; for, without that, you had never seen me again; and
though I am alive now, perhaps, if it was gone, I might not be so
some moments hence; therefore I hope you will give me leave to keep
that, and to wear it always on my finger. Who knows what dangers you
and I may be exposed to, which neither of us can foresee, and which
it may deliver us from? As Aladdin’s arguments were just, and had
a great deal of weight in them, his mother had nothing to say
against them; but only replied, that he might do what he pleased,
but for her part, she would have nothing to do with genies, but
would wash her hands of them, and never say any thing mere about
them.

By the next night they had eaten all the provisions the genie had
brought; and the next day Aladdin, who could not bear the thoughts
of hunger, took one of the silver plates under his coat, and went
out early to sell it, and addressing himself to a Jew whom he met in
the streets, took him aside, and pulling out the plate, asked him if
he would buy it. The cunning Jew took the plate and examined it, and
no sooner found that it was good silver, but he asked Aladdin how
much he valued it at. Aladdin, who knew not the value of it, and
never had been used to such traffic, told him he would trust to his
judgment and honour. The Jew was somewhat confounded at this plain
dealing; and doubting whether Aladdin understood the material, or
the full value of what he offered to sell him, he took a piece of
gold out of his purse and gave it him, though it was but the
sixtieth part of the worth of the plate. Aladdin took the money very
eagerly, and, as soon as he got it in his pocket, retired with so
much haste, that the Jew, not content with the exorbitancy of his
profit, was vexed he had not penetrated into Aladdin’s ignorance,
and was going to run after him, to endeavour to get some change out
of the piece of gold; but Aladdin ran so fast, and had got so far,
that it would have been impossible for him to overtake him.

Before Aladdin went home to his mother, he called at a baker’s,
bought a loaf, changed his money, and went home, and gave the rest
to his mother, who went and bought provisions enough to last them
some time. After this manner they lived, till Aladdin had sold the
twelve plates, one at a time, to the Jew, for the same money; who,
after the first time, durst not offer him less, for fear of losing
so good a chap. When he had sold the last plate, he had recourse to
the basin, which weighed ten times as much as the plate, and would
have carried it to his old purchaser, but that it was too large and
cumbersome; therefore he was obliged to bring him home with him to
his mother’s, where, after the Jew had examined the weight of the
basin, he laid down ten pieces of gold, with which Aladdin was very
well satisfied.

They lived on these ten pieces in a frugal manner a pretty while;
and Aladdin, who had been used to an idle life, left off playing
with young lads of his own age ever since his adventure with the
African magician. He spent his time in walking about, and talking
with people with whom he had got acquainted. Sometimes he would stop
at the most capital merchants’ shops, where people of distinction
met, and listen to their discourse, by which he gained some little
knowledge of the world.

When all the money was spent, Aladdin had recourse again to the
lamp. He took it in his hand, looked for the same place where his
mother had rubbed it with the sand, and rubbed it also, and the
genie immediately appeared, and said, What wouldst thou have? I am
ready to obey thee as thy slave, and the slave of all those who have
that lamp in their hands; I, and the other slaves of the lamp. I am
hungry, said Aladdin; bring me something to eat. The genie
disappeared, and presently returned with a basin, and the same
number of covered plates, &c. and set them down on a table, and
vanished again.

Aladdin’s mother, knowing what her son was going to do, went out
at that time about some business, on purpose to avoid being in the
way when the genie came; and when she returned, which was in a short
time, and found the table and sideboard so furnished a second time,
was almost as much surprised as before, at the prodigious effect of
the lamp. However, she sat down with her son, and when they had
eaten as much as they had a mind to, she set enough by to last them
two or three days.

As soon as Aladdin found that their provisions and money were spent,
he took one of these plates, and went to look for his Jew chapman
again; but passing by a goldsmith’s shop, who had the character of
a very fair and honest man, the goldsmith perceiving him, called to
him, and said, My lad, I have often observed you go by, loaded as
you are at present, and talk with such a Jew, and then come back
again empty-handed. I imagine that you carry something that you sell
to him; but perhaps you do not know what a rogue he is, and that he
is the greatest rogue among all the Jews, and is so well known, that
nobody will have any thing to do with him. What I tell you is for
your own good. If you will show me what you now carry, and it is to
be sold, I will give you the full worth of it; or I will direct you
to other merchants who will not cheat you.

The hopes of getting more money for his plate induced Aladdin to
pull it from under his coat, and show it to the goldsmith. The old
man, who at first sight saw that it was made of the finest silver,
asked him if he had sold any such as that to the Jew, and Aladdin
told him plainly that he had sold him twelve such, for a piece of
gold each. What a villain! cried the goldsmith; but, added he, my
son, what is past cannot be recalled. By showing you the value of
this plate, which is of the finest silver we use in our shops, I
will let you see how much the Jew has cheated you.

The goldsmith took a pair of scales, weighed the plate, and after he
had told Aladdin how much an ounce of fine silver contained and was
worth, he demonstrated to him that his plate was worth by weight
sixty pieces of gold, which he paid him down immediately. If you
dispute my honesty, said he, you may go to any other of our trade,
and if he gives you any more, I will be bound to forfeit twice as
much; for we gain only the fashion of the plate that we buy, and
that the fairest dealing Jews do not.

Aladdin thanked him for his good advice, so greatly to his
advantage, and never after went to any other person, but sold him
all his plates and the basin, and had as much for them as the weight
came to.

Though Aladdin and his mother had an inexhaustible treasure of money
in their lamp, and might have whatever they had a mind to whenever
they pleased, yet they lived with the same frugality as before,
except that Aladdin went more neat: as for his mother, she wore no
clothes but what she earned by her spinning cotton. After their
manner of living, we may easily suppose, that the money Aladdin had
sold the plates and basin for was sufficient to maintain them some
time. They went on for many years by the help of the produce
Aladdin, from time to time, made of his lamp.

During this time, Aladdin frequented the shops of the principal
merchants, where they sold cloth of gold and silver, and linens,
silk stuffs, and jewellery, and oftentimes joining in their
conversation, acquired a complete knowledge of the world, and
assumed its manners. By his acquaintance among the jewellers, he
came to know that the fine fruit which he had gathered when he took
the lamp, were not coloured glass, but stones of extraordinary
value. For as he had seen all sorts of jewels bought and sold in
their shops, but none that were so beautiful or so large as his, he
found, that instead of coloured glass, he possessed an inestimable
treasure; but had the prudence not to say any thing of it to any
one, not even to his mother.

One day as Aladdin was walking about the town, he heard an order of
the sultan’s published, for all people to shut up their shops and
houses, and keep within doors, while the princess Badroulboudour,
[97] the sultan’s daughter, went to the baths and back again.

This public order inspired Aladdin with a great curiosity to see the
princess’s face, which he could not do without getting into the
house of some acquaintance, and through a window; but this did not
satisfy him, when he considered that the princess, when she went to
the baths, had a veil on; but to gratify his curiosity, he presently
thought of a scheme which succeeded; that was, to place himself
behind the door of the bath, which was so situated that he could not
fail of seeing her face.

Aladdin had not waited long before the princess came, and he could
see her plainly through a chink of the door without being seen. She
was attended with a great crowd of ladies, slaves, and eunuchs, who
walked on each side and behind her. When she came within three or
four paces from the door of the baths, she took off her veil, and
gave Aladdin an opportunity of a full look at her.

Till then Aladdin, who had never seen any woman’s face but his
mother’s, who was old, and never could boast of any such features,
thought that all women were like her, and could hear people talk of
the most surprising beauties without being the least moved; for
whatever words are made use of to set off the merit of a beauty,
they can never make the same impression as the beauty herself.

But as soon as Aladdin had seen the princess Badroulboudour, his
sentiments were very much changed, and his heart could not withstand
all those inclinations so charming an object inspires. The princess
was the most beautiful brunette in the world; her eyes were large,
lively, and sparkling; her looks sweet and modest; her nose was of a
just proportion and without a fault; her mouth small, her lips of a
vermilion red, and charmingly agreeable symmetry; in a word, all the
features of her face were perfectly regular. It is not therefore
surprising that Aladdin, who had never seen, and was a stranger to
so many charms, was dazzled, and his senses quite ravished with such
an assemblage. With all these perfections, the princess had so
delicate a shape, so majestic an air, that the sight of her was
sufficient to inspire respect.

After the princess had passed by Aladdin, and entered the baths, he
remained some time astonished, and in a kind of ecstacy, retracing
and imprinting the idea of so charming an object deeply in his mind.
But at last considering that the princess was gone past him, and
that when she returned from the bath her back would be towards him,
and then veiled, he resolved to quit his post and go home. But when
he came there, he could not conceal his uneasiness so well but that
his mother perceived it, and was very much surprised to see him so
much more thoughtful and melancholy than usual; and asked him what
had happened to him to make him so, or if he was ill. Aladdin
returned her no answer, but sat carelessly down on the sofa, and
remained in the same condition, full of the image of the charming
Badroulboudour. His mother, who was dressing supper, pressed him no
more. When it was ready, she set it on the table before him; but
perceiving that he gave no attention to it, she bid him eat, and had
much ado to persuade him to change his place; and when he did, he
ate much less than usual, and all the time cast down his eyes, and
observed so profound a silence, that she could not possibly get the
least word out of him in answer to all the questions she put, to
find the reason of so extraordinary an alteration.

After supper, she asked him again, why he was so melancholy, but
could get no information, and he determined to go to bed rather than
give her the least satisfaction. Without examining how Aladdin,
passed the night, his mind full as it was with the beautiful charms
of the princess Badroulboudour, I shall only observe, that as he sat
next day on the sofa, over against his mother, as she was spinning
cotton, he spoke to her in these words: I perceive, mother, that my
silence yesterday has very much troubled you; I was not, nor am I
sick, as I fancy you believed; but I can tell you, that what I felt
then, and now endure, is worse than any disease. I cannot tell well
what ails me; but doubt not what I am going to tell you will inform
you.

It was not known in this quarter of the town, and therefore you
could know nothing of it, that the princess Badroulboudour, the
sultan’s daughter, was to go to the baths after dinner. I heard
this as I walked about the town, and an order was issued, that, to
pay all the respect that was due to that princess, all the shops
should be shut up in her way thither, and every body keep within
doors, to leave the streets free for her and her attendants. As I
was not then far from the bath, I had a great curiosity to see the
princess’s face; and as it occurred to me that the princess, when
she came nigh the door of the bath, would pull her veil off, I
resolved to get behind that door. You know the situation of the
door, and may imagine that I must have a full view of her, if it
happened as I expected. The princess threw off her veil, and I had
the happiness of seeing her lovely face with the greatest
satisfaction imaginable. This, mother, was the cause of my
melancholy and silence yesterday; I love the princess with so much
violence, that I cannot express it; and as my lively passion
increases every moment, I cannot live without the possession of the
amiable princess Badroulboudour, and am resolved to ask her in
marriage of the sultan her father.

Aladdin’s mother listened with attention to what her son told her:
but when he talked of asking the princess Badroulboudour in marriage
of the sultan, she could not help bursting out into a loud laugh.
Aladdin would have gone on with his discourse, but she interrupted
him: Alas! child, said she, what are you thinking of? you must be
mad to talk so.

I assure you, mother, replied Aladdin, that I am not mad, but in my
right senses: I foresaw that you would reproach me with this folly
and extravagance; but I must tell you once more, that I am resolved
to demand the princess Badroulboudour of the sultan in marriage, and
your remonstrances shall not prevent me.

Indeed, son, replied the mother seriously, I cannot help telling
you, that you have quite forgot yourself; and if you would put this
resolution of yours in execution, I do not see who you can get to
venture to propose it for you. You yourself, replied he immediately.
I go to the sultan! answered the mother, amazed and surprised. I
shall take care how I engage in such an affair. Why, who are you,
son, continued she, that you can have the assurance to think of your
sultan’s daughter? Have you forgot that your father was one of the
poorest tailors in the capital, and that I am of no better
extraction? and do not you know, that sultans never marry their
daughters but to princes, sons of sultans like themselves?

Mother, answered Aladdin, I have already told you that I foresaw all
that you have said, or can say: and tell you again, that neither
your discourse nor your remonstrances, shall make me change my mind.
I have told you that you must ask the princess Badroulboudour in
marriage for me: it is a favour I desire of you, with all the
respect I owe you; and I beg of you not to refuse me, unless you
would rather see me in my grave, than by so doing give me new life.

The good old woman was very much embarrassed, when she found Aladdin
so obstinately persisting in so foolish a design. My son, said she
again, I am your mother, who brought you into the world, and there
is nothing that is reasonable but I would readily do for you. If I
was to go and treat about your marriage with some neighbour’s
daughter, whose circumstances were equal with yours, I would do it
with all my heart; and then they would expect you should have some
little estate or fortune, or be of some trade. When such poor folks
as we are have a mind to marry, the first thing they ought to think
of, is how to live. But without reflecting on the meanness of your
birth, and the little merit and fortune you have to recommend you,
you aim at the highest pitch of fortune; and your pretensions are no
less than to demand in marriage the daughter of your sovereign, who
with one single word, can crush you to pieces. I say nothing of what
respects yourself. I leave you to reflect on what you have to do, if
you have ever so little thought. I come now to consider what
concerns myself. How could so extraordinary a thought come into your
head, as that I should go to the sultan, and make a proposal to him,
to give his daughter in marriage to you? Suppose I had, not to say
the boldness, but the impudence to present myself before the sultan,
and make so extravagant a request, to whom should I address myself
to be introduced to his majesty? Do you not think the first person I
should speak to would take me for a mad woman, and chastise me as I
should deserve? Suppose there is no difficulty in presenting myself
to an audience of the sultan, as I know there is none to those who
go to ask justice, which he distributes equally among his subjects;
I know too that to those who ask some favour, he grants it with
pleasure when he sees it is deserved, and the persons are worthy of
it. But is that your case? and do you think you have deserved the
favour you would have me ask for you? are you worthy of it? What
have you done to deserve such a favour? What have you done either
for your prince or country? How have you distinguished yourself? If
you have done nothing to merit so great a favour, nor are worthy of
it, with what face shall I ask it! How can I open my mouth to make
the proposal to the sultan? His majestic presence and the lustre of
his court would presently silence me, who used to tremble before my
late husband your father, when I asked him for any thing. Here is
another reason, my son, which you do not think of, which is, nobody
ever goes to ask a favour of the sultan without a present; for by a
present, they have this advantage, that if for some particular
reasons the favour is denied, they are sure to be heard. But what
presents have you to make? And if you had any that was worthy of the
least attention of so great a monarch, what proportion could it bear
to the favour you would ask? Therefore, reflect well on what you are
about, and consider, that you aspire to a thing which is impossible
for you to obtain.

Aladdin heard very calmly all that his mother could say to endeavour
to dissuade him from his design, and after he had weighed her
representation in all points, made answer: I own, mother, it is
great rashness in me to presume to carry my pretensions so far; and
a great want of consideration, to ask you with so much heat and
precipitancy to go and make the proposal of my marriage to the
sultan, without first taking proper measures to procure a favourable
reception, and therefore beg your pardon. But be not surprised, that
through the violence of my passion I did not at first sight see
every thing that was necessary to be done, to procure me that
happiness I seek after. I love the princess Badroulboudour beyond
all you can imagine; or rather I adore her, and shall always
persevere in my design, of marrying her; which is a thing I have
determined and resolved on. I am obliged to you for the hint you
have given me, and look upon it as the first step I ought to take to
procure me the happy success I promise myself.

You say, it is not customary to go to the sultan without a present,
and that I have nothing worthy of his acceptance. As to what you say
about the present, I agree with you, and own that I never thought of
it; but as to what you say, that I have nothing fit to present him
with, do not you think, mother, that what I brought home with me
that day on which I was delivered from an inevitable death, may be
an agreeable present? I mean those things you and I both took for
coloured glasses; but now I am undeceived, and can tell you that
they are jewels of an inestimable value, and fit for the greatest
monarchs. I know the worth of them by frequenting the jewellers’
shops; and you may take my word for it, all the jewels that I saw in
the most capital jewellers’ shops were not to be compared to those
we have, either for size or beauty, and yet they value them at an
excessive price. In short, neither you nor I know the value of ours;
but be it as it will, by the little experience I have, I am
persuaded that they will be received very favourably by the sultan:
you have a large porcelain dish fit to hold them; fetch it, and let
us see how they will look, when we have ranged them according to
their different colours.

Aladdin’s mother fetched the china dish, and he took the jewels
out of the two purses in which he had kept them, and placed them in
the dish. But the brightness and lustre they had in the day-time,
and the variety of the colours, so dazzled the eyes both of mother
and son, that they were astonished beyond measure; for they had only
seen them by the light of the lamp: for though Aladdin had seen them
hang on the trees like fruit, beautiful to the eye, yet as he was
but a boy, he did not take much notice of them; but looked on them
only as trinkets.

After they had admired the beauty of this present some time, Aladdin
said to his mother, Now you cannot excuse yourself from going to the
sultan, under the pretext of not having a present to make him, since
here is one which will gain you a favourable reception.

Though Aladdin’s mother, notwithstanding the beauty and lustre of
the present, did not believe it so valuable as her son esteemed it,
she thought it might nevertheless be agreeable to the sultan, and
found that she could not have any thing to say against it, but was
always thinking of the request Aladdin wanted her to make to the
sultan by favour of his present. My son, said she, I cannot conceive
that your present will have its desired effect, and that the sultan
will look upon me with a favourable eye; and I am sure that if I
attempt to acquit myself on this message of yours, I shall have no
power to open my mouth; and therefore I shall not only lose my
labour, but the present, which you say is so extraordinary, and
shall return home again in confusion, to tell you that your hopes
are frustrated. I have told you the consequence, and you ought to
believe me; but, added she, I will exert my best endeavour to please
you, and wish I may have power to ask the sultan as you would have
me; but certainly he will either laugh at me, or send me back like a
fool, or be in so great a rage, as to make us both the victims of
his fury.

She used a great many more arguments to endeavour to make him change
his mind; but the charms of the princess Badroulboudour had made too
great an impression on his heart to dissuade him from his design.
Aladdin persisted in desiring his mother to execute his resolution,
and she, as much out of tenderness as for fear he should be guilty
of a greater piece of extravagance, condescended to his request.

As it was now late, and the time of day for going to the sultan’s
palace was passed, it was put off till the next. The mother and son
talked of different matters the remaining part of the day; and
Aladdin took a great deal of pains to encourage his mother in the
task she had undertaken to go to the sultan; while she,
notwithstanding all his arguments, could not persuade herself she
could ever succeed; and it must be confessed she had reason enough
to doubt. Child, said she to Aladdin, if the sultan should receive
me as favourably as I wish for your sake, and should hear my
proposal with calmness, and after this kind reception should think
of asking me where lie your riches and your estate, (for he will
sooner inquire after these than your person,) if, I say, he should
ask me the question, what answer would you have me return him?

Let us not be uneasy, mother, replied Aladdin, about what may never
happen. First, let us see how the sultan receives, and what answer
he gives you. If it should so fall out, that he desires to be
informed of all that you mention, I have thought of an answer, and
am confident that the lamp, which hath subsisted us so long, will
not fail me in time of need.

Aladdin’s mother could not say any thing against what her son then
proposed; but reflected that the lamp might be capable of doing
greater wonders than just providing victuals for them. This
consideration satisfied her, and at the same time removed all the
difficulties which might have prevented her from undertaking the
service she had promised her son with the sultan; when Aladdin, who
penetrated into his mother’s thoughts, said to her, Above all
things, mother, be sure to keep the secret, for thereon depends the
success we have to expect; and after this caution, Aladdin and his
mother parted to go to bed. But violent love, and the great prospect
of so immense a fortune, had so much possessed the son’s thoughts,
that he could not rest as well as he could have wished. He rose at
day-break, and went presently and awakened his mother, pressing her
to get herself dressed to go to the sultan’s palace, and to get in
first, as the grand vizier, the other viziers, and all the great
officers of state, went in to take their seats in the divan, where
the sultan always assisted in person.

Aladdin’s mother did all her son desired. She took the china dish,
in which they had put the jewels the day before, tied up in two
napkins, one finer than the other, which was tied at four corners
for more easy carriage, and set forwards for the sultan’s palace,
to the great satisfaction of Aladdin. When she came to the gates,
the grand vizier, and the other viziers and most distinguished lords
of the court, were just gone in; and, notwithstanding the crowd of
people who had business at the divan was extraordinary great, she
got into the divan, which was a large spacious hall, the entry into
which was very magnificent. She placed herself just before the
sultan, grand vizier and the great lords, who sat in that council,
on his right and left hand. Several causes were called, according to
their order, and pleaded and adjudged, until the time the divan
generally broke up, when the sultan rising, dismissed the council,
and returned to his apartment, attended by the grand vizier; the
other viziers and ministers of state returned, as also did all those
whose business called them thither; some pleased with gaining their
causes, others dissatisfied at the sentences pronounced against
them, and some in expectation of theirs being heard the next sitting.

Aladdin’s mother, seeing the sultan rise and retire, and all the
people go away, judged rightly that he would not come again that
day, and resolved to go home. When Aladdin saw her return with the
present designed for the sultan, he knew not at first what to think
of her success, and in the fear he was in lest she should bring him
some ill news, he had not courage enough to ask her any questions,
till his mother, who had never set foot into the sultan’s palace
before, and knew not what was every day practised there, freed him
from his embarrassment, and said to him, with a great deal of
simplicity, Son, I have seen the sultan, and am very well persuaded
he has seen me too; for I placed myself just before him, and nothing
could hinder him from seeing me; but he was so much taken up with
all those who talked on all sides of him, that I pitied him, and
wondered at his patience to hear them. At last I believe he was
heartily tired, for he rose up suddenly, and would not hear a great
many who were ready prepared to speak to him, but went away, at
which I was very well pleased, for indeed I began to lose all
patience, and was extremely tired with staying so long. But there is
no harm done; I will go again to-morrow; perhaps the sultan may not
be so busy.

Though Aladdin’s passion was very violent, he was forced to be
satisfied with this excuse, and to fortify himself with patience. He
had at least the satisfaction to find that his mother had got over
the greatest difficulty, which to procure access to the sultan, and
hoped that the example of those she saw speak to him would embolden
her to acquit herself better of her commission when a favourable
opportunity offered to speak to him.

The next morning she went to the sultan’s palace with the present,
as early as the day before, but when she came there; she found the
gates of the divan shut, and understood that the council sat but
every other day, therefore she must come again the next. This news
she carried to her son, whose only relief was to guard himself with
patience. She went six times afterwards on the days appointed,
placed herself always directly before the sultan, but with as little
success as the first time, and might have perhaps come a thousand
times to as little purpose, if the sultan himself had not taken a
particular notice of her: for it is very probable that only those
who came with petitions approached the sultan, and each pleaded
their cause in its turn, and Aladdin’s mother was not one of them.

That day, at last, after the council was broke up, when the sultan
was returned to his own apartment, he said to his grand vizier, I
have for some time observed a certain woman, who comes constantly
every day that I go into council, and has something wrapped up in a
napkin: she always stands up from the beginning to the breaking up
of the council, and affects to place herself just before me. Do you
know what she wants?

Sir, replied the grand vizier, who knew no more than the sultan what
she wanted, but had not a mind to seem uninformed, your majesty
knows that women often form complaints on trifles; perhaps this
woman may come to complain to your majesty, that somebody has sold
her some bad flour, or some such trifling matter. The sultan was not
satisfied with this answer, but replied, If this woman comes again
next council-day, do not fail to call her, that I may hear what she
has to say. The grand vizier made answer by kissing his hand, and
lifting it up above his head, signifying his willingness to lose it
if he failed.

By this time Aladdin’s mother was so much used to go to the
council, and stand before the sultan, that she did not think it any
trouble, if she could but satisfy her son that she neglected nothing
that lay in her power to please him: so the next council-day she
went to the divan, and placed herself before the sultan as usual;
and before the grand vizier had made his report of business, the
sultan perceived her, and compassionated her for having waited so
long, he said to the vizier, before you enter upon any business,
remember the woman I spoke to you about: bid her come near, and let
us hear and despatch her business first. The grand vizier
immediately called the chief of the officers, who stood ready to
obey his commands; and pointing to her, bid him go to that woman,
and tell her to come before the sultan.

The chief of the officers went to Aladdin’s mother, and at a sign
he gave her, she followed him to the foot of the sultan’s throne,
where he left her, and retired to his place by the grand vizier.
Aladdin’s mother, by the example of a great many others whom she
saw salute the sultan, bowed her head down to the carpet, which
covered the steps of the throne, and remained in that posture till
the sultan bid her rise, which she had no sooner done, than the
sultan said to her, Good woman, I have observed you to stand a long
time, from the beginning to the rising of the divan; what business
brings you here?

At these words, Aladdin’s mother prostrated herself a second time;
and when she got up again, said, Monarch of monarchs, before I tell
your majesty the extraordinary and almost incredible business which
brings me before your high throne, I beg of you to pardon the
boldness or rather impudence of the demand I am going to make, which
is so uncommon, that I tremble, and am ashamed to propose it to my
sultan. In order to give her the more freedom to explain herself,
the sultan ordered every body to go out of the divan but the grand
vizier, and then told her that she might speak without restraint.

Aladdin’s mother, not content with this favour of the sultan’s
to save her the trouble and confusion of speaking before so many
people, was notwithstanding for securing herself against his anger,
which, from the proposal she was going to make, she was not a little
apprehensive of; therefore resuming her discourse, she said, I beg
of your majesty, if you should think my demand the least injurious
or offensive, to assure me first of your pardon and forgiveness.
Well, replied the sultan, I will forgive you, be it what it will,
and no hurt shall come to you: speak boldly.

When Aladdin’s mother had taken all these precautions, for fear of
the sultan’s anger, she told him faithfully how Aladdin had seen
the princess Badroulboudour, the violent love that fatal sight had
inspired him with, the declaration he had made to her of it when he
came home, and what representations she had made to dissuade him
from a passion, no less injurious, said she, to your majesty, as
sultan, than to the princess your daughter. But, continued she, my
son, instead of taking my advice and reflecting on his boldness, was
so obstinate as to persevere in it, and to threaten me with some
desperate act, if I refused to come and ask the princess in marriage
of your majesty; and it was not till after an extreme violence on
myself, I was forced to have this complaisance for him, for which I
beg your majesty once more to pardon not only me, but forgive
Aladdin my son, for entertaining such a rash thought as to aspire to
so high an alliance.

The sultan hearkened to this discourse with a great deal of
mildness, without showing the least anger or passion; but before he
gave her any answer, he asked her what she had brought tied up in
that napkin. She took the china dish, which she had set down at the
foot of the throne before she prostrated herself before him; she
untied it, and presented it to the sultan.

The sultan’s amazement and surprise were inexpressible, when he
saw so many large, beautiful, and valuable jewels, collected in one
dish. He remained for some time motionless with admiration. At last,
when he had recovered himself, he received the present from
Aladdin’s mother’s hand, and crying out in a transport of joy,
How rich and now beautiful! After he had admired and handled all the
jewels, one after another, he turned about to his grand vizier, and
showing him the dish, said, Look here, and confess that your eyes
never beheld any thing so rich and beautiful before. The vizier was
charmed. Well, continued the sultan, what sayest thou to such a
present? Is it not worthy of the princess my daughter? And ought I
not to bestow her on one who values her at so great a price.

These words put the grand vizier into a strange agitation. The
sultan had some time before signified to him his intention of
bestowing the princess his daughter on a son of his; therefore he
was afraid, and not without grounds, that the sultan, dazzled by so
rich and extraordinary a present, might change his mind. Thereupon,
going to him, and whispering him in the ear, he said to him, Sir, I
cannot but own the present is worthy of the princess; but I beg of
your majesty to grant me three months before you come to a
resolution. I hope, before that time, my son, on whom you have had
the goodness to look with a favourable eye, will be able to make a
nobler present than Aladdin, who is an entire stranger to your
majesty.

The sultan, though he was very well persuaded that it was not
possible for the vizier to provide so considerable a present for his
son to make the princess, yet he hearkened to him, and granted him
that favour. So turning about to Aladdin’s mother, he said to her,
Good woman, go home, and tell your son that I agree to the proposal
you have made me; but I cannot marry the princess my daughter till
some furniture I design for her be got ready, which cannot be
finished these three months; but at the expiration of that time come
again.

Aladdin’s mother returned home much more overjoyed than she could
have imagined, for she looked upon her access to the sultan as a
thing impossible; and besides, she had met with a favourable answer,
instead of the refusal and confusion she expected. From two
circumstances, Aladdin, when he saw his mother return, judged that
she brought him good news; the one was, that she returned sooner
than ordinary, and the next was, the gaiety of her countenance.
Well, mother, said he to her, may I entertain any hopes, or must I
die with despair? When she had pulled off her veil, and had sat
herself down on the sofa by him, she said to him, Not to keep you
long in suspense, son, I will begin by telling you, that instead of
thinking of dying, you have every reason to be very well satisfied.
Then pursuing her discourse, she told him, how that she had an
audience before every body else, which made her come home so soon;
the precautions she had taken lest she should have displeased the
sultan, by making the proposal of marriage between him and the
princess Badroulboudour, and the favourable answer she had from the
caliph’s own mouth; and that, as far as she could judge, the
present wrought that powerful effect. But when I least expected it,
said she, and he was going to give me an answer, the grand vizier
whispered him in the ear, and I was afraid might be some obstacle to
his good intention towards us.

Aladdin thought himself the most happy of all men, at hearing of
this news, and thanked his mother for all the pains she had taken in
the pursuit of this affair, the good success of which was of so
great importance to his peace. Though, through his impatience to
enjoy the object of his passion, three months seemed an age, yet he
disposed himself to wait with patience, relying on the sultan’s
word, which he looked upon to be irrevocable. But all that time he
not only counted the hours, days, and weeks, but every moment. When
two of the three months were past, his mother one evening going to
light the lamp, and finding no oil in the house, went out to buy
some, and when she came into the city, found a general rejoicing.
The shops, instead of being shut up, were open, drest with foliage,
every one striving to show their zeal in the most distinguished
manner. The streets were crowded with officers in habits of
ceremony, mounted on horses richly caparisoned, each attended by a
great many footmen. Aladdin’s mother asked the oil-merchant what
was the meaning of all those doings. Whence came you, good woman,
said he, that you don’t know that the grand vizier’s son is to
marry the princess Badroulboudour, the sultan’s daughter,
to-night? She will presently return from the baths; and these
officers that you see are to assist at the cavalcade to the palace,
where the ceremony is to be solemnized.

This was news enough for Aladdin’s mother. She ran till she was
quite out of breath home to her son, who little suspected any such
thing. Child, cried she, you are undone! you depend upon the
sultan’s fine promises, but they will come to nothing. Aladdin was
terribly alarmed at these words. Mother, replied he, how do you know
the sultan has been guilty of a breach of promise? This night,
answered the mother, the grand vizier’s son is to marry the
princess Badroulboudour. She then related how she had heard it; so
that from all circumstances, he had no reason to doubt the truth of
what she said.

At this account Aladdin was thunder-struck. Any other man would have
sunk under the shock; but a secret motive of jealousy soon roused
his spirits, and he bethought himself of the lamp, which had till
then been so useful to him; and without venting his rage in empty
words against the sultan, the vizier, or his son, he only said,
Perhaps, mother, the vizier’s son may not be so happy to-night as
he promises himself: while I go into my chamber a moment, do you go
and get supper ready. She accordingly went about it, and she guessed
that her son was going to make use of the lamp, to prevent, if
possible, the consummation of the marriage.

When Aladdin had got into his chamber, he took the lamp, and rubbed
it in the same place as before, and immediately the genie appeared,
and said to him, What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee as
thy slave, and the slave of all those who have that lamp in their
hands; I and the other slaves of the lamp. Hear me, said Aladdin;
thou hast hitherto brought me whatever I wanted as to provisions;
but now I have business of the greatest importance for thee to
execute. I have demanded the princess Badroulboudour in marriage of
the sultan her father; he promised her to me, but only asked three
months time; and instead of keeping that promise, has this night,
before the expiration of that time, married her to the grand
vizier’s son. I have just heard this, and have no doubt of it.
What I ask of you is, That as soon as the bride and bridegroom are
in bed, you bring them both hither in their bed. Master, replied the
genie, I will obey you. Have you any other commands? None at
present, answered Aladdin; and then the genie disappeared.

Aladdin went down stairs, and supped with his mother, with the same
tranquillity of mind as usual; and after supper, talked of the
princess’s marriage as of an affair wherein he had not the least
concern; and afterwards returned to his own chamber again, and left
his mother to go to bed; but he, for his part, sat up till the genie
had executed his orders.

In the mean time, every thing was prepared with the greatest
magnificence in the sultan’s palace to celebrate the princess’s
nuptials; and the evening was spent with all the usual ceremonies
and great rejoicings till midnight, when the grand vizier’s son,
on a signal given him by the chief of the princess’s eunuchs,
slipped away from the company, and was introduced by that officer
into the princess’s apartment, where the nuptial bed was prepared.
He went to bed first, and in a little time after, the sultaness,
accompanied by her own women, and those of the princess, brought the
bride, who, according to the custom of new married ladies, made
great resistance. The sultaness herself helped to undress her, put
her into bed by a kind of violence, and, after having kissed her,
and wished her good-night, retired with all the women, and the last
who came out shut the door.

No sooner was the door shut, but the genie, as the faithful slave of
the lamp, and punctual in executing the commands of those who
possessed it, without giving the bridegroom the least time to caress
his bride, to the great amazement of them both, took up the bed, and
transported it in an instant into Aladdin’s chamber, where he set
it down.

Aladdin, who waited impatiently for this moment, did not suffer the
vizier’s son to remain long in bed with the princess. Take this
new-married man, said he to the genie, and shut him up in the house
of office, and come again to-morrow morning after day-break. The
genie presently took the vizier’s son out of bed, and carried him
in his shirt whither Aladdin bid him; and after he had breathed upon
him, which prevented his stirring, he left him there.

Great as was Aladdin’s love for the princess Badroulboudour, he
did not talk much to her when they were alone; but only said, with a
passionate air, Fear nothing, adorable princess; you are here in
safety: for, notwithstanding the violence of my passion, which your
charms have kindled, it shall never exceed the bounds of the
profound respect I owe you. If I have been forced to come to this
extremity, it is not with any intention of affronting you, but to
prevent an unjust rival’s possessing you, contrary to the sultan
your father’s promise in favour of me.

The princess, who knew nothing of these particulars, gave very
little attention to what Aladdin could say. The fright and amazement
of so unexpected an adventure had put her into such a condition,
that he could not get one word from her. However, he undressed
himself, and got into the vizier’s son’s place, and lay with his
back to the princess, putting a sabre between himself and her, to
show that he deserved to be punished, if he attempted any thing
against her honour.

Aladdin, very well satisfied with having thus deprived his rival of
the happiness he had flattered himself with enjoying that night,
slept very quietly, though the princess Badroulboudour never passed
a night so ill in her life; and if we consider the condition the
genie left the grand vizier’s son in, we may imagine that the new
bridegroom spent it much worse.

Aladdin had no occasion the next morning to rub the lamp to call the
genie; he came at the hour appointed, and just when he had done
dressing himself, and said to him, I am here, master; what are your
commands? Go, said Aladdin, fetch the vizier’s son out of the
place where you left him, and put him into his bed again, and carry
it to the sultan’s palace, from whence you brought it. The genie
presently returned with the vizier’s son. Aladdin took up his
sabre, the bridegroom was laid by the princess, and in an instant
the nuptial bed was transported into the same chamber of the palace
from whence it had been brought. But we must observe that all this
time the genie never appeared either to the princess or the grand
vizier’s son. His hideous form would have made them die with fear.
Neither did they hear any thing of the discourse between Aladdin and
him; they only perceived the motion of the bed, and their
transportation from one place to another; which we may well imagine
was enough to frighten them.

As soon as the genie had set down the nuptial-bed to its proper
place, the sultan, curious to know how the princess his daughter had
spent the wedding-night, opened the door to wish her good morning.
The grand vizier’s son, who was almost perished with cold, by
standing in his shirt all night, and had not had time to warm
himself in bed, no sooner heard the door open, but he got out of
bed, and ran into the wardrobe, where he had undressed himself the
night before.

The sultan went to the bed-side, kissed the princess between the
eyes, according to custom, wishing her a good-morrow, and asked her,
smiling, how she had passed the night. But lifting up her head, and
looking at her more earnestly, he was extremely surprised to see her
so melancholy, and that neither by a blush nor any other sign she
could satisfy his curiosity. She only cast at him a sorrowful look,
expressive of great affliction or great dissatisfaction. He said a
few words to her; but finding that he could not get a word from her,
he attributed it to her modesty, and retired. Nevertheless, he
suspected that there was something extraordinary in this silence,
and thereupon went immediately to the sultaness’s apartment, and
told her in what a state he found the princess, and how she received
him. Sir, said the sultaness, your majesty ought not to be surprised
at this behaviour; all new-married people always have a reserve
about them the next day; she will be quite another thing in two or
three days time, and then she will receive the sultan her father as
she ought; but I will go and see her, added she; I am very much
deceived if she receives me in the same manner.

As soon as the sultaness was dressed, she went to the princess’
apartment, who was still in bed. She undrew the curtain, wished her
good-morrow, and kissed her. But how great was her surprise when she
returned no answer; and looking more attentively at her, she
perceived her to be very much dejected, which made her judge that
something had happened, which she did not understand. How comes it,
child, said the sultaness, that you do not return my caresses? Ought
you to treat your mother after this manner? And do you think I do
not know what may have happened in your circumstances? I am apt to
believe you do not think so, and something extraordinary has
happened: come, tell me freely, and leave me no longer in a painful
suspense.

At last the princess Badroulboudour broke silence with a great sigh,
and said, Alas! madam, most honoured mother, forgive me if I have
failed in the respect I owe you. My mind is so full of the
extraordinary things which have befallen me this night, that I have
not yet recovered my amazement and fright, and scarce know myself.
Then she told her, how the instant after she and her husband were in
bed, the bed was transported into a dark dirty room, where he was
taken from her and carried away, where she knew not, and she was
left alone with a young man, who after he had said something to her,
which her fright did not suffer her to hear, laid himself down by
her, in her husband’s place, but first put his sabre between them;
and in the morning her husband was brought to her again, and the bed
was transported back to her own chamber in an instant. All this,
said she, was but just done, when the sultan my father came into my
chamber. I was so overwhelmed with grief, that I had not power to
make him one word of answer; therefore I am afraid that he is
offended at the manner in which I received the honour he did me; but
I hope he will forgive me, when he knows my melancholy adventure,
and the miserable state I am in at present.

The sultaness heard all the princess told her very patiently, but
would not believe it. You did well, child, said she, not to speak of
this to your father: take care not to mention it to any body for you
will certainly be thought mad if you talk at this rate. Madam,
replied the princess, I can assure you I am in my right senses: ask
my husband, and he will tell you the same story. I will, said the
sultaness; but if he should talk in the same manner, I shall not be
better persuaded of the truth. Come, rise, and throw off this idle
fancy: it will be a fine story indeed, if all the feasts and
rejoicings in the kingdom should be interrupted by such a vision. Do
not you hear the trumpets sounding, and drums beating, and concerts
of the finest music? Cannot all these inspire you with joy and
pleasure, and make you forget all the fancies you tell me of? At the
same time the sultaness called the princess’s women, and after she
had seen her get up, and set her at her toilet, she went to the
sultan’s apartment, and told him that her daughter had got some
odd notions in her head, but that there was nothing in them.

Then she sent for the vizier’s son, to know of him something of
what the princess had told her; but he, thinking himself highly
honoured to be allied to the sultan, resolved to disguise the
matter. Son-in-law, said the sultaness, are you as much infatuated
as your wife? Madam, replied the vizier’s son, may I be so bold as
to ask the reason of that question? Oh! that is enough, answered the
sultaness; I ask no more, I see you are wiser than her.

The rejoicings lasted all that day in the palace, and the sultaness,
who never left the princess, forgot nothing to divert her, and
induce her to take part in the various diversions and shows; but she
was so struck with the idea of what had happened to her that night,
that it was easy to see her thoughts were entirely taken up about
it. Neither was the grand vizier’s son’s affliction less, but
that his ambition made him disguise it, and nobody doubted but he
was a happy bridegroom.

Aladdin, who was well acquainted with what passed in the palace,
never disputed but that the new-married couple were to lie together
again that night, notwithstanding the troublesome adventure of the
night before; and therefore, having as great an inclination to
disturb them, he had recourse to his lamp, and when the genie
appeared, and offered his service, he said to him, The grand
vizier’s son and the princess Badroulboudour are to lie together
again to-night: go, and as soon as they are in bed, bring the bed
hither, as thou didst yesterday.

The genie obeyed Aladdin as faithfully and exactly as the day
before: the grand vizier’s son passed the night as coldly and
disagreeably as before, and the princess had the mortification again
to have Aladdin for her bedfellow with the sabre between them. The
genie, according to Aladdin’s orders, came the next morning, and
brought the bridegroom and laid him by his bride, and then carried
the bed and new-married couple back again to the palace.

The sultan, after the reception the princess Badroulboudour had
given him that day, was very anxious to know how she passed the
second night, and if she would give him the same reception, and
therefore went into her chamber as early as the morning before. The
grand vizier’s son, more ashamed and mortified with the ill
success of this last night, no sooner heard him coming, but he
jumped out of bed, and ran hastily into the wardrobe. The sultan
went to the princess’s bed-side, and after the caresses he had
given her the former morning, bid her good morrow. Well, daughter,
he said, are you in a better humour than you was yesterday morning?
Still the princess was silent, and the sultan perceived her to be
more troubled, and in greater confusion than before; he doubted not
but that something very extraordinary was the cause; but provoked
that his daughter should conceal it, he said to her, in a rage, with
his sabre in his hand, Daughter, tell me what is the matter, or I
will cut off your head immediately.

The princess, more frightened at the menaces and tone of the enraged
sultan, than at the sight of the drawn sabre, at last broke silence,
and said, with tears in her eyes, My dear father and sultan, I ask
your majesty’s pardon if I have offended you, and hope, that out
of your goodness and clemency you will have compassion on me, when I
have told you, in what a miserable condition I have spent this last
night and the night before.

After this preamble, which appeased and affected the sultan, she
told him what had happened to her in so moving a manner, that he,
who loved her tenderly, was most sensibly grieved. She added, If
your majesty doubts the truth of this account, you may inform
yourself from my husband, who, I am persuaded, will tell you the
same thing.

The sultan immediately felt all the extreme uneasiness so surprising
an adventure must have given the princess. Daughter, said he, you
are very much to blame for not telling me this yesterday, since it
concerns me as much as yourself. I did not marry you with an
intention to make you miserable, but that you might enjoy all the
happiness you deserve and might hope for from a husband, who to me
seemed agreeable to you. Efface all these troublesome ideas out of
your memory; I will take care and give orders that you shall have no
more such disagreeable and insupportable nights.

As soon as the sultan had got back to his own apartment, he sent for
the grand vizier. Vizier, said he, have you seen your son, and has
he not told you any thing? The vizier replied, No. Then the sultan
related all that the princess Badroulboudour had told him, and
afterwards said, I do not doubt but that my daughter has told me the
truth; but nevertheless I should be glad to have it confirmed by
your son; therefore go and ask him how it was.

The grand vizier went immediately to his son, and communicated to
him what the sultan had told him, and enjoined him to conceal
nothing from him, but to tell him the whole truth. I will disguise
nothing from you, father, replied the son, for indeed all that the
princess says is true; but what relates particularly to myself she
knows nothing of. After my marriage, I have passed two such nights
as are beyond imagination or expression; not to mention the fright I
was in, to feel my bed lifted up four times, and transported from
one place to another, without being able to guess how it was done.
You shall judge of the miserable condition I was in, to pass two
whole nights in nothing but my shirt, standing in a kind of privy,
unable to stir out of the place where I was put, or to make the
least movement, though I could not perceive any obstacle to prevent
me. Yet I must tell you that all this ill usage does not in the
least lessen those sentiments of love, respect, and gratitude I
entertain for the princess, and of which she is so deserving; but I
must confess, that notwithstanding all the honour and splendour that
attends my marrying my sovereign’s daughter, I would much rather
die, than live longer in so great an alliance, if I must undergo
what I have already endured. I do not doubt but that the princess
entertains the same sentiments, and that she will readily agree to a
separation, which is so necessary both for her repose and mine.
Therefore, father, I beg you, by the same tenderness you had for me
to procure me so great an honour, to get the sultan’s consent that
our marriage may be declared null and void.

Notwithstanding the grand vizier’s ambition to have his son allied
to the sultan, the firm resolution he saw he had formed to be
separated from the princess, made him not think it proper to propose
to him to have a little patience for a few days, to see if this
disappointment would not have an end; but left him to go and give
the sultan an account of what he had told him, assuring him that all
was but too true, without waiting till the sultan himself, whom he
found pretty much disposed to it, spoke of breaking the marriage, he
begged of him to give his son leave to retire from the palace;
alleging for an excuse, that it was not just that the princess
should be a moment longer exposed to so terrible a persecution upon
his son’s account.

The grand vizier found no great difficulty to obtain what he asked.
From that instant the sultan, who had determined it already, gave
orders to put a stop to all rejoicings in the palace and town, and
sent expresses to all parts of his dominions to countermand his
first orders; and, in a short time, all rejoicings ceased.

This sudden and unexpected change gave rise both in the city and
kingdom to various speculations and inquiries; but no other account
could be given of it, except that both the vizier and his son went
out of the palace very much dejected. Nobody but Aladdin knew the
secret. He rejoiced within himself for the happy success procured
for him by his lamp, which now he had no more occasion to rub, to
produce the genie to prevent the consummation of the marriage, which
he had certain information was broken off, and that his rival had
left the palace. But, what is most particular, neither the sultan
nor the grand vizier, who had forgot Aladdin and his request, had
the least thought that he had any hand in the enchantment which
caused the dissolution of the marriage.

Nevertheless, Aladdin waited till the three months were completed,
which the sultan had appointed for the consummation of the marriage
between the princess Badroulboudour and himself; but the next day
sent his mother to the palace, to remind the sultan of his promise.

Aladdin’s mother went to the palace, as her son had bid her, and
stood before the divan in the same place as before. The sultan no
sooner cast his eyes upon her, but he knew her again, and remembered
her business, and how long he had put her off: therefore when the
grand vizier was beginning to make his report, the sultan
interrupted him, and said, Vizier, I see the good woman who made me
the present some months hence; forbear your report till I have heard
what she has to say. The vizier then looking about the divan,
presently perceived Aladdin’s mother, and sent the chief of the
officers for her.

Aladdin’s mother came to the foot of the throne, and prostrated
herself as usual, and when she rose up again, the sultan asked her
what she would have. Sir, said she, I come to represent to your
majesty, in the name of my son Aladdin, that the three months, at
the end of which you ordered me to come again, are expired; and to
beg you to remember your promise.

The sultan, when he took this time to answer the request of this
good woman the first time he saw her, little thought of hearing any
more of a marriage, which he imagined must be very disagreeable to
the princess, when he only considered the meanness and poverty of
Aladdin’s mother in her dress, not above the common run: but this
summons for him to be as good as his word was somewhat embarrassing
to him; he declined giving an answer till he had consulted his
vizier, and signified to him the little inclination he had to
conclude a match for his daughter with a stranger, whose fortune he
supposed to be very mean indeed.

The grand vizier freely told the sultan his thoughts on the matter,
and said to him, In my opinion, sir, there is an infallible way for
your majesty to avoid a match so disproportionable, without giving
Aladdin, were he better known to your majesty, any cause of
complaint; which is, to set so high a value upon the princess, that
were he never so rich, he could not come up to. This is the only way
to make him desist from so bold, not to say, rash an undertaking,
which he never weighed before he engaged in it.

The sultan approving of the grand vizier’s advice, turned about to
Aladdin’s mother, and after some reflection, said to her, Good
woman, it is true sultans ought to be as good as their words, and I
am ready to keep mine, by making your son happy by the marriage of
the princess my daughter. But as I cannot marry her without some
valuable consideration from your son, you may tell him I will fulfil
my promise as soon as he shall send me forty basins of massy gold,
brim-full of the same things you have already made me a present of,
and carried by the like number of black slaves, who shall be led by
as many young and handsome well-made white slaves, all dressed
magnificently. On these conditions I am ready to bestow the princess
my daughter on him; therefore, good woman, go and tell him so, and I
will wait till you bring me his answer.

Aladdin’s mother prostrated herself a second time before the
sultan’s throne, and retired. In her way home she laughed within
herself at her son’s foolish imagination. Where, said she, can he
get so many such large gold basins, and enough of that coloured
glass to fill them? Must he go again to that subterraneous abode,
the entrance into which is stopped up, and gather them off the
trees? But where will he get so many such slaves as the sultan
requires? It is altogether out of his power, and I believe he will
not be well satisfied with my embassy this time. When she came home,
full of these thoughts, she said to her son, Indeed, child, I would
not have you think any farther of your marriage with the princess
Badroulboudour. The sultan received me very kindly, and I believe he
was well inclined to you; but if I am not very much deceived, the
grand vizier has made him change his mind, as you will guess from
what I have to tell you. After I had represented to his majesty that
the three months were expired, and begged of him to remember his
promise, I observed that he whispered with his grand vizier before
he gave me this answer. Then she gave her son an exact account of
what the sultan said to her, and the conditions on which he
consented to the match. Afterwards she said to him, The sultan
expects your answer immediately; but continued she, laughing, I
believe he may wait long enough.

Not so long, mother, as you imagine, replied Aladdin; the sultan is
mistaken if he thinks by this exorbitant demand to prevent my
entertaining thoughts of the princess. I expected greater
difficulties, and that he would have set a higher price upon that
incomparable princess. But I am very well pleased; his demand is but
a trifle to what I could have done for her. But while I think of
satisfying his request, go and get us something for dinner, and
leave the rest to me.

As soon as Aladdin’s mother was gone out to market, Aladdin took
up the lamp, and rubbing it, the genie appeared, and offered his
service as usual. The sultan, said Aladdin to him, gives me the
princess his daughter in marriage: but demands first of me forty
large basins of massy gold, brimfull of the fruits of the garden
from whence I took this lamp you are slave to; and these he expects
to have carried by as many black slaves, each preceded by a young
handsome well-made white slave, richly clothed. Go, and fetch me
this present as soon as possible, that I may send it to him before
the divan breaks up. The genie told him his command should be
immediately obeyed, and disappeared.

In a little time afterwards, the genie returned with forty black
slaves, each bearing on his head a basin of massy gold of twenty
marks weight, full of pearls, diamonds, rubies, and emeralds, all
larger and more beautiful than those presented to the sultan before.
Each basin was covered with a silver stuff, embroidered with flowers
of gold: all these, and the white slaves, quite filled the house,
which was but a small one, and the little court before it, and the
little garden behind. The genie asked Aladdin if he had any other
commands? Aladdin telling him that he wanted nothing farther then,
the genie disappeared.

When Aladdin’s mother came from market, she was in a great
surprise to see so many people and such vast riches. As soon as she
had laid down her provisions, she was going to pull off her veil;
but Aladdin prevented her, and said, Mother, let us lose no time:
but before the sultan and the divan rise, I would have you return to
the palace, and go with this present, as the dowry he asked for the
princess Badroulboudour, that he may judge by my diligence and
exactness of the ardent and sincere zeal I have to procure myself
the honour of this alliance. Without waiting for his mother’s
making a reply, Aladdin opened the street-door, and made the slaves
walk out; a white slave followed always by a black one with a basin
on his head. When they were all got out, the mother followed the
last black slave, and he shut the door, and then retired to his
chamber, full of hopes that the sultan, after this present, which
was such as he required, would at length receive him as his
son-in-law.

The first white slave that went out of the house made all the
people, who were going by and saw him, stop; and before they were
all got out of the house, the street was crowded with spectators,
who ran to see so extraordinary and noble a sight. The dress of each
slave was so rich, both for the stuff and the jewels, that those who
were dealers in them valued each at no less than a million of money;
besides the neatness and propriety of the dress, the good grace,
noble air, and delicate shape and proportion of each slave, was
unparalleled; their grave walk at an equal distance from each other,
the lustre of the jewels, which were large, and curiously set in
their girdles of massy gold, in beautiful symmetry, and those
ensigns of precious stones in their hats, which were of so
particular a taste, put the crowds of spectators into so great
admiration, that they could not be weary of gazing at them, and
following them with their eyes as far as possible; but the streets
were so crowded with people that none could move out of the spot
they stood on. As they were to pass through a great many streets to
go to the palace, a great part of the city had an opportunity of
seeing them. As soon as the first of these slaves arrived at the
palace-gate, the porters formed themselves into order, and took him
for a king, by the richness and magnificence of his habit, and were
going to kiss the hem of his garment; but the slave, who was
instructed by the genie, prevented them, and said, We are only
slaves; our master will appear at a proper time.

Then this slave, followed by the rest, advanced into the second
court, which was very spacious, and in which the sultan’s
household was ranged during the sitting of the divan. The
magnificence of the officers, who stood at the head of their troops,
was very much eclipsed by the slaves who bore Aladdin’s present,
of which they themselves made a part. Nothing was ever seen so
beautiful and brilliant in the sultan’s palace before; and all the
lustre of the lords of his court was not to be compared to them.

As the sultan, who had been informed of their march, and coming to
the palace, had given orders for them to be admitted when they came,
they met with no obstacle, but went into the divan in good order,
one part filing to the right and the other to the left. After they
were all entered, and had formed a great semi-circle before the
sultan’s throne, the black slaves laid the basins on the carpet,
and all prostrated themselves, touching the carpet with their
foreheads, and at the same time the white slaves did the same. When
they all rose again, the black slaves uncovered the basins, and then
all stood with their arms crossed over their breasts with great
modesty.

In the mean time Aladdin’s mother advanced to the foot of the
throne, and having paid her respects, said to the sultan, Sir, my
son Aladdin is sensible this present, which he has sent your
majesty, is much below the princess Badroulboudour’s worth; but
hopes, nevertheless, that your majesty will accept of it, and make
it agreeable to the princess, with the greater confidence that he
has endeavoured to conform to the conditions you were pleased to
impose on him.

The sultan was not able to give the least attention to this
compliment of Aladdin’s mother. The moment he cast his eyes on the
forty basins, brim-full of the most precious, brilliant, and
beautiful jewels he had ever seen, and the fourscore slaves, who
appeared, by the comeliness of their persons, and the richness and
magnificence of their dress, like so many kings, he was so struck,
that he could not recover from his admiration; but, instead of
answering the compliment of Aladdin’s mother, addressed himself to
the grand vizier, who could not any more than the sultan comprehend
from whence such a profusion of riches could come. Well, vizier,
said he aloud, who do you think it can be that has sent me so
extraordinary a present, and neither of us know? Do you think him
worthy of the princess Badroulboudour, my daughter?

The vizier, notwithstanding his envy and grief to see a stranger
preferred to be the sultan’s son-in-law before his son, durst not
disguise his sentiments. It was too visible that Aladdin’s present
was more than sufficient to merit his being received into that great
alliance; therefore, adopting the sultan’s sentiments, he returned
this answer: I am so far, sir, from having any thoughts that the
person who has made your majesty so noble a present is unworthy of
the honour you would do him, that I should be bold to say he
deserved much more, if I was not persuaded that the greatest
treasure in the world ought not to be put in a balance with the
princess, your majesty’s daughter. This advice was applauded by
all the lords who were then in council.

The sultan made no longer hesitation, nor thought of informing
himself whether Aladdin was endowed with all the qualifications
requisite in one who aspired to be his son-in-law. The sight alone
of such immense riches, and Aladdin’s diligence in satisfying his
demand, without starting the least difficulty on the exorbitant
conditions he had imposed on him, easily persuaded him that he could
want nothing to render him accomplished, and such as he desired.
Therefore, to send Aladdin’s mother back with all the satisfaction
she could desire, he said to her, Good woman, go and tell your son
that I wait to receive him with open arms and embrace him; and the
more haste he makes to come and receive the princess my daughter
from my hands, the greater pleasure he will do me.

As soon as Aladdin’s mother retired, overjoyed as a woman in her
condition must be, to see her son raised beyond all expectations to
such great fortune, the sultan put an end to the audience for that
day; and, rising from his throne, ordered that the princess’s
eunuchs should come and carry those basins into their mistress’s
apartment, whither he went himself to examine them with her at his
leisure. The fourscore slaves were not forgotten, but were conducted
into the palace; and some time after, the sultan, telling the
princess Badroulboudour of their magnificent appearance, ordered
them to be brought before her apartment, that she might see through
the lattices he exaggerated not in his account of them.

In the mean time, Aladdin’s mother got home, and showed in her air
and countenance the good news she brought her son. My son, said she
to him, you have now all the reason in the world to be pleased: you
are, contrary to my expectations, arrived at the height of your
desires, and you know what I always told you. Not to keep you too
long in suspense, the sultan, with the approbation of the whole
court, has declared that you are worthy to possess the princess
Badroulboudour, and waits to embrace you, and conclude your
marriage; therefore you must think of making some preparations for
that interview, that may answer the high opinion he has formed of
your person; and after the wonders I have seen you do, I am
persuaded nothing can be wanting. But I must not forget to tell you,
the sultan waits for you with great impatience, therefore lose no
time to go to him.

Aladdin, charmed with this news, and full of the object which
possessed his soul, made his mother very little reply, but retired
to his chamber. There, after he had rubbed his lamp, which had never
failed him in whatever he wished for, the obedient genie appeared.
Genie, said Aladdin, I want to bathe immediately; and you must
afterwards provide me the richest and most magnificent habit ever
worn by a monarch. No sooner were the words out of his mouth, but
the genie rendered him, as well as himself, invisible, and
transported him into a bath of the finest marble of all sorts of
colours; where he was undressed, without seeing by whom, in a neat
and spacious hall. From the hall he was led to the bath, which was
of a moderate heat, and he was there rubbed and washed with all
sorts of scented water. After he had passed through several degrees
of heat, he came out, quite a different man from what he was before.
His skin was clear, white, and red, and his body lightsome and free;
and when he returned into the hall, he found, instead of his own, a
suit, the magnificence of which very much surprised him. The genie
helped him to dress, and when he had done, transported him back to
his own chamber, where he asked him if he had any other commands?
Yes, answered Aladdin; I expect you should bring me as soon as
possible a horse, that surpasses in beauty and goodness the best in
the sultan’s stables, with a saddle, bridle, and housing, and
other accoutrements, worth a million of money. I want also twenty
slaves, as richly clothed as those who carried the present to the
sultan, to walk by my side, and follow me, and twenty more such to
go before me in two ranks. Besides these, bring my mother six women
slaves to wait on her, as richly dressed at least as any of the
princess Badroulboudour’s, each loaded with a complete suit fit
for any sultaness. I want also ten thousand pieces of gold in ten
purses. Go, and make haste.

As soon as Aladdin had given these orders, the genie disappeared,
and presently returned with the horse, the forty slaves, ten of whom
carried each a purse with one thousand pieces of gold, and six women
slaves, each carrying on their head a different dress for
Aladdin’s mother, wrapped up in a piece of silver stuff, and
presented them all to Aladdin.

Of the ten purses Aladdin took but four, which he gave to his
mother, telling her those were to supply her with necessaries; the
other six he left in the hands of the slaves who brought them, with
an order to throw them by handfuls among the people as they went to
the sultan’s palace. The six slaves who carried the purses he
ordered likewise to march before him, three on the right hand and
three on the left. Afterwards he presented the six women slaves to
his mother, telling her they were her slaves, and that the dresses
they had brought were for her use.

When Aladdin had thus settled matters, he told the genie he would
call for him when he wanted him, and thereupon the genie
disappeared. Aladdin’s thoughts now were only of answering, as
soon as possible, the desire the sultan had shown to see him. He
despatched one of the forty slaves to the palace, with an order to
address himself to the chief of the officers, to know, when he might
have the honour to come and throw himself at the sultan’s feet.
The slave soon acquitted himself of his message, and brought for
answer that the sultan waited for him with impatience.

Aladdin immediately mounted his horse, and began his march in the
order we have already described; and though he never was on a
horse’s back before, he appeared with such extraordinary grace,
that the most experienced horsemen would not have taken him for a
novice. The streets through which he was to pass were almost
instantly filled with an innumerable concourse of people, who made
the air echo with their acclamations, especially every time the six
slaves who carried the purses threw handfuls of gold into the air on
both sides. --Neither did these acclamations and shouts of joy come
only from those who scrambled for the money, but from a superior
rank of people, who could not forbear applauding publicly
Aladdin’s generosity. Not only those who knew him once when he
played in the streets like a vagabond, did not know him again; those
who saw him but a little while before hardly knew him, so much were
his features altered: such were the effects of the lamp, as to
procure by degrees to those who possessed it, perfections agreeable
to the rank the right use of it advanced them to. Much more
attention was paid to Aladdin’s person than to the pomp and
magnificence of his attendants, which had been taken notice of the
day before, when the slaves walked in procession with the present to
the sultan. Nevertheless the horse was very much admired by good
judges, who knew not how to discern his beauties, without being
dazzled with the jewels and richness of the furniture: and when the
report was every where spread about, that the sultan was going to
give the princess Badroulboudour in marriage to him, nobody regarded
his birth, nor envied his good fortune, so worthy he seemed of it.

When he arrived at the palace, every thing was prepared for his
reception; and when he came to the second gate, he would have
alighted from off his horse, agreeable to the custom observed by the
grand vizier, the generals of the armies, and governors of provinces
of the first rank; but the chief of the officers, who waited on him
by the sultan’s order, prevented him, and attended him to the
council hall, where he helped him to dismount; though Aladdin
opposed him very much, but could not prevail. The officers formed
themselves into two ranks at the entrance of the hall. The chief put
Aladdin on his right hand, and through the midst of them led him to
the sultan’s throne.

As soon as the sultan perceived Aladdin, he was no less surprised to
see him more richly and magnificently clothed than ever he had been
himself, than surprised at his good mien, fine shape, and a certain
air of unexpected grandeur, very different from the meanness his
mother appeared in.

But notwithstanding, his amazement and surprise did not hinder him
from rising off his throne, and descending two or three steps quick
enough to prevent Aladdin’s throwing himself at his feet. He
embraced him with all the demonstrations of friendship. After this
civility, Aladdin would have cast himself at his feet again; but he
held him fast by the hand, and obliged him to sit between him and
the grand vizier.

Then Aladdin, resuming the discourse, said, I receive, sir, the
honour which your majesty, out of your great goodness is pleased to
confer on me; but permit me to tell you, that I have not forgotten
that I am your slave; that I know the greatness of your power, and
that I am not insensible how much my birth is below the splendour
and lustre of the high rank to which I am raised. If any way,
continued he, I could have merited so favourable a reception, I
confess I owe it merely to the boldness which chance inspired me to
raise my eyes, thoughts, and desires to the divine princess, who is
the object of my wishes. I ask your majesty’s pardon for my
rashness, but I cannot dissemble, that I should die with grief if I
should lose my hopes of seeing them accomplished.

My son, answered the sultan, embracing him a second time, you would
wrong me to doubt for a moment of my sincerity: your life from this
moment is too dear to me not to preserve it, by presenting you with
the remedy which is at my disposal. I prefer the pleasure of seeing
and hearing you before all your treasure added to mine.

After these words the sultan gave a signal, and immediately the air
echoed with the sound of trumpets and hautboys, and other musical
instruments: and at the same time the sultan led Aladdin into a
magnificent hall, where there was prepared a noble feast. The sultan
and Aladdin eat by themselves, the grand vizier and the great lords
of the court, according to their dignity and rank, waited all the
time. The conversation turned on different subjects; but all the
while the sultan took so great a pleasure in seeing him, that he
hardly ever took his eyes off him; and throughout all their
conversation Aladdin showed so much good sense, as confirmed the
sultan in the good opinion he had of him.

After the feast, the sultan sent for the chief judge of his capital,
and ordered him to draw up immediately a contract of marriage
between the princess Badroulboudour his daughter, and Aladdin. In
the mean time the sultan and he entered into another conversation on
various subjects, in the presence of the grand vizier and the lords
of the court, who all admired the solidity of his wit, the great
ease and freedom wherewith he delivered himself, and the beautiful
thoughts, and his delicacy in expressing them.

When the judge had drawn up the contract in all the requisite forms,
the sultan asked Aladdin if he would stay in the palace, and
solemnize the ceremonies of marriage that day. To which he answered,
Sir, though great is my impatience to enjoy your majesty’s
goodness, yet I beg of you to give me leave to defer it till I have
built a palace fit to receive the princess in; I therefore desire
you to grant me a convenient spot of ground near your palace, that I
may come the more frequently to pay my respects to you, and I will
take care to have it finished with all diligence. Son, said the
sultan, take what ground you think proper; there is land enough
before my palace; but consider, I cannot then see you so soon united
with my daughter, which would complete my joy. After these words he
embraced Aladdin again, who took his leave with as much politeness
as if he had been bred up and had always lived at court.

Aladdin mounted his horse again, and returned home in the same order
he came, with the acclamations of the people, who wished him all
happiness and prosperity. As soon as he dismounted, he retired to
his own chamber, took the lamp, and called the genie as before, who,
in the usual manner, made him a tender of his service. Genie, said
Aladdin, I have all the reason in the world to commend your
exactness in executing hitherto punctually whatever I have asked you
to do; but now, if you have any regard for the lamp your mistress,
you must show, if possible, more zeal and diligence than ever. I
would have you build me, as soon as you can, a palace over against
and at a proper distance from the sultan’s, fit to receive my
spouse the princess Badroulboudour. I leave the choice of the
materials to you, that is to say, porphyry, jasper, agate, lapis
lazuli, and the finest marble of the most varied colours, and of the
rest of the building. But I expect, that in the highest story of
this palace you shall build me a large hall with a dome, and four
equal fronts; and that, instead of layers of bricks, the walls be
made of massy gold and silver, laid alternately; that each front
shall contain six windows, the lattices of all which, except one,
which must be left unfinished and imperfect, shall be so enriched
with art and symmetry, with diamonds, rubies, and emeralds, that
they shall exceed every thing of the kind that has ever been seen in
the world. I would have an inner and outer court before this palace,
and a curious garden; but above all things take care that there be
laid in a place which you shall point out to me, a treasure of gold
and silver coin. Besides, this palace must be well provided with
kitchens, and offices, store-houses, and rooms to keep choice
furniture in, for every season of the year. I must have stables full
of the finest horses, with their equerries and grooms, and hunting
equipage. There must be officers to attend the kitchens and offices,
and women slaves to wait on the princess. You understand what I
mean; therefore go about it, and come and tell me when all is
finished.

By the time Aladdin had instructed the genie with his intentions
respecting the building of his palace, the sun was set. The next
morning by break of day, Aladdin, whose love for the princess would
not let him sleep, was no sooner up, but the genie presented
himself, and said, Sir, your palace is finished; come and see bow
you like it. Aladdin had no sooner signified his consent, but the
genie transported him thither in an instant, and he found it so much
beyond his expectation, that he could not enough admire it. The
genie led him through all the apartments, where he met with nothing
but what was rich and magnificent, with officers and slaves, all
dressed according to their rank and the services to which they were
appointed. Then the genie showed him the treasury, which was opened
by a treasurer, where Aladdin saw heaps of purses, of different
sizes, piled up to the top of the ceiling, and disposed in most
pleasing order. The genie assured him of the treasurer’s fidelity,
and thence led him to the stables, where he showed him some of the
finest horses in the world, and the grooms busy in dressing them;
from thence they went to the store-houses, which were filled with
all necessary provisions, both for the food and ornament of the
horses.

When Aladdin had examined the palace from top to bottom, and
particularly the hall with the four-and-twenty windows, and found it
much beyond whatever he could have imagined, he said to the genie,
Genie, no one can be better satisfied than I am; and indeed I should
be very much to blame if I found any fault. There is only one thing
wanting, which I forgot to mention; that is, to lay from the
sultan’s palace to the door of the apartment, designed for the
princess, a carpet of fine velvet for her to walk upon. The genie
immediately disappeared, and Aladdin saw what he desired executed
that minute. Then the genie returned and carried Aladdin home,
before the gates of the sultan’s palace were opened.

When the porters, who had always been used to an open prospect, came
to open the gates, they were amazed to find it obstructed, and to
see a carpet of velvet spread for a great way. They did not
immediately see what it meant; but when they could discern
Aladdin’s palace distinctly, their surprise was increased. The
news of so extraordinary a wonder was presently spread through the
palace. The grand vizier, who came soon after the gates were open,
was no less amazed than other people at this novelty, but ran and
acquainted the sultan, and endeavoured to make him believe it to be
all enchantment. Vizier, replied the sultan, why will you have it to
be enchantment? You know, as well as I, that it is Aladdin’s
palace, which I gave him leave to build, to receive my daughter in.
After the proof we have had of his riches, can we think it strange
that he should build a palace in so short a time? He has a mind to
surprise us, and let us see what wonders are to be done with ready
money every day. Confess sincerely with me that that enchantment you
talk of proceeds from a little envy. The hour of going to council
put an end to the conversation.

When Aladdin had been conveyed home, and had dismissed the genie, he
found his mother up, and dressing herself in one of those suits that
were brought her. By the time the sultan came from the council,
Aladdin had prepared his mother to go to the palace with her slaves,
and desired her, if she saw the sultan, to tell him she came to do
herself the honour to attend the princess towards evening to her
palace. Accordingly she went; but though she and the women slaves
who followed her were all dressed like sultanesses, yet the crowd
was nothing near so great, because they were all veiled, and had
each an upper garment on, agreeable to the richness and magnificence
of their habits. As for Aladdin, he mounted his horse, and took
leave of his paternal house for ever, taking care not to forget his
wonderful lamp, by the assistance of which he had reaped such
advantages, and arrived at the utmost height of his wishes and went
to the palace in the same pomp as the day before.

As soon as the porters of the sultan’s palace saw Aladdin’s
mother, they went and informed the sultan, who presently ordered the
bands of trumpets, cymbals, drums, fifes, and hautboys, placed in
different parts of the palace, to play and beat, so that the air
resounded with concerts, which inspired the whole city with joy: the
merchants began to adorn their shops and houses with fine carpets
and cushions, and bedeck them with boughs, and prepare illuminations
against night. The artists of all sorts left their work, and the
people all repaired to the great space between the sultan’s and
Aladdin’s palace; which last drew all their attention, not only
because it was new to them, but because there was no comparison
between the two buildings. But their amazement was, to comprehend by
what unheard-of miracle, so magnificent a palace should be so soon
built, it being apparent to all that there were no prepared
materials, or any foundations laid, the day before.

Aladdin’s mother was received in the palace with honour, and
introduced into the princess Badroulboudour’s apartment, by the
chief of the eunuchs. As soon as the princess saw her, she went and
saluted her, and desired her to sit down on her sofa; and while her
women made an end of dressing her, and adorned her with the jewels
Aladdin had presented her with, a noble collation was served up. At
the same time the sultan, who had a mind to be as much with his
daughter as possible before he parted with her, came and paid her
great respect. Aladdin’s mother had often talked to the sultan, in
public, but he had never seen her with her veil off, as she was
then; and though she was somewhat advanced in years, she had the
remains of a good face, which showed what she had been in her youth.
The sultan, who had always seen her dressed very meanly, not to say
poorly, was surprised to find her as richly and magnificently
clothed as the princess his daughter. This made him think Aladdin
equally prudent and wise in whatever he undertook.

When it was night, the princess took her leave of the sultan her
father; their adieus were tender, and accompanied with tears. They
embraced each other several times, and at last the princess left her
own apartment, and set forward for Aladdin’s palace, with his
mother on her left hand, followed by a hundred women slaves, dressed
with surprising magnificence. All the bands of music, which played
from the time Aladdin’s mother arrived, joined together, led the
procession, followed by a hundred chiaoux, and the like number of
black eunuchs, in two files, with their officers at their head. Four
hundred of the sultan’s young pages carried flambeaux on each
side, which, together with the illuminations of the sultan’s and
Aladdin’s palaces, made it as light as day.

In this order the princess walked on the carpet, which was spread
from the sultan’s palace to Aladdin’s, preceded by bands of
musicians, who, as they advanced, joining with those on the terraces
of Aladdin’s palace, formed a concert, which, extraordinary and
confused as it appeared, increased the joy not only of the crowd
assembled in the great square, but of all that were in the two
palaces, the town, and a great way round about it.

At length the princess arrived at the new palace. Aladdin ran with
all imaginable joy to receive her at the entrance of the apartment
appointed for him. His mother had taken care to point him out to the
princess, in the midst of the officers that surrounded him, and she
was charmed with his person as soon as she saw him. Adorable
princess, said Aladdin to her, accosting her, and saluting her
respectfully, if I have the misfortune to have displeased you by my
boldness in aspiring to the possession of so lovely a princess, and
my sultan’s daughter, I must tell you, that you ought to blame
your bright eyes and charms, not me. Prince, (as I may now call
you,) answered the princess, I am obedient to the will of my father;
and it is enough for me to have seen you, to tell you that I obey
without reluctance.

Aladdin, charmed with so agreeable and satisfactory an answer, would
not keep the princess standing after she had walked so far, which
was more than she was used to do; but took her by the hand, which he
kissed with the greatest demonstrations of joy, and led her into a
large hall, illuminated with an infinite number of wax candles,
where, by the care of the genie, a noble feast was served up. The
plates were of massy gold, and contained the most delicate meats.
The vases, basins, and goblets, with which the beaufet was
furnished, were gold also, and of exquisite workmanship, and all the
other ornaments and embellishments of the hall were answerable to
this great wealth. The princess, dazzled to see so much riches
collected in one place, said to Aladdin, I thought, prince, that
nothing in the world was so beautiful as the sultan my father’s
palace; but the sight of this hall alone is sufficient to show I was
deceived.

Then Aladdin led the princess to the place appointed for her, and as
soon as she and his mother were sat down, a band of the most
harmonious instruments, accompanied with the voices of beautiful
ladies, began a concert, which lasted without intermission to the
end of the repast. The princess was so charmed, that she declared
she never heard any thing like it in the sultan her father’s
court; but she knew not that these musicians were fairies chosen by
the genie, slave of the lamp.

When the supper was ended, and the table taken away, there entered a
company of dancers, who danced according to the custom of the
country, several figure dances, ending with a dancing man and woman,
who performed their parts with surprising lightness and agility, and
showed all the address they were capable of. About midnight,
Aladdin, according to the custom of that time in China, rose up and
presented his hand to the princess Badroulboudour to dance with her,
and to finish the ceremonies of their nuptials. They danced with so
good a grace, that they were the admiration of all the company. When
they left off, Aladdin did not let the princess’s hand go, but led
her to the apartment where the nuptial bed was prepared. The
princess’s women helped to undress her, and put her to bed;
Aladdin’s officers did the same by him, and then all retired. Thus
ended the ceremonies and rejoicings at the marriage of Aladdin with
the princess Badroulboudour.

The next morning when Aladdin awaked, his valets-de-chambre
presented themselves to dress him, and brought him another habit as
rich and magnificent as that he wore the day before. Then he ordered
one of the horses appointed for his use to be got ready, mounted
him, and went in the midst of a large troop of slaves to the
sultan’s palace. The sultan received him with the same honours as
before, embraced him, placed him on the throne near him, and ordered
in breakfast. Aladdin replied, I beg your majesty will dispense with
me from accepting that honour to-day; I came to ask you to come and
take a repast in the princess’s palace, attended by your grand
vizier, and all the lords of your court. The sultan consented with
pleasure, rose up immediately, and as it was not far off, went
thither on foot, with Aladdin on his right hand, the grand vizier on
his left, preceded by the chiaoux and principal officers of his
palace, and followed by all the great lords of his court.

The nearer the sultan approached Aladdin’s palace, the more he was
struck with its beauty, but was much more amazed when he entered it;
and could not forbear breaking out into exclamations of approbation.
But when he came into the hall with the four-and-twenty windows,
into which Aladdin had invited him, and had seen the ornaments, and,
above all, cast his eyes on the windows, enriched with diamonds,
rubies, emeralds, all large perfect stones; and when Aladdin had
observed to him, that it was as rich on the outside, he was so much
surprised, that he remained some time motionless. After he recovered
himself, he said to his vizier, Is it possible that there should be
such a stately palace so nigh my own, and I be an utter stranger to
it till now? Sir, replied the grand vizier, your majesty may
remember that the day before yesterday you gave Aladdin, whom you
accepted for your son-in-law, leave to build a palace over against
your own, and that very day at sun-set there was no palace on this
spot, and yesterday I had the honour first to tell you that the
palace was built and finished. I remember it, replied the sultan,
but never imagined that the palace was one of the wonders of the
world; for where in all the world besides shall we find walls built
of courses of massy gold and silver, instead of courses of brick,
stone, or marble; and diamonds, rubies, and emeralds, set thick
about the windows! There never was any thing mentioned like it in
this world before.

The sultan would examine and admire the beauty of all the windows,
and counting them, found that there were but three-and-twenty
windows that were so richly adorned, and he was greatly astonished
that the twenty-fourth was left imperfect. Vizier, said he, for that
minister made a point of never leaving him, I am surprised that a
hall of this magnificence should be left thus imperfect. Sir,
replied the grand vizier, without doubt Aladdin only wanted time to
finish this window like the rest; for it is not to be supposed but
that he has sufficient jewels for it, and that he will set about it
the first opportunity.

Aladdin, who had left the sultan to go and give some orders,
returned just as the vizier had given that prince his supposed
reasons. Son, said the sultan to him, this hall is the most worthy
of admiration of any hall in the world: there is only one thing that
surprises me, which is, to find one of the windows unfinished. Is it
from the forgetfulness or negligence of the workmen, or want of
time, that they have not put the finishing stroke to so beautiful a
piece of architecture? Sir, answered Aladdin, it was for none of
there reasons that your majesty sees it in this condition. The thing
was done by design, and it was by my orders that the workmen left it
thus, since I had a mind that your majesty should have the glory of
finishing this hall, and the palace also together, and I beg of you
to approve of my good intention, that I may remember the favours I
have received from you. If you did it with this intention, replied
the sultan, I take it kindly, and will give orders about it
immediately. He accordingly sent for the most considerable jewellers
and goldsmiths in his capital.

In the mean time the sultan went out of this hall, and Aladdin led
him into that where he had regaled the princess Badroulboudour on
their wedding day. The princess came immediately afterwards, and
received the sultan her father, with an air that showed how much she
was satisfied with her marriage. Two tables were immediately spread
with the most delicious meats, all served up in gold dishes. The
sultan, princess, Aladdin, and the grand vizier, sat down at the
first, and all the lords of the court at the second, which was very
long. The sultan was very much pleased with the meats, and owned he
had never eaten any thing more excellent. He said the same of the
wines, which were delicious; but what he most of all admired were
four large beaufets, profusely furnished with large flagons, basins,
and cups, all of massy gold, set with jewels. He was besides charmed
with several bands of music, which were ranged along the hall, and
formed most agreeable concerts.

When the sultan rose from table, he was informed that the jewellers
and goldsmiths he had sent for attended; upon which he returned to
the hall, and showed them the window which was unfinished: I sent
for you, said he, to fit up this window in as great perfection as
the rest; examine them well, and make all the despatch you can to
make them all alike.

The jewellers and goldsmiths examined the other three-and-twenty
windows with great attention, and after they had consulted together,
to know what each could furnish, they returned, and presented
themselves before the sultan, whose principal jeweller, undertaking
to speak for the rest, said, Sir, we are all willing to exert our
utmost care and industry to obey your majesty; but among us all we
cannot furnish jewels enough for so great a work. I have more than
are necessary, said the sultan; come to my palace, and you shall
choose what are fitting.

When the sultan returned to his palace, he ordered his jewels to be
fetched out, and the jewellers took a great quantity, particularly
those which Aladdin had made him a present of, which they soon used,
without making any great advance in their work. They came again
several times for more, and in a month’s time had not finished
half their work. In short, they used all the jewels the sultan had
of his own, and borrowed of the vizier, and yet the work was not
half done.

Aladdin, who knew that all the sultan’s endeavours to make his
window like the rest were in vain, and that he never could compass
it with credit, sent for the jewellers and goldsmiths, and not only
bid them desist from their work, but ordered them to undo what they
had begun, and to carry all their jewels back to the sultan and to
the vizier. They undid in a few hours what they had been six weeks
about, and retired, leaving Aladdin alone in the hall. He took the
lamp which he carried about him, and rubbed it, and presently the
genie appeared. Genie, said Aladdin, I ordered thee to leave one of
the four-and-twenty windows of this hall imperfect, and thou hast
executed my commands punctually; now I would have thee make it like
the rest. The genie immediately disappeared. Aladdin went out of the
hall, and returning soon after into it, he found the window, as he
wished it to be, like the others.

In the mean time the jewellers and goldsmiths reached the palace,
and were introduced into the sultan’s presence; where the first
jeweller presenting the jewels which he had brought back, said in
the name of all the rest, Sir, your majesty knows how long we have
been upon the work you was pleased to set us about, in which we used
all imaginable industry. It was far advanced, when Aladdin obliged
us not only to leave off, but to undo what we had already begun, and
bring your majesty your jewels back. The sultan asked them if
Aladdin gave them any reason for so doing, and they answering that
he had given them none, he ordered a horse to be brought to him
presently, which he mounted, and rode to Aladdin’s palace with
some few attendants on foot by his side. When he came there, he
alighted at the staircase, which led up to the hall with the
twenty-four windows, and went directly up to it, without giving
previous notice to Aladdin; but it happened that at that very
juncture Aladdin was opportunely there, and had just time to receive
him at the door.

The sultan, without giving Aladdin time to complain obligingly of
his not giving him notice, that he might have acquitted himself with
the more duty and respect, said to him, Son, I come myself to know
the reason why you left so noble and magnificent a hall as this is
imperfect.

Aladdin disguised the true reason, which was, that the sultan was
not rich enough in jewels to be at so great an expense, but said, It
is true your majesty saw this hall unfinished, but I beg of you now
to see if anything is wanting.

The sultan went directly to the window which was left imperfect, and
when he found it like the rest, he fancied that he was mistaken, and
examined the two windows on each side, and afterwards all the
four-and-twenty; and when he was convinced that the window, which
several workmen had been so long about, was finished in so short a
time, he embraced Aladdin, and kissed him between his eyes. My son,
said he, what a man you are to do such surprising things always in
the twinkling of an eye! there is not your fellow in the world: the
more I know you, the more I admire you.

Aladdin received these praises from the sultan with a great deal of
modesty, and replied in these words: Sir, it is a great honour to me
to deserve your majesty’s good-will and approbation, and I assure
you I shall study to deserve them more.

The sultan returned to his palace as he came, but would not let
Aladdin go back with him. When he came there, he found his grand
vizier waiting for him, to whom he related the wonder he had been a
witness of with the utmost admiration, and in such terms as left
that minister no room to doubt but that the fact was as the sultan
related it; though he was the more confirmed in his belief that
Aladdin’s palace was the effect of enchantment, as he told the
sultan the first moment he saw it. He was going to repeat the same
thing again, but the sultan interrupted him, and said, You told me
so once before; I see, vizier, you have not forgot your son’s
marriage to my daughter. The grand vizier plainly saw how much the
sultan was prepossessed, and therefore avoided any disputes, and let
him remain in his own opinion. The sultan, as certain as he rose in
a morning, went into the closet to look at Aladdin’s palace, and
would go many times in a day to contemplate and admire it.

All this time Aladdin did not confine himself in his palace, but
took care to show himself once or twice a week in the town, by going
sometimes to one mosque, and sometimes to another, to prayers, or to
pay a visit to the grand vizier, who affected to pay his court to
him on certain days, or to do the principal lords of the court the
honour to return their visits, after he had regaled them at his
palace. Every time he went out he caused two slaves, who walked by
the side of his horse, to throw handfuls of money among the people
as he passed through the streets and squares, which were generally
on those occasions crowded. Besides, no one came to his palace gates
to ask alms, but returned satisfied with his liberality. In short,
he so divided his time, that not a week passed but Aladdin went
either once or twice a hunting, sometimes in the environs of the
city, sometimes farther off; at which time the villages through
which he passed felt the effects of his generosity, which gained him
the love and blessings of the people; and it was common for them to
swear by his head. In short, without giving the least umbrage to the
sultan, to whom he paid all imaginable respect, it might be said
that Aladdin, by his affable behaviour and liberality, had won the
affections of the people, and was more beloved than the sultan
himself. With all these good qualities, he showed a courage and a
zeal for the public good which could not be sufficiently applauded.
He gave sufficient proofs of both in a revolt on the borders of that
kingdom: for he no sooner understood that the sultan was levying an
army to disperse the rebels, but he begged the command of it, which
he found no difficulty to obtain. As soon as he was at the head of
the army, he marched against the rebels with so much expedition,
that the sultan heard of the defeat of the rebels before he had
received an account of his arrival in the army. And though this
action rendered his name famous throughout the kingdom, it made no
alteration in his disposition, but he was as affable after his
victory as before.

Aladdin had behaved himself after this manner several years, when
the African magician, who undesignedly had been the instrument of
raising him to so high a pitch of fortune, bethought himself of him
in Africa, whither, after his expedition, he returned; and though he
was almost persuaded that Aladdin died miserably in the
subterraneous abode where he left him, yet he had the curiosity to
inform himself about his end with certainty; and as he was a great
geomancer, he took out of a cupboard a square covered box, which he
made use of in his geomantic observations, then sat himself down on
his sofa, set it before him, and uncovered it. After he had prepared
and levelled the sand which was in it, with an intention to discover
whether or no Aladdin died in the subterraneous abode, he cast the
points, drew the figures, and formed a horoscope, by which, when he
came to examine it, he found that Aladdin, instead of dying in the
cave, had escaped out of it, lived splendidly, was very rich, had
married a princess, and was very much honoured and respected.

The magician no sooner understood by the rules of his diabolical art
that Aladdin had arrived to that height of good fortune, but a
colour came into his face, and he cried out in a rage. This poor
sorry tailor’s son has discovered the secret and virtue of the
lamp! I believed his death to be certain, but find too plainly he
enjoys the fruit of my labour and study. But I will prevent his
enjoying it long, or perish in the attempt. He was not a great while
deliberating on what he should do, but the next morning mounted a
barb which was in his stable, set forwards, and never stopped but
just to refresh himself and horse, till he arrived at the capital of
China. He alighted, took up his lodging in a khan, and staid there
the remainder of the day and the night, to refresh himself after so
long a journey.

The next day his first object was to inquire what people said of
Aladdin; and, taking a walk through the town, he went to the most
public and frequented places, where people of the first distinction
met to drink a certain warm liquor, which he had drank often when he
was there before. As soon as he sat down, he was presented with a
glass of it, which he took; but, listening at the same time to the
discourse of the company on each side of him, he heard them talking
of Aladdin’s palace. When he had drank off his glass, he joined
them; and taking this opportunity, asked them particularly what
palace that was they spoke so advantageously of. From whence come
you? said the person to whom he addressed himself: you must
certainly be a stranger, not to have seen or heard talk of prince
Aladdin’s palace, (for he was called so after his marriage with
the princess Badroulboudour.) I do not say, continued the man, that
it is one of the wonders of the world, but that it is the only
wonder of the world, since nothing so grand, rich, and magnificent,
was ever seen. Certainly you must have come from a great distance
not to have heard of it; it must have been talked of all over the
world. Go and see it, and then judge whether I have told you more
than the truth. Forgive my ignorance, replied the African magician;
I arrived here but yesterday, and came from the farthest part of
Africa, where the fame of this palace had not reached when I came
away. For the affair which brought me hither was so urgent, that my
sole object was to get here as soon as I could, without stopping any
where, or making any acquaintance. But I will not fail to go and see
it; my impatience is so great, I will go immediately and satisfy my
curiosity, if you will do me the favour to show me the way thither.

The person to whom the African magician addressed himself, took a
pleasure in showing him the way to Aladdin’s palace, and he got up
and went thither instantly. When he came to the palace, and had
examined it on all sides, he doubted not but that Aladdin had made
use of the lamp to build it. Without attending to the inability of
Aladdin, a poor tailor’s son, he knew that none but the genies,
the slaves of the lamp, the attaining of which he had missed, could
have performed such wonders; and, piqued to the quick at Aladdin’s
happiness and greatness, he returned to the khan where he lodged.

The next thing was to know where the lamp was; if Aladdin carried it
about with him, or where he kept it; and this he was to discover by
an operation of geomancy. As soon as he entered his lodging, he took
his square box of sand, which he always carried with him when he
travelled, and after he had performed some operations, he knew that
the lamp was in Aladdin’s palace; and so great was his joy at the
discovery, that he could hardly contain himself. Well, said he, I
shall have the lamp, and I defy Aladdin’s preventing my carrying
it off, and making him sink to his original meanness, from which he
has taken so high a flight.

It was Aladdin’s misfortune at that time to be gone a hunting for
eight days, of which only three were expired, which the magician
came to know by this means. After he had performed this operation,
which gave him so much joy, he went to the master of the khan,
entered into discourse with him on indifferent matters, and among
the rest, told him he had been to see Aladdin’s palace; and after
exaggerating on all that he had seen most surprising and most
striking to him and all the world, he added, But my curiosity leads
me farther, and I shall not be easy till I have seen the person to
whom this wonderful edifice belongs. That will be no difficult
matter, replied the master of the khan; there is not a day passes
but he gives an opportunity when he is in town, but at present he is
not at home, and has been gone these three days on a hunting match,
which will last eight.

The magician wanted to know no more: he took his leave of the master
of the khan, and returning to his own chamber, said to himself, This
is an opportunity I ought by no means to let slip, but will make the
best use of it. To that end he went to a maker and seller of lamps,
and asked for a dozen of copper lamps. The master of the shop told
him he had not so many by him, but if he would have patience till
the next day, he would get him so many against any time he had a
mind to have them. The magician appointed his time, and bid him take
care that they should be handsome and well polished. After promising
to pay him well, he returned to his inn.

The next day the magician called for his twelve lamps, paid the man
his full price for them, put them in a basket which he brought on
purpose, and with the basket hanging on his arm, went directly to
Aladdin’s palace; and when he came near it, he began crying. Who
will change old lamps for new ones? As he went along, he gathered a
crowd of children about him, who hooted at him, and thought him, as
did all who chanced to be passing by, mad or a fool, to offer to
change new lamps for old ones.

The African magician never minded all their scoffs and hootings, or
all they could say to him, but still continued crying, Who will
change old lamps for new ones? He repeated this so often, walking
backwards and forwards about the princess Badroulboudour’s palace,
that the princess, who was then in the hall with the four-and-twenty
windows, hearing a man cry something, and not being able to
distinguish his words, by reason of the hooting of the children and
increasing mob about him, sent one of her women slaves down to know
what he cried.

The slave was not long before she returned, and ran into the hall,
laughing so heartily, that the princess could not forbear herself.
Well, gigler, said the princess, will you tell me what you laugh at?
Madam, answered the slave, laughing still, who can forbear laughing
to see a fool, with a basket on his arm, full of fine new lamps, ask
to change them for old ones? the children and mob, crowding about
him so that he can hardly stir, make all the noise they can by
deriding him.

Another woman slave nearing this, said, Now you speak of lamps, I
know not whether the princess may have observed it, but there is an
old one upon the cornice, and whoever owns it will not be sorry to
find a new one in its stead. If the princess has a mind, she may
have the pleasure to try if this fool is so silly as to give a new
lamp for an old one, without taking any thing for the exchange.

The lamp this slave spoke of was Aladdin’s wonderful lamp, which
he, for fear of losing it, had laid upon the cornice before he went
hunting; which precaution he made use of several times before, but
neither the princess, the slaves, nor the eunuchs, had ever taken
notice of it. At all other times but hunting he carried it about
him, and then, indeed, he might have locked it up; but other people
have been guilty of as great oversights, and will be so to the end
of time.

The princess Badroulboudour, who knew not the value of this lamp,
and the interest that Aladdin, not to mention herself, had to keep
it safe from every body else, entered into the pleasantry, and bid
an eunuch take it, and go and make the exchange. The eunuch obeyed,
went out of the hall, and no sooner got to the palace gates, but he
saw the African magician, called to him, and showing him the old
lamp, said to him, Give me a new lamp for this.

The magician never doubted but this was the lamp he wanted. There
could be no other such in this palace, where all was gold or silver.
He snatched it eagerly out of the eunuch’s hand, and, thrusting it
as far as he could into his breast, offered him his basket, and bid
him choose which he liked best. The eunuch picked out one, and
carried it to the princess Badroulboudour; but the exchange was no
sooner made, than the palace rung with the shouts of the children,
deriding the magician’s folly.

The African magician gave every body leave to laugh as much as they
pleased; he stayed not long about Aladdin’s palace, but made the
best of his way, without crying any longer, New lamps for old ones.
His end was answered, and by his silence he got rid of the children
and the mob.

As soon as he got out of the square between the two palaces, he
skulked down the streets which were the least frequented; and having
no more occasion for his lamps or basket, set all down in the midst
of a street where nobody saw him; then scouring down another street
or two, he walked till he came to one of the city gates, and
pursuing his way through the suburbs, which were very long, he
bought some provisions before he left the city, got into the fields,
and turned into a road, which led to a lonely remote place, where he
stopped for a time to execute the design he came about, never caring
for his horse, which he left at the khan, but thinking himself
perfectly compensated by the treasure he had acquired.

In this place the African magician passed the remainder of the day,
till the darkest time of night, when he pulled the lamp out of his
breast, and rubbed it. At that summons the genie appeared, and said,
What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave, and
the slave of all those who have that lamp in their hands; both I and
the other slaves of the lamp. I command thee, replied the magician,
to transport me immediately, and the palace which thou and the other
slaves of the lamp have built in this town, such as it is, and with
all the people in it, to such a place in Africa. The genie made no
reply, but, with the assistance of the other genies, the slaves of
the lamp, transported him and the palace entire immediately to the
place he appointed in Africa; where we will leave the magician,
palace, and the princess Badroulboudour, to speak of the surprise of
the sultan.

As soon as the sultan rose the next morning, according to custom, he
went into his closet to have the pleasure of contemplating and
admiring Aladdin’s palace; but when he first looked that way, and,
instead of a palace, saw an empty space such as it was before the
palace was built, he thought he was mistaken, and rubbed his eyes:
he looked again, and saw nothing more the second time than the
first, though the weather was fine, the sky clear, and the daybreak
beginning to appear, had made all objects very distinct. He looked
through the two openings on the right and left, and saw nothing more
than he had formerly been used to see out of them. His amazement was
so great, that he stood for some time turning his eyes to the spot
where the palace had stood, but where it was no longer to be seen.
He could not comprehend how so large a palace as Aladdin’s, which
he saw plainly every day, and but the day before, should vanish so
soon, and not leave the least remains behind. Certainly, said he to
himself, I am not mistaken; it stood there: if it had tumbled down,
the materials would have lain in heaps; and if it had been swallowed
up by an earthquake, there would be some mark left. Whatever was the
case, though he was convinced that no palace stood there, he could
not help staying there some time, to see whether he might not be
mistaken. At last he retired to his apartment, not without looking
behind him before he quitted the spot, and ordered the grand vizier
to be fetched in all haste; and, in the mean time, sat down, his
mind agitated by so many different thoughts, that he knew not what
to resolve on.

The grand vizier did not make the sultan wait long for him, but came
with so much precipitation, that neither he nor his attendants, as
they passed by, missed Aladdin’s palace; neither did the porters,
when they opened the palace gates, observe any alteration.

When he came into the sultan’s presence, he said to him, Sir, the
haste in which your majesty sent for me makes me believe something
very extraordinary has happened, since you know this is council-day,
and I shall not fail attending you there very soon. Indeed, said the
sultan, it is something very extraordinary, as you say, and you will
allow it to be so: tell me what has become of Aladdin’s palace.
Aladdin’s palace! replied the grand vizier, in great amazement; I
thought, as I passed by it, it stood in its usual place: such
substantial buildings are not so easily removed. Go into my closet,
said the sultan, and tell me if you can see it.

The grand vizier went into the closet, where he was struck with no
less amazement than the sultan had been. When he was well assured
that there was not the least appearance of this palace, he returned
to the sultan. Well, said the sultan, have you seen Aladdin’s
palace? Sir, answered the vizier, your majesty may remember that I
had the honour to tell you, that that palace, which was the subject
of your admiration, with all its immense riches, was only the work
of magic and a magician; but your majesty would not pay the least
attention to what I said.

The sultan, who could not deny what the grand vizier had represented
to him, flew into the greater passion. Where is that impostor, that
wicked wretch, said he, that I may have his head cut off
immediately? Sir, replied the grand vizier, it is some days since he
came to take his leave of your majesty; he ought to be sent to, to
know what is become of his palace, since he cannot be ignorant of
what has been transacted. That is too great an indulgence, replied
the sultan; go and order a detachment of thirty horse, to bring him
to me loaded with chains. The grand vizier went and gave orders for
a detachment of thirty horse, and instructed the officer who
commanded them, how they were to act, that Aladdin might not escape
them. The detachment pursued their orders; and, about five or six
leagues from the town, met him returning from hunting. The officer
went up to him, and told him that the sultan was so impatient to see
him, that he had sent them to accompany him home.

Aladdin had not the least suspicion of the true reason of their
meeting him, but pursued his way hunting; but when he came within
half a league of the city, the detachment surrounded him, and the
officer addressed himself to him, and said, Prince Aladdin, it is
with great regret that I declare to you the sultan’s order to
arrest you, and to carry you before him as a criminal. I beg of you
not to take it ill that we acquit ourselves of our duty, and to
forgive us.

Aladdin, who felt himself innocent, was very much surprised at this
declaration, and asked the officer if he knew what crime he was
accused of, who replied he did not. Then Aladdin, finding that his
retinue was much inferior to this detachment, alighted off his
horse, and said to the officer, Execute your orders; I am not
conscious that I have committed any crime against the sultan’s
person or government. A large long chain was immediately put about
his neck, and fastened round his body, so that both his arms were
pinioned down; then the officer put himself at the head of the
detachment, and one of the troopers taking hold of the end of the
chain, and proceeding after the officer, led Aladdin, who was
obliged to follow him on foot, into the town.

When this detachment entered the suburbs, the people, who saw
Aladdin thus led as a state criminal, never doubted but that his
head was to be cut off; and as he was generally beloved, some took
sabres and other arms; and those who had none, gathered stones, and
followed the detachment. The last five of the detachment faced about
to disperse them; but their numbers presently increased so much,
that the detachment began to think that it would be well if they
could get into the sultan’s palace before Aladdin was rescued; to
prevent which, according to the different extent of the streets,
they took care to cover the ground by extending or closing. In this
manner they arrived at the palace square, and there drew up in a
line, and faced about till their officer and the trooper that led
Aladdin had got within the gates, which were immediately shut.

Aladdin was carried before the sultan, who waited for him, attended
by the grand vizier, in a balcony; and as soon as he saw him, he
ordered the executioner, who waited there on purpose, to cut off his
head without hearing him, or giving him leave to clear himself.

As soon as the executioner had taken off the chain that was fastened
about Aladdin’s neck and body, and laid down a skin stained with
the blood of the many criminals he had executed, he made Aladdin
kneel down, and tied a bandage over his eyes. Then drawing his
sabre, he took his measures to strike the blow, by flourishing it
three times in the air, waiting for the sultan’s giving the signal
to separate his head from his body.

At that instant the grand vizier perceiving that the populace had
forced the guard of horse, and crowded the great square before the
palace, and were scaling the walls in several places, and beginning
to pull them down to force their way in, he said to the sultan,
before he gave the signal, I beg of your majesty to consider what
you are going to do, since you will hazard your palace being forced;
and who knows what fatal consequence may attend it? My palace
forced! replied the sultan; who can have that boldness? Sir,
answered the grand vizier, if your majesty but cast your eyes
towards the great square, and on the palace walls, you will know the
truth of what I say.

The sultan was so frightened when he saw so great a crowd, and
perceiving how enraged they were, that he ordered the executioner to
put his sabre immediately in the scabbard, and to unbind Aladdin;
and at the same time, bid the chiaoux declare to the people that the
sultan had pardoned him and that they might retire.

Then all those who had already got upon the walls, and were
witnesses of what had passed, abandoned their design, and got
quickly down, overjoyed that they had saved the life of a man they
dearly loved, published the news among the rest, which was presently
confirmed by the chiaoux from the top of the terraces. The justice
which the sultan had done to Aladdin soon disarmed the populace of
their rage; the tumult abated, and the mob dispersed.

When Aladdin found himself at liberty, he turned towards the
balcony, and perceiving the sultan, raised his voice, and said to
him in a moving manner, I beg of your majesty to add one favour more
to that which I have already received, which is, to let me know my
crime. Your crime! answered the sultan; perfidious wretch! do you
not know it? Come up hither, and I will show it you.

Aladdin went up, and presenting himself to the sultan, the latter
going before him without looking at him, said, Follow me; and then
led him into his closet. When he came to the door, he said, Go in;
you ought to know whereabouts your palace stood; look around, and
tell me what is become of it.

Aladdin looked round, but saw nothing. He perceived very well the
spot of ground his palace had stood on; but not being able to divine
how it should disappear, this extraordinary and surprising event
threw him into so great confusion and amazement, that he could not
return one word of answer.

The sultan growing impatient, said to him again, Where is your
palace, and what is become of my daughter? Then Aladdin breaking
silence, said to him, Sir, I see very well, and own that the palace
which I have built is not in the same place it was, but is vanished;
neither can I tell your majesty where it may be, but can assure you
I have no hand in it.

I am not so much concerned about your palace, replied the sultan; I
value my daughter ten thousand times before it, and would have you
find her out, otherwise I will cause your head to be struck off, and
no consideration shall prevent it.

I beg of your majesty, answered Aladdin, to grant me forty days to
make my inquiries; and if in that time I have not the success I wish
for, I will come again, and offer my head at the foot of your
throne, to be disposed of at your pleasure. I give you the forty
days you ask for, said the sultan; but think not to abuse the favour
I show you, by imagining you shall escape my resentment; for I will
find you out in whatsoever part of the world you are.

Aladdin went out of the sultan’s presence with great humiliation,
and in a condition worthy of pity. He crossed the courts of the
palace, hanging down his head, and in so great confusion that he
durst not lift up his eyes. The principal officers of the court, who
had all professed themselves his friends, and whom he had never
disobliged, instead of going up to him to comfort him, and offer him
a retreat in their houses, turned their backs on him, as much to
avoid seeing him, as lest he should know them. But had they accosted
him with a word of comfort, or offer of service, they would have no
more known Aladdin. He did not know himself, and was no longer in
his senses, as plainly appeared by asking every body he met, and at
every house, if they had seen his palace, or could tell him any news
of it.

These questions made every body believe that Aladdin was mad. Some
laughed at him, but people of sense and humanity, particularly those
who had had any connexion of business or friendship with him, really
pitied him. For three days he rambled about the city after this
manner, without coming to any resolution, or eating any thing but
what some good people forced him to take out of charity.

At last, as he could no longer, in his unhappy condition, stay in a
city where he had formerly made so fine a figure, he quitted it, and
took the road to the country; and after he had traversed several
fields in a frightful uncertainty, at the approach of night he came
to a river side. There, possessed by his despair, he said to
himself, Where shall I seek my palace? In what province, country, or
part of the world, shall I find that and my dear princess whom the
sultan expects from me? I shall never succeed; I had better free
myself at once from so much fruitless fatigue and such bitter grief
which preys upon me. He was just going to throw himself into the
river, but as a good Mussulman, true to his religion, he thought he
could not do it without first saying his prayers. Going to prepare
himself, he went first to the river side to wash his hands and face,
according to custom. But that place being steep and slippery, by
reason of the water beating against it, he slid down and had
certainly fallen into the river, but for a little rock which
projected about two feet out of the earth. Happily also for him, he
still had on the ring which the African magician put on his finger
before he went down into the subterraneous abode to fetch the
precious lamp, which had not been taken from him. In slipping down
the bank he rubbed the ring so hard by holding on the rock, that
immediately the same genie appeared whom he saw in the cave where
the magician left him. What wouldst thou have? said the genie. I am
ready to obey thee as thy slave, and the slave of all those that
have that ring on their finger; both I and the other slaves of the
ring.

Aladdin, agreeably surprised at an apparition he so little expected
in the despair he was in, replied, Save my life, genie, a second
time, either by showing me the place where the palace I have caused
to be built now stands, or immediately transport it back where it
first stood. What you command me, answered the genie, is not in my
power; I am only the slave of the ring; you must address yourself to
the slave of the lamp. If it be so, replied Aladdin, I command thee
by the power of the ring to transport me to the place where my
palace stands, in what part of the world soever it is, and set me
down under the princess Badroulboudour’s window. These words were
no sooner out of his mouth, but the genie transported him into
Africa, to the midst of a large meadow, where his palace stood, a
small distance from a great city, and set him exactly under the
windows of the princess’s apartments, and then left him. All this
was done almost in an instant.

Aladdin, notwithstanding the darkness of the night, knew his palace
and the princess Badroulboudour’s apartment again very well; but
as the night was far advanced, and all was quiet in the palace, he
retired to some distance, and sat down at the foot of a large tree.
There, full of hopes, and reflecting on his happiness, for which he
was indebted to pure chance, he found himself in a much more
peaceable situation than when he was arrested and carried before the
sultan, and delivered from the danger of losing his life. He amused
himself some time with these agreeable thoughts; but not having
slept for five or six days, he was not able to resist the drowsiness
which came upon him, but fell fast asleep where he was.

The next morning, as soon as day appeared, Aladdin was agreeably
awakened not only by the singing of the birds which had roosted in
the tree under which he had passed the night, but all those which
perched in the thick groves of the palace garden. When he cast his
eyes on that wonderful edifice, he felt an inexpressible joy to
think he should soon be master of it again, and once more possess
his dear princess Badroulboudour. Pleased with these hopes, he
immediately got up, went towards the princess’s apartment, and
walked some time under her window, in expectation of her rising,
that he might see her. During this expectation, he began to consider
with himself from whence the cause of his misfortunes proceeded; and
after mature reflection, he no longer doubted that it was owing to
his having put his lamp out of his sight. He accused himself of
negligence, and the little care he took of it, to let it be a moment
away from him. But what puzzled him most was, he could not imagine
who had been so jealous of his happiness. He would soon have guessed
this, if he had known that both he and his palace were in Africa,
the very name of which would soon have made him remember the
magician, his declared enemy; but the genie, the slave of the ring,
had not made the least mention of the name of the place, nor had
Aladdin asked him.

The princess Badroulboudour rose earlier that morning than she had
done since her transportation into Africa by the magician, whose
presence she was forced to support once a day, because he was master
of the palace; but she had always treated him so harshly, that he
dared not reside in it. As she was dressing, one of the women
looking through the window, perceived Aladdin, and presently ran and
told her mistress. The princess, who could not believe the news,
went that moment herself to the window, and seeing Aladdin,
immediately opened it. The noise the princess made in opening the
window made Aladdin turn his head that way, who, knowing the
princess, saluted her with an air that expressed his joy. To lose no
time, said she to him, I have sent to have the private door opened
for you; enter, and then come up; she then shut the window.

The private door, which was just under the princess’s apartment,
was soon opened, and Aladdin was conducted up into the princess’s
chamber. It is impossible to express the joy of those lovers at
seeing each other, after a separation which they both thought was
for ever. They embraced several times, and showed all the marks of a
sincere love and tenderness, after an event so unforeseen and
melancholy. After these embracings, and shedding tears of joy, they
sat down, and Aladdin assuming the discourse, said, I beg of you,
princess, in God’s name, before we talk of any thing else, to tell
me, both for your own sake, and the sultan your father’s, and
mine, what is become of an old lamp which I left upon the cornice in
the hall of the four-and-twenty windows, before I went to hunting?

Alas! dear husband, answered the princess, I am afraid our
misfortune is owing to that lamp: and what grieves me most is, that
I have been the cause of it. Princess, replied Aladdin, do not blame
yourself, since it was entirely my fault, and I ought to have taken
more care of it. But let us now think only of repairing the loss;
tell me what has happened, and into whose hands it has fallen.

Then the princess Badroulboudour gave Aladdin an account how she
changed the old lamp for a new one, which she ordered to be fetched,
that he might see it, and how the next morning she found herself in
the unknown country they were then in, which she was told was Africa
by the traitor who had transported her thither by his magic art.

Princess, said Aladdin, interrupting her, you have informed me who
the traitor is, by telling me we are in Africa. He is the most
perfidious of all men; but this is neither a time nor place to give
you a full account of his villanies. I desire you only to tell me
what he has done with the lamp, and where he has put it. He carries
it carefully wrapt up in his bosom, said the princess; and this I
can assure you, because he pulled it out before me, and showed it to
me in triumph.

Princess, said Aladdin, do not be displeased that I trouble you with
so many questions, since they are equally important both to you and
me. But to come to what most particularly concerns me. Tell me, I
conjure you, how so wicked and perfidious a man treats you. Since I
have been here, replied the princess, he comes once every day to see
me; and I am persuaded the little satisfaction he receives from his
visits makes him come no oftener. All his discourse tends to
persuade me to break that faith I have pledged to you, and to take
him for a husband; giving me to understand, I ought not to entertain
any hopes of ever seeing you again, for that you were dead, and had
had your head struck off by the sultan my father’s order. He
added, to justify himself, that you were an ungrateful wretch; that
your good fortune was owing to him, and a great many other things of
that nature, which I forbear to repeat: but as he received no answer
from me but grievous complaints and tears, he was always forced to
retire with as little satisfaction as he came. I doubt not his
intention is to allow me time to vanquish my grief, in hopes
afterwards that I may change my sentiments; and if I persevere in an
obstinate refusal, to use violence. But my dear husband’s presence
removes all my disquiets.

I am confident it is not in vain, replied Aladdin, since my
princess’s fears are removed, and I think I have found the means
to deliver you from both your enemy and mine: to execute this
design, it is necessary for me to go to the town. I shall return by
noon, and then will communicate my design to you, and tell you what
must be done by you to ensure success. But that you may not be
surprised, I think it proper to acquaint you that I shall change my
apparel, and beg of you to give orders that I may not wait long at
the private door, but that it may be opened at the first knock: all
which the princess promised to observe.

When Aladdin was got out of the palace by that door, he looked round
about him on all sides, and perceiving a peasant going into the
country, he hastened after him; and when he had overtaken him, made
a proposal to him to change clothes, which the man agreed to: they
went behind a hedge, and there made the exchange. The countryman
went about his business, and Aladdin to the city. After traversing
several streets, he came to that part of the town where all sorts of
merchants and artisans had their particular streets according to
their trades. He went into that of the druggists; and going into one
of the largest and best furnished shops, asked the druggist if he
had a certain powder which he named.

The druggist looking upon Aladdin by his habit to be very poor, and
that he had not money enough to pay for it, told him he had it, but
that it was very dear; upon which Aladdin, penetrating into his
thoughts, pulled out his purse, and allowing him some gold, asked
for half a drachm of the powder; which the druggist weighed, and
wrapt up in a piece of paper, and gave him, telling him the price
was a piece of gold. Aladdin put the money into his hand, and
staying no longer in the town but just to get a little refreshment,
returned to the palace, where he waited not long at the private
door. When he came into the princess’s apartment, he said to her,
Princess, perhaps the aversion you tell me you have for your
ravisher, may be an objection to your executing what I am going to
propose to you; but give me leave to tell you, it is proper that you
should at this juncture dissemble a little, and do violence to your
inclinations, if you would deliver yourself from him, and give my
lord the sultan your father the satisfaction of seeing you again.

If you will take my advice, continued he, dress yourself this moment
in one of your richest habits, and when the African magician comes,
make no difficulty to give him the best reception; receive him with
an open countenance, without affectation or constraint, yet so as
that, if there remains any cloud of affliction, he may imagine time
will dissipate it. In your conversation, let him understand that you
strive to forget me; and that he may be the more fully convinced of
your sincerity, invite him to sup with you, and give him to
understand you should be glad to taste some of the best wines of his
country. He will presently go to fetch you some. During his absence,
put into one of the cups like that you are accustomed to drink out
of, this powder, and setting it by, charge the slave you design that
night to attend you, upon a signal you shall agree upon with her, to
bring that cup to you. When the magician and you have eaten and
drank as much as you choose, let her bring you the cup, and change
cups with him. He will take it as so great a favour that he will not
refuse you, and will empty the cup; but no sooner will he have drank
it off, than you will see him fall backwards. If you have any
reluctance to drink out of his cup, you may pretend only to do it,
without fear of being discovered; for the effect of the powder is so
quick, that he will not have time enough to know whether you drink
or not.

When Aladdin had finished, I own, answered the princess, I shall do
myself a great violence in consenting to make the magician such
advances as I see are absolutely necessary for me to make; but what
cannot one resolve to do against a cruel enemy? I will therefore
follow your advice, since both my repose and yours depend on it.
After the princess had agreed to the measures proposed by Aladdin,
he took his leave of her, and went and spent the rest of the day in
the neighbourhood of the palace till it was night, when he might
safely return to the private door.

The princess Badroulboudour, who was not only inconsolable to be
separated from her dear husband, whom she loved from the first
moment, and still continued to love more out of inclination than
duty, but also from the sultan her father, who had always showed a
tender and paternal love for her, had, ever since that cruel
separation, lived in great neglect of her person. She had almost, as
one may say, forgot the neatness so becoming persons of her sex and
quality, particularly after the first time the magician paid her a
visit; and she understood by some of the women, who knew him again,
that it was he who took the old lamp in exchange for a new one,
which notorious cheat rendered the sight of him more abhorred.
However, the opportunity of taking the revenge he deserved sooner
than she durst hope for, made her resolve to gratify Aladdin. As
soon, therefore, as he was gone, she sat down at her toilet, and was
dressed by her women to the best advantage, in the richest habit,
most suitable to her design. Her girdle was of the finest and
largest diamonds set in gold, which she suited with a necklace of
pearls, six on a side, so well proportioned to that in the middle,
which was the largest and most valuable, that the greatest
sultanesses and queens would have been proud to have been adorned
with only two of the smallest. Her bracelets, which were of diamonds
and rubies intermixed, answered admirably to the richness of the
girdle and necklace.

When the princess Badroulboudour was completely dressed, she
consulted her glass and women upon her adjustment; and when she
found she wanted no charms to flatter the foolish passion of the
African magician, she sat down on a sofa, expecting his arrival.

The magician came at the usual hour, and as soon as he entered the
great hall, where the princess waited to receive him, she rose up in
all her beauty and charms, and pointed with her hand to the most
honourable place, waiting till he sat down, that she might sit at
the same time, which was a piece of civility she had never shown him
before.

The African magician, dazzled more with the lustre of the
princess’s eyes than the glittering of the jewels with which she
was adorned, was very much surprised. The majestic and graceful air
with which she received him, so opposite to her former behaviour,
quite confounded him.

When he was sat down, the princess, to free him from his
embarrassment, broke silence first, looking at him all the time in a
manner sufficient to make him believe that he was not so odious to
her as she had given him to understand before, said to him, You are
doubtless amazed to find me so much altered to-day from what I used
to be; but your surprise will not be so great when I acquaint you
that I am naturally of a disposition so opposite to melancholy and
grief, sorrow and uneasiness, that I always strive to put them as
far away as possible when I find the subject of them is past. I have
reflected on what you told me of Aladdin’s fate, and know the
sultan my father’s temper so well, that I am persuaded, with you,
that Aladdin could not escape the terrible effects of his rage;
therefore, should I continue to lament him all my life --my tears
cannot recall him. For this reason, after I have paid all the duties
my love requires of me to his memory, now he is in the grave, I
think I ought to endeavour to comfort myself. These are the motives
of the change you see in me; and to begin to cast off all
melancholy, I am resolved to banish it entirely; and persuaded you
will bear me company to-night, I have ordered a supper to be
prepared; but as I have no wines but of China, I have a great desire
to taste of the product of Africa, where I now am, and doubt not you
will get some of the best.

The African magician, who looked upon the happiness of coming so
soon and so easily into the princess Badroulboudour’s good graces
as impossible, could not think of words expressive enough to testify
how sensible he was of her favours; but to put an end the sooner to
a conversation which would have embarrassed him, if he had engaged
farther in it, he turned it upon the wines of Africa, and said, of
all the advantages Africa can boast, that of producing the most
excellent wines is one of the principal. I have a vessel of seven
years old, which has never been broached; and it is indeed not
praising it too much to say it is the finest wine in the world. If
my princess, added he, will give me leave, I will go and fetch two
bottles, and return again immediately. I should be sorry to give you
that trouble, replied the princess, you had better send for them. It
is necessary I should go myself, answered the African magician; for
nobody but myself knows where the key of the cellar is laid, or has
the secret to unlock the door. If it be so, said the princess, make
haste back again; for the longer you stay, the greater will be my
impatience, and we shall sit down to supper as soon as you come back.

The African magician, full of hopes of his expected happiness,
rather flew than ran, and returned quickly with the wine. --The
princess not doubting in the least but he would make haste, put with
her own hand the powder Aladdin gave her into the cup that was set
apart for that purpose. They sat down at the table opposite to each
other, the magician’s back towards the beaufet. The princess
presented him with the best at the table, and said to him, If you
please, I will entertain you with a concert of vocal and
instrumental music; but as we are only two. I think conversation may
be more agreeable. This the magician took as a new favour.

After they had eaten some time, the princess called for some wine,
and drank the magician’s health; and afterwards said to him,
Indeed you was in the right to commend your wine, since I never
tasted of any so delicious in my life. Charming princess, said he,
holding in his hand the cup which had been presented to him, my wine
becomes more exquisite by your approbation of it. Then drink my
health, replied the princess; you will find I understand wines. He
drank the princess’s health, and returning the cup, said, I think
myself happy, princess, that I reserved this wine for so good an
occasion; and I own I never before drank any so excellent in every
respect.

When they had drank two or three cups more a-piece, the princess,
who had completely charmed the African magician by her civility and
obliging behaviour, gave the signal to the slave who served them
with wine, bidding her bring the cup which had been filled for
herself, and at the same time bring the magician a full cup. When
they both had their cups in their hands, she said to him, I know not
how you here express your love when drinking together as we are:
with us in China, the lover and his mistress reciprocally exchange
cups, and drink each other’s health; at the same time she
presented to him the cup which was in her hand, and held out her
hand to receive his. He for his part hastened to make the exchange
with the more pleasure, as he looked upon this favour as the most
certain token of an entire conquest over the princess, which raised
his happiness to its height. Before he drank, he said to her, with
the cup in his hand, Indeed, princess, we Africans are not so
refined in the art of love as you Chinese; and instructing me in a
lesson I was ignorant of, informs me how sensible I ought to be of
the favour done me. I shall never, lovely princess, forget my
recovering, by drinking out of your cup, that life, which your
cruelty, had it continued, would have made me despair of.

The princess Badroulboudour, who began to be tired with this
barefaced declaration of the African magician, interrupted him, and
said, Let us drink first, and then say what you will afterwards; and
at the same time set the cup to her lips, while the African
magician, who was eager to get his wine off first, drank up the very
last drop. In finishing it, he had reclined his head back to show
his eagerness, and remained some time in that state. The princess
kept her cup at her lips, till she saw his eyes turn in his head,
and he fell backwards lifeless.

The princess had no occasion to order the back-door to be opened to
Aladdin; for her women were so disposed from the great hall to the
foot of the staircase, that the word was no sooner given, that the
African magician was fallen backwards, but the door opened that
instant.

As soon as Aladdin entered the hall, he saw the magician stretched
backwards on the sofa. The princess Badroulboudour rose from her
seat and ran overjoyed to him to embrace him; but he stopped her,
and said, Princess, it is not yet time; oblige me by retiring to
your apartment, and let me be left alone a moment, while I endeavour
to transport you back to China as soon as you were brought from
thence.

When the princess, her women, and eunuchs, were gone out of the
hall, Aladdin shut the door, and going directly to the dead body of
the magician, opened his vest, and took out the lamp carefully wrapt
up, as the princess told him, and unfolding and rubbing it, the
genie immediately appeared. Genie, said Aladdin, I have called thee
to command thee on the part of thy good mistress this lamp, to
transport this palace presently into China, to the same place from
whence it was brought hither. The genie bowed his head in token of
obedience, and disappeared. Immediately the palace was transported
into China, and its removal was only felt by two little shocks, the
one when it was lifted up, the other when it was set down, and both
in a very short interval of time.

Aladdin went down to the princess’s apartment, and embracing her,
said, I can assure you, princess, that your joy and mine will be
complete to-morrow morning. The princess, who had not quite supped,
guessing that Aladdin might be hungry, ordered the meats that were
served up in the hall, and were scarcely touched, to be brought
down. The princess and Aladdin eat as much as they thought fit, and
drank in like manner of the African magician’s old wine; during
which time their discourse could not be any otherwise than
satisfactory, and then they retired to their own chamber.

From the time of the transportation of Aladdin’s palace, and of
the princes Badroulboudour in it, the sultan, that princess’s
father, was inconsolable for the loss of her, as he considered it.
He hardly slept night or day, and instead of taking measures to
avoid every thing that could keep up his affliction, he, on the
contrary, indulged it; for whereas before he used to go every
morning into his closet to please himself with that agreeable
prospect, he went now many times in the day to renew his tears, and
plunge himself into the deepest melancholy, by the idea of no more
seeing that which once gave him so much pleasure, and reflecting how
he had lost what was the most dear to him in this world.

The very morning of the return of Aladdin’s palace, the sultan
went, by break of day, into his closet to indulge his sorrows.
Collected in himself, and in a pensive mood, he cast his eyes in a
melancholy manner towards the place where he remembered the palace
once stood, expecting only to see an open space; but perceiving that
vacuum filled up, he at first imagined it to be the effect of a fog;
but looking more attentively, he was convinced beyond the power of
doubt that it was his son-in-law’s palace. Then joy and gladness
succeeded to sorrow and grief. He returned immediately into his
apartment, and ordered a horse to be saddled and brought to him in
all haste, which he mounted that instant, thinking he could not make
haste enough to get to Aladdin’s palace.

Aladdin, who foresaw what would happen, rose that morning by
daybreak, put on one of the most magnificent habits his wardrobe
afforded, and went up into the hall of twenty-four windows, from
whence he perceived the sultan coming, and got down soon enough to
receive him at the foot of the great staircase, and to help him to
dismount. Aladdin, said the sultan, I cannot speak to you till I
have seen and embraced my daughter.

He led the sultan into the princess Badroulboudour’s apartment,
who having been told by him when he rose, that she was no longer in
Africa, but in China, and in the capital of the sultan her father,
had just done dressing herself. The sultan embraced her with his
face bathed in tears of joy; and the princess, on her side, gave him
all the testimonies of the extreme pleasure the sight of him gave
her.

The sultan was some time before he could open his lips, so great was
his surprise and joy to find his daughter again, after he had given
her up for lost; and the princess, after seeing her father, let fall
tears of joy.

At last the sultan broke silence, and said, I would believe,
daughter, your joy to see me makes you seem so little changed, as if
no misfortune had befallen you; for a large palace cannot be so
suddenly transported as yours has been, without great fright and
terrible anguish. I would have you tell me all that has happened,
and conceal nothing from me.

The princess, who took great pleasure in giving the sultan the
satisfaction he demanded, said, Sir, if I appear so little altered,
I beg of your majesty to consider, that I received new life
yesterday morning by the presence of my dear husband and deliverer
Aladdin, whom I looked upon and bewailed as lost to me; and the
happiness of seeing and embracing whom has almost recovered me to my
former state of health. But my greatest trouble was only to find
myself forced from your majesty, and my dear husband; not only in
resect to the inclination I bore to my husband, but from the
uneasiness I laboured under besides, for fear that he, though
innocent, should feel the effects of your anger, to which I knew he
was left exposed. I suffered but little from the insolence of the
wretch who had carried me off; for having secured the ascendant over
him, I always put a stop to his disagreeable discourse, and was as
little constrained as I am at present.

As to what relates to my transportation, Aladdin had no hand in it;
I myself am the innocent cause of it. To persuade the sultan of the
truth of what she said, she gave him a full account how the African
magician disguised himself like a seller of lamps, and offered to
change new lamps for old ones; and how she amused herself in making
that exchange, being entirely ignorant of the secret and importance
of that lamp; how the palace and herself were carried away and
transported into Africa, with the African magician, who was
recollected by two of her women, and the eunuch who made the
exchange of the lamp, when he had the boldness to pay her the first
visit, after the success of his audacious enterprise, to propose
himself for her husband; how he persecuted her till Aladdin’s
arrival; how he and she concerted measures together to get the lamp
from him again, which he carried about him; and the success they
had; and particularly by her dissimulation, inviting him to supper,
and giving him the cup with the powder prepared for him. For the
rest, added she, I leave it to Aladdin to give you an account.

Aladdin had not much to tell the sultan, but only said, When the
private door was opened, I went up into the great hall, where I
found the magician lying dead on the sofa; as I thought it not
proper for the princess to stay there any longer, I desired her to
go down into her own apartment, with her women and eunuchs. As soon
as I was alone, and had taken the lamp out of the magician’s
breast, I made use of the same secret he had done, to remove the
palace, and carry off the princess; and by that means the palace was
brought into the same place where it stood before; and I have the
happiness to bring back the princess to your majesty, as you
commanded me. But that your majesty may not think that I impose upon
you, if you will give yourself the trouble to go up into the hall,
you shall see the magician punished as he deserved.

The sultan, to be assured of the truth, rose up instantly, and went
up into the hall, where, when he saw the African magician dead, and
his face already livid by the strength of the poison, he embraced
Aladdin with great tenderness, and said, My son, be not displeased
at my proceedings against you; they arose from my paternal love, and
therefore you ought to forgive the excesses to which it hurried me.
Sir, replied Aladdin, I have not the least reason to complain of
your majesty’s conduct, since you did nothing but what your duty
required of you. This infamous magician, the basest of men, was the
sole cause of my misfortune. When your majesty has leisure, I will
give you an account of another villanous action he was guilty of to
me, which was no less black and base than this, from which I was
preserved by the grace of God in a very particular manner. I will
take an opportunity, and that very shortly, replied the sultan, to
hear it; but in the mean time let us think only of rejoicing, and
the removal of this odious object.

Aladdin ordered the magician’s dead carcass to be removed and
thrown on the dunghill, for the birds and beasts to prey upon. In
the mean time the sultan commanded the drums, trumpets, cymbals, and
other instruments of music, to announce the public joy, and a feast
of ten days to be proclaimed for joy of the return of the princess
Badroulboudour, and Aladdin with his palace.

Thus Aladdin escaped a second time the almost inevitable danger of
losing his life: but this was not the last, since he ran as great a
hazard a third time; the circumstances of which I shall relate.

The African magician had a younger brother, who was as great a
necromancer, and even surpassed him in villany, and pernicious
designs. As they did not live together, or in the same city, but
oftentimes when one was in the east the other was in the west, they
failed not every year to inform themselves, by their art of
necromancy, where each other was, how they did, and whether they
stood in need of each other’s assistance.

Some time after the African magician had failed in his enterprise
against Aladdin’s happiness, his younger brother, who had not
heard any tidings of him for a year, and was not in Africa, but in a
distant country, had the curiosity to know in what part of the world
he was, how he did, and what he was doing; and as he, as well as his
brother, always carried a geomantic square instrument about him, he
prepared the sand, [98] cast the points, and drew the figures. On
examining the houses, he found that his brother was no longer
living; by another house, that he had been poisoned, and died
suddenly; and by another, that it was in the capital of the kingdom
of China; and that the person who poisoned him was of mean birth,
and married to a princess, a sultan’s daughter.

When the magician had after this manner informed himself of his
brother’s fate, he lost no time in useless regret, which could not
restore him to life again; but resolving immediately to revenge his
death, he took horse, and set forwards for China: where, after
crossing plains, rivers, mountains, deserts, and a long tract of
country, without stopping, he arrived after incredible fatigues.

When he came to the capital of China, which his knowledge of
geomancy pointed out to him, and being certain he had not mistaken
any other kingdom for it, he took a lodging. The next day he went
out, and walked through the town, not so much to observe the
beauties, which were indifferent to him, but with an intention to
take proper measures to execute his pernicious designs. He
introduced himself into the most frequented places, where he
listened to every body’s discourse. In a place where people
resorted to divert themselves with all sorts of games, and where
some are conversing while others play, he heard some persons talk of
the virtue and piety of a woman called Fatima, who was retired from
the world, and of the miracles she performed. As he fancied that
this woman might be serviceable to him in the project he had in his
head, he took one of the company aside, and desired him to tell him
more particularly who that holy woman was, and what sort of miracles
she performed.

What! said the person to whom he addressed himself, have you never
seen or heard talk of her? She is the admiration of the whole town;
first, for her fasting, her austerities, and her exemplary life.
Except Mondays and Fridays, she never stirs out of her little cell;
and on those days on which she comes into the town, she does an
infinite deal of good; for there is not a person who has the
head-ache, but is cured by her laying her hand upon them.

The magician wanted no further information. He only asked the person
in what part of the town this holy woman’s cell was. After he had
shown him it, and he had concluded and determined on the detestable
design he had in his head, and that he might know the way again, and
be fully informed, he watched all her steps the first day she went
out after he had made this inquiry, without losing sight of her till
evening, when he saw her re-enter her cell. When he had fully
observed the place, he went to one of those houses where they sell a
certain hot liquor, and where any person may pass the night,
particularly in the great heats, when the people of that country
prefer lying on a mat to a bed. About midnight, after the magician
had satisfied the master of the house for what little he had called
for, he went out, and proceeded directly to the cell of Fatima, the
holy woman, the name she was known by throughout the town. He had no
difficulty to open the door, which was only fastened with a latch,
and he shut it again after he had got in, without any noise; and
when he entered the cell, perceived Fatima by moonlight lying in the
air on a sofa, covered only by an old mat, with her head leaning
against the wall. He awakened her and clapped a dagger to her breast.

Poor Fatima, opening her eyes, was very much surprised to see a man
with a dagger at her breast ready to stab her, and who said to her,
If you cry out, or make the least noise, I will kill you; but get up
and do as I bid you.

Fatima, who had lain down in her clothes, got up trembling with
fear. Do not be so much frightened, said the magician; I only want
your habit; give it me presently, and take mine. Accordingly Fatima
and he changed clothes. Then he said, colour my face as yours is,
that I may be like you; but perceiving that the poor creature could
not help trembling, to encourage her, he said, I tell you again, you
need not fear any thing: I swear by the name of God I will not take
away your life. Fatima lighted her lamp, made him come into the
cell, and taking a pencil and dipping it into a certain liquor,
rubbed it over his face, and assured him the colour would not
change, and that his face was of the same dye as her own: after
which she put her own head-dress on his head, with a veil, with
which she showed him how to hide his face as he passed through the
town. After this, she put a long string of beads about his neck,
which hung down to the middle of his body, and giving him the stick
she used to walk with, in his hand, brought him a looking-glass, and
bid him look if he was not as like her as possible. The magician
found himself disguised as he wished to be; but he did not keep the
oath he so solemnly swore to the good Fatima; but instead of
stabbing her, for fear the blood might discover him, he strangled
her; and when he found she was dead, threw her body into a cistern
just by the cell.

The magician thus disguised like the holy woman Fatima, spent the
remainder of the night in the cell, after he had committed so horrid
a murder. The next morning, two hours after sunrise, though it was
not a day the holy woman used to go out on, he crept out of the
cell, being well persuaded that nobody would ask him any questions
about it; or, if they should, he had an answer ready for them. As
one of the first things he did after his arrival was to find out
Aladdin’s palace, where he was to execute his designs, he went
directly thither.

As soon as the people saw the holy woman, as they imagined him to
be, they presently gathered about him in a great crowd. Some begged
his blessing, others kissed his hand, and others more reserved, only
the hem of his garment; while others, whether their heads ached, or
they had a mind to be preserved against that distemper, stooped for
him to lay his hands upon them; which he did, muttering some words
in form of prayer: and, in short, counterfeited so well, that every
body took him for the holy woman.

After frequently stopping to satisfy these kind of people, who
received neither good nor harm from this imposition of hands, he
came at last to the square before Aladdin’s palace. The crowd was
so great that the eagerness to get at him increased in proportion.
Those who were the most zealous and strong forced their way through
the crowd to get room. There were such quarrels, and so great a
noise, that the princess, who was in the hall of four-and-twenty
windows, heard it, and asked what was the matter; but nobody being
able to give her an account, she ordered them to go and see, and
inform her. One of her women looked out of a window, and then told
her it was a great crowd of people that were gathering about the
holy woman, to be cured of the head-ache by the imposition of her
hands.

The princess, who had for a long time heard a great deal of this
holy woman, but had never seen her, conceived a great curiosity to
have some conversation with her, which the chief of the eunuchs
perceiving, told her it was an easy matter to bring her to her, if
she desired and commanded it; and the princess showing a desire, he
immediately sent four eunuchs for the pretended holy woman.

As soon as the crowd saw the eunuchs coming, they made way, and the
magician perceiving also that they were coming for him, advanced to
meet them, overjoyed to find his plot took so well. Holy woman, said
one of the eunuchs, the princess wants to see you, and has sent us
for you. The princess does me too great an honour, replied the false
Fatima. I am ready to obey her command, and at the same time
followed the eunuchs to the palace.

When the magician, who under a holy garment disguised a wicked
heart, was introduced into the great hall, and perceived the
princess, he began a prayer, which contained a long enumeration of
vows and good wishes for the princess’s health and prosperity, and
that she might have every thing she desired. Then he displayed all
his deceitful, hypocritical rhetoric, to insinuate himself into the
princess’s favour under the cloak of piety, which it was no hard
matter for him to do; for as the princess herself was naturally
good, she was easily persuaded that all the world was like her,
especially those who made profession of serving God in solitary
retreat.

When the pretended Fatima had made an end of his long harangue, the
princess said to him, I thank you, good mother, for your prayers; I
have great confidence in them, and hope God will hear them. Come,
and sit by me. The false Fatima sat down with affected modesty: then
the princess resuming her discourse, said, My good mother, I have
one thing to ask you, which you must not refuse me; which is, to
stay with me, that you may entertain me with your way of living; and
that I may learn from your good example how to serve God. Princess,
said the counterfeit Fatima, I beg of you not to ask what I cannot
consent to, without neglecting my prayers and devotion. That shall
be no hindrance to you, answered the princess; I have a great many
apartments unoccupied; you shall choose which you like best, and
shall have as much liberty to perform your devotions, as if you were
in your own cell.

The magician, who wanted nothing more than to introduce himself into
Aladdin’s palace, where it would be a much easier matter for him
to execute his pernicious designs, under the favour and protection
of the princess, than if he had been forced to come and go from the
cell to the palace, did not urge much to excuse himself from
accepting the obliging offer the princess made him. Princess, said
he, whatever resolution a poor wretched woman, as I am, may have
made to renounce the pomp and grandeur of this world, I dare not
presume to oppose the will and commands of so pious and charitable a
princess.

Upon this the princess rising up, said, Come along with me, I will
show you what empty apartments I have, that you may make choice of
which you like best. The magician followed the princess
Badroulboudour, and of all the apartments she showed him, made
choice of that which was the worst furnished, saying, That it was
too good for him, and that he only accepted of it to please her.

Afterwards the princess would have brought him back again into the
great hall to make him dine with her; but he considering that then
he should be obliged to show his face, which he had always taken
care to hide; and fearing that the princess should find out that he
was not Fatima, he begged of her earnestly to dispense with him,
telling her that he never eat any thing but bread and dried fruits,
and desiring to eat that slight repast in his own apartment; that
the princess granted him, saying, You may be as free here, good
mother, as if you were in your own cell: I will order you a dinner,
But remember I expect you as soon as you have finished your repast.

After the princess had dined, and the false Fatima had been informed
by one of the eunuchs that she was risen from the table, he failed
not to wait upon her. My good mother, said the princess, I am
overjoyed to have the company of so holy a woman as yourself, who
will confer a blessing upon this palace. But now I am speaking of
this palace, pray how do you like it? And before I show you it all,
tell me first what you think of this hall.

Upon this question, the counterfeit Fatima, who, to act his part the
better, affected to hang down his head, without so much as ever once
lifting it up, at last looked up, and surveying the hall from one
end to the other, when he had examined it well, said to the
princess, As far as such a solitary being as I can judge, who am
unacquainted with what the world calls beautiful, this hall is truly
admirable and most beautiful; there wants but one thing. What is
that, good mother? answered the princess Badroulboudour; tell me, I
conjure you. For my part I always believed, and have heard say, it
wanted nothing; but if it does, it shall be supplied.

Princess, said the false Fatima, with great dissimulation, forgive
me for the liberty I have taken; but my opinion is, if it can be of
any importance, that if a roc’s egg was hung up in the middle of
this dome, this hall would have no parallel in the four quarters of
the world, and your palace would be the wonder of the universe.

My good mother, said the princess, what bird is a roc, and where may
one get an egg? Princess, replied the pretended Fatima, it is a bird
of prodigious size, which inhabits the top of mount Caucasus: the
architect who built your palace can get you one.

After the princess Badroulboudour had thanked the false Fatima for
what she believed her good advice, she conversed with her upon other
matters; but could not forget the roc’s egg, which she made
account to tell Aladdin of when he returned from hunting. He had
been gone six days, which the magician knew, and therefore took
advantage of his absence: but he returned that evening, after the
false Fatima had taken leave of the princess, and retired to his
apartment. As soon as he arrived, he went directly up to the
princess’s apartment, saluted and embraced her, but she seemed to
receive him coldly. My princess, said he, I think you are not so
cheerful as you used to be; has any thing happened during my
absence, which has displeased you, or given you any trouble or
dissatisfaction? In the name of God, do not conceal it from me; I
will leave nothing undone that is in my power to please you. It is a
trifling matter, replied the princess, which gives me so little
concern that I could not have thought you could have perceived it in
my countenance; but since you have unexpectedly discovered some
alteration, I will no longer disguise a matter of so little
consequence from you.

I always believed, as well as you, continued the princess
Badroulboudour, that our palace was the most superb, magnificent,
and complete in the world: but I will tell you now what I find fault
with, upon examining the hall of four-and-twenty windows. Do not you
think with me, that it would be complete, if a roc’s egg was hung
up in the midst of the dome? Princess, replied Aladdin, it is enough
that you think there wants such a thing; you shall see by the
diligence used to repair that deficiency, that there is nothing
which I would not do for your sake.

Aladdin left the princess Badroulboudour that moment, and went up
into the hall of four-and-twenty windows, where pulling out of his
bosom the lamp, which, after the danger he had been exposed to, he
always carried about him, he rubbed it; upon which the genie
immediately appeared. Genie, said Aladdin, there wants a roc’s egg
to be hung up in the midst of the dome: I command thee, in the name
of this lamp, to repair the deficiency. Aladdin had no sooner
pronounced these words, but the genie gave so loud and terrible a
cry, that the hall shook, and Aladdin could scarce stand upright.
What! wretch, said the genie, in a voice that would have made the
most undaunted man tremble, is it not enough that I and my
companions have done every thing for you, but you, by an unheard-of
ingratitude, must command me to bring my master, and hang him up in
the midst of this dome? This attempt deserves that you, your wife,
and your palace, should be immediately reduced to ashes; but you are
happy in not being the author of this request, and that it does not
come from yourself. Know then, that the true author is the brother
of the African magician, your enemy, whom you have destroyed as he
deserved. He is now in your palace, disguised in the clothes of the
holy woman Fatima, whom he murdered; and it is he who has suggested
to your wife to make this pernicious demand. His design is to kill
you, therefore take care of yourself. After these words, the genie
disappeared.

Aladdin lost not a word of what the genie had said. He had heard
talk of the holy woman Fatima, and how she pretended to cure the
head-ache. He returned to the princess’s apartment, and without
mentioning a word of what had happened, he sat down, and complained
of a great pain which had suddenly seized his head; upon which the
princess ordered the holy woman to be presently fetched, and then
told him how that holy woman came to the palace, and that she had
appointed her an apartment.

When the pretended Fatima came, Aladdin said, Come hither, good
mother; I am glad to see you here at so fortunate a time: I am
tormented with a violent pain in my head, and request your
assistance, by the confidence I have in your good prayers, and hope
you will not refuse me that favour which you do to so many persons
afflicted with this distemper. So saying, he rose up, but held down
his head. The counterfeit Fatima advanced towards him, with his hand
all the time on a dagger concealed in his girdle under his gown;
which Aladdin observing, he seized his hand before he had drawn it,
pierced him to the heart with his own dagger, and then threw him
down on the floor dead.

My dear husband, what have you done? cried the princess in surprise.
You have killed the holy woman. No, my princess, answered Aladdin,
without emotion, I have not killed Fatima, but a wicked wretch, that
would have assassinated me, if I had not prevented him. This wicked
man, added he, uncovering his face, has strangled Fatima, whom you
accused me of killing, and disguised himself in her clothes, to come
and murder me: but that you may know him better, he is brother to
the African magician. Then Aladdin told her how he came to know
those particulars, and afterwards ordered the dead body to be taken
away.

Thus was Aladdin delivered from the persecution of two brothers, who
were magicians. Within a few years afterwards the sultan died in a
good old age, and as he left no male children, the princess
Badroulboudour, as lawful heir of the crown, succeeded him, and
communicating the power to Aladdin, they reigned together many
years, and left a numerous and illustrious posterity behind them.

Sir, said the sultaness Scheherazade, after she had finished the
story of the Wonderful Lamp, your majesty without doubt has observed
in the person of the African magician a man abandoned to the
unbounded passion for possessing immense treasures by the most
unworthy means. On the contrary, your majesty sees in Aladdin, a
person of mean birth raised to the regal dignity by making use of
the same treasures, which came to him without his seeking, but just
as he had an occasion for them to compass the end proposed; and in
the sultan you will have learnt what dangers a just and equitable
monarch runs, even to the risk of being dethroned, when, by crying
injustice, and against all the rules of equity, he dares, by an
unreasonable precipitation, condemn an innocent person to death,
without giving him leave to justify himself. In short, you must
abhor those two wicked magicians, one of whom sacrificed his life to
attain great riches, the other his life and religion to revenge him,
and both received the chastisements they deserved.

The sultan of the Indies signified to his spouse the sultaness
Scheherazade, that he was very much delighted with the prodigies he
had heard of the Wonderful Lamp, and that the stories which she told
him every night gave him a great deal of pleasure. Indeed they were
all diverting, and for the most part seasoned with a good moral. He
found that the sultaness knew how to introduce them, and was not
sorry that she gave him an opportunity of suspending, by this means,
the execution of a vow he had made, never to keep a woman above one
night, and put her to death next day. His only thought was to see if
he could exhaust her store.

With this intention, the next morning he prevented Dinarzade, and
awakened the sultaness himself, asking her if she was at the end of
all her stories. --At the end of my stories, sir! replied the
sultaness, surprised at the question, I am far from that and the
number of them is so great, that I cannot tell your majesty how many
I have yet left; but am afraid you will be sooner tired with
hearing, than I with telling them.

Do not let that fear disturb you, answered the sultan; but let us
hear what you have now to tell me.

The sultaness Scheherazade, encouraged with these words, said, I
have often entertained your majesty with the adventures of the
famous caliph Haroun Alraschid, who had a great many in his time;
but, among the rest, I think none more worthy of your hearing than
the following:




The Adventures of the Caliph Haroun Alraschid.


Your majesty cannot be insensible, but must have experienced, that
we are sometimes in such extraordinary transports of joy, that we
presently communicate that passion to those about us, or easily
partake of theirs; and sometimes our melancholy is so great, that we
are insupportable to ourselves, and are so incapable of giving any
one a reason, that should ask it, that we cannot account for it
ourselves.

The caliph was one day in one of these latter fits, when his
faithful and favourite grand vizier Giafar came to him. That
minister finding him alone, which was seldom the case, and
perceiving as he came nearer to him, that he was in a very
melancholy humour, and never lifted up his eyes, he stopt till he
would vouchsafe to look at him.

At last the caliph cast his eyes upon Giafar, but presently turned
them away again, and remained in the same posture, motionless as
before.

The grand vizier observing nothing in the caliph’s eyes which
regarded him personally, took the liberty to speak to him, and said,
Commander of the faithful, will your majesty give me leave to ask
whence proceeds this melancholy, of which you always seemed to me so
little susceptible?

Indeed, vizier, answered the caliph, clearing up his countenance, I
am very little subject to it, and had not perceived it but for you,
and will remain no longer in it. If no new affair brought you
hither, you will do me a pleasure by inventing something to dispel
it.

Commander of the faithful, replied the grand vizier, my duty obliged
me to wait on you, and I take the liberty to remind your majesty,
that this is the day which you have appointed to inform yourself of
the good government of your capital and its environs; and this
occasion very opportunely presents itself to dispel those clouds
which obscure your natural gaiety.

You do well to remind me, replied the caliph, for I had entirely
forgotten it: go and change your dress, while I do the same.

They each put on the habit of a foreign merchant, and under that
disguise went out by a private door of the palace-garden, which led
into the fields. After they had gone round the outside of the city
to the banks of the Euphrates, at a sufficient distance from the
city gate, on that side, without having observed any thing
disorderly, they crossed the river in the first boat they met with,
and making another tour on the other side, came over the bridge,
which formed the communication betwixt the two parts of the town.

At the foot of the bridge they met with an old blind man, who asked
alms of them; the caliph turned about, and put a piece of gold into
his hand. The blind man presently caught hold of his hand, and
stopped him. Charitable person, said he, whoever you are, whom God
hath inspired to bestow alms on me, do not refuse the favour I ask
you, to give me a box on the ear, for I deserve that and a greater
punishment. After these words, he let the caliph’s hand go, that
he might strike, but, for fear he should pass on without doing it,
held him fast by his clothes.

The caliph, surprised both at the request and action of the blind
man, said, I cannot acquiesce with your request. I will not lessen
the merit of my charity, by treating you as you would have me. After
these words, he endeavoured to get away from the blind man.

The blind man, who expected this reluctance of his benefactor, by
the long experience he had, exerted himself to hold him. Sir, said
he, forgive my boldness and importunity; I desire you would either
give me a box on the ear, or take your alms back again, for I cannot
receive it but on that condition, without breaking a solemn oath
which I have sworn to God; and if you knew the reason, you would
agree with me, that the punishment is very slight.

The caliph, not caring to be detained any longer, yielding to the
importunity of the blind man, gave him a very slight blow: whereupon
he immediately let him go, and thanked and blessed him. When the
caliph and vizier had got some small distance from the blind man,
the caliph said to the vizier, This blind man must certainly have
some very substantial reasons, which make him behave himself in this
manner to all who give him alms. I should be glad to know them;
therefore return and tell him who I am, and bid him not fail to come
to my palace about prayer-time in the afternoon, that I may have
some talk with him.

The grand vizier went back, bestowed his alms on the blind man, and
after he had given him a box on the ear, told him the caliph’s
order, and then returned again to the caliph.

When they came into the town, they found in a square a great
concourse of spectators, looking at a handsome well-shaped young
man, who was mounted on a mare, which he rode full speed round the
place, spurring and whipping the poor creature so barbarously, that
she was all over sweat and blood.

The caliph, amazed at the inhumanity of the young man, stopped to
ask the people if they knew why he used the mare so ill; but could
learn nothing, except that for some time past he had every day, at
the same hour, treated her after the same manner.

As they went along, the caliph bid the grand vizier take particular
notice of the place, and not fail to order the young man to come the
next day, at the hour appointed to the blind man. But before the
caliph got to his palace, he observed in a street, which he had not
passed through a long time before, an edifice newly built, which
seemed to him to be the palace of some of the great lords of the
court. He asked the grand vizier if he knew to whom it belonged; who
answered he did not, but would inquire; and thereupon asked a
neighbour, who told him that the house was one Cogia Hassan’s,
surnamed Alhabbal, upon account of his profession of rope-making,
which he had seen him work at himself, when poor, and that without
knowing how fortune had favoured him, he had got such great wealth,
that he defrayed honourably and splendidly the expenses he had been
at in building.

The grand vizier rejoined the caliph, and gave him a full account of
what he had heard. I must see this Cogia Hassan Alhabbal, said the
caliph, therefore go and tell him, vizier, to come to my palace, at
the same hour you have ordered the other two. Accordingly the vizier
obeyed.

The next day, after afternoon prayers, the caliph retired to his own
apartment, and the grand vizier introduced the three persons we have
been speaking of, and presented them to the caliph.

They all three prostrated themselves before the caliph, and when
they rose up again, the caliph asked the blind man his name, who
answered, it was Baba Abdalla.

Baba Abdalla, replied the caliph, your manner of asking alms seemed
so strange to me yesterday, that if it had not been for some certain
considerations, I should not have complied with your request, but
should have prevented you from giving any more offence to the
public. I ordered you to come hither, to know from yourself what
induced you to make that indiscreet oath you have told me of, that I
may judge whether you have done well, and if I ought to suffer you
to continue a practice that appears to me to set so ill an example.
Tell me freely how so extravagant a thought came into your head, and
do not disguise any thing from me, for I will absolutely know the
truth.

Baba Abdalla, intimidated by this reprimand, cast himself a second
time at the foot of the caliph’s throne, with his face to the
ground, and when he rose up again, said, Commander of the faithful,
I most humbly ask your majesty’s pardon for my boldness, in daring
to require, and almost force you to do a thing which indeed appears
so contrary to reason. I acknowledge my crime; but as I did not then
know your majesty, I implore your clemency, and hope you will
consider my ignorance.

As to the extravagance of my action, I own it, and that it must seem
strange to mankind; but in the eye of God it is a very slight
penance I have enjoined myself, for an enormous crime I am guilty
of, and for which, if all the people in the world were each to give
me a box on the ear, it would not be a sufficient atonement. Your
majesty will judge of it yourself, when, in telling my story, in
obedience to your commands, I shall let you know what that heinous
crime was.




The Story of the Blind Man Baba Abdalla.


Commander of the faithful, continued Baba Abdalla, I was born at
Bagdad, and had a pretty fortune left me by my father and mother,
who died a few days after each other. Though I was then but very
young, I did not squander away my fortune as most young men do, in
idle expenses and debauchery; on the contrary, I neglected no
opportunity to increase it by my industry. At last I became rich
enough to purchase fourscore camels, which I let out to merchants
for caravans, who paid me well for every journey I went with them
throughout the extent of your majesty’s dominions.

In the midst of this happiness, and with an ardent desire of growing
much richer, as I was returning one day with my camels unloaded from
Balsora, whither I had carried some merchandises that were to be
embarked for the Indies, I met with good pasturage, at some distance
from any habitation; made a halt there, and let them graze for some
time. While I was seated, a dervise, who was walking to Balsora,
came and sat down by me to rest himself. I asked him from whence he
came, and where he was going, and he put the same questions to me;
and when we had satisfied each other’s curiosity, we produced our
provisions and eat together.

During our repast, after we had talked of many indifferent things,
the dervise told me that he knew of a treasure a small distance from
thence, where there were such immense riches, that if all my
fourscore camels were loaded with gold and jewels that might be
taken from it, it would not seem as if any thing had been taken away.

This good news surprised and charmed me at the same time; and I was
so overjoyed, that I could scarce contain myself. I could not
believe that the dervise was capable of telling me a falsity;
therefore I fell upon his neck, and said, Good dervise, I know you
value not the riches of this world, therefore what service can the
knowledge of this treasure be to you? You are alone, and cannot
carry much of it away with you; show me where it is; I will load all
my camels, and as an acknowledgement of the favour done me, will
present you with one of them.

Indeed I offered very little, but after he had communicated that
secret to me, my desire of riches was become so violent, that I
thought it a great deal, and looked upon the seventy-nine camel
loads which I reserved for myself, as nothing in comparison of what
I allowed him.

The dervise, though he saw my avarice, was not however angry at the
unreasonable offer I had made him, but replied, without the least
concern, You are sensible, brother, that what you offer me is not
proportionable to the kindness you ask of me. I might have chosen
whether I would communicate my secret to you, and have kept the
treasure to myself: but what I have told you is sufficient to show
you my good intentions, and that it is still in my power to oblige
you, and make you remember me, by making both our fortunes. I have
another proposition more just and equitable to make to you; it lies
in your own breast whether or no you will agree to it.

You say, continued the dervise, that you have fourscore camels: I am
ready to carry you to the place where the treasure lies, and we will
load them with as much jewels and gold as they can well carry, on
condition, that when they are so loaded, you will let me have one
half, and you take the other; after which we will separate, and
carry our camels where we think fit. You see there is nothing but
what is strictly equitable in this division; for if you give me
forty camels, you will get by my means wherewithal to purchase
thousands more.

I could not but agree there was a great deal of justice in what the
dervise said: but, without considering what riches I should gain in
accepting of the condition he proposed, I could not without
reluctance think of parting with my forty camels, especially when I
considered that the dervise would then be as rich as myself, and
that I was beforehand making an ungrateful return for a favour,
purely gratuitous, which I had not yet received from the dervise.
But there was no time to hesitate; I must either accept of the
proposal, or resolve to repent all my lifetime after of losing, by
my own fault, an opportunity of obtaining a great fortune. That
instant I went and collected all my camels; and after we had
travelled some time, we came into a large spacious valley, the
entrance into which was so narrow, that two camels could not go
abreast. The two mountains which formed this valley terminated in a
semicircle, but were so high, craggy, and impracticable, that there
was no fear of being seen by any one.

When we came between these two mountains, the dervise said to me,
Stop your camels, and make them lie down, that we may load them the
easier, and I will proceed to discover the treasure.

I did as the dervise bid me; and going to him soon after, found him
with a match in one hand, gathering sticks to light a fire; which he
had no sooner done, than he cast some incense into it, and
pronouncing certain words, which I did not understand, there
presently arose a thick cloud. He divided this cloud, when the rock,
though of a prodigious perpendicular height, opened like two
folding-doors, and exposed to view a magnificent palace in the
hollow of the mountain, which seemed to be rather the workmanship of
genies than men; for no man could ever have thought of such a bold
and surprising work.

But this, I must tell your majesty, was an after-thought, which did
not occur to me at the moment. I did not even stop to admire the
immense riches which I saw on all sides; and, without staying to
observe the just regularity in which the treasures were ranged, like
an eagle seizing her prey, I fell upon the first heap of golden
money that I was near to, and began to fill the sack I had in my
hand as full as I could carry it. The sacks were all large, and with
my good-will I would have filled them all; but I was obliged to
proportion my burden to the strength of my camels. The dervise did
the same; but I perceived he paid more attention to the jewels, and
as he told me the reason, I followed his example, and we took away
much more jewels than gold --When we had filled our sacks, and
loaded our camels, we had nothing left to do but to shut up the
treasure, and go our way.

But before we parted, the dervise went again into the treasury,
where there were a great many wrought vessels of gold of different
shapes and materials. I observed that he took out of one of these
vessels a little box of a certain wood, which I knew not, and put it
into his breast; but first showed me that it contained only a kind
of pomatum.

The dervise used the same ceremony to shut the treasury as he had
done to open it; and after he pronounced some certain words, the
doors of the treasury shut again, and the rock seemed as whole and
entire as before.

Then we divided our camels. I put myself at the head of the forty
which I reserved for myself, and the dervise at the head of the rest
which I had given him. We came out of the valley by the same way we
went in, and travelled together till we came to the great road,
where we were to part; the dervise to go to Balsora, and I to
Bagdad. To thank him for so great a kindness, I made use of the most
expressive terms, testifying my gratitude for the preference he had
given me before all other men, in letting me have a share of such
riches. We embraced each other with great joy, and taking our leave,
went our different ways.

I had not gone many paces to overtake my camels, which went on the
track I put them into, before the demon of ingratitude and envy took
possession of my heart, and I deplored the loss of my forty camels,
and much more the riches wherewith they were loaded. The dervise,
said I to myself, has no occasion for all these riches; he is master
of the treasure, and may have as much as he pleases. So I gave
myself up to the blackest ingratitude, and determined immediately to
take the camels with their loading from him.

To execute this design, I first stopped my own camels, and
afterwards ran after the dervise, and called to him as loud as I
could, giving him to understand that I had something material to say
to him, and made a sign to him to stop his, and stay for me; which
he accordingly did.

When I came up to him, I said, Brother, I had no sooner parted from
you, but a thought came into my head, which neither of us had
reflected on before. You are a good dervise, used to live in
tranquillity, disengaged from all the cares of the world, and intent
only upon serving God. You know not, perhaps, what trouble you have
taken upon yourself, to take care of so many camels. If you would
take my advice, you would keep but thirty; you will find them
sufficiently troublesome to manage. Take my word; I have had
experience.

I believe you are right, replied the dervise, who found he was not
able to contend with me; I own I never thought of it. I begin
already to be uneasy at what you have represented to me. Choose
which ten you please, and take them, and go on in God’s keeping.

I set ten apart; and after I had driven them off, I put them in the
road to follow my others. I could not have imagined that the dervise
would be so easily persuaded to part with his camels, which
increased my covetousness, and made me flatter myself that it would
be no hard matter to get ten more. Wherefore, instead of thanking
him for his present, I said to him again, Brother, the interest I
take in your repose is so great, that I cannot resolve to part with
you without desiring you to consider once more how difficult a thing
it is to govern thirty loaded camels, especially for you, who are
not used to such work; you will find it much better to return me as
many more back as you have done already. What I tell you is not for
my own sake and interest, but to do you the greater pleasure. Ease
yourself then of the camels, and leave them to me, who can manage a
hundred as well as one.

My discourse had the desired effect upon the dervise, who gave me,
without any hesitation, the other ten camels; so that he had but
twenty left, and I was master of sixty, and might boast of greater
riches than many sovereign princes. Any one would have thought I
should now have been content; but, as a person afflicted with a
dropsy, the more he drinks the more thirsty he is, so I became more
greedy and desirous of the other twenty camels.

I redoubled my solicitations, prayers, and importunities, to make
the dervise condescend to grant me ten of the twenty, which he did
with a good grace; and as to the other ten he had left, I embraced
him, kissed him, and caressed him, conjuring him not to refuse me,
but to complete the obligation I should ever have to him, so that he
crowned my joy by giving me them also. Make a good use of them,
brother, said the dervise: and remember that God can take away
riches as well as give them, if we do not assist the poor, whom he
reduces to their situation on purpose that the rich may merit by
their charity a greater recompense in the other world.

My blindness was so great that I could not profit by so wholesome
advice. I was not content, though I had my forty camels again, and
knew they were loaded with an inestimable treasure. But a thought
came into my head, that the little box of pomatum which the dervise
showed me had something in it more precious than all the riches
which I was obliged to him for. The place from whence the dervise
took it, said I to myself, and his care to secure it, makes me
believe there is something mysterious in it. This determined me to
do something to obtain it. I had just embraced him, and bade him
adieu; and as I turned about from him, I said, What will you do with
that little box of pomatum? It seems such a trifle, said I, it is
not worth your carrying away. I entreat you to make me a present of
it; for what occasion has a dervise, as you are, who has renounced
the vanities of the world, for pomatum?

Would to heaven he had refused me that box! But if he had, I was
stronger than him, and was resolved to have taken it from him by
force; that for my complete satisfaction it might not be said he had
carried away the smallest part of the treasure.

The dervise, far from denying me, presently pulled it out of his
bosom, and presenting it to me with the best grace in the world,
said, Here, take it, brother, and be content: if I could do more for
you, you needed but to have asked for it; I am ready to satisfy you.

When I had the box in my hand, I opened it, and looking at the
pomatum, said to him, Since you are so good, I am sure you will not
refuse me this one favour, to tell me the particular use of this
pomatum.

The use is very surprising and wonderful, replied the dervise: if
you apply a little of this pomatum round the left eye, and upon the
lid, you will see all the treasures contained in the bosom of the
earth; but if you apply it to the right eye, it will make you blind.

I would make the experiment myself: Take the box, said I to the
dervise, and apply some of this pomatum to my left eye; you
understand now to do it better than I, for I long to experience what
seems so incredible to me. Accordingly, I shut my left eye, and the
dervise took the trouble to apply the pomatum. When he had done, I
opened my eye, and was convinced he had told me truth. I saw immense
treasures, and such prodigious riches, so diversified, that it is
impossible for me to give an account of them; but as I was obliged
to keep my right eye shut with my hand, and that tired me, I desired
the dervise to apply some of the pomatum to that eye.

I am ready to do it, said the dervise; but you must remember what I
told you, that if you put any of it upon your right eye, you would
immediately be blind; such is the virtue of the pomatum.

Far from being persuaded of the truth of what the dervise said, I
imagined, on the contrary, that there was some new mystery which he
meant to hide from me. Brother, replied I, smiling, I see plainly
you wish to mislead me: it is not natural that this pomatum should
have two such contrary effects.

The thing is as I tell you, replied the dervise, taking the name of
God to bear witness; you ought to believe me, for I cannot disguise
the truth.

I would not believe the dervise, who spoke like an honest man. My
insurmountable desire of seeing at my ease all the treasures in the
world, and perhaps of enjoying that pleasure as often as I had a
mind, had such an effect upon me, that I could not hearken to his
remonstrances, nor be persuaded of what was, however, but too true,
as to my great misfortune I soon experienced.

I persuaded myself that if that pomatum, by being applied to the
left eye, had the virtue of showing me all the treasures of the
earth, by being applied to the right, it might have the power of
putting them in my disposal. Possessed with this thought, I
obstinately pressed the dervise to apply the pomatum to my right
eye; but he as positively refused me. Brother, said he, after I have
done you so much service, I cannot resolve to do you so great an
injury: consider with yourself what a misfortune it is to be
deprived of one’s eye-sight; do not reduce me to the hard
necessity of obliging you in a thing which you will repent of all
your life after.

I persisted in my obstinacy, and said to him, in strong terms,
Brother, I earnestly desire you to lay aside all the difficulties
you start. You have granted me most generously all that I have asked
of you hitherto, and would you have me go away dissatisfied with you
at last about a thing of so little consequence? For God’s sake,
grant me this last favour: whatever happens, I will not lay the
blame on you, but take it upon myself alone.

The dervise made all the resistance possible; but seeing that I was
able to force him to do it, he said, Since you will absolutely have
it so, I will satisfy you; and thereupon he took a little of the
fatal pomatum, and applied it to my right eye, which I kept shut;
but, alas! when I came to open it, I could distinguish nothing with
either eye but thick darkness, and became blind as you see me now.

Ah! dervise, cried I that moment, what you foretold me is but too
true. Fatal curiosity! added I, insatiable desire of riches! into
what an abyss of miseries have you cast me! I am now sensible what a
misfortune I have brought upon myself; but you, dear brother, cried
I, addressing myself to the dervise, who are so charitable and good,
among the many wonderful secrets you are acquainted with, have you
not one to restore to me my sight again?

Miserable wretch! answered the dervise, if you would have been
advised by me, you would have avoided this misfortune, but you have
your deserts; the blindness of your mind was the cause of the loss
of your eyes. It is true I have secrets, and you, in the little time
I have been with you, might know I have; but I have none to restore
you to your sight. Pray to God, if you believe there is one; it is
He alone that can restore it to you. He gave you riches, of which
you were unworthy, and takes them from you again, and will, by my
hands, give them to men not so ungrateful as you.

The dervise said no more, and I had nothing to reply. He left me to
myself, overwhelmed with confusion, and plunged in inexpressible
grief. After he had collected my camels, he carried them away, and
pursued the road to Balsora.

I desired him not to leave me in that miserable condition, but to
conduct me at least to the first caravan; but he was deaf to my
prayers and entreaties. Thus, deprived of sight, and all I had in
the world, I should have died with affliction and hunger, if the
next day a caravan returning from Balsora had not received me
charitably, and brought me back to Bagdad.

After this manner was I reduced without remedy from a condition
worthy the envy of princes for riches and magnificence, though not
for power, to beggary without resource. I had no other way to
subsist, but must resolve to ask charity, which I have done till
now. But to expiate my offence against God, I enjoined myself, by
way of penance, a box on the ear from every charitable person that
should commiserate my condition.

This, commander of the faithful, is the motive which seemed so
strange to your majesty yesterday, and for which I ought to incur
your indignation. I ask your pardon once more as your slave, and
submit to receive the chastisement I deserve. And if you vouchsafe
to pronounce any thing on the penance I have imposed upon myself, I
am ready to undergo it, since I am persuaded you think it too slight
and much too little for my crime.

When the blind man had made an end of his story, the caliph said,
Baba Abdalla, your sin is great; but God be praised, you know both
the enormity of that; and your penance --It is enough. You must
continue it henceforth, not ceasing to ask of God pardon for it in
every prayer your religion obliges you to say daily; and that you
may not be prevented by the care of getting your living, I will
settle a charity on you during your life of four silver drachmas a
day, which my grand vizier shall give you; therefore do not go away,
but wait till he has executed my orders.

At these words, Baba Abdalla prostrated himself before the
caliph’s throne, and rising up, returned him thanks, and wished
him all happiness and prosperity.

The caliph Haroun Alraschid, very well satisfied with the story of
Baba Abdalla and the dervise, addressed himself to the young man who
used his mare so ill, and asked him his name; to which he replied,
it was Sidi Nonman. [99]

Sidi Nonman, then, said the caliph, I have seen horses exercised all
my life, and have often exercised them myself, but never after so
barbarous a manner as you yesterday treated your mare in the full
square, to the great offence of all the spectators, who murmured
loudly at it. I myself was not less displeased, and had like,
contrary to my intention, to have discovered who I was, to have
remedied that disorder. By your air and behaviour you do not seem to
be a barbarous and cruel man; and therefore I would fain believe
that you had reason for what you did, since I am informed that this
was not the first time, but that you practise the same thing every
day. I would know what is the cause, and sent for you for that
purpose, that you should tell me the truth, and disguise nothing
from me.

Sidi Nonman soon understood what the caliph demanded of him. The
relation was painful to him. He changed colour several times, and
could not help showing how greatly he was embarrassed. However, he
must resolve to tell his story; but before he spoke, he prostrated
himself before the caliph’s throne, and after he rose up again,
endeavoured to speak, to satisfy the caliph, but was so confounded,
not so much at the presence of the caliph, as by the nature of his
relation, that he was speechless.

The caliph, notwithstanding his natural impatience to be obeyed,
showed not the least anger at Sidi Nonman’s silence: he saw
plainly, that he either had not assurance to speak before him, or
was intimidated by the tone of his voice; or, in short, that there
was something to be concealed in his story.

Sidi Nonman, said the caliph, to encourage him, recollect yourself;
but tell your story as if you were speaking, not to me, but to your
most familiar friend. If there is any thing in your relation which
troubles you, and you think I may be offended at it, I pardon you
now: therefore be not uneasy, but speak boldly and freely, and
disguise nothing.

Sidi Nonman, encouraged by these last words of the caliph, said,
Commander of the faithful, whatever apprehensions a man may be under
at your majesty’s presence, I am sensible that respectful
apprehension would not deprive me of the use of my speech, so as to
fail in my obedience to you, in giving you satisfaction in any other
matter but this you now ask of me. I dare not say I am the most
perfect of men; yet I am not wicked enough to have committed, or to
have had an intention of committing any thing against the laws, to
fear their severity; and yet I cannot say I am exempt from sin
through ignorance. In this case I do not say that I depend upon your
majesty’s pardon, but will submit myself to your justice, and
receive the punishment I deserve. I own that the manner in which I
have for some time treated my mare, and which your majesty was
witness of, is strange and cruel, and sets an ill example: but I
hope you will think the motive well grounded, and that I am more
worthy of compassion than chastisement: but not to keep your majesty
any longer in suspense by a long preamble, I will tell you my story.

[Illustration: BABA ABDALLAH PUNISHED.]




The Story of Sidi Nonman.


Commander of the faithful, said Sidi Nonman, I shall not trouble
your majesty with my birth, which is not illustrious enough to merit
your attention. For my fortune, my parents, by their good economy,
left me enough to live on like an honest man, free from ambition, or
being burdensome to any one.

With these advantages, the only thing that I wanted to render my
happiness complete, was an amiable wife, who might share them with
me; but that was a blessing it did not please God to grant me: on
the contrary, it was my misfortune to have one, who, the very next
day after our wedding, began to exercise my patience in a manner not
to be conceived by any one that has not had the same trial.

As it is a custom for us to marry without seeing or knowing whom we
are to marry, your majesty is sensible that a husband has no reason
to complain, when he finds that the wife that has been chosen for
him, is not horribly ugly and deformed, and that her carriage, wit,
and behaviour, make amends for any slight imperfections of the body.

The first time I saw my wife with her face uncovered, after she was
brought home with the usual ceremonies to my house, I rejoiced to
find that I had not been imposed upon in the description of her
person, which pleased me, and she was perfectly agreeable to my
inclination.

The next day after our wedding, when our dinner was served up, which
consisted of several dishes, I went into the room where the cloth
was laid, and not finding my wife there, ordered her to be called.
After making me wait a long time, at last she came. I dissembled my
impatience, and we sat down to table, and I began with the rice,
which I took up with a spoon, as usual.

On the other hand, my wife, instead of making use of a spoon, as
every body does, pulled a little case out of her pocket, and took
out of it a kind of ear-picker, with which she picked up the rice,
and put it into her mouth, grain by grain.

Surprised at this manner of eating, I said to her, Amina, which was
her name, are you used to eat rice so in your family, or do you do
it because you are a little eater, or would you count the grains,
that you may not eat more at one time than another? If you do it out
of savingness, or to teach me not to be extravagant, you have no
reason to fear that, and I can assure you we shall not ruin
ourselves that way. We have, God be thanked, enough to live at our
ease, without depriving ourselves of necessaries. Do not restrain
yourself, my dear Amina, but eat as you see me eat. The kind manner
in which I made these remonstrances might have produced some
obliging answer; but she, without saying a word, continued to eat
after the same manner. At last, to make me the more uneasy, she ate
a grain of rice occasionally; and instead of eating any of the other
meats with me, she only now and then put some crumbs of bread into
her mouth, but not so much as a sparrow would have eaten.

I was very much provoked at her obstinacy; but yet, to indulge and
excuse her, I imagined that she had not been used to eat with men,
much more with a husband, before whom she might perhaps have been
taught to restrain herself; but at the same time thought she carried
it too far out of pure simplicity. I fancied again that she might
have breakfasted late, or that she might have a mind to eat alone,
and more at liberty. These considerations prevented me from saying
any more to her then, to ruffle her temper, or to show any sign of
dissatisfaction. After dinner I left her, but not with an air that
showed any displeasure.

At supper she did the same thing; and the next day, and every time
we ate together, behaved herself after the same manner. I knew it
was impossible for a woman to live on so little food as she took,
and that there was some mystery in it, which I did not understand.
This made me resolve to dissemble; I appeared to take no notice of
her actions, in hopes that time would bring her to live with me as I
desired she should. But my hopes were in vain, and it was not long
before I was convinced they were so.

One night, when Amina thought me fast asleep, she got out of bed
softly, dressed herself with great precaution, avoiding any noise
for fear of waking me. I could not comprehend what her design was,
but curiosity made me feign a sound sleep; and as soon as she had
dressed herself, she went softly out of the room without making any
noise.

As soon as she was gone out, I got up, threw my gown over my
shoulders, and had time enough to see by a window, that looked into
my court-yard, that she opened the street-door and went out.

I ran presently down to the door, which she left half open, and
followed her by moonlight, till I saw her go into a burying-ground
just by our house. I got to the end of the wall, taking care not to
be seen, and looking over, saw Amina with a goule.

Your majesty knows that the goules of both sexes are wandering
demons, which generally infest old buildings; from whence they rush
out, by surprise, on people that pass by, kill them, and eat their
flesh; and for want of such prey, will sometimes go in the night
into burying-grounds, and feed upon dead bodies, which they dig up.

I was in a terrible surprise to see my wife with this goule. They
dug up a dead body which had been buried but that day, and the goule
cut off pieces of the flesh, which they ate together by the
grave-side, conversing together very quietly during their cruel and
inhuman repast. But I was too far off to hear their discourse, which
must have been as strange as their repast, the remembrance of which
still makes me shudder.

When they had made an end of this horrible feast, they threw the
dead body into the grave again, and filled it up with the earth they
had dug out. I left them at their work, and made haste home, and
leaving the door half open, as I found it, went into my chamber, and
to bed again, where I pretended to be fast asleep.

Soon afterwards Amina returned without the least noise, undressed
herself, and came to bed again, rejoiced, as I imagined, that she
had succeeded so well without being discovered.

My mind was so full of the idea of so barbarous and abominable an
action as I had seen, that I felt a great reluctance to lie by a
person who had been guilty of it, and was a long time before I could
fall asleep again. However. I got a short nap; but waked at the
first call to public prayers at daybreak, got up, dressed myself,
and went to the mosque.

After prayers, I went out of the town, and spent the morning in
walking in the gardens, and thinking what I should do to oblige my
wife to change her manner of life. I rejected all the violent
measures that came into my thoughts, and I resolved to use all
gentle means to cure that unhappy inclination of hers; and these
thoughts brought me insensibly home by dinner-time.

As soon as Amina saw me come in, she ordered dinner to be served up;
and as I saw she persisted in the same manner of eating rice by
single grains, I said to her, with all the moderation possible, You
know, Amina, what reason I have to be surprised, when the next day
after our marriage I saw you eat rice in so small a quantity, and in
a manner which would have offended any other husband but me: you
know also, I contented myself with telling you, that I was uneasy at
it, and desired you to eat of the other meats, which I ordered to be
dressed several ways, to endeavour to suit your taste: and I am sure
my table did not want for variety: but all my remonstrances have had
no effect upon you, and you persist in your old way. I have said
nothing, because I would not constrain you, and should be sorry that
any thing I now say should make you uneasy; but tell me, Amina, I
conjure you, are not the meats served up at my table better than
dead flesh?

I had no sooner pronounced these last words, but Amina, who
perceived that I had watched her last night, flew into a rage beyond
imagination. Her face was as red as scarlet, her eyes ready to start
out of her head, and she foamed with passion.

The terrible condition I saw her in frightened me so much, that I
stood motionless, and was not able to defend myself against the
horrible wickedness she meditated against me, and which will
surprise your majesty. In the violence of her passion, she dipped
her hand into a basin of water, which stood just by her, and
muttering between her teeth some words, which I could not hear, she
threw some water in my face, and said to me in a furious tone,
Wretch, receive the punishment of thy curiosity, and become a dog.

No sooner had Amina, whom I knew not to be a sorceress till then,
pronounced these diabolical words, but I was immediately changed
into a dog. My amazement and surprise at so sudden and unexpected a
change prevented my thinking at first of providing for my safety,
till she took up a great stick to beat me, with which she laid on
such heavy blows, that I wonder they did not kill me. I thought to
have escaped her rage, by running into the yard: but she pursued me
with the same fury, and, notwithstanding all my activity, I could
not avoid her blows. At last, when she was tired of running after me
and beating me, and in despair that she had not killed me, as she
desired, she thought of a new way to do it: she half opened the
street-door, that she might squeeze me to death in it, as I ran out
to preserve my life. Dog as I was, I presently perceived her
pernicious design; and as present danger inspires a presence of
mind, to elude her vigilance I watched her face and motions so well,
that I took my opportunity, and passed through quick enough to save
my life and escape her malice, though she pinched the end of my tail.

The pain I felt made me cry out and howl as I ran along the streets,
which brought all the dogs out upon me, and I got bit by several of
them; but to avoid their pursuit, I ran into the shop of a man who
sold boiled sheep’s heads, tongues, and feet, where I saved myself.

The man at first took my part with much compassion, by driving away
the dogs that followed me, and would have run into his house. My
first care was to creep into a corner to hide myself; but I found
not the sanctuary and protection I hoped for. My host was one of
those extravagantly superstitious persons, who think dogs unclean
creatures, and if by chance one should happen to touch them in the
streets, cannot use soap and water enough to wash their garments
clean. After the dogs who chased me were all dispersed and gone, he
did all he could to drive me out of his house that day; but I was
hid, and out of his reach, and spent that night in his shop in spite
of him; and indeed I had need of rest, to recover after Amina’s
ill treatment.

But not to weary your majesty with trifling circumstances, I shall
not particularize the melancholy reflections I made on my
metamorphosis; but only tell you, that my host going out the next
morning to lay in a stock of sheep’s heads, tongues, and trotters,
when he returned he opened his shop, and while he was laying out his
goods, I crept out of my corner, and got among some other dogs of
the neighbourhood, who had followed my host by the scent of his
meat, and surrounded the shop, in expectation of having some thrown
to them. I joined them, and put myself among them in a begging
posture. My host observing me, and considering that I had eaten
nothing while I lay in the shop, distinguished me from the rest, by
throwing me larger pieces of meat, and oftener than the other dogs.
After he had given me as much as he thought fit, I looked at him
earnestly, and wagged my tail, to show him I begged he would repeat
his favours. But he was inflexible, and opposed my entrance with a
stick in his hand, and with so unkind a look, that I was forced to
go and seek a new habitation.

Some houses farther I stopped at a baker’s shop, who was of a
lively gay temper, quite the reverse of the other man, who was eaten
up with melancholy. He was then at breakfast, and though I made no
sign that I asked for any thing, he threw me a bit of bread. Instead
of catching it up greedily, as other dogs do, I looked at him,
moving my head and wagging my tail, to show my gratitude; at which
he was mightily pleased, and smiled. Though I was not hungry, I ate
the piece of bread to please him, and I ate slowly, to show him that
it was out of respect to him. He observed this, and let me continue
near the shop. I sat down and turned myself to the street, to show
him I only then wanted his protection; which he not only granted,
but by his caresses encouraged me to come into the house. This I did
in a way that showed it was with his leave. He was pleased, and
showed me a place where to lie, which I took possession of, and kept
while I lived with him. I was always well treated; and whenever he
breakfasted, dined, or supped, I had my share of provisions; and,
for my part, I loved him, and was as faithful as gratitude required
of me. I always had my eyes upon him, and he scarce stirred out of
doors, or went into the city on business, but I was at his heels. I
was the more exact, because I perceived my attention pleased him;
for whenever he went out, without giving me time to see him, he
would call Chance, which was the name he gave me.

At this name I used to spring from my place, jump, and caper, and
run before the door, and never cease fawning on him till he went
out; and then I always either followed him, or ran before him,
always looking at him to show my joy.

I had lived some time with this baker, when a woman came one day
into the shop to buy some bread, and giving my master a piece of bad
money, among some good, he perceived it, returned it, and asked for
another.

The woman refused to take it again, and affirmed it to be good. The
baker maintained the contrary, and in the dispute told the woman he
was sure that the piece of money was so visibly false, that his dog
could distinguish it; upon which he called Chance, Chance, and I
jumped immediately on the counter, and the baker throwing the money
down before me, said, See, and tell me which of these pieces is bad!
I looked over all the pieces of money, and then set my paw upon that
which was bad, separated it from the rest, looking in my master’s
face to show it him.

The baker, who only called me to banter the woman, was very much
surprised to see me so immediately pitch upon the bad money. The
woman, thus convicted, had nothing to say for herself, but was
obliged to give another piece instead of the bad one. As soon as she
was gone, my master called in some neighbours, and enlarged very
much upon my capacity, telling them what had happened.

The neighbours all desired to make the experiment, and of all the
bad money they showed me, mixed with good, there was not one on
which I did not set my paw, and separate the bad money from the good.

The woman, for her part, was sure to tell every body she met what
had happened; insomuch that the fame of my skill in distinguishing
good money from bad was not only spread throughout the
neighbourhood, but over all that part of the town, and insensibly
through the whole city.

I had business enough every day; for I was obliged to show my skill
to all customers that came to buy bread of my master. In short, my
reputation procured my master more business than he could manage,
and brought him customers from the most distant parts of the town;
and this run of business lasted so long, that my master owned to his
friends and neighbours, that I was a treasure to him.

My little knowledge made many people envy my master’s good
fortune, and lay traps to steal me away, which obliged him always to
keep me in his sight. One day a woman came out of curiosity to buy
some bread like the rest, and seeing me sit upon the counter, threw
down before me six pieces of money, among which was one that was
bad. I separated it presently from the good, and setting my paw upon
it, looked in the woman’s face, as much as to say, is it not so?
The woman looking at me, replied, Yes, you are in the right; it is
bad; and staying some time in the shop, to look at and admire me, at
last paid my master for his bread, and when she went out of the
shop, made a sign, unknown to him, for me to follow her.

I was always attentive to any means to deliver myself out of so
strange a metamorphosis, and had observed that the woman examined me
with an extraordinary attention. I imagined that she might know
something of my misfortune, and the melancholy condition I was
reduced to: however, I let her go, and contented myself with looking
at her. After walking two or three steps, she turned about, and
seeing that I only looked at her, without stirring out of my place,
she made me another sign to follow her.

Without deliberating any longer, and observing that my master the
baker was busy cleaning his oven to put bread into it, and did not
mind me, I jumped off the counter, and followed the woman, who
seemed overjoyed.

After I had got some way, she stopped at a house, opened the door,
and called to me to come in, saying, You will not repent following
me. When I had got in, she shut the door, and carried me to her
chamber, where I saw a beautiful young lady working embroidery. This
lady, who was daughter to the charitable woman who had brought me
from the baker’s shop, was a very skilful magician, as I found
afterwards.

Daughter, said the mother, I have brought you the famous baker’s
dog, that can tell good money from bad. You know I gave you my
thoughts on that matter when I first heard of him, and told you, I
fancied he was a man changed into a dog by some wicked trick. To-day
I bethought myself of going to buy some bread of that baker, and was
myself a witness of the wonders performed by this dog, who has made
such extraordinary noise in Bagdad. What say you, daughter, am I
deceived in my conjecture? Mother, you are not, answered the
daughter, and I will make it appear so.

The young lady immediately got up, put her hand into a basin of
water, and throwing some upon me, said, If thou wert born a dog,
remain so; but if thou wert born a man, resume thy former shape by
the virtue of this water. At that instant the enchantment was
broken, and I became a man as before.

Penetrated with the greatness of this kindness, I threw myself at my
deliverer’s feet; and after I had kissed the hem of her garment, I
said, My dear deliverer, I am so sensible of your exceeding and
unparalleled goodness towards a stranger, as I am, that I beg of you
to tell me yourself what I shall do to show my gratitude; or rather
dispose of me as a slave, to whom you have a just right, since I am
no more my own, but entirely yours: and that you may know who I am,
I will tell you my story in as few words as possible.

After I had told her who I was, I gave her an account of my marriage
with Amina, of the complaisance I showed her, my patience in bearing
with her humour, her extraordinary behaviour, and the indignity with
which she treated me out of inconceivable wickedness, and finished
my story with my transformation, and thanking her mother for the
inexpressible happiness she had procured me.

Sidi Nonman, said the daughter to me, let us not talk of the
obligation you say you owe me; it is enough for me that I have done
any service to so honest a man as you are. But let us talk a little
of Amina your wife. I was acquainted with her before your marriage;
and as I know her to be a magician, she also is sensible that I have
some knowledge of that art, since we both learnt it of the same
mistress. We often meet at the baths, but as our tempers are
different, I avoid all opportunities of contracting an intimacy with
her, which is no difficult matter, as she does the same by me. I am
not at all surprised at her wickedness; but what I have already done
for you is not sufficient; I will complete what I have begun. It is
not enough to have broken the enchantment by which she has excluded
you from the society of men. You must punish her as she deserves, by
going home again, and assuming the authority which belongs to you. I
will give you the proper means. Converse a little with my mother
till I come back.

My deliveress went into a closet and while she was there, I repeated
my obligation to the mother as well as daughter. She said to me, You
see my daughter has as great skill in the magic art as Amina; but
makes so good a use of it, that you would be surprised to know the
good she has done, and daily does with it. This induces me to let
her practise it; for I should not permit her, if I perceived she
made an ill use of it in the smallest instance.

The mother began to relate some of the wonders she had seen her do,
when she came into the room again, with a little bottle in her hand.
Sidi Nonman, said she, my books, which I have been consulting, tell
me that Amina is now abroad, but will be at home presently. They
also inform me, she pretended before your servants to be very uneasy
at your absence, and made them believe, that at dinner you
recollected some business which obliged you to go out again
immediately; that as you went out, you left the door open, and a dog
came into the hall where she was at dinner, and she beat him out
with a great stick.

Take this little bottle and go home immediately, and wait in your
own chamber till she comes in, which will not be long. As soon as
she comes home, run down into the yard, and meet her face to face.
In her surprise to see you return so unexpectedly, she will turn her
back to run away; then be sure to have the bottle ready, and throw
some of the liquor it contains upon her, pronouncing at the same
time these words boldly: Receive the chastisement of thy wickedness.
I will tell you no more; you will see the effect.

After these words I took my leave of my benefactress and her mother,
with all the testimonies of the most perfect gratitude, and a
sincere protestation never to forget my obligation to them; and then
went home.

All things happened as the young magician foretold. Amina was not
long before she came home. As she came up the yard, I met her with
the water in my hand. As soon as she saw me, she shrieked out; and
as she turned about to run to the door, I threw the liquor upon her,
pronouncing the words which the young magician taught me, and she
was instantly changed into the same mare which your majesty saw me
upon yesterday.

At that instant, in the surprise she was in, I seized her by the
mane, and notwithstanding her resistance, led her into the stable,
where I put an halter upon her head, and when I had tied her to the
rack, reproaching her with her baseness, I chastised her with a whip
till I was tired, and punished her every day since after the same
manner. I hope, commander of the faithful, continued Sidi Nonman,
making an end of his story, your majesty will not disapprove of my
conduct, and will think I have shown so wicked and pernicious a
woman more indulgence than she deserved.

When the caliph found that Sidi Nonman had no more to say, he said
to him, Your story is very singular, and the wickedness of your wife
inexcusable; therefore I do not absolutely condemn the chastisement
you have hitherto given her; but I would have you consider now great
a punishment it is to be reduced to the condition of beasts, and
wish you would be content with that chastisement. I would order you
to go and address yourself to the young magician, to wave the
enchantment and metamorphosis she has inflicted, but that I know the
obstinacy and incorrigible cruelty of magicians of both sexes, who
abuse their art; and were I not apprehensive that the second effect
of your wife’s revenge would be more violent than the first.

The caliph, who was naturally mild and compassionate to all
sufferers, after he had declared his mind to Sidi Nonman, addressed
himself to the third person the grand vizier Giafar had summoned to
attend him. Cogia Hassan, said he, passing yesterday by your house,
it seemed so magnificent that I had a curiosity to know to whom it
belonged, and was told that you, whose trade is so mean that a man
can scarce get his bread by it, have built this house after you had
followed this trade some years. I was likewise informed that you
make a good use of the riches God has blessed you with, and your
neighbours speak well of you.

All this pleases me well, added the caliph, and I am persuaded that
the means by which Providence has been pleased to bestow these gifts
on you must have been very extraordinary. I am curious to know them
from your own mouth, and sent for you on purpose to have that
satisfaction. Speak sincerely, that when I know your story, I may
rejoice in your good fortune.

But that you may not suspect my curiosity, and believe that I have
any other interest than what I tell you, I declare, that far from
having any pretensions, I give you my word you shall enjoy freely
all you have got.

On these assurances of the caliph, Cogia Hassan prostrated himself
before his throne, with his forehead down to the carpet, and when he
rose up again, said, Commander of the faithful, any other person but
myself might have been alarmed at having been summoned to appear
before your majesty; but knowing that my conscience was clear, and
that I had committed nothing against the law, nor your majesty, but,
on the contrary, had always the most respectful sentiments and the
profoundest veneration for your person, my only fear was, that I
should not be able to support the lustre of your throne. But
nevertheless, on the public report of your majesty’s receiving
favourably, and hearing the meanest of your subjects, I took
courage, and never doubted but I should have confidence enough to
give you all the satisfaction you should require of me. Besides,
your majesty has given me a proof of your goodness, by granting me
your protection before you know whether I deserve it. Nevertheless,
I hope you will retain the advantageous sentiments you have of me,
when, in obedience to your command, I shall relate my adventures to
you.

After this little compliment to conciliate the caliph’s good will
and attention, and after some moments’ recollection, Cogia Hassan
resumed his discourse in the following manner:




The Story of Cogia Hassan Alhabbal.


Commander of the faithful, said he, that your majesty may the better
understand by what means I arrived at the happiness I now enjoy, I
ought to acquaint you, there are two intimate friends, citizens of
Bagdad, now alive, who can testify the truth of what I shall tell
you, and to whom, after God, the author of all good, I owe my
prosperity.

These two friends are called, the one Saadi, the other Saad. Saadi,
who is very rich, was always of opinion, that no man could be happy
in this world without great riches, to live independent of every one.

Saad was of another opinion; he agreed that riches were necessary in
life, but maintained that the happiness of a man’s life consisted
in virtue, without any farther attachment to worldly goods than what
were necessary in life, and to do good withal.

Saad himself is one of this number, and lives very happily and
contented in his station; and though Saadi is infinitely more rich,
their friendship is very sincere, and the richest sets no more value
on himself than the other. They never had any other dispute but on
this point; in all other things their union has been very strict.

One day as they were talking upon this subject, as I have since been
informed by them both, Saadi affirmed that poverty proceeded from
men’s being born poor, or spending their fortunes in luxury and
debauchery, or by some of those unforeseen fatalities which are not
extraordinary. My opinion, said he, is, that most people’s poverty
is owing to their wanting at first a sufficient sum of money to
raise them above want, by employing their industry to improve it:
for, said he, if they once had such a sum, and made a right use of
it, they would not only live well, but would infallibly grow rich in
time.

Saad could not come into his sentiments. The way, said he, which you
propose to make a poor man rich, is not so certain as you imagine.
Your plan is very hazardous, and I can bring many good arguments
against your opinions, but that they will carry us too far. I
believe, with as much probability, that a poor man may become rich
by other means, as well as by money: and there are people who have
raised as great and surprising fortunes by mere chance, as others
have done by money, with all their good economy and management to
increase it by the best conducted trade.

Saad, replied Saadi, I see we shall not come to any determination by
my persisting in opposing my opinion against yours. I will make an
experiment to convince you, by giving, for example, a sum of money
to some artisan, whose ancestors from father to son have always been
poor, and lived only from day to day, and died as arrant beggars as
they were born. If I have not the success I expect, you shall try if
you will have better by the means you shall use.

Some days after this dispute, these two friends happened to walk out
together, and passing through the street where I was at work in my
stall, at my trade of rope-making, which I learnt of my father, who
learnt of his, and he of his ancestors; and by my dress and equipage
it was no hard matter for them to guess at my poverty.

Saad, remembering Saadi’s engagement, said, If you have not forgot
what you said to me, there is a man, pointing to me, whom I can
remember a long time working at his trade of rope-making, and in the
same poverty: he is a worthy subject for your liberality, and a
proper person for you to make your experiment upon. I remember it so
well, replied Saadi, that I have ever since carried a sufficient sum
about me to do it, but only waited for an opportunity of being
together, that you might be witness of the fact. Let us go to him,
and know if he is really necessitous.

The two friends came to me, and I, seeing that they had a mind to
speak to me, left off work. They both accosted me with the common
salutation, and Saadi wishing me peace, asked me my name.

I returned their salutation, and answered their question, saying to
him, Sir, my name is Hassan; but by reason of my trade, I am
commonly known by the name of Hassan Alhabbal.

Hassan, replied Saadi, as there is no trade but what a man may live
by, I doubt not but yours produces enough for you to live well; and
I am amazed, that the long time you have worked at your trade, you
have not saved enough to lay in a good stock of hemp to extend your
manufacture and employ more hands, by the profit of whose work you
would soon increase your income.

Sir, replied I, you will be no longer amazed I have not saved money,
and taken the way you mention to become rich, when you come to know
that let me work as hard as I can from morning till night, I can
hardly get enough to keep my family in bread and pulse. I have a
wife and five children, not one of whom is old enough to be of the
least assistance to me. I must keep them and clothe them, and in our
poor way of living, they still want a thousand necessaries, which
they cannot do without. And though hemp is not very dear, I must
have money to buy it. This is the first thing I do with any money I
receive for my work; otherwise, if I should neglect to do so, I and
my family must starve.

Now judge, Sir, added I, if it is possible, that I should save any
thing for myself and family: it is enough that we are content with
the little that God sends us, and that we have not the knowledge nor
desire of what we want, but can live as we have always been bred up,
and are not reduced to beg.

When I had given Saadi this account, he said to me, Hassan, I am not
so much surprised, as I was, and I comprehend what obliges you to be
content in your station. But if I should make a present of a purse
of two hundred pieces of gold, would not you make a good use of it?
and do not you believe, that with such a sum you could become soon
as rich as the principal of your profession?

Sir, replied I, you seem to be so good a gentleman, that I am
persuaded you would not banter me, but that the offer you make me,
is serious; and I dare say, without presuming too much upon myself,
that a much less sum would be sufficient, not only to make me as
rich as the principal of our profession, but that in time I should
be richer than all of them in this city together, though Bagdad is
so large and populous.

The generous Saadi showed me immediately that in what he said he was
serious. He pulled a purse out of his bosom, and putting it into my
hands, said, Here, take this purse; you will find it contains two
hundred pieces of gold: I pray God bless you with them, and give you
grace to make the good use of them I desire; and believe me, my
friend Saad, whom you see here, and I, shall both take great
pleasure in finding we may contribute in making you more happy than
you now are.

Commander of the faithful, when I had got the purse, the first thing
I did was to put it into my bosom; but the transport of my joy was
so great, and I was so much penetrated with gratitude, that my
speech failed me, and I could give my benefactor no other tokens of
my gratitude, than to lay hold of the hem of his garment and kiss
it; but he drew it from me; and he and his friend pursued their walk.

As soon as they were gone, I returned to my work again, and my first
thought was, what I should do with my purse to keep it safe. I had
in my poor house neither box nor cupboard to lock it up in, nor any
other place where I could be sure it would not be discovered if I
had it.

In this perplexity, as I had been used, like many poor people of my
sort, to put the little money I had in the folds of my turban, I
left my work, and went into the house, under pretence of wrapping my
turban up anew. And I took such precautions that neither my wife nor
children saw what I was doing. But first I laid aside ten pieces of
gold for present necessaries, and wrapt the rest up in the folds of
the linen which went about my cap.

The principal expense I was at that day, was to lay in a good stock
of hemp, and afterwards, as my family had eaten no flesh meat a long
time, I went to the shambles, and bought something for supper.

As I was carrying the meat I had bought home in my hand, a famished
kite flew upon me, and would have taken away my meat, if I had not
held it very fast; but, alas! I had better parted with it than lost
my money; the fester I held my meat, the more the bird struggled to
get it, drawing me sometimes on one side, and sometimes on another;
but would not quit the prize, till unfortunately by my efforts the
turban fell on the ground.

The kite immediately let go his hold, and seizing on my turban
before I could pick it up, flew away with it. I cried out so loud,
that I frightened all the men, women, and children in the
neighbourhood, who joined their shouts and cries to make the kite
quit his hold; for by that means these sort of voracious birds are
often forced to quit their prey. But our cries did not frighten this
kite; he carried off my turban, and we soon lost sight of him before
he dropt it, and it would have been in vain for me to fatigue myself
with running after him.

I went home very melancholy at the loss of my turban and money. I
was obliged to buy a new turban, which diminished the small
remainder of the ten pieces; for I had laid out a deal in hemp. The
little that was left was not sufficient to give me reason to gratify
the great hopes I had conceived.

But what troubled me most was the little satisfaction I should be
able to give my benefactor for his ill-placed generosity, when he
should come to hear what a misfortune I had met with, which he would
perhaps look upon as incredible, and consequently an idle excuse.

While the remainder of the ten pieces lasted, my little family and I
lived the better for it; but I soon relapsed into the same poverty,
and the same inability to extricate myself from wretchedness.
However, I never murmured nor repined. God, said I, was pleased to
give me riches when I least expected them; he has thought fit to
take them from me again almost at the same time, because it so
pleased him, and they were at his disposal; yet I will praise his
name for all the benefits I have received, as it was his good
pleasure, and submit myself, as I have ever done hitherto, to his
will.

These were my sentiments, while my wife, from whom I could not keep
secret the loss I had sustained, was inconsolable. In my trouble I
had told my neighbours, that when I lost my turban, I lost a hundred
and ninety pieces of gold; but as they knew my poverty, and could
not comprehend how I should have got so great a sum by my work, they
only laughed at me.

About six months after this my misfortune, which I have related to
your majesty, the two friends walking through that part of the town
where I lived, the neighbourhood put Saad in mind of me. We are now,
said he to Saadi, not far from the street where Hassan Alhabbal
lives; let us call and see what use he made of the two hundred
pieces of gold you gave him, and whether they have enabled him to
take any steps towards bettering his fortune.

With all my heart, replied Saadi; I have been thinking of him some
days, and it will be a great pleasure and satisfaction to me to have
you with me, as a witness of the proof of my proposal. You will see
a great alteration. I expect we shall hardly know him again.

Just as Saadi said this, these two friends turned the corner of the
street, and Saad, who perceived me first at a distance, said to his
friend, I believe you reckon without your host; I see Hassan
Alhabbal, but can discern no change in his person, for he is as
ill-dressed as when we saw him before; the only difference that I
can perceive is, his turban looks something better. Observe him
yourself, and see whether I am in the wrong.

As they drew nearer to me, Saadi saw me too, and found Saad was in
the right, but could not tell to what he should attribute the little
alteration he saw in my person; and was so much amazed, that he
could not speak when he came up to me. Well, Hassan, said Saad, we
do not ask you how affairs go since we saw you last; without doubt
they are in a better train.

Gentlemen, replied I, addressing myself to them both, I have the
great mortification to tell you, that your desires, wishes, and
hopes, as well as mine, have not had the success you had reason to
expect, and I promised myself; you will scarce believe the
extraordinary adventure that has befallen me. I assure you,
nevertheless, on the word of an honest man, and you ought to believe
me, for nothing is more true than what I am going to tell you. Then
I related to them my adventures, with the same circumstances I had
the honour to tell your majesty.

Saadi rejected my discourse, and said, Hassan, you joke with me, and
would deceive me; for what you say is a thing incredible. What have
kites to do with turbans? they only search for something to satisfy
their hunger. You have done as all such sort of people as you
generally do: if they have made any extraordinary gain, or any good
fortune happens to them, which they never expected, they throw aside
their work, take their pleasure, and make merry, while the money
lasts; and when they have eaten and drank it all out, are reduced to
the same necessity and want as before. You would not be so
miserable, but because you deserve it, and render yourself unworthy
of any good action done to you.

Sir, replied I, I bear all these reproaches, and am ready to bear as
many more, if they were more severe, and all with the more patience,
because I do not think I deserve them. The thing is so publicly
known in this part of the town, that there is nobody but can satisfy
you of the truth of it. If you inquire, you will find that I do not
impose upon you. I own, I never heard talk of kites flying away with
turbans; but this has actually happened to me, as a great many other
things, which do not fall out every day, and yet have actually
happened.

Saad took my part, and told Saadi a great many as surprising stories
of kites, some of which he affirmed he knew to be true, insomuch
that at last he pulled his purse out of his bosom, and counted out
two hundred pieces of gold into my hand, which I put into my bosom
for want of a purse.

When Saadi had told me out that sum, he said to me, Hassan, I make
you a present of these two hundred pieces; but take care to put them
in a safer place, that you may not lose them so unfortunately as you
have done the others, and employ them in such a manner that they may
procure you the advantages that the others would have done. I told
him that the obligation of this his second kindness was much greater
than I deserved, after what had happened, and that I should be sure
to make good use of his advice. I would have said a great deal more,
but he did not give me time, but went away, and continued his walk
with his friend.

As soon as they were gone, I left off work and went home, and
finding neither my wife nor children within, I pulled out my money,
put ten pieces by, and wrapt up the rest in a clean linen cloth,
tying it fast with a knot; but then I was to consider where I should
hide this linen cloth, that it might be safe. After I had considered
some time, I bethought of laying it at the bottom of a great earthen
vessel full of bran, which stood in a corner, where I imagined
neither my wife nor children would look into. My wife came home soon
after, and as I had but very little hemp in the house, I told her I
should go out to buy some, without saying any thing to her about the
two friends.

While I was out, a sand-man, who sells scouring sand, which women
use in baths, passed through our street, and called, Sand, ho! My
wife, who wanted some, called him: but as she had no money, she
asked him, if he would make an exchange of some sand for some bran.
The sand-man asked to see the bran. My wife showed him the pot; the
bargain was made; she had the scouring sand, with which she filled a
lean-to which I had made to the house, and the sand-man took the pot
and bran along with him.

Not long after, I came home, loaded with as much hemp as I could
carry, and followed by five porters loaded also with the same. After
I had satisfied them for their trouble, I sat down to rest myself;
and, looking about me, could not see the pot of bran.

It is impossible for me to express to your majesty my surprise, and
the effect it had on me at the moment. I asked my wife hastily what
was become of it: and she told me the bargain she had made with the
sand-man, which she thought to be a very good one.

Ah! unfortunate woman! cried I, you know not the injury you have
done me, yourself, and our children, by making that bargain, which
has ruined us quite. You thought only of selling the bran, but with
the bran you have enriched the sand-man with a hundred and ninety
pieces of gold, which Saadi with his friend came and made me a
second present of.

My wife was like one stark mad, when she knew what a fault she had
committed through ignorance. She cried, beat her breast, and tore
her hair and clothes. Unhappy wretch that I am, cried she, am I fit
to live after so horrid a mistake? Where shall I find this sand-man?
I know him not; I never saw him in our street before. Oh! husband,
added she, you was very much in the wrong to be so reserved in a
matter of such importance! This had never happened, if you had
communicated the secret to me. In short, I should never make an end
of my story, if I were to tell your majesty what her grief made her
say. You are not ignorant how eloquent women often are in their
afflictions.

Wife, said I, moderate your grief; by your weeping and howling you
will alarm all the neighbourhood, and there is no reason they should
be informed of our misfortunes. They will only laugh at us, instead
of pitying us. We had best bear our loss patiently, and submit
ourselves to the will of God, and bless him, for that out of two
hundred pieces of gold which he had given us, he has taken back but
one hundred and ninety, and left us ten, which, by the use I shall
make of them, will be a great relief to us.

My wife at first did not relish all these my arguments; but as time
softens the greatest misfortunes, and makes them more supportable,
she at last grew easy, and had almost forgotten them. It is true,
said I to her, we live but poorly; but what have the rich, which we
have not? Do not we breathe the same air, enjoy the same light, and
the same warmth of the sun? Therefore what conveniences have they
more than we, that we should envy their happiness? They die as well
as we. In short, while we live in the fear of God, as we should
always do, the advantage they have over us is so very
inconsiderable, that we ought not to regard it.

I will not tire your majesty any longer with my moral reflections.
My wife and I comforted ourselves, and I pursued my trade with as
much alacrity as before these two mortifying losses, which followed
one another so quickly. The only thing that troubled me sometimes
was, how I should look Saadi in the face when he should come and ask
me how much I had improved his two hundred pieces of gold, and
advanced my fortune by his liberality. I saw no remedy but to
resolve to submit to the confusion I should feel, though it was by
no fault of mine, this time, any more than before, that this
misfortune had happened.

The two friends stayed away longer this time than the former, though
Saad had often spoken to Saadi, who always put it off; for, said he,
the longer we stay away, the richer Hassan will be, and I shall have
the greater satisfaction.

Saad, who had not the same opinion of the effect of his friend’s
generosity, made answer, You fancy then that your present will have
been turned to a better account this time than before. I would
advise you not to flatter yourself too much, for fear you should be
more sensibly mortified if it should prove otherwise. Why, replied
Saadi, kites do not fly away with turbans every day; and Hassan will
be more cautious this time.

I do not doubt of it, replied Saad; but, added he, there are other
accidents that neither you nor I can think of; therefore, I say
again, moderate your joy, and do not depend too much on Hassan’s
good success; for to tell you what I think, and what I always
thought, (whether you like to hear it or not), I have a secret
foresight, that you will not have succeeded, and that I shall
succeed better than you in proving that a poor man may sooner become
rich by any other means than by money.

In short, one day, when Saad and Saadi were together, and were
disputing upon this subject, Saad observed that enough had been
said: I am resolved, said he, to inform myself this very day, what
has passed; it is time for walking; let us not lose it, but go see
which of us has lost the wager. I saw them at a distance, was
terribly concerned, and was just going to leave my work, and to run
and hide myself. However, I appeared very earnest at work, made as
if I had not seen them, and never lifted up my eyes till they were
close to me, and had saluted me, and then I could not help it I hung
down my head, and told them my last misfortune, with all the
circumstances, and that I was as poor as when they first saw me.

After that, I added, you may say that I ought to have hid my money
in another place than in a pot of bran, which was carried out of my
house that same day: but that pot had stood there many years, and
had never been removed, whenever my wife parted with the bran. Could
I guess that a sand-man should come by that very day, and my wife
would have no money, and would make such an exchange? You may indeed
allege, that I ought to have told my wife of it; but I will never
believe that such prudent persons, as I am persuaded you are, would
have given me that advice; and if I had put my money any where else,
what certainty could I have had that it would be more safe?

I see, sir, said I, addressing myself to Saadi, that it has pleased
God, whose ways are secret and impenetrable, that I should not be
enriched by your liberality, but that I must be poor; however, the
obligation is the same as if it had wrought the desired effect.

After these words, I was silent; and Saadi replied, Though I would
persuade myself, Hassan, that all you tell us is true, and not owing
to your debauchery or ill management, yet I must not be extravagant,
and ruin myself for the sake of an experiment. I do not regret in
the least the four hundred pieces of gold I gave you to raise you in
the world. I did it out of respect to God, without expecting any
recompense but the pleasure of doing good. If any thing makes me
repent, it is that I did not address myself to another, who might
have made a better use of my charity. Then turning about to his
friend, Saad, continued he, you may know by what I have said, that I
do not entirely give up the cause. You may now make your experiment,
and let me see, that there are ways, besides giving money, to make a
poor man’s fortune in the way we both mean. Let Hassan be the man.
I dare say, whatever you give him he will not be richer than he was
with four hundred pieces of gold. Saad had a piece of lead in his
hand, which he showed Saadi. You saw me, said he, take up this piece
of lead, which I found on the ground; I will give it to Hassan; and
you shall see what it is worth.

Saadi burst out a laughing at Saad. What is that bit of lead worth?
said he; a farthing? What can Hassan do with that? Saad presented it
to me, and said, Take it, Hassan: let Saadi laugh: you will tell us
some news of the good luck it has brought one time or another. I
thought Saad was in jest, and had a mind to divert himself; however,
I put the lead in my pocket, and thanked him. The two friends
pursued their walk, and I fell to work again.

At night, when I pulled off my clothes to go to bed, the piece of
lead, which I had never thought of from the time he gave it me,
tumbled out of my pocket. I took it up, and laid it on the first
place that was nearest to me. The same night it happened that a
fisherman, a neighbour, mending his nets, found a piece of lead
wanting; and it being too late to buy any, since the shops were shut
up, and he must either fish that night or his family go without
bread the next day, he called to his wife, and bid her inquire among
the neighbours for a piece. She went from door to door on both sides
of the street, but could not get any, and came back again to tell
her husband so. He asked her if she had been to several of their
neighbours, naming them, and among the rest Hassan Alhabbal’s
house. No, indeed, said the wife, I have not been there; that was
too far off, and if I had gone, do you think I should have found
any? I know by experience they never have any thing when one wants
it. No matter, said the fisherman; you are an idle hussy; you must
go there; for though you have been there a hundred times before,
without getting any thing, you may chance to get what we want now.
You must go.

The fisherman’s wife went out grumbling and growling, came and
knocked at my door, and waked me out of a sound sleep. I asked her
what she wanted. Hassan Alhabbal, said she, as loud as she could
bawl, my husband wants a bit of lead to mend his nets with; and if
you have a piece, desires you to give it him.

The piece of lead which Saad had given me was so fresh in my memory,
and had so lately dropt out of my clothes, that I could not forget
it. I told my neighbour I had some; and if she would stay a moment,
my wife should give her what she wanted. Accordingly, my wife, who
was wakened by the noise as well as myself, got up, and groping
about where I directed her, found the lead, opened the door, and
gave it to the fisherman’s wife, who was so overjoyed, that she
promised my wife, that for the kindness she did her and her husband,
she would answer for him we should have the first cast of the nets.

The fisherman was so much rejoiced to see the lead, which he so
little expected, that he very much approved his wife’s promise. He
finished mending his nets, and went a fishing two hours before day,
according to custom. At the first throw he caught but one fish,
about a yard long, and proportionable in thickness; and afterwards
had a great many successful casts; but of all the fish he took, none
came up in size equal to the first.

When the fisherman had done fishing, he went home, where his first
care was to think of me. I was extremely surprised, when at my work,
to see him come to me with a large fish in his hand. Neighbour, said
he, my wife promised you last night, in return for your kindness,
whatever fish I should catch at my first throw; and I approved her
promise. It pleased God to send me no more than this one for you,
which I desire you to accept of, such as it is. I wish it had been
better. Had he sent me my net full, they should all have been yours.

Neighbour, said I, the bit of lead which I sent you was such a
trifle, that it ought not to be valued at so high a rate; neighbours
should assist each other in their little wants. I have done no more
for you than I should have expected from you had I been in such a
case; therefore I would refuse your present, if I was not persuaded
you gave it me freely, and that I should offend you if I did so; and
since you will have it so, I take it, and I return you my hearty
thanks.

After these civilities, I took the fish, and carried it home to my
wife. Here, said I, take this fish, which the fisherman our
neighbour has made me a present of, in return for the little bit of
lead he sent to us for last night: I believe it is all that we can
expect from the present Saad made me yesterday, promising me that it
would bring me good luck; and then I told her what had passed
between the two friends.

My wife was very much startled to see so large a fish. What would
you have me do with it? said she. Our gridiron is only fit to broil
small fish; and we have not a pot big enough to boil it. That is
your business, answered I; dress it as you will, I shall like it
either way; and then I went to my work again.

In gutting the fish, my wife found a large diamond, which, when she
washed it, she took for a piece of glass: indeed she had heard talk
of diamonds, but if she had ever seen or handled one, she would not
have known how to distinguish them. She gave it to the youngest of
our children for a plaything, and his brothers and sisters handled
it about from one to another, to admire the brightness and beauty of
it.

At night when the lamp was lighted, and the children were still
playing with the diamond, they perceived that it gave a light, when
my wife, who was getting them their supper, stood between them and
the lamp; upon which they snatched it from one another to try it;
and the younger ones fell a crying, that the elder ones would not
let them have it long enough. But as a little matter amuses
children, and makes them squabble and fall out, my wife and I took
no notice of their noise, which presently ceased, when the bigger
ones supped with us, and my wife had given the younger each their
share.

After supper, the children got together again, and began to make the
same noise. Then I called to the eldest, to know what was the
matter, who told me that it was about a piece of glass, which gave a
light when his back was to the lamp. I bid him bring it to me, and
made the experiment myself; and it appeared so extraordinary to me,
that I asked my wife what it was. She told me it was a piece of
glass, which she found in gutting the fish.

I thought no more than she but that it was a bit of glass, but I was
resolved to make a farther experiment of it; and therefore bid my
wife to put the lamp in the chimney, which she did, and still found
that the supposed piece of glass gave so great a light, that we
might see to go to bed without the lamp. So I put it out, and placed
the bit of glass upon the chimney to light us. Look, said I, this is
another advantage that Saadi’s friend’s piece of lead procures
us: it will spare us the expense of oil.

When the children saw the lamp was put out, and the bit of glass
supplied its place, they cried out so loud, and made so great a
noise with astonishment, that it was enough to alarm the
neighbourhood; and before my wife and I could quiet them we were
forced to make a greater noise, nor could we silence them till we
had put them to bed; and after talking a long while in their way
about the wonderful light of a bit of glass, they fell asleep. After
they were in bed, my wife and I went to bed by them; and next
morning, without thinking any more of the glass, I went to my work
as usual; which ought not to seem strange for such a man as I, who
had never seen any diamonds, or, if I had, never attended to their
value.

But before I proceed, I must tell your majesty, that there was but a
very slight partition-wall between my house and my next
neighbour’s, who was a very rich Jew, and a jeweller; and the
chamber that he and his wife lay in joined to ours. They were both
in bed, and the noise my children made awakened them.

The next morning the jeweller’s wife came to mine to complain of
being disturbed out of their first sleep. Good neighbour Rachael,
which was the Jew’s wife’s name, said my wife, I am very sorry
for what happened, and hope you will excuse it; you know it was the
children, and they will laugh and cry for a trifle. Come in, and I
will show you what was the occasion of all the noise.

The Jewess went in with her, and my wife taking the diamond (for
such it really was, and a very extraordinary one) off the
chimney-piece, gave it into her hands. See here, said she; it was
this piece of glass that caused all the noise; and while the Jewess,
who understood all sorts of precious stones, was examining this
diamond with admiration, my wife had told her how she found it in
the fish’s belly, and what had happened.

Indeed, Aischach, which was my wife’s name, said the jeweller’s
wife, giving her the diamond again, I believe as you do, it is a
piece of glass; but as it is more beautiful than common glass, and I
have just such another piece at home, I will buy it, if you will
sell it.

The children, who heard them talking of selling their plaything,
presently interrupted their conversation, crying and begging their
mother not to part with it, who, to quiet them, promised she would
not.

The Jewess being thus prevented in her bargain by my children, went
away, but first whispering my wife (who followed her to the door),
if she had a mind to sell it, not to show it to any body without
acquainting her.

The Jew went out early in the morning to his shop in that part of
the town where the jewellers all resorted to. Thither his wife went
to him, and told him the discovery she had made. She gave him an
account of the size and weight of it as near as she could guess, and
of its beauty, water, and lustre, and particularly of the light
which it gave in the night according to my wife’s account, which
was the more credible as she was uninformed.

The Jew sent his wife immediately to treat, and to offer her a
trifle at first, as she should think fit, and then to raise her
price by degrees; but be sure to bring it, cost what it would.
Accordingly his wife came again to mine privately, and, without
supposing that she was determined to sell the diamond, asked her if
she would take twenty pieces of gold for that piece of glass.

My wife thinking the sum so considerable for a mere piece of glass,
as she thought it, would not make any bargain; but told her she
could not part with it, till she had spoken with me. In the mean
time I came from my work to dinner. As they were talking at the
door, my wife stopped me, and asked me, if I would sell the piece of
glass she had found in the fish’s belly for twenty pieces of gold
which our neighbour offered her. I returned no answer; but reflected
immediately on the assurance with which Saad, in giving me the piece
of lead, told me it would make my fortune. The Jew woman, fancying
that the low price she had offered was the reason I made no reply,
said, I will give you fifty, neighbour, if that will do.

As soon as I found that she rose presently from twenty to fifty, I
told her that I expected a great deal more. Well, neighbour, said
she, I will give you a hundred, and that is so much, I know not
whether my husband will bear me out. At this new advance, I told her
I would have a hundred thousand pieces of gold for it; that I saw
plainly that the diamond was worth a great deal more; but to oblige
her and her husband, as they were neighbours. I would limit myself
to that price, which I was determined to have; and if they refused
to give it, other jewellers should have it, who would give a great
deal more.

The Jewess confirmed me in this my resolution, by her eagerness to
conclude the bargain: and by coming up at several biddings to fifty
thousand pieces, which I refused. I can offer you no more, said she,
without my husband’s consent. He will be at home at night; and I
would beg the favour of you to let him see it, which I promised.

At night when the Jew came home, his wife told him what she had
done; that she had got no forwarder with my wife or me; that she
offered, and I refused, fifty thousand pieces of gold; and that I
had promised to stay till night at her request. He observed the time
when I left off work, and came to me. Neighbour Hassan, said he, I
desire you would show me the diamond your wife showed to mine. I
brought him in, and showed it him. As it was very dark, and my lamp
was not lighted, he knew presently, by the light the diamond gave,
and by the lustre it cast in my hand, that his wife had given him a
true account of it. He looked at and admired it a long time. Well,
neighbour, said he, my wife tells me she offered you fifty thousand
pieces of gold; I will give you twenty thousand more.

Neighbour, said I, your wife can tell you that I value my diamond at
a hundred thousand pieces, and I will take nothing less. He haggled
a long time with me, in hopes that I would make some abatement: but
finding at last that I was positive, and for fear that I should show
it to other jewellers, as I certainly should have done, he would not
leave me till the bargain was concluded on my own terms. He told me
that he had not so much money at home, but would pay it all to me by
that time to-morrow, and that very instant fetched two bags of a
thousand pieces each, as an earnest; and the next day, though I do
not know how he raised the money, whether he borrowed it of his
friends, or let some other jewellers into partnership with him, he
brought me the sum we agreed for, at the time appointed, and I
delivered to him the diamond.

Having thus sold my diamond, and being rich, infinitely beyond my
hopes, I thanked God for his bounty and liberality; and would have
gone and thrown myself at Saad’s feet to express my gratitude, if
I had known where he lived; as also at Saadi’s, to whom I was
first obliged, though his good intention had not the same success.

Afterwards I thought of the good use I should make of so
considerable a sum. My wife, with the vanity natural to her sex,
proposed immediately to buy rich clothes for her and her children;
and to purchase a house, and furnish it handsomely. I told her we
ought not to begin with such expenses; for, said I, money is made to
be spent, so as that it may produce a fund which we may draw from
without its failing. This I intend, and shall begin to-morrow.

I spent all that day and the next in going to the people of my own
trade, who worked as hard every day for their bread as I had done;
and giving them money beforehand, engaged them to work for me in
different sorts of rope-making, according to their skill and
ability, with a promise not to make them wait for their money, but
to pay them as soon as their work was done.

By this means I engrossed almost all the business of Bagdad, and
every body was pleased with my exactness and punctual payment.

As so great a number of workmen must produce a great deal of work, I
went and hired warehouses in several parts of the town to hold my
goods, and appointed over each a clerk, to sell both wholesale and
retail; and by this economy received a considerable profit and
income. Afterwards, to unite so many warehouses in one place, I
bought a large house, which stood upon a great deal of ground, but
was ruinous, pulled it down, and built that which your majesty saw
yesterday, which, though it makes so great an appearance, consists,
for the most part, of warehouses for my business, with apartments
just necessary for myself and family.

Some time after I had left my poor old habitation, and removed to
this new one, Saad, and Saadi, who had scarce thought of me from the
last time they had been with me, as they were one day walking
together, and passing by our street, resolved to call upon me: but
how great was their surprise when they did not see me at work, as
they used to find me! They asked what was become of me, and if I was
alive or dead? Their amazement was redoubled, when they were told I
was become a great merchant, and was no longer called plain Hassan,
but Cogia Hassan Alhabbal, which was to say, Merchant Hassan
Rope-maker, and that I had built in a street, which was named to
them, a house like a palace.

The two friends went directly to the street, and in the way, as
Saadi could not imagine that the bit of lead which Saad had given me
could have been the raising of my fortune, he said to him, I am
overjoyed to have made Hassan Alhabbal’s fortune: but I cannot
forgive the two lies he told me, to get four hundred pieces instead
of two: for I nor nobody else can attribute it to the piece of lead
you gave him.

So you think, replied Saad; but so do not I. I do not see why you
should do Cogia Hassan so much injustice as to take him for a liar.
You must give me leave to believe that he told us the truth, and
disguised nothing from us, and that the piece of lead which I gave
him is the cause of his prosperity; and you will find he will
presently tell us so.

In this discourse the two friends came into the street where I
lived, and asked whereabouts my house stood; and being showed it,
and considering the front, they had much ado to believe it.

They knocked at the door, and my porter opened it; and Saadi,
fearing to be guilty of rudeness in taking the house of a nobleman
for that he was inquiring after, said to the porter, We are informed
that this is Cogia Hassan Alhabbal’s house; tell us if we are not
mistaken. You are very right, sir, said the porter, opening the door
wider; it is the same: come in; he is in the hall, and any of the
slaves will point him out to you.

I had no sooner set my eyes upon the two friends, but I knew them. I
rose from my seat, ran to them, and would have kissed the hem of
their garments, but they would not suffer it, but embraced me. I
invited them to sit down on a sofa made to hold four persons, which
was placed full in view of my garden. I desired them to sit down,
and they would have me take the place of honour. I assured them that
I had not forgot that I was poor Hassan Alhabbal, nor the
obligations I had to them; but were this not the case, I knew the
respect due to them, and begged them not to expose me. They sat down
in the proper place, and I over-against them.

Then Saadi, addressing himself to me, said, Cogia Hassan, I cannot
express my joy to see you in the condition I wished you, when I
twice made you a present of two hundred pieces of gold, with which I
mean not to upbraid you; and I am persuaded that those four hundred
pieces have made this wonderful change in your fortune, which I see
with pleasure. One thing vexes me, which is, I cannot comprehend the
reason why you should twice disguise the truth from me, alleging
that your losses were the effect of misfortunes which still seem to
me incredible. Was it not because, when we were together the last
time, you had so little advanced your small income with each of the
two hundred pieces of gold, that you were ashamed to own it? I am
willing to believe this, and wait to be confirmed in my opinion.

Saad heard this discourse of Saadi’s with impatience, not to say
indignation, which he showed by casting down his eyes and shaking
his head: he did not however interrupt him. When he had done, he
said to him, Forgive me, Saadi, if I anticipate Cogia Hassan, before
he answers you, to tell you, that I admire your prepossessions
against his sincerity, and that you still persist in not believing
the assurances he has already given you. I have told you before, and
I repeat it to you once more, that I believe those two accidents
which befell him upon his bare relation; and whatever you may say, I
am persuaded they are true; but let him speak himself, and tell
which of us does him justice.

After this discourse of the two friends, I said, addressing myself
to them both, Gentlemen, I should condemn myself to perpetual
silence, on the explanation you ask of me, if I was not certain the
dispute you argue upon my account cannot break that friendship which
subsists between you; therefore I will declare to you the truth,
since you require it; and with the same sincerity as before. Then I
told them every circumstance, as your majesty has heard, without
forgetting the least.

All my protestations had no effect on Saadi, to cure him of his
prejudice. Cogia Hassan, replied Saadi, the adventure of the fish,
and diamond found in his belly, appears to me as incredible as the
kite’s flying away with your turban, and the exchange of the
scouring-sand. Be it as it will, I am equally convinced that you are
no longer poor, but rich as I intended you should be, by my means;
and I rejoice sincerely.

As it grew late, they got up to take their leaves; when I stopped
them, and said, Gentlemen, there is one favour I have to ask, and I
beg of you not to refuse to do me the honour to stay and take a
slight supper with me, and a bed to-night, and to-morrow I will
carry you by water to a small country-house, which I bought for the
sake of the air, and we will return the same day on my horses.

If Saad has no business that calls him elsewhere, said Saadi, I
consent. Saad told him that nothing should prevent his enjoying his
company. We have only to send a slave to my house, that we may not
be waited for. I provided a slave; and while they were giving their
orders, I went and ordered supper.

While it was getting ready, I shewed my benefactors my house and all
my offices, which they thought very extensive, considering my
fortune. I call them both benefactors, without distinction, because
without Saadi, Saad would never have given me the piece of lead; and
without Saad, Saadi would not have given me the four hundred pieces
of gold, to which I attribute the rise of my good fortune. Then I
brought them back again into the hall, where they asked me several
questions about my business; and I gave them such answers as
satisfied them.

During this discourse, my servants came to tell me that supper was
served up. I led them into another hall, where they admired the
manner in which it was lighted, the beaufet, and the entertainment I
had provided. I regaled them also with a concert of vocal and
instrumental music during the repast, and afterwards with a company
of dancers, and other entertainments, endeavouring to show them as
much as possible my gratitude.

The next morning, as we had agreed to set out early to enjoy the
fresh air, we repaired to the river side by sunrise, and went on
board a pleasure-boat well carpeted, that waited for us; and in less
than an hour and a half, with six good rowers, and the stream, we
arrived at my country-house.

When we went ashore, the two friends stopt to observe the beauty of
the outside of my house, and to admire its advantageous situation
for the prospects, which were neither too much limited nor too
extensive, but such as made it very agreeable. Then I carried them
into all the apartments, and showed them all the out-houses and
conveniencies; with all which they were very well pleased.

Afterwards we walked in the gardens, where what they were most taken
with was a grove of orange and lemon trees, loaded with fruit and
flowers, which were planted at equal distances, and watered by a
canal of fresh water, which was cut from a pleasant river just by.
The close shade, the fragrant smell which perfumed the air, the soft
murmurings of the water, the harmonious notes of an infinite number
of birds, and many other agreeable circumstances, struck them in
such a manner, that they frequently stopt to express how much they
were obliged to me for bringing them to so delightful a place, and
to congratulate me upon my great acquisitions, with other
compliments. I led them to the end of that grove, which was very
long and broad, where I showed them a wood of large trees which
terminated my garden, and afterwards a summer-house, open on all
sides, shaded with a cluster of palm-trees, but not so as to spoil
the prospect; then I invited them to walk in, and repose themselves
on a sofa covered with carpets and cushions.

Two of my boys, whom I had sent into the country, with a tutor, for
the air, left us, to go into the wood bird-nesting; and seeing a
nest which was built in the branches of a great tree, they attempted
to get at it; but as they had neither strength nor address to
accomplish it, they showed it to the slave who waited on them, and
never left them, and bid him climb the tree for it; who, when he
came to it, was very much surprised to find it built in a turban.
However, he took it, and brought it down with him, and showed it to
my children; and as he thought that I might like to see a thing that
was so uncommon, he gave it to the eldest boy to bring to me.

I saw the children at a distance, coming back to us, overjoyed to
have gotten a nest. Father, said the eldest lad, we have found a
nest in a turban. The two friends and I were very much surprised at
the novelty; but I much more, when I knew the turban to be that
which the kite flew away with. After I had examined it well, and
turned it about, I said to my guests, Gentlemen, have you memories
good enough to remember the turban I had on the day you did me the
honour first to speak to me? I do not think, said Saad, that either
my friend or I gave any attention to it; but if the hundred and
ninety pieces of gold are in it, we cannot doubt of it.

Sir, replied I, there is no doubt but it is the same turban; for,
besides that I know it very well, I feel by the weight it is too
heavy to be any other, and you will perceive this, if you give
yourself the trouble to take it in your hand. Then, after taking out
the birds, and giving them to the children, I put it into his hands,
and he gave it to Saadi. --Indeed, said Saadi, I believe it to be
your turban, which I shall be better convinced of when I see the
hundred and ninety pieces of gold.

Now, sir, added I, taking the turban, again, observe very well,
before I touch it, that it is of no very fresh date in the tree; and
the state in which you see it, and the nest so neatly made in it,
without having been touched by the hand of man, are sufficient
proofs that the kite dropt or laid it in the tree ever since that
day he took it from off my head, and the branches hindered it from
falling to the ground. Excuse my making this remark, since it
concerns me so much to remove all suspicions of fraud on my part.
Saad backed me in what I urged, and said, Saadi, this regards you
and not me, for I am verily persuaded that Cogia Hassan does not
impose upon us.

While Saad was talking, I pulled off the linen cloth which was
wrapped about the cap of the turban, and took out the purse, which
Saadi knew to be the same he gave me. I emptied it on the carpet
before them, and said, There, gentlemen, there is the money; count
it, and see if it be right. Which Saad did, and found it to be a
hundred and ninety pieces of gold. Then Saadi, who could not deny so
manifest a truth, addressing himself to me, said, I agree, Cogia
Hassan, that this money could not serve to enrich you; but the other
hundred and ninety pieces, which you would make me believe you hid
in a pot of bran, might. Sir, answered I, I have told you the truth
in regard to both sums: you would not have me retract, to make
myself a liar.

Cogia Hassan, said Saad, leave Saadi to his own opinion; I consent
with all my heart that he believes you are obliged to him for one
part of your good fortune, by means of the last sum he gave you,
provided he will agree that I contributed to the other half by the
bit of lead, and will not pretend to dispute the valuable diamond
found in the fish’s belly. I agree to it, answered Saadi; but
still you must give me liberty to believe that money is not to be
amassed without money.

What, replied Saad, if chance should throw a diamond in my way worth
fifty thousand pieces of gold, and I should have that sum given me
for it, can it be said I got that sum by money?

They disputed no farther then; but we rose up, and went into the
house, just as dinner was ready. After dinner, I left my guests
together, to pass away the heat of the day more at their liberty and
with greater composure, while I went to give orders to my
housekeeper and gardener. Afterwards I went to them again, and we
talked of indifferent matters till it grew a little cooler; when we
returned into the garden for fresh air, and stayed till sun-set.
Then we all mounted on horseback, and got to Bagdad by moonlight two
hours after, followed by one of my slaves.

It happened by I know not what negligence of my servants, that we
were then out of oats, and the storehouses were all shut up; when
one of my slaves, seeking about the neighbourhood for some, met with
a pot of bran in a shop, bought the bran, and brought the pot along
with him, promising to carry it back again the next day. The slave
emptied the bran into the manger, and, dividing it with his hands
among the horses, felt a linen cloth tied up, and very heavy: he
brought the cloth to me in the condition that he found it, and
presented it to me, telling me that it might perhaps be the cloth he
had often heard me talk of among my friends.

Overjoyed, I said to my two benefactors, Gentlemen, it has pleased
God that you should not part from me before you were fully convinced
of the truth of what I have assured you. There are the other hundred
and ninety pieces of gold which you gave me, continued I, addressing
myself to Saadi; I know it very well by the cloth, which I tied up
with my own hands; and then I told out the money before them. I
ordered the pot presently to be brought to me, and knew it to be the
same; and sent to my wife to ask if she recognised it, ordering them
to say nothing to her of what had happened. She knew it immediately,
and sent me word that it was the same vase she had exchanged full of
bran for the scouring-earth.

Saadi readily submitted, and renounced his incredulity; and said to
Saad, I yield to you, and acknowledge that money is not always the
means of becoming rich.

When Saadi had done, I said to him, I dare not propose to return you
the three hundred and eighty pieces of gold which it hath pleased
God should be found, to undeceive you as to the opinion of my
honesty. I am persuaded that you did not give them to me with an
intention that I should return them; and, for my part, I ought to be
very well content with what Providence has sent me from other
quarters, and I do not design to make use of them; but, if you
approve of it, to-morrow I will give them to the poor, that God may
bless us both.

The two friends lay at my hours that night also; and next day, after
embracing me, went to their own houses, very well pleased with the
reception I had given them, and to find I did not make an ill use of
the riches Heaven had blessed me with. I thanked them both, and look
upon the leave they gave me to cultivate a friendship with them, and
to visit them, as a great honour.

The caliph Haroun Alraschid was so attentive to Cogia Hassan’s
story, that he had not perceived the end of it but by his silence.
Cogia Hassan, said he, I have not for a long time heard any thing
that has given me so much pleasure, to see the wonderful ways by
which God gave thee thy riches, to make thee happy in this world.
Thou oughtest to continue to return him thanks, by the good use thou
makest of his blessings. I am glad I can tell thee, that the same
diamond which made thy fortune is now in my treasury; and, for my
part, I am happy to know how it came there: but because there may
remain in Saadi some doubts on the singularity of this diamond,
which I look upon to be the most precious and valuable thing I am
master of, I would have you carry him with Saad to my treasurer, who
shall show it them, to remove Saadi’s unbelief, and to let him see
that money is not the only certain means of making a poor man rich
in a short time, without taking a great deal of pains. I would also
have you to tell the keeper of my treasury this story, that he may
get it put into writing, and that it may be kept with the diamond.

After these words, the caliph signified to Cogia Hassan, Sidi
Nonman, and Baba Abdalla, by bowing of his head, that he was
satisfied with them; who all took their leaves, by prostrating
themselves at the throne, and then retired.




The Story of Ali Baba and the Forty Robbers, destroyed by a Slave.


In a town in Persia, there lived two brothers, one named Cassim, the
other Ali Baba. Their father left them no great property; but as he
had divided it equally between them, it should seem their fortune
would have been equal; but chance directed otherwise.

Cassim married a wife, who, soon after their marriage, became
heiress to a plentiful estate, and a good shop and warehouse full of
rich merchandizes; so that he all at once became one of the richest
and most considerable merchants, and lived at his ease.

Ali Baba, on the other hand, who married a woman as poor as himself,
lived in a very mean habitation, and had no other means to maintain
his wife and children but his daily labour, by cutting of wood in a
forest near the town, and bringing it upon three asses, which were
his whole substance, to town to sell.

One day, when Ali Baba was in the forest, and had just cut wood
enough to load his asses, he saw at a distance a great cloud of
dust, which seemed to approach towards him. He observed it very
attentively, and distinguished a large body of horse coming briskly
on; and though they did not talk of robbers in that country, Ali
Baba began to think that they might prove so; and, without
considering what might become of his asses, he was resolved to save
himself. He climbed up a large thick tree, whose branches, at a
little distance from the ground, divided in a circular form so close
to one another, that there was but little space between them. He
placed himself in the middle, from whence he could see all that
passed without been seen; and this tree stood at the bottom of a
single rock, which was very high above it; and so steep and craggy,
that nobody could climb up it.

This troop, who were all well mounted, and well armed, came to the
foot of this rock, and there dismounted. Ali Baba counted forty of
them, and, by their looks and equipage, never doubted they were
thieves. Nor was he mistaken in his opinion; for they were a troop
of banditti, who, without doing any hurt to the neighbourhood,
robbed at a distance, and made that place their rendezvous; and what
confirmed him in this opinion was, every man unbridled his horse,
and tied him to some shrub or other, and hung about his neck a bag
of corn, which they brought behind them. Then each of them took his
portmanteau, which seemed to Ali Baba to be full of gold and silver
by their weight. One, who was most personable amongst them, and whom
he took to be their captain, came with his portmanteau on his back
under the tree in which Ali Baba was hid, and making his way through
some shrubs, pronounced these words so distinctly, _Open, Sesame_,
[100] that Ali Baba heard him. As soon as the captain of the robbers
had uttered these words, a door opened; and after he had made all
his troop go in before him, he followed them, and the door shut
again of itself.

The robbers stayed some time within the rock; and Ali Baba, who
feared that some one, or all of them together, should come out and
catch him, if he should endeavour to make his escape, was obliged to
sit patiently in the tree. He was, nevertheless, tempted once or
twice to get down, and mount one of their horses, and lead another,
driving his asses before him with all the haste he could to town;
but the uncertainty of the event made him choose the safest way.

At last the door opened again, and the forty robbers came out. As
the captain went in last, he came out first, and stood to see them
all pass by him; and then Ali Baba heard him make the door close, by
pronouncing these words, _Shut, Sesame_. Every man went and bridled
his horse, fastening his portmanteau, and mounting again; and when
the captain saw them all ready, he put himself at their head, and
they returned the same way they came.

Ali Baba did not immediately quit his tree; for said he to himself,
they may have forgotten something and come back again, and then I
shall be taken. He followed them with his eyes as far as he could
see them; and after that stayed a considerable time before he came
down; remembering the words the captain of the robbers made use of
to cause the door to open and shut, he had the curiosity to try if
his pronouncing it would have the same effect. Accordingly he went
among the shrubs, and perceiving the door concealed behind them, he
stood before it, and said, _Open, Sesame_. The door instantly flew
wide open.

Ali Baba, who expected a dark dismal place, was very much surprised
to see it well lighted and spacious, cut out by men’s hands in
form of a vault, which received the light from an opening at the top
of the rock, cut in like manner. He saw all sorts of provisions, and
rich bales of merchandizes, of silk, stuff, brocade, and valuable
carpeting, piled upon one another; and, above all, gold and silver
in great heaps, and money in great leather purses. The sight of all
these riches made him believe that this cave had been occupied for
ages by robbers, who succeeded one another.

Ali Baba did not stand long to consider what he should do, but went
immediately into the cave, and as noon as he was in, the door shut
again. But this did not disturb him, because he knew the secret to
open it again. He never regarded the silver, but made the best use
of his time in carrying out as much of the gold coin, which was in
bags, at several times, as he thought his three asses could carry.
When he had done, he collected his asses, which were dispersed, and
when he had loaded them with the bags, laid the wood on them in such
a manner that they could not be seen. When he had done, he stood
before the door, and pronouncing the words, _Shut, Sesame_, the door
closed after him, for it had shut of itself while he was within, and
remained open while he was out. He then made the best of his way to
town.

When Ali Baba got home, he drove his asses into a little yard, and
shut the gates very carefully, threw off the wood that covered the
bags, and carried them into his house, and ranged them in order
before his wife, who sat on a sofa.

His wife handled the bags, and finding them full of money, suspected
that her husband had been robbing, insomuch that when he had brought
them all in, she could not help saying, Ali Baba, have you been so
unhappy as to --Be quiet, wife, interrupted Ali Baba; do not
frighten yourself: I am no robber, unless he can be one who steals
from robbers. You will no longer entertain an ill opinion of me,
when I shall tell you my good fortune. Then he emptied the bags,
which raised such a great heap of gold as dazzled his wife’s eyes:
and when he had done, he told her the whole adventure from the
beginning to the end; and, above all, recommended it to her to keep
it secret.

The wife, recovered and cured of her fears, rejoiced with her
husband at their good luck, and would count the money piece by
piece. Wife, replied Ali Baba, you do not know what you undertake,
when you pretend to count the money; you will never have done. I
will go and dig a hole and bury it; there is no time to be lost. You
are in the right of it, husband, replied the wife; but let us know,
as nigh as possible, how much we have. I will go and borrow a small
measure in the neighbourhood and measure it, while you dig the hole.
What you are going to do is to no purpose, wife, said Ali Baba; if
you would take my advice, you had better let it alone; but be sure
to keep the secret, and do what you please.

Away the wife ran to her brother-in-law Cassim, who lived just by,
but was not then at home; and addressing herself to his wife,
desired her to lend her a measure for a little while. Her
sister-in-law asked her whether she would have a great or a small
one. The other asked for a small one. She bid her stay a little, and
she would readily fetch one.

The sister-in-law did so, but as she knew very well Ali Baba’s
poverty, she was curious to know what sort of grain his wife wanted
to measure, and bethought herself of artfully putting some suet at
the bottom of the measure, and brought it to her with an excuse,
that she was sorry that she had made her stay so long, but that she
could not find it sooner.

Ali Baba’s wife went home, set the measure upon the heap of gold,
and filled it and emptied it often, at a small distance upon the
sofa, till she had done: and she was very well satisfied to find the
number of measures amounted to so many as they did, and went to tell
her husband, who had almost finished digging the hole. While Ali
Baba was burying the gold, his wife, to shew her exactness and
diligence to her sister-in-law, carried the measure back again, but
without taking notice that a piece of gold stuck at the bottom.
Sister, said she, giving it to her again, you see that I have not
kept your measure long: I am obliged to you for it, and return it
with thanks.

[Illustration: ALI BABA DISPLAYING HIS TREASURE.]

As soon as Ali Baba’s wife’s back was turned, Cassim’s wife
looked at the bottom of the measure, and was in an inexpressible
surprise to find a piece of gold stuck to it. Envy immediately
possessed her breast. What! said she, has Ali Baba gold so plentiful
as to measure it? Where has that poor wretch got all this gold?
Cassim, her husband, was not at home, as I said before, but at his
shop, which he left always in the evening. His wife waited for him,
and thought the time an age; so great was her impatience to tell him
the news, at which he would be as much surprised.

When Cassim came home, his wife said to him, Cassim, I warrant you,
you think yourself rich, but you are much mistaken; Ali Baba is
infinitely richer than you; he does not count his money, but
measures it. Cassim desired her to explain the riddle, which she
did, by telling him the stratagem she had made use of to make the
discovery, and showed him the piece of money, which was so old a
coin that they could not tell in what prince’s reign it was coined.

Cassim, instead of being pleased at his brother’s prosperity,
conceived a mortal jealousy, and could not sleep all that night for
it, but went to him in the morning before sunrise. Now Cassim, after
he married the rich widow, never treated Ali Baba as a brother, but
forgot him. Ali Baba, said he, accosting him, you are very reserved
in your affairs: you pretend to be miserably poor, and yet you
measure gold. How, brother! replied Ali Baba; I do not know what you
mean: explain yourself. Do not pretend ignorance, replied Cassim,
showing him the piece of gold his wife had given him. How many of
these pieces, added he, have you? My wife found this at the bottom
of the measure you borrowed yesterday.

By this discourse, Ali Baba perceived that Cassim and his wife,
through his own wife’s folly, knew what they had so much reason to
keep secret; but what was done could not be recalled; therefore,
without showing the least surprise or trouble, he confessed all, and
told his brother by what chance he had discovered this retreat of
the thieves, and in what place it was; and offered him part of his
treasure to keep the secret. I expect as much, replied Cassim
haughtily; but I will know exactly where this treasure is, and the
signs and tokens how I may go to it myself when I have a mind;
otherwise I will go and inform against you, and then you will not
only get no more, but will lose all that you have got, and I shall
have my share for my information.

Ali Baba, more out of his natural good temper, than frightened by
the insulting menaces of a barbarous brother, told him all he
desired, and even the very words he was to make use of to go into
the cave, and to come out again.

Cassim, who wanted no more of Ali Baba, left him, resolving to be
beforehand with him, and hoping to get all the treasure to himself.
He rose early the next morning, a long time before the sun, and set
out with ten mules loaded with great chests, which he designed to
fill: proposing to carry many more the next time, according to the
riches he found; and followed the road which Ali Baba had told him.
He was not long before he came to the rock, and found out the place
by the tree, and other marks his brother had given him. When he came
to the door, he pronounced these words, _Open, Sesame_, and it
opened; and when he was in, shut again. In examining the cave, he
was in great admiration to find much more riches than he apprehended
by Ali Baba’s relation. He was so covetous and fond of riches,
that he could have spent the whole day in feasting his eyes with so
much treasure, if the thoughts that he came to carry some away with
him, and loading his mules, had not hindered him. He laid as many
bags of gold as he could carry away at the door, and coming at last
to open the door, his thoughts were so full of the great riches he
should possess, that he could not think of the necessary word; but
instead of _Sesame_, said, _Open, Barley_, and was very much amazed
to find that the door did not open, but remained fast shut. He named
several sorts of grain, all but the right, and the door would not
open.

Cassim never expected such an accident, and was so frightened at the
danger he was in, that the more he endeavoured to remember the word
_Sesame_, the more his memory was confounded, and he had as much
forgotten it as if he had never heard it in his life before. He
threw down the bags he had loaded himself with, and walked hastily
up and down the cave, without having the least regard to all the
riches that were round him. In this miserable condition we will
leave him, bewailing his fate, and undeserving of pity.

About noon the robbers returned to their cave, and at some distance
from it saw Cassim’s mules straggling about the rock, with great
chests on their backs. Alarmed at this novelty they gallopped full
speed to the cave. They drove away the mules, which Cassim had
neglected to fasten, and they strayed away through the forest so
far, that they were soon out of sight. The robbers never gave
themselves the trouble to pursue the mules: they were more concerned
to know who they belonged to. And while some of them searched about
the rock, the captain and the rest went directly to the door, with
their naked sabres in their hands, and pronouncing the words, it
opened.

Cassim, who heard the noise of the horses’ feet from the middle of
the cave, never doubted of the coming of the robbers, and his
approaching death; but was resolved to make one effort to escape
from them. To this end he stood ready at the door, and no sooner
heard the word _Sesame_, which he had forgotten, and saw the door
open, but he jumped briskly out, and threw the captain down, but
could not escape the other robbers, who with their sabres soon
deprived him of life.

The first care of the robbers after this was to go into the cave.
They found all the bags which Cassim had brought to the door, to be
more ready to load his mules with, and carried them all back again
to their places, without perceiving what Ali Baba had taken away
before. Then holding a council, and deliberating upon this matter,
they guessed that Cassim, when he was in, could not get out again;
but they could not imagine how he got in. It came into their heads
that he might have got down by the top of the cave; but the opening
by which it received light was so high, and the top of the rock so
inaccessible without, besides that nothing showed that he had done
so, that they believed it impracticable for them to find out. That
he came in at the door they could not satisfy themselves, unless he
had the secret of making it open. In short, none of them could
imagine which way he entered; for they were all persuaded that
nobody knew their secret, little imagining that Ali Baba had watched
them. But, however it happened, it was a matter of the greatest
importance to them to secure their riches. They agreed therefore to
cut Cassim’s body into four quarters, and to hang two on one side,
and two on the other, within the door of the cave, to terrify any
person that should attempt the same thing, determining not to return
to the cave till the stench of the body was completely exhaled. They
had no sooner taken this resolution, but they executed it; and when
they had nothing more to detain them, they left the place of their
retreat well closed. They mounted their horses, and went to beat the
roads again, and to attack the caravans they should meet.

In the mean time Cassim’s wife was very uneasy when night came,
and her husband was not returned. She ran to Ali Baba in a terrible
fright, and said, I believe, brother-in-law, that you know that
Cassim, your brother, is gone to the forest, and upon what account:
it is now night, and he is not returned: I am afraid some misfortune
has come to him. Ali Baba, who never disputed but that his brother,
after what he had said to him, would go to the forest, declined
going himself that day, for fear of giving him any umbrage;
therefore told her, without any reflection upon her husband’s
unhandsome behaviour, that she need not frighten herself, for that
certainly Cassim did not think it proper to come into the town till
the night should be pretty far advanced.

Cassim’s wife, considering how much it concerned her husband to
keep this thing secret, was the more easily persuaded to believe
him. She went home again, and waited patiently till midnight. Then
her fears redoubled with grief the more sensible, because she durst
not vent it, nor show it, but was forced to keep it secret from the
neighbourhood. Then, as if her fault had been irreparable, she
repented of her foolish curiosity, and cursed her desire of
penetrating into the affairs of her brother and sister-in-law. She
spent all that night in weeping; and as soon as it was day, went to
them, telling them, by her tears, the cause of her coming.

Ali Baba did not wait for his sister-in-law to desire him to go and
see what was become of Cassim, but went immediately with his three
asses, begging of her first to moderate her affliction. He went to
the forest, and when he came near the rock, and having seen neither
his brother nor his mules in his way, he was very much surprised to
see some blood spilt by the door, which he took for an ill omen; but
when he had pronounced the word, and the door opened, he was much
more startled at the dismal sight of his brother’s quarters. He
was not long in determining how he should pay the last dues to his
brother, and without remembering the little brotherly friendship he
had for him, went into the cave, to find something to wrap them in,
and loaded one of his asses with them, and covered them over with
wood. The other two asses he loaded with bags of gold, covering them
with wood also as before; and then bidding the door shut, came away;
but was so cautious as to stop some time at the end of the forest,
that he might not go into the town before night. When he came home,
he drove the two asses loaded with gold into his little yard, and
left the care of unloading them to his wife, while he led the other
to his sister-in-law’s.

Ali Baba knocked at the door, which was opened by Morgiana, a
cunning, intelligent slave, fruitful in inventions to ensure success
in the most difficult undertakings: and Ali Baba knew her to be
such. When he came into the court, he unloaded the ass, and taking
Morgiana aside, said to her, The first thing I ask of you is an
inviolable secrecy, which you will find is necessary both for your
mistress’s sake and mine. Your master’s body is contained in
these two bundles, and our business is, to bury him as if he died a
natural death. Go tell your mistress I want to speak with her, and
mind what I say to you.

Morgiana went to her mistress, and Ali Baba followed her. Well,
brother, said she, with great impatience, what news do you bring me
of my husband? I perceive no comfort in your countenance. Sister,
answered Ali Baba, I cannot tell you any thing before you hear my
story from the beginning to the end, without speaking a word; for it
is of as great importance to you as to me to keep what has happened
secret. Alas! said she, this preamble lets me know that my husband
is dead; but at the same time I know the necessity of the secrecy
you require of me, and I must constrain myself: say on; I will hear
you.

Then Ali Baba told his sister the success of his journey, till he
came to the finding of Cassim’s body. Now, said he, sister, I have
something to tell you, which will afflict you much the more, because
it is what you so little expect; but it cannot now be remedied; and
if any thing can comfort you, I offer to put that little which God
hath sent me, to what you have, and marry you; assuring you that my
wife will not be jealous, and that we shall live happily together.
If this proposal is agreeable to you, we must think of acting so, as
that my brother should appear to have died a natural death. I think
you may leave the management of it to Morgiana, and I will
contribute all that lies in my power.

What could Cassim’s widow do better than accept of this proposal?
For though her first husband had left behind him plentiful
substance, this second was much richer, and by the discovery of this
treasure might be much more so. Instead of rejecting the offer, she
looked upon it as a reasonable motive to comfort her; and drying up
her tears, which began to flow abundantly, and suppressing the
outcries usual with women who have lost their husbands, showed Ali
Baba she approved of his proposal. Ali Baba left the widow, and
recommended to Morgiana to act her part well, and then returned home
with his ass.

Morgiana went out at the same time to an apothecary, and asked him
for a sort of lozenges, which he prepared, and were very efficacious
in the most dangerous distempers. The apothecary asked her who was
sick at her master’s. She replied with a sigh, Her good master
Cassim himself: that they knew not what his distemper was, but that
he could neither eat nor speak. After these words Morgiana carried
the lozenges home with her, and the next morning went to the same
apothecary’s again, and, with tears in her eyes, asked for an
essence which they used to give to sick people only when at the last
extremity. Alas! said she, taking it from the apothecary, I am
afraid that this remedy will have no better effect than the
lozenges, and that I shall lose my good master.

On the other hand, as Ali Baba and his wife were often seen to go
between Cassim’s and their own house all that day, and to seem
melancholy, nobody was surprised in the evening to hear the
lamentable shrieks and cries of Cassim’s wife and Morgiana, who
told it every where that her master was dead.

The next morning, soon after day appeared, Morgiana, who knew a
certain old cobbler that opened his stall early, before other
people, went to him, and bidding him good-morrow, put a piece of
gold into his hand. Well, said Baba Mustapha, which was his name,
and who was a merry old fellow, looking on the gold, though it was
hardly day-light, and seeing what it was, this is good hansel: what
must I do for it? I am ready.

Baba Mustapha, said Morgiana, you must take with you your sewing
tackle, and go with me; but I must tell you, I shall blindfold you
when you come to such a place.

Baba Mustapha seemed to boggle a little at these words. Oh, ho!
replied he, you would have me do something against my conscience, or
against my honour. God forbid! said Morgiana, putting another piece
of gold into his hand, that I should ask any thing that is contrary
to your honour; only come along with me, and fear nothing.

Baba Mustapha went with Morgiana, who, after she had bound his eyes
with a handkerchief, at the place she told him of, carried him to
her deceased master’s house, and never unloosed his eyes till he
came into the room where she had put the corpse together. Baba
Mustapha, said she, you must make haste, and sew these quarters
together; and when you have done, I will give you another piece of
gold.

After Baba Mustapha had done, she blindfolded him again, and gave
him the third piece of gold, as she promised, recommending secrecy
to him, carried him back to the place where she first bound his
eyes, pulled off the bandage, and let him go home, but watched him
that he returned to his stall, till he was quite out of sight, for
fear he should have the curiosity to return and dodge her, and then
went home.

By the time Morgiana had warmed some water to wash the body, Ali
Baba came with incense to embalm it, and bury it with the usual
ceremonies. Not long after, the joiner, according to Ali Baba’s
orders, brought the coffin, which Morgiana, that he might find out
nothing, received at the door, and helped Ali Baba to put the body
into it; and as soon as he had nailed it up, she went to the mosque
to tell the iman that they were ready. The people of the mosque,
whose business it was to wash the dead, offered to perform their
duty, but she told them it was done already.

Morgiana had scarce got home before the iman and the other ministers
of the mosque came. Four neighbours carried the corpse on their
shoulders to the burying-ground, following the iman, who recited
some prayers. Morgiana, as a slave to the deceased, followed the
corpse, weeping, beating her breast, and tearing her hair; and Ali
Baba came after with some neighbours, who often relieved the others
in carrying the corpse to the burying ground.

Cassim’s wife stayed at home mourning, uttering lamentable cries
with the women of the neighbourhood, who came according to custom
during the funeral, and, joining their lamentations with hers,
filled the quarter far and near with sorrow.

In this manner Cassim’s melancholy death was concealed and hushed
up between Ali Baba, his wife, Cassim’s widow, and Morgiana, with
so much contrivance that nobody in the city had the least knowledge
or suspicion of it.

Three or four days after the funeral, Ali Baba removed his few goods
to his brother’s widow’s house; but the money he had taken from
the robbers he conveyed thither by night; and soon after the
marriage with his sister-in-law was published, and as these
marriages are common in our religion, nobody was surprised.

As for Cassim’s shop, Ali Baba gave it to his own eldest son, who
had been some time out of his apprenticeship to a great merchant,
promising him withal, that if he managed well, he would soon give
him a fortune to marry very advantageously according to his
situation.

Let us now leave Ali Baba to enjoy the beginning of his good
fortune, and return to the forty robbers.

They came again at the appointed time to visit their retreat in the
forest; but how great was their surprise to find Cassim’s body
taken away, and some of their bags of gold. We are certainly
discovered, said the captain, and shall be undone, if we do not take
care and speedily apply some remedy; otherwise we shall insensibly
lose all the riches which our ancestors have been so many years
amassing together with so much pains and danger. All that we can
think of this loss which we have sustained is, that the thief whom
we have surprised had the secret of opening the door, and we came
luckily as he was coming out: but his body being removed, and with
it some of our money, plainly shows, that he has an accomplice; and
as it is likely that there were but two who had got this secret, and
one has been caught, we must look narrowly after the other. What say
you to it, my lads?

All the robbers thought the captain’s proposal so reasonable, that
they unanimously approved of it, and agreed that they must lay all
other enterprises aside, to follow this closely, and not give it up
till they had succeeded.

I expected no less, said the captain, from your courage and bravery:
but, first of all, one of you who is bold, artful, and enterprising,
must go into the town dressed like a traveller and stranger, and
exert all his contrivance to try if he can hear any talk of the
strange death of the man whom we have killed, as he deserved, and to
endeavour to find out who he was, and where he lived. This is a
matter of the first importance for us to know, that we may do
nothing which we may have reason to repent of, by discovering
ourselves in a country where we have lived so long unknown, and
where we have so much reason to continue; but to warn that man who
shall take upon himself this commission, and to prevent our being
deceived by his giving us a false report, which may be the cause of
our ruin, I ask you all, if you do not think it fit, that in that
case he shall submit to suffer death?

Without waiting for the suffrages of his companions, one of the
robbers started up, and said, I submit to this law, and think it an
honour to expose my life, by taking such a commission upon me; but
remember, at least, if I do not succeed, that I neither wanted
courage nor good-will to serve the troop.

After this robber had received great commendations from the captain
and his comrades, he disguised himself so that nobody would take him
for what he was; and taking his leave of the troop that night, went
into the town just at day-break; and walked up and down till he came
to Baba Mustapha’s stall, which was always open before any of the
shops of the town.

Baba Mustapha was set on his seat with an awl in his hand, just
going to work. The robber saluted him, bidding him good-morrow; and
perceiving that he was very old, he said, Honest man, you begin to
work very early: is it possible that any one of your age can see so
well? I question, if it was somewhat lighter, whether you could see
to stitch.

Certainly, replied Baba Mustapha, you must be a stranger, and do not
know me; for, old as I am, I have extraordinary good eyes; and you
will not doubt it when I tell you, that I sewed a dead body together
in a place where I had not so much light as I have now.

The robber was overjoyed to think that he addressed himself, at his
first coming into the town, to a man who gave him the intelligence
he wanted, without asking him. A dead body! replied he with
amazement, to make him explain himself. What could you sew up a dead
body for? added he: you mean, you sewed up his winding-sheet. No,
no, answered Baba Mustapha, I know what I say; you want to have me
speak out, but you shall know no more.

The robber wanted no greater insight to be persuaded that he had
discovered what he came about. He pulled out a piece of gold, and
putting it into Baba Mustapha’s hand, said to him, I do not want
to know your secret, though I can assure you I would not divulge it,
if you trusted me with it. The only thing which I desire of you, is
to do me the favour to show the house where you stitched up the dead
body.

If I would do you that favour which you ask of me, replied Baba
Mustapha, holding the money in his hand, ready to return it, I
assure you I cannot: and you may believe me, on my word, I was
carried to a certain place, where they first blinded me, and then
led me to the house, and brought me back again after the same
manner; therefore you see the impossibility of doing what you desire.

Well, replied the robber, you may remember a little of the way that
you was led blindfolded. Come, let me blind your eyes at the same
place. We will walk together by the same way and turnings; perhaps
you may remember some part; and as every body ought to be paid for
their trouble, there is another piece of gold for you; gratify me in
what I ask you. So saying, he put another piece of gold into his
hand.

The two pieces of gold were great temptations to Baba Mustapha. He
looked at them a long time in his hand, without saying a word,
thinking with himself what he should do; but at last he pulled out
his purse, and put them in. I cannot assure you, said he to the
robber, that I remember the way exactly; but, since you desire it, I
will try what I can do. At these words Baba Mustapha rose up, to the
great satisfaction of the robber, and without shutting up his shop,
where he had nothing valuable to lose, he led the robber to the
place where Morgiana bound his eyes. It was here, said Baba
Mustapha, I was blindfolded; and I turned as you see me. The robber,
who had his handkerchief ready, tied it over his eyes, and walked by
him till he stopped, partly leading him, and partly guided by him. I
think, said Baba Mustapha, I went no farther, and he had now stopped
directly at Cassim’s house where Ali Baba lived then; upon which
the thief, before he pulled off the band, marked the door with a
piece of chalk, which he had ready in his hand; and when he pulled
it off, he asked him if he knew whose house that was: to which Baba
Mustapha replied, that as he did not live in that neighbourhood, he
could not tell.

The robber, finding he could discover no more from Baba Mustapha,
thanked him for the trouble he had given him, and left him to go
back to his stall, while he returned to the forest, persuaded that
he should be very well received.

A little after the robber and Baba Mustapha parted, Morgiana went
out of Ali Baba’s house for something, and coming home again,
seeing the mark the robber had made, she stopped to observe it. What
is the meaning of this mark? said she to herself: somebody intends
my master no good, or else some boy has been playing the rogue with
it: with whatever intention it was done, added she, it is good to
guard against the worst. Accordingly she went and fetched a piece of
chalk, and marked two or three doors on each side in the same
manner, without saying a word to her master or mistress.

In the mean time, the thief rejoined his troop again in the forest,
and told them the good success he had; expatiating upon his good
fortune, in meeting so soon with the only person who could inform
him of what he wanted to know. All the robbers listened to him with
the utmost satisfaction; when the captain, after commending his
diligence, addressing himself to them all, said, Comrades, we have
no time to lose: let us all set off well armed, without its
appearing who we are; and that we may not give any suspicion, let
one or two go privately into the town together, and appoint the
rendezvous in the great square; and in the mean time, our comrade,
who brought us the good news, and I, will go and find out the house,
that we may consult what is best to be done.

This speech and plan was approved by all, and they were soon ready.
They filed off in small parcels of two or three, at the proper
distance from each other: and all got into the town without being in
the least suspected. The captain, and he that came in the morning as
a spy, came in last of all. He led the captain into the street where
he had marked Ali Baba’s house, and when they came to one of the
houses which Morgiana had marked, he pointed it out. But going a
little farther, to prevent being taken notice of, the captain
observed that the next door was chalked after the same manner, and
in the same place; and showing it to his guide, asked him which
house it was, that or the first. The guide was so confounded, that
he knew not what answer to make; and much less, when he and the
captain saw five or six houses besides marked after the same manner.
He assured the captain, with an oath, that he had marked but one,
and could not tell who had chalked the rest so like to that which he
marked, and owned, in that confusion, he could not distinguish it.

The captain, finding that their design proved abortive, went
directly to the place of rendezvous, and told the first of his troop
that he met, that they had lost their labour, and must return to
their cave the same way as they came. He himself set them the
example, and they all returned as they came.

When the troop was all got together, the captain told them the
reason of their returning; and presently the conductor was declared
by all worthy of death. He condemned himself, acknowledging that he
ought to have taken better precaution, and kneeled down to receive
the stroke from him that was appointed to cut off his head.

But as it was the safety of the troop that an injury should not go
unpunished, another of the gang, who promised himself that he should
succeed better, presented himself, and his offer being accepted, he
went and corrupted Baba Mustapha, as the other had done; and being
shown the house, marked it, in a place more remote from sight, with
red chalk.

Not long after, Morgiana, whose eyes nothing could escape, went out,
and seeing the red chalk, and arguing after the same manner with
herself, marked the other neighbours’ houses in the same place and
manner.

The robber, at his return to his company, valued himself very much
upon the precaution he had taken, which he looked upon as an
infallible way of distinguishing Ali Baba’s house from his
neighbours, and the captain and all of them thought it must succeed.
They conveyed themselves into the town in the same manner as before;
and when the robber and his captain came to the street, they found
the same difficulty; at which the captain was enraged, and the
robber in as great confusion as his predecessor.

Thus the captain and his troop were forced to retire a second time,
and much more dissatisfied; and the robber, as the author of the
mistake, underwent the same punishment, which he willingly submitted
to.

The captain, having lost two brave fellows of his troop, was afraid
of diminishing it too much by pursuing this plan to get information
about Ali Baba’s house. He found, by their example, that their
heads were not so good as their hands on such occasions; and
therefore resolved to take upon himself this important commission.

Accordingly he went and addressed himself to Baba Mustapha, who did
him the same piece of service he had done to the former. He never
amused himself with setting any particular mark on the house, but
examined and observed it so carefully, by passing often by it, that
it was impossible for him to mistake it.

The captain, very well satisfied with his journey, and informed of
what he wanted to know, returned to the forest; and when he came
into the cave, where the troop waited for him, he said, Now,
comrades, nothing can prevent our full revenge; I am certain of the
house, and in my way hither I have thought how to put it in
execution, and if any one knows a better expedient, let him
communicate it. Then he told them his contrivance; and as they
approved of it, he ordered them to go into the towns and villages
about, and buy nineteen mules, and thirty-eight large leather jars,
one full, and the others all empty.

In two or three days time the robbers purchased the mules and jars,
and as the mouths of the jars were rather too narrow for his
purpose, the captain caused them to be widened; and after having put
one of his men into each, with the weapons which he thought fit,
leaving open the seam which had been undone to leave them room to
breathe, he rubbed the jars on the outside with oil from the full
vessel.

Things being thus prepared, when the nineteen mules were loaded with
thirty-seven robbers in jars, and the jar of oil, the captain, as
their driver, set out with them, and reached the town by the dusk of
the evening, as he intended. He led them through the streets till he
came to Ali Baba’s, at whose door he designed to have knocked; but
was prevented by his sitting there, after supper, to take a little
fresh air. He stopped his mules, and addressed himself to him, and
said, I have brought some oil here, a great way, to sell at
tomorrow’s market; and it is now so late, that I do not know where
to lodge. If I should not be troublesome to you, do me the favour to
let me pass the night with you, and I shall be very much obliged to
you.

Though Ali Baba had seen the captain of the robbers in the forest,
and had heard him speak, it was impossible for him to know him in
the disguise of an oil-merchant. He told him he should be welcome,
and immediately opened his gates for the mules to go into the yard.
At the same time he called to a slave he had, and ordered him, when
the mules were unloaded, not only to put them into the stable, but
to give them corn and hay; and then went to Morgiana, to bid her get
a good hot supper for his guest, and make him a good bed.

He did more. To make his guest as welcome as possible, when he saw
the captain had unloaded his mules, and that they were put into the
stable as he ordered, and he was looking for a place to pass the
night in the air, he brought him into the hall where he received his
company, telling him he would not suffer him to be in the court. The
captain excused himself, on pretence of not being troublesome; but
really to have room to execute his design, and it was not till after
the most pressing importunity that he yielded. Ali Baba, not content
to keep company with the man who had a design on his life, till
supper was ready, continued talking with him till it was ended, and
repeating his offer of service.

The captain rose up at the same time, and went with him to the door;
and while Ali Baba went into the kitchen to speak to Morgiana, he
went into the yard, under pretence of looking at his mules. Ali
Baba, after charging Morgiana afresh to take great care of his
guest, said to her, Tomorrow morning I design to go to the bath
before day; take care my bathing linen be ready, and give them to
Abdalla, which was the slave’s name, and make me some good broth
against I come back. After this he went to bed.

In the mean time the captain of the robbers went from the stable to
give his people orders what to do; and beginning at the first jar,
and so on to the last, said to each man, As soon as I throw some
stones out of the chamber window where I lie, do not fail to cut the
jar open with the knife you have about you, pointed and sharpened
for the purpose, and come out, and I will be presently with you.
After this he returned into the kitchen, and Morgiana taking up a
light, conducted him to his chamber, where, after she had asked him
if he wanted any thing, she left him; and he, to avoid any
suspicion, put the light out soon after, and laid himself down in
his clothes, that he might be the more ready to rise again.

Morgiana, remembering Ali Baba’s orders, got his bathing linen
ready, and ordered Abdalla, who was not then gone to bed, to set on
the pot for the broth; but while she scummed the pot the lamp went
out, and there was no more oil in the house, nor any candles. What
to do she did not know, for the broth must be made. Abdalla seeing
her very uneasy, said, Do not fret and tease yourself, but go into
the yard, and take some oil out of one of the jars.

Morgiana thanked Abdalla for his advice; and while he went to bed,
near Ali Baba’s room, that he might be the better able to rise and
follow Ali Baba to the bath, she took the oil-pot, and went into the
yard; and as she came nigh the first jar, the robber within said
softly, Is it time?

Though the robber spoke low, Morgiana was struck with the voice the
more, because the captain, when he unloaded the mules, opened this
and all the other jars, to give air to his men, who were ill enough
at their ease, without wanting room to breathe.

Any other slave but Morgiana, so surprised as she was to find a man
in a jar, instead of the oil she wanted, would have made such a
noise, as to have given an alarm, which would have been attended
with ill consequences; whereas Morgiana, apprehending immediately
the importance of keeping the secret, and the danger Ali Baba, his
family, and she herself were in, and the necessity of applying a
speedy remedy without noise, conceived at once the means, and
collecting herself without showing the least emotion, answered, Not
yet, but presently. She went in this manner to all the jars, giving
the same answer, till she came to the jar of oil.

By this means, Morgiana found that her master Ali Baba, who thought
that he had entertained an oil merchant, had admitted thirty-eight
robbers into his house; looking on this pretended merchant as their
captain. She made what haste she could to fill her oil pot, and
returned into her kitchen; where, as soon as she had lighted her
lamp, she took a great kettle, and went again to the oil jar, filled
the kettle, and set it on a great wood fire to boil; and as soon as
it boiled, went and poured enough into every jar to stifle and
destroy the robber within.

When this action, worthy of the courage of Morgiana, was executed
without any noise, as she had projected, she returned into the
kitchen with the empty kettle, and shut the door: and having put out
the great fire she had made to boil the oil, and leaving just enough
to make the broth, put out also the lamp, and remained silent;
resolving not to go to bed till she had observed what was to follow
through a window of the kitchen, which opened into the yard, as far
as the darkness of the night permitted.

She had not waited a quarter of an hour, before the captain of the
robbers waked, got up, and opened the window; and finding no light,
and hearing no noise, or any one stirring in the house, gave the
signal, by throwing little stones, several of which hit the jars, as
he knew by the sound they gave. Then he listened, and not hearing
nor perceiving any thing whereby he could judge that his companions
stirred, he began to grow very uneasy, and threw stones again a
second and a third time, and could not comprehend the reason that
none of them should answer to his signal: cruelly alarmed, he went
softly down into the yard, and going to the first jar, and asking
the robber, whom he thought alive, if he was asleep, he smelled the
hot boiled oil, which sent forth a steam out of the jar, and knew
thereby that his plot to murder Ali Baba and plunder his house was
discovered. Examining all the jars one after another, he found that
all his gang were dead; and by the oil he missed out of the last
jar, he guessed at the means and manner of their deaths. Enraged to
despair at having failed in his design, he forced the lock of a
door, that led from the yard to the garden, and, climbing over the
walls of several gardens, at last made his escape.

When Morgiana heard no noise, and found, after waiting some time,
that the captain did not return, she guessed that he chose rather to
make his escape by the gardens than by the street door, which was
double locked; satisfied and pleased to have succeeded so well, and
secured the house, she went to bed and fell asleep.

Ali Baba rose before day, and, followed by his slave, went to the
baths, entirely ignorant of the amazing accident that had happened
at home; for Morgiana did not think it right to wake him before for
fear of losing her opportunity; and afterwards she thought it
needless to disturb him.

When he returned from the baths, and the sun had risen, he was very
much surprised to see the oil jars, and that the merchant was not
gone with the mules. He asked Morgiana, who opened the door, and had
let all things stand as they were, that he might see them, the
reason of it. My good master, answered she, God preserve you and all
your family! you will be better informed of what you wish to know,
when you have seen what I have to show you, if you will give
yourself the trouble to follow me.

As soon as Morgiana had shut the door, Ali Baba followed her; and
when she brought him into the yard, she bid him look into the first
jar, and see if there was any oil. Ali Baba did so, and seeing a
man, started back frightened, and cried out. Do not be afraid, said
Morgiana; the man you see there can neither do you nor any body else
any harm. He is dead. Ah, Morgiana! said Ali Baba, what is it you
show me? Explain the meaning of it to me. I will, replied Morgiana;
moderate your astonishment, and do not excite the curiosity of your
neighbours; for it is of great importance to keep this affair
secret. Look in all the other jars.

Ali Baba examined all the other jars, one after another; and when he
came to that which had the oil in it, he found it prodigiously sunk,
and stood for some time motionless, sometimes looking on the jars,
and sometimes on Morgiana, without saying a word, so great was his
surprise; at last, when he had recovered himself he said, And what
is become of the merchant?

Merchant! answered she: he is as much one as I am. I will tell you
who he is, and what is become of him; but you had better hear the
story in your own chamber; for it is time for your health that you
had your broth after your bathing.

While Ali Baba went into his chamber, Morgiana went into the kitchen
to fetch the broth, and carry it to him: but before he would drink
it, he first bid her satisfy his impatience, and tell him the story
with all its circumstances; and she obeyed him.

Last night, sir, said she, when you were gone to bed, I got your
bathing linen ready, and gave them to Abdalla; afterwards I set on
the pot for the broth, and as I was skimming the pot, the lamp, for
want of oil, went out; and as there was not a drop more in the
house, I looked for a candle, but could not find one. Abdalla,
seeing me vexed, put me in mind of the jars of oil which stood in
the yard. I took the oil pot, and went directly to the jar which
stood nearest to me; and when I came to it, I heard a voice within
it say, Is it time? Without being dismayed, and comprehending
immediately the malicious intention of the pretended oil merchant, I
answered, Not yet, but presently. Then I went to the next, and
another voice asked me the same question, and I returned the same
answer; and so on, till I came to the last, which I found full of
oil: with which I filled my pot.

When I considered that there were thirty-seven robbers in the yard,
who only waited for a signal to be given by the captain, whom you
took to be an oil merchant, and entertained so handsomely, I thought
there was no time to be lost: I carried my pot of oil into the
kitchen, lighted the lamp, and afterwards took the biggest kettle I
had, went and filled it full of oil, and set it on the fire to boil,
and then went and poured as much into each jar as was sufficient to
prevent them from executing the pernicious design they came about:
after this I retired into the kitchen, and put out the lamp; but,
before I went to bed, I waited at the window to know what measures
the pretended merchant would take.

After I had watched some time for the signal, he threw some stones
out of the window against the jars, and neither hearing nor
perceiving any body stirring, after throwing three times, he came
down, and I saw him go to every jar, after which, through the
darkness of the night, I lost sight of him. I waited some time
longer, and finding that he did not return, I never doubted but
that, seeing he had missed his aim, he had made his escape over the
walls of the garden. Persuaded that the house was now safe, I went
to bed.

This, said Morgiana, is the account you asked of me; and I am
convinced it is the consequence of an observation which I had made
for two or three days before, but did not think fit to acquaint you
with; for when I came in one morning early, I found our street-door
marked with white chalk, and the next morning with red; and both
times, without knowing what was the intention of those chalks, I
marked two or three neighbours’ doors on each hand after the same
manner. If you reflect on this, and what has since happened, you
will find it to be a plot of the robbers of the forest, of whose
gang there are two wanting, and now they are reduced to three: all
this shows that they had sworn your destruction, and it is proper
you should stand upon your guard, while there is one of them alive:
for my part, I shall not neglect any thing necessary to your
preservation, as I am in duty bound.

When Morgiana had left off speaking, Ali Baba was so sensible of the
great service she had done him, that he said to her, I will not die
without rewarding you as you deserve: I owe my life to you, and for
the first token of my acknowledgment I give you your liberty from
this moment, till I can complete your recompense as I intend. I am
persuaded, with you, that the forty robbers have laid all manner of
snares for me: God, by your means, has delivered me from them, and I
hope will continue to preserve me from their wicked designs, and by
averting the danger which threatened me, will deliver the world from
their persecution and their cursed race. All that we have to do is
to bury the bodies of these pests of mankind immediately, and with
all the secrecy imaginable, that nobody may suspect what is become
of them. But that Abdalla and I will undertake.

Ali Baba’s garden was very long, and shaded at the farther end by
a great number of large trees. Under these trees he and the slave
went and dug a trench, long and wide enough to hold all the robbers,
and as the earth was light, they were not long doing it. Afterwards
they lifted the bodies out of the jars, took away their weapons,
carried them to the end of the garden, laid them in the trench, and
levelled the ground again. When this was done, Ali Baba hid the jars
and weapons; and as for the mules, as he had no occasion for them,
he sent them at different times to be sold in the market by his
slave.

While Ali Baba took these measures to prevent the public from
knowing how he came by his riches in so short a time, the captain of
the forty robbers returned to the forest, in most inconceivable
mortification; and in the agitation, or rather confusion, he was in
at his want of success, so contrary to what he had promised himself,
he entered the cave, not being able, all the way from the town, to
come to any resolution what to do to Ali Baba.

The loneliness of the dark place seemed frightful to him. Where are
you, my brave lads, cried he, old companions of my watchings,
inroads, and labour? What can I do without you? Did I collect you to
lose you by so base a fate, and so unworthy your courage? Had you
died with your sabres in your hands, like brave men, my regret had
been less! When shall I get so gallant a troop again? And if I
could, can I undertake it without exposing so much gold and treasure
to him, who hath already enriched himself out of it? I cannot, I
ought not to think of it, before I have taken away his life. I will
undertake that myself, which I could not accomplish with so powerful
assistance; and when I have taken care to secure this treasure from
being pillaged, I will provide for it new masters and successors
after me, who shall preserve and augment it to all posterity. This
resolution being taken, he was not at a loss how to execute it; but,
easy in his mind, and full of hopes, he slept all that night very
quietly.

When he waked early next morning, as he had proposed, he dressed
himself, agreeably to the project he had in his head, and went to
the town, and took a lodging in a khan. And as he expected what had
happened at Ali Baba’s might make a great noise in the town, he
asked his host, by way of discourse, what news there was in the
city. Upon which the innkeeper told him a great many things, which
did not concern him in the least. He judged by this, that the reason
why Ali Baba kept this affair so secret was for fear people should
know where the treasure lay, and the means of coming at it; and
because he knew his life would be sought upon account of it. And
this urged him the more to neglect nothing to rid himself of so
dangerous a person.

The next thing that the captain had to do was to provide himself
with a horse, to convey a great many sorts of rich stuffs and fine
linen to his lodging, which he did by a great many journeys to the
forest, but with all the necessary precautions imaginable to conceal
the place whence he brought them. In order to dispose of the
merchandizes, when he had amassed them together, he took a furnished
shop, which happened to be opposite to that which was Cassim’s,
which Ali Baba’s son had not long occupied.

He took upon him the name of Cogia Houssain, and as a new comer,
was, according to custom, extremely civil and complaisant to all the
merchants his neighbours. And as Ali Baba’s son was young and
handsome, and a man of good sense, and was often obliged to converse
with Cogia Houssain, he soon made himself acquainted with him. He
strove to cultivate his friendship, more particularly when, two or
three days after he was settled, he recognised Ali Baba, who came to
see his son, and stopped to talk with him as he was accustomed to
do; and when he was gone, he learnt from his son who he was. He
increased his assiduities, caressed him after the most engaging
manner, made him some small presents, and often asked him to dine
and sup with him; and treated him very handsomely.

Ali Baba’s son did not care to lie under such obligation to Cogia
Houssain without making the like return; but was so much straitened
for want of room in his house, that he could not entertain him so
well as he wished; and therefore acquainted his father Ali Baba with
his intention, and told him that it did not look well for him to
receive such favours from Cogia Houssain without inviting him again.

Ali Baba, with great pleasure, took the treat upon himself. Son,
said he, to-morrow (Friday), which is a day that the shops of such
great merchants as Cogia Houssain and yourself are shut, get him to
take a walk with you after dinner, and as you come back, pass by my
door, and call in. It will look better to have it happen
accidentally, than if you gave him a formal invitation. I will go
and order Morgiana to provide a supper.

The next day, after dinner, Ali Baba’s son and Cogia Houssain met
by appointment, and took their walk, and as they returned, Ali
Baba’s son led Cogia Houssain through the street where his father
lived; and when they came to the house, he stopped and knocked at
the door. This, sir, said he, is my father’s house; who, upon the
account I have given him of your friendship, charged me to procure
him the honour of your acquaintance; and I desire you to add this
pleasure to those I am already indebted to you for.

Though it was the sole aim of Cogia Houssain to introduce himself
into Ali Baba’s house, that he might kill him without hazarding
his own life or making any noise; yet he excused himself, and
offered to take his leave. But a slave having opened the door, Ali
Baba’s son took him obligingly by the hand, and in a manner forced
him in.

Ali Baba received Cogia Houssain with a smiling countenance, and in
the most obliging manner he could wish. He thanked him for all the
favours he had done his son; adding withal, the obligation was the
greater, as he was a young man not very well acquainted with the
world, and that he might contribute to his information.

Cogia Houssain returned the compliment, by assuring Ali Baba, that
though his son might not have acquired the experience of older men,
he had good sense equal to the experience of many others. After a
little more conversation on different subjects, he offered again to
take his leave; when Ali Baba, stopping him, said, Where are you
going, sir, in so much haste? I beg you would do me the honour to
sup with me, though what I have to give you is not worth your
acceptance; but such as it is, I hope you will accept it as heartily
as I give it. Sir, replied Cogia Houssain, I am thoroughly persuaded
of your good-will; and if I ask the favour of you not to take it ill
that I do not accept of your obliging invitation, I beg of you to
believe that it does not proceed from any slight or intention to
affront, but from a certain reason, which you would approve of if
you knew it.

And what may that reason be, sir, replied Ali Baba, if I may be so
bold as to ask you? It is, answered Cogia Houssain, that I can eat
no victuals that have any salt in them; therefore judge how I should
look at your table. If that is the only reason, said Ali Baba, it
ought not to deprive me of the honour of your company at supper;
for, in the first place, there is no salt ever put into my bread,
and for the meat we shall have to-night, I promise you there shall
be none. I will go and take care of that. Therefore you must do me
the favour to stay; I will come again immediately.

Ali Baba went into the kitchen, and ordered Morgiana to put no salt
to the meat that was to be dressed that night; and to make quickly
two or three ragouts besides what he had ordered, but be sure to put
no salt in them.

Morgiana, who was always ready to obey her master, could not help,
this time, seeming somewhat dissatisfied at his new order. Who is
this difficult man, said she, who eats no salt with his meat? Your
supper will be spoiled, if I keep it back so long. Do not be angry,
Morgiana, replied Ali Baba, he is an honest man: therefore do as I
bid you.

Morgiana obeyed, though with no little reluctance, and had a
curiosity to see this man who eat no salt. To this end, when she had
done what she had to do in the kitchen, and Abdalla laid the cloth,
she helped to carry up the dishes; and looking at Cogia Houssain,
knew him at the first sight to be the captain of the robbers,
notwithstanding his disguise; and examining him very carefully,
perceived that he had a dagger hid under his garment. I am not in
the least amazed, said she to herself, that this wicked wretch, who
is my master’s greatest enemy, would eat no salt with him, since
he intends to assassinate him; but I will prevent him.

When Morgiana had sent up the supper by Abdalla, while they were
eating, she made the necessary preparations for executing one of the
boldest acts which could be thought on, and had just done, when
Abdalla came again for the dessert of fruit, which she carried up,
and as soon as Abdalla had taken the meat away, set it upon the
table; after that, she set a little table and three glasses by Ali
Baba, and going out, took Abdalla along with her to go to sup
together, and to give Ali Baba the more liberty of conversation with
his guest.

Then the pretended Cogia Houssain, or rather captain of the robbers,
thought he had a favourable opportunity to kill Ali Baba. I will,
said he to himself, make the father and son both drunk; and then the
son, whose life I intend to spare, will not be able to prevent my
stabbing his father to the heart; and while the slaves are at
supper, or asleep in the kitchen, I can make my escape over the
gardens as before.

Instead of going to supper, Morgiana, who penetrated into the
intentions of the counterfeit Cogia Houssain, would not give him
leave to put his villanous design in execution, but dressed herself
neatly with a suitable head-dress like a dancer, girded her waist
with a silver-gilt girdle, to which there hung a poniard with a hilt
and guard of the same metal, and put a handsome mask on her face.
When she had thus disguised herself, she said to Abdalla, Take your
tabor, and let us go and divert our master and his son’s guest, as
we do sometimes when he is alone.

Abdalla took his tabor, and played before Morgiana all the way into
the hall, who, when she came to the door, made a low curtsey, with a
deliberate air, to make herself taken notice of, and by way of
asking leave to show what she could do. Abdalla, seeing that his
master had a mind to say something, left off playing. Come in,
Morgiana, said Ali Baba, and let Cogia Houssain see what you can do,
that he may tell us what he thinks of you. But, sir, said he,
turning towards Cogia Houssain, do not think that I put myself to
any expense to give you this diversion, since these are my slave and
my cook and house-keeper; and I hope you will not find the
entertainment they give us disagreeable.

Cogia Houssain, who did not expect this diversion after supper,
began to fear that he should not have the opportunity that he
thought he had found; but hoped, if he missed it now, to have it
another time, by keeping up a friendly correspondence with the
father and son; therefore, though he could have wished Ali Baba
would have let it alone, he pretended to be obliged to him for it,
and had the complaisance to express a pleasure at what he saw
pleased his host.

As soon as Abdalla saw that Ali Baba and Cogia Houssain had done
talking, he began to play on the tabor, and accompanied it with an
air; to which Morgiana, who was an excellent dancer, danced after
such a manner, as would have created admiration in any other company
but that before which she now exhibited, among whom, perhaps, none
but the false Cogia Houssain was in the least attentive to her.

After she had danced several dances with the same propriety and
strength, she drew the poniard, and holding it in her hand, dancing
a dance, in which she outdid herself, by the many different figures
and light movements, and the surprising leaps and wonderful
exertions, with which she accompanied it. Sometimes she presented
the poniard to one’s breast, and sometimes to another’s, and
oftentimes seeming to strike her own. At last, as if she was out of
breath, she snatched the tabor from Abdalla with her left hand, and
holding the dagger in her right, presented the other side of the
tabor, after the manner of those who get a livelihood by dancing,
and solicit the liberality of the spectators.

Ali Baba put a piece of gold into the tabor, as did also his son;
and Cogia Houssain, seeing that she was coming to him, had pulled
his purse out of his bosom to make her a present; but while he was
putting his hand into it, Morgiana, with a courage and resolution
worthy of herself, plunged the poniard into his heart.

Ali Baba and his son, frightened at this action, cried out aloud.
Unhappy wretch! exclaimed Ali Baba, what have you done to ruin me
and my family? It was to preserve you, not to ruin you, answered
Morgiana; for see here, said she, (opening Cogia Houssain’s
garment, and showing the dagger), what an enemy you had entertained!
Look well at him, and you will find him to be both the pretended
oil-merchant, and the captain of the gang of forty robbers.
Remember, too, that he would eat no salt with you; and what would
you have more to persuade you of his wicked design? Before I saw
him, I suspected him as soon as you told me you had such a guest. I
saw him, and you now find that my suspicion was not groundless.

Ali Baba, who immediately felt the new obligation he had to Morgiana
for saving his life a second time, embraced her: Morgiana, said he,
I gave you your liberty, and then promised you that my gratitude
should not stop there, but that I would soon complete it. The time
is come for me to give you a proof of it, by making you my
daughter-in-law. Then addressing himself to his son, he said to him,
I believe you, son, to be so dutiful a child, that you will not
refuse Morgiana for your wife. You see that Cogia Houssain sought
your friendship with a treacherous design to take away my life; and
if he had succeeded, there is no doubt but he would have sacrificed
you also to his revenge. Consider, that by marrying Morgiana, you
marry the support of my family and your own.

The son, far from showing any dislike, readily consented to the
marriage; not only because he would not disobey his father, but that
his inclination prompted him to it.

After this, they thought of burying the captain of the robbers with
his comrades, and did it so privately, that nobody knew any thing of
it till a great many years after, when not any one had any concern
in the publication of this remarkable history.

A few days afterwards, Ali Baba celebrated the nuptials of his son
and Morgiana with great solemnity and a sumptuous feast, and the
usual dancing and spectacles; and had the satisfaction to see that
his friends and neighbours, whom he invited, had no knowledge of the
true motives of that marriage; but that those who were not
unacquainted with Morgiana’s good qualities, commended his
generosity and goodness of heart.

Ali Baba forbore, a long time after this marriage, from going again
to the robbers’ cave, from the time he brought away his brother
Cassim and some bags of gold on three asses, for fear of finding
them there, and being surprised by them. He kept away after the
death of the thirty-seven robbers and their captain, supposing the
other two robbers, whom he could get no account of, might be alive.

But at the year’s end, when he found they had not made any attempt
to disturb him, he had the curiosity to make another journey, taking
the necessary precautions for his safety. He mounted his horse, and
when he came to the cave, and saw no footsteps of men or horses, he
looked upon it as a good sign. He alighted off his horse, and tied
him to a tree; and presenting himself before the door, and
pronouncing these words, _Open, Sesame!_ the door opened. He went
in, and by the condition he found things in, he judged that nobody
had been there since the false Cogia Houssain, when he fetched the
goods for his shop, and that the gang of forty robbers was
completely destroyed, and never doubted he was the only person in
the world who had the secret of opening the cave, and that all the
treasure was solely at his disposal; and having brought with him a
wallet, into which he put as much gold as his horse could carry, he
returned to town.

Afterwards Ali Baba carried his son to the cave, taught him the
secret, which they handed down to their posterity; and using their
good fortune with moderation, lived in great honour and splendour,
serving the greatest offices of the city.




The Story of Ali Cogia, a Merchant of Bagdad.


In the reign of the caliph Haroun Alraschid, there lived at Bagdad a
merchant whose name was Ali Cogia, that was neither one of the
richest nor the meanest sort. He was a bachelor, and lived in the
house which was his father’s, master of his own actions, content
with the profit he made by his trade. But happening to dream a dream
for three nights together, that a venerable old man came to him,
and, with a severe look, reprimanded him for not having made a
pilgrimage to Mecca, he was very much troubled.

As a good Mussulman, he knew he was obliged to undertake a
pilgrimage; but as he had a house, shop, and goods, he had always
believed that they might stand for a sufficient reason to excuse
him, endeavouring by his charity, and other good works, to atone for
that neglect. But after this dream, his conscience was so much
pricked, that the fear lest any misfortune should befal him, made
him resolve not to defer it any longer; and to be able to go that
year, he sold off his household goods, his shop, and with it the
greatest part of his merchandises, reserving only some, which he
thought might turn to a better account at Mecca: and meeting with a
tenant for his house, let that also.

Things being thus disposed, he was ready to go when the Bagdad
caravan set out for Mecca: the only thing he had to do was to secure
a sum of a thousand pieces of gold, which would have been
troublesome to carry along with him, besides the money he had set
apart to defray his expenses on the road, and for other purposes. To
this end he made choice of a jar of a proportionable size, put the
thousand pieces of gold into it, and covered them over with olives.
When he had closed the mouth of the jar, he carried it to a
merchant, a particular friend of his, and said to him, You know,
brother, that in a few days I set out with the caravan, on my
pilgrimage to Mecca. I beg the favour of you, that you would take
charge of a jar of olives, and keep it for me till I return. The
merchant promised him he would, and in an obliging manner said,
Here, take the key of my warehouse, and set your jar where you
please. I promise you shall find it there when you come again.

On the day the caravan was to set out, Ali Cogia joined it, with a
camel loaded with what merchandises he thought fit to carry along
with him, which served him to ride on, and arrived safe at Mecca,
where he visited, along with other pilgrims, the temple so much
celebrated and frequented by Mussulmen of all nations every year,
who come from all parts of the world, and observe religiously the
ceremonies prescribed them; and when he had acquitted himself of the
duties of his pilgrimage, he exposed the merchandises he had brought
with him, to sell or exchange them.

Two merchants passing by, and seeing Ali Cogia’s goods, thought
them so fine and choice, that they stopped some time to look at
them, though they had no occasion for them; and when they had
satisfied their curiosity, one of them said to the other, as they
were going away, If this merchant knew to what profit these goods
would turn at Cairo, he would carry them thither, and not sell them
here, though this is a good mart.

Ali Cogia heard these words; and as he had often heard talk of the
beauties of Egypt, he was resolved to take the opportunity of seeing
them, and taking a journey thither. Therefore, after having packed
up his goods again, instead of returning to Bagdad, he set out for
Egypt, with the caravan of Cairo; and when he came thither, he found
his account in his journey, and in a few days sold all his goods to
a greater advantage than he hoped for. With the money he bought
others, with an intent to go to Damascus; and while he waited for
the opportunity of a caravan, which was to set forward in six weeks,
he saw all the rarities at Cairo, as also the pyramids; and sailing
up the Nile, viewed the famous towns on each side of that river.

As the Damascus caravans took Jerusalem in their way, our Bagdad
merchant had the opportunity of visiting the temple, looked upon by
all the Mussulmen to be the most holy, after that of Mecca, whence
this city takes its name of _Noble Holiness_.

Ali Cogia found Damascus so delicious a place, abounding with fine
meads, pleasantly watered, and delightful gardens, that it exceeded
the descriptions given of it in history. Here he made a long abode,
but, nevertheless, had not forgot his native Bagdad: for which place
he set out, and arrived at Aleppo, where he made some stay; and from
thence, after having passed the Euphrates, he bent his course to
Moussoul, with an intention, in his return, to come by a shorter way
down the Tigris.

When Ali Cogia came to Moussoul, the Persian merchants, with whom he
travelled from Aleppo, and with whom he had contracted a great
friendship, had got so great an ascendant over him by their
civilities and agreeable conversation, that they easily persuaded
him not to leave them till they came to Schiraz, from whence he
might easily return to Bagdad with a considerable profit. They led
him through the towns of Sultania, Rei, Coam, Caschan, Ispahan, and
from thence to Schiraz; from whence he had the complaisance to bear
them company to India, and so came back again with them to Schiraz;
insomuch that, including the stay he made in every town, he was
seven years absent from Bagdad, whither he then resolved to return.

All this time his friend, with whom he had left his jar of olives,
neither thought of him nor them; but just at the time when he was on
the road with a caravan from Schiraz, one evening, when this
merchant was supping at home with his family, the discourse
happening to fall upon olives, his wife was desirous to eat some,
saying, she had not tasted any for a long while. Now you speak of
olives, said the merchant, you put me in mind of a jar, which Ali
Cogia left with me seven years ago, when he went to Mecca; and put
it himself in my warehouse, for me to keep for him against he
returned. What is become of him I know not; though, when the caravan
came back, they told me he was gone for Egypt. Certainly he must be
dead, since he has not returned in all this time; and we may eat the
olives if they prove good. Give me a plate and a candle, and I will
go and fetch some of them, and we will taste them.

For God’s sake, husband, said the wife, do not commit so base an
action: you know that nothing is more sacred than what is committed
to one’s care and trust. You say Ali Cogia has been gone to Mecca,
and is not returned; but you have been told that he is gone into
Egypt; and how do you know but he may be gone farther? As you have
no news of his death, he may return to-morrow, for any thing you can
tell; and what a disgrace would it be to you and your family, if he
should come, and you not restore him his jar in the same condition
he left it! I declare I have no desire of the olives, and will not
taste of them: for when I mentioned them, it was only by way of
discourse; besides, do you think that they can be good, after they
have been kept so long? They must be all mouldy, and spoiled; and if
Ali Cogia should return, as I have a strong persuasion he will, and
should find they have been opened, what will he think of your
honour? I beg of you to let them alone.

The wife had not argued so long with her husband, but that she read
his obstinacy in his face. In short, he never regarded what she
said, but got up, took a candle and a plate, and went into the
warehouse. Well, husband, said the wife again, remember I have no
hand in this business, and that you cannot lay any thing to my
charge, if you should have cause to repent of this action.

The merchant’s ears were deaf to these remonstrances of his wife,
and he persisted in his design. When he came into the warehouse, he
opened the jar, and found the olives all mouldy; but to see if they
were all so to the bottom, he turned some of them upon the plate,
and by shaking the jar, some of the gold tumbled out.

At the sight of the gold, the merchant, who was naturally covetous,
looked into the jar, and perceived that he had shaken out almost all
the olives, and what remained was fine gold coin. He immediately put
the olives into the jar again, covered it up, and returned to his
wife. Indeed, wife, said he, you was in the right to say that the
olives were all mouldy; for I found it so, and have made up the jar
just as Ali Cogia left it; so that he will not perceive that they
have been touched, if he should return. You had better have taken my
advice, said the wife, and not meddled with them. God grant no
mischief comes of it!

The merchant was not more affected with his wife’s last words than
he had been by her former, but spent almost the whole night in
thinking how he might appropriate Ali Cogia’s gold to his own use,
and keep possession of it, in case Ali Cogia should return and ask
him for the jar. The next morning, he went and bought some olives of
that year, took out the old and the gold, and filled the jar with
the new, covered it up, and put it in the same place where Ali Cogia
left it.

About a month after the merchant had committed so base an action,
for which he was to pay dear, Ali Cogia arrived at Bagdad; and as he
had let his house, he alighted at a khan, choosing to stay there
till he had signified his arrival to his tenant, and he had provided
himself with another house.

The next morning, Ali Cogia went to pay a visit to the merchant his
friend, who received him in the most obliging manner imaginable, and
expressed a great deal of joy at his return, after so many years
absence; telling him that he had begun to lose all hopes of ever
seeing him again.

After the usual compliments on both sides on such a meeting, Ali
Cogia desired the merchant to return him the jar of olives which he
had left with him, and to excuse the liberty he had taken in giving
him so much trouble.

My dear friend, Ali Cogia, replied the merchant, you are to blame to
make all these apologies; your vessel has been no inconvenience to
me: on such an occasion I should have made as free with you: there,
take the key of my warehouse; go and take it; you will find it in
the same place where you left it.

Ali Cogia went into the merchant’s warehouse, took his jar, and
after having returned him the key, and thanks for the favour he had
done him, returned with it to the khan where he lodged; and opening
the jar, and putting his hand down as low as the pieces of gold lay,
was very much surprised to find none. At first, he thought he might
perhaps be mistaken; and, to discover the truth, poured out all the
olives into all his travelling kitchen-utensils, without so much as
finding one single piece of money. His astonishment was so great,
that he stood for some time motionless; then lifting up his hands
and eyes to heaven, he cried out, Is it possible that a man, whom I
took to be my good friend, should be guilty of so base an action?

Ali Cogia, cruelly alarmed at the fear of so considerable a loss,
returned immediately to the merchant. My good friend, said he, be
not surprised to see me come back so soon. I own the jar of olives
to be the same put into your magazine; but with the olives I put a
thousand pieces of gold into it, which I do not find. Perhaps you
might have occasion for them, to employ them in trade; if so, they
are at your service; only put me out of my pain, and give me an
acknowledgment, after which you may pay me again at your own
convenience.

The merchant, who expected that Ali Cogia would come with such a
complaint, had meditated an answer. Friend Ali Cogia, said he, when
you brought your jar of olives to me, did I touch it? did not I give
you the key of my warehouse? did not you carry it there yourself,
and did not you find it in the same place, covered in the same
manner as when you left it? And if you put gold in it, you should
have found it again. You told me that they were olives, and I
believed it. This is all I know of the matter: you may believe me,
if you please; but I never touched them.

Ali Cogia made use of all the mild ways he could think of to oblige
the merchant to do him right. I love peace and quietness, said he to
him, and shall be very sorry to come to those extremities which will
bring the greatest disgrace upon you: consider that merchants, as we
are, ought to abandon all interest to preserve a good reputation.
Once again I tell you, I should be very much concerned if your
obstinacy shall oblige me to force you to do me justice; for I would
rather almost lose what is my right than have recourse to law.

Ali Cogia, replied the merchant, you agree that you left a jar of
olives with me; and now you have taken it away, you come and ask me
for a thousand pieces of gold. Did you ever tell me that such a sum
was in the jar? I did not even know that they were olives, for you
never showed them to me. I wonder you do not as well ask me for
diamonds and pearls instead of gold; begone about your business, and
do not raise a mob about my shop: for some persons had already
stopped. These last words were pronounced in so great heat and
passion, as not only made those who stood about the shop already
stay longer, and created a great mob, but the neighbouring merchants
came out of their shops to see what was the dispute between Ali
Cogia and the merchant, and endeavour to reconcile them; and when
Ali Cogia had informed them of his grievance, they asked the
merchant what he had to say.

The merchant owned that he had kept the jar for Ali Cogia in his
warehouse, but denied that ever he meddled with it; and swore that
he knew it was full of olives only because Ali Cogia told him so,
and bid them all bear witness of the insult and affront offered him.
You bring it upon yourself, said Ali Cogia, taking him by the arm;
but since you use me so basely, I cite you to the law of God; let us
see whether you will have the assurance to say the same thing before
the cady.

The merchant could not refuse this summons, which every good
Mussulman is bound to observe, or be declared a rebel against
religion; but said, With all my heart; we shall soon see who is in
the wrong.

Ali Cogia carried the merchant before the cady, before whom he
accused him of cheating him of a thousand pieces of gold, which he
had left with him. The cady asked him if he had any witnesses; to
which he replied, that he had not taken that precaution, because he
believed the person he trusted his money with to be his friend, and
always took him for an honest man.

The merchant made the same defence he had done before the merchants
his neighbours, offering to make oath that he never had the money he
was accused of, and that he did not so much as know there was such a
sum; upon which the cady took his oath, and dismissed him acquitted.

Ali Cogia, extremely mortified to find that he must sit down with so
considerable a loss, protested against the sentence, declaring to
the cady that he would appeal to the caliph Haroun Alraschid, who
would do him justice; which protestation the cady only looked upon
as the effect of the common resentment of all those who lose their
cause, and thought he had done his duty in acquitting a person who
had been accused without witnesses.

While the merchant returned home, triumphing over Ali Cogia, and
overjoyed at his good fortune, Ali Cogia went and drew up a
petition; and the next day, observing the time when the caliph came
from noon prayers, he placed himself in the street he was to pass
through, and holding out his hand with the petition, an officer
appointed for that purpose, who always goes before the caliph, came
and took it to present it.

As Ali Cogia knew that it was the caliph’s custom to read the
petitions at his return to the palace, he went into the court, and
waited till the officer who had taken the petition read it, and came
out of the caliph’s apartment, who told him that the caliph had
appointed an hour to hear him next day; and then asking him where
the merchant lived, he sent to notify him to attend at the same time.

That same evening, the caliph, the grand vizier Giafar, and Mesrour,
the chief of the eunuchs, went all disguised through the town, as I
have already told your majesty it was his custom occasionally to do:
and, passing through a street, the caliph heard a noise, and mending
his pace, he came to a gate, which led into a little court; through
a hole he perceived ten or twelve children playing by moonlight.

The caliph, who was curious to know at what play the children
played, sat down upon a stone bench just by; and, still looking
through the hole, he heard one of the briskest and liveliest of the
children say, Let us play at the cady. I will be the cady; bring Ali
Cogia and the merchant who cheated him of the thousand pieces of
gold before me.

These words of the child put the caliph in mind of the petition Ali
Cogia had given him that day, and made him redouble his attention to
see the issue of the trial.

As the affair of Ali Cogia and the merchant made a great noise in
Bagdad, it had not escaped the children, who all accepted the
proposition with joy, and agreed on the part each was to act: not
one of them refused him that made the proposal to be cady; and when
he had taken his seat, which he did with all the seeming gravity of
a cady, another, as an officer of the court, presented two before
him, one as Ali Cogia, and the other as the merchant against whom he
complained.

Then the pretended cady, directing his discourse to the feigned Ali
Cogia, asked him what he had to lay to that merchant’s charge.

Ali Cogia, after a low bow, informed the young cady of the fact, and
related every particular, and afterwards begged that he would use
his authority, that he might not lose so considerable a sum of money.

Then the feigned cady, turning about to the merchant, asked him why
he did not return the money which Ali Cogia demanded of him.

The feigned merchant alleged the same reasons as the real merchant
had done before the cady himself, and offered to confirm by oath
that what he had said was truth.

Not so fast, replied the pretended cady; before you come to your
oath, I should be glad to see the jar of olives. Ali Cogia, said he,
addressing himself to the lad who acted that part, have you brought
the jar? No, replied he. Then go and fetch it immediately, said the
other.

The pretended Ali Cogia went immediately, and returning as soon,
feigned to set a jar before the cady, telling him that it was the
same he left with the accused person, and took away again. But, to
omit no part of the formality, the supposed cady asked the merchant
if it was the same; and as by his silence he seemed not to deny it,
he ordered it to be opened. He that represented Ali Cogia seemed to
take off the cover, and the pretended cady made as if he looked into
it. They are fine olives, said he; let me taste of them; and then
pretending to eat of them, added, They are excellent; but, continued
he, I cannot think that olives will keep seven years, and be so
good: send for some olive-merchants, and let me hear what is their
opinion. Then two boys, as olive-merchants, presented themselves.
Are you olive-merchants? said the sham cady. Tell me how long olives
will keep to be fit to eat?

Sir, replied the two merchants, let us take what care we can, they
will hardly be worth any thing the third year; for then they have
neither taste nor colour. If it be so, answered the cady, look into
that jar, and tell me how long it is since those olives were put
into it.

The two merchants pretended to examine and to taste the olives, and
told the cady they were new and good. You are mistaken, said the
young cady; Ali Cogia says he put them into the jar seven years ago.

Sir, replied the merchants, we can assure you they are of this
year’s growth; and we will maintain there is not a merchant in
Bagdad but will say the same.

The feigned merchant that was accused would have objected against
the evidence of the olive-merchants; but the feigned cady would not
suffer him. Hold your tongue, said he; you are a rogue; let him be
hanged. Then the children put an end to their play, clapping their
hands with great joy, and seizing the feigned criminal to carry him
to execution.

Words cannot express how much the caliph Haroun Alraschid admired
the sagacity and sense of the boy who had passed so just a sentence
in an affair which was to be pleaded before him the next day. He
withdrew, and rising off the bench he sat on, he asked the grand
vizier, who heard all that passed, what he thought of it. Indeed,
commander of the true believers, answered the grand vizier Giafar, I
am surprised to find so much sagacity in one so young.

But, answered the caliph, do you know one thing? I am to pronounce
sentence in this very cause to-morrow; the true Ali Cogia presented
his petition to me to-day; and do you think, continued he, that I
can give a better sentence? I think not, answered the vizier, if the
case is as the children represented it. Take notice then of this
house, said the caliph, and bring the boy to me to-morrow, that he
may try this cause in my presence; and also order the cady, who
acquitted the roguish merchant, to attend, to learn his duty from a
child. Take care likewise to bid Ali Cogia bring his jar of olives
with him, and let two olive merchants be present. After this charge,
he pursued his rounds, without meeting with any thing else worth his
attention.

The next day the vizier went to the house where the caliph had been
witness of the children’s play, and asked for the master of it;
but he being abroad, his wife came to him. He asked her, if she had
any children. To which she answered, she had three, and called them.
My brave boys, said the vizier, which of you was the cady when you
played together last night? The eldest made answer he was; but not
knowing why he asked the question, coloured. Come along with me, my
lad, said the grand vizier, the commander of the faithful wants to
see you.

The mother was in a great fright when she saw the grand vizier would
take her son with him, and asked him upon what account the caliph
wanted him. The grand vizier encouraged her, and promised her that
he should return again in less than an hour’s time, when she
should know it from himself. If it be so, sir, said the mother, give
me leave to dress him first, that he may be fit to appear before the
commander of the faithful; which the vizier readily complied with.

As soon as the child was dressed, the vizier carried him away and
presented him to the caliph at the time he had appointed to hear Ali
Cogia and the merchant.

The caliph, who saw that the boy was dashed, to encourage him, said,
Come to me, child, and tell me if it was you that determined the
affair between Ali Cogia and the merchant that cheated him of his
money? I saw and heard you, and am very well pleased with you. The
boy answered modestly that it was he. Well, my son, replied the
caliph, come and sit down by me, and you shall see the true Ali
Cogia, and the true merchant.

Then the caliph took him by the hand, and set him on the throne by
him, and asked for the two parties. When they were called, they came
and prostrated themselves before the throne, bowing their heads
quite down to the carpet that covered it. Afterwards the caliph said
to them, Plead each of you your causes before this child, who will
hear and do you justice; and if he should be at a loss, I will
rectify it.

Ali Cogia and the merchant pleaded one after the other; but when the
merchant proposed his oath as before, the child said, It is too
soon; it is proper that we should see the jar of olives.

At these words, Ali Cogia presented the jar, placed it at the
Caliph’s feet, and opened it. The caliph looked upon the olives,
and took one and tasted it. Afterwards the merchants were called,
who examined the olives, and reported that they were good, and of
that year. The boy told them that Ali Cogia affirmed that it was
seven years since he put them up; and they returned the same answer
as the children, who represented them the night before.

Though the merchant who was accused saw plainly that these
merchants’ opinions would condemn him, yet he would say something
in his own justification. But the child, instead of ordering him to
be hanged, looked at the caliph, and said, Commander of the
faithful, this is no jesting matter; it is your majesty that must
condemn him to death, and not me, though I did it yesterday in play.

The caliph, fully satisfied of the merchant’s villany, delivered
him into the hands of the ministers of justice to be hanged. This
sentence was executed upon him after he had confessed where he had
hid the thousand pieces of gold, which were restored to Ali Cogia.
Then the monarch, most just and equitable, turning to the cady, bid
him learn of that child to acquit himself more exactly of his duty;
and embracing the boy, sent him home with a purse of a hundred
pieces of gold, as a token of his liberality.




The Story of the Enchanted Horse.


The Nevrouz, [101] or the new day, which is the first of the year
and spring, is observed as an ancient and solemn feast throughout
all Persia, which has been continued from the time of idolatry; and
our prophet’s religion, pure as it is, and true as we hold it, has
not been able to abolish that heathenish custom, and the
superstitious ceremonies which are observed, not only in the great
cities, but celebrated with extraordinary rejoicings in every little
town, village and hamlet.

But the rejoicings are the most extraordinary at the court, for the
variety of new and surprising sights, insomuch that strangers are
invited from the neighbouring states, and the most remote parts, by
rewards and liberality of the king towards those who are the most
excellent in their invention and contrivance. In short, nothing in
the rest of the world can come nigh them in magnificence.

One of these feast days, after the most ingenious artists of the
country had repaired to Schiraz, where the court then resided, and
had entertained the king and all the court with their sights, and
had been bountifully and liberally rewarded according to their merit
and to their satisfaction by the king, when the assembly was just
breaking up, an Indian appeared at the foot of the throne with an
artificial horse, richly bridled and saddled, and so well made, that
at first sight he looked like a living horse.

The Indian prostrated himself before the throne, and pointing to the
horse, said to the king, Though, sir, I present myself the last
before your majesty, yet I can assure you that nothing that has been
shown to-day is so wonderful as this horse, on which I beg your
majesty will be pleased to cast your eyes. I see nothing more in the
horse, said the king, but the natural resemblance the workman has
given him, which the skill of another workman may do as well or
better.

Sir, replied the Indian, it is not for his outward form and
appearance that I recommend my horse to your majesty’s examination
as wonderful, but the use I know how to make of him, and what any
other person, when I have communicated the secret to him, may do as
well. Whenever I mount him, be it where it will, if I wish to
transport myself through the air to the most distant part of the
world, I can do it in a very short time. This, sir, is the wonder of
my horse, a wonder which nobody ever heard speak of, and which I
offer to show your majesty, if you command me. [102]

The king of Persia, who was fond of every thing that was curious,
and, after the many wonderful things he had seen and desired to see,
had never seen nor heard any thing that came up to this, told the
Indian that nothing but the experience of what he told should
convince him; and that withal he was ready to see him perform what
he promised.

The Indian presently put his foot into the stirrup, and mounted his
horse with a great deal of activity; and when he had got the other
foot into the stirrup, and had fixed himself in the saddle, he asked
the king of Persia where he pleased to send him.

About three leagues from Schiraz there was a high mountain,
discernible from the large square before the palace, where the king
and his court, and a great concourse of people then were. Do you see
that mountain? said the king, pointing to the hill; go to it, it is
not a great way off, but it is far enough to judge of the haste you
can make in going and coming. But because it is not possible for the
eye to follow you so far, for a certain sign that you have been
there, I expect that you will bring me a branch of a palm tree that
grows at the bottom of the hill.

The king of Persia had no sooner declared his will, but the Indian
turned a peg, which was in the hollow of the horse’s neck, just by
the pommel of the saddle, and in an instant the horse rose off the
ground, and carried his rider into the air like lightning to such a
height, that those who had the strongest sight could not discern
him, to the admiration of the king and all the spectators. Within
less than a quarter of an hour they saw him come again with the palm
branch in his hand; but before he came quite down, he took two or
three turns in the air over the spot, amid the acclamations of all
the people, then descended upon the same spot of ground whence he
set off, without receiving the least shock from the horse to
disorder him. He dismounted, and going up to the throne, prostrated
himself, and laid the branch of the palm-tree at the king’s feet.

The king of Persia, who was an eye-witness, with no less admiration
than astonishment of this unheard-of sight, which the Indian had
exhibited, conceived a great desire to have the horse; and as he
persuaded himself that he should not find it a difficult matter to
treat with the Indian about him, for whatever sum of money he should
value him at, he began to look upon him as the most valuable thing
in his treasury. To judge of thy horse by his outward appearance,
said he to the Indian, I did not think him so much worth my
consideration. As you showed me his merits, I am obliged to you for
undeceiving me; and to show you how much I esteem him, I will buy
him of you, if he is to be sold.

Sir, replied the Indian, I never doubted that your majesty, who has
the character of the most judicious prince on earth, would set a
just value on my work as soon as I had shown you on what account he
was worthy your attention. I also foresaw that you would not only
admire and commend him, but would desire to have him. For my part,
sir, though I know the true value of him, and that my being master
of him will render my name immortal in the world, yet I am not so
fond of him but I can resign him, to gratify that noble passion of
your majesty; but in making this declaration, I have another to add,
without which I cannot resolve to part with him, and perhaps you may
not approve of it.

Your majesty will not be displeased, continued the Indian, if I tell
you that I did not buy this horse, but obtained him of the inventor
and maker, by giving him my only daughter in marriage, and promising
at the same time never to sell him; but, if I parted with him, to
exchange him for something that I should like.

The Indian would have gone on, but at the word exchange, the king of
Persia interrupted him: I am willing, said he, to give you what you
will ask in exchange. You know my kingdom is large, and contains
many great, rich, and populous cities; I will give you the choice of
which you like best, in full sovereignty for the rest of your life.

This exchange seemed royal and noble to the whole court, but was
much below what the Indian proposed to himself, who had raised his
thoughts much higher. I am infinitely obliged to your majesty for
the offer you make me, answered he, and cannot thank you enough for
your generosity; yet I must beg of you not to be angry with me, if I
have the boldness to tell you, that I cannot resign to you my horse,
but by receiving the hand of the princess your daughter as my wife:
this is the only price at which I can give up my property in him.

The courtiers about the king of Persia could not forbear laughing
aloud at this extravagant demand of the Indian; but the prince
Firouz Schah, the king’s eldest son, and presumptive heir to the
crown, could not bear it without indignation. The king was of a very
different opinion, and thought he might sacrifice the princess of
Persia to the Indian, to satisfy his curiosity. He remained,
however, undetermined, considering what he should do.

Prince Firouz Schah, who saw his father hesitating what answer he
should make, began to fear lest he should comply with the Indian’s
demand, and looked upon it as not only injurious to the royal
dignity and his sister, but also to himself; therefore, to
anticipate his father, he said, Sir, I hope your majesty will
forgive me for daring to ask you, if it is possible that your
majesty should hesitate a moment about a denial to so insolent a
demand from such an insignificant fellow, and scandalous juggler;
and that you should give him reason to flatter himself a moment with
being allied to one of the most powerful monarchs in the world? I
beg of you to consider what you owe to yourself, and to your own
blood, and the high rank of your ancestors.

Son, replied the king of Persia, I very much approve of your
remonstrance, and am very sensible of your zeal for preserving the
lustre of your noble birth; but you do not consider enough the
excellence of this horse, nor that the Indian, if I should refuse
him, may make the offer somewhere else, where this nice point of
honour may be waved. I shall be in the utmost despair if another
prince should boast of having exceeded me in generosity, and
deprived me of the glory of possessing a horse, which I esteem as
the most singular and wonderful thing in the world. I will not say I
consent to grant him what he asked. Perhaps he has not made up his
mind upon this exorbitant demand; and, putting my daughter the
princess out of the question, I may make another agreement with him
that will answer his purpose as well. But before I strike the
bargain with him, I should be glad that you would examine the horse;
try him yourself, and give me your opinion; I doubt not he will
permit.

As it is natural for us to flatter ourselves in what we desire, the
Indian fancied, by what he heard the king of Persia say, he was not
entirely averse to his alliance, by taking the horse at his price;
and that the prince, who, instead of being against it, might become
more favourable to him, and not oppose the desire the king seemed to
have; and to show he consented to it with a great deal of pleasure,
he expressed much joy, ran before the prince to help him to mount,
and showed him how to guide and manage the horse.

The prince mounted the horse with wonderful address, without the
Indian assisting him; and no sooner had he got his feet in both
stirrups, but, without staying for the Indian’s advice, he turned
the peg he had seen him use, and mounted into the air as quick as an
arrow shot out of a bow by the stoutest and most adroit archer; and
in a few moments the king, court, and the numerous assembly, lost
sight of him. Neither horse nor prince were to be seen; and the king
of Persia made vain efforts to discern them: when the Indian,
alarmed at what had happened, prostrated himself before the throne,
and forced the king to look at him, and give attention to what he
said. Sir, said he, your majesty yourself saw that the prince was so
hasty, that he would not permit me to give him the necessary
instructions to govern my horse. From what he saw me do, he would
show that he wanted not my advice to set off. He was too willing to
show his address, but knows not the way which I was going to show
him, how to turn the horse about and bring it back again. Therefore,
sir, the favour I ask of your majesty is, not to make me accountable
for what accidents may befall him; you are too just to impute to me
any misfortune that may attend him.

This discourse of the Indian very much surprised and afflicted the
king of Persia, who saw the danger his son was in to be inevitable,
if, as the Indian said, there was another secret to bring him back
again, that was different from that which carried him away; and
asked, in a passion, why he did not call him back the moment he went.

Sir, answered the Indian, your majesty saw as well as I with what
swiftness the horse and the prince flew away. The surprise I was
then, and still am in, deprived me of the use of my speech; and, if
I could have spoken, he was got too far to hear me. If he had heard
me, he knew not the secret to bring him back, which, through his
impatience, he would not stay to learn. But, sir, added he, there is
room to hope that the prince, when he finds himself at a loss, will
perceive another peg, and, as soon as he turns that, the horse will
cease to rise, and will descend to the ground, and he may turn him
to what place he pleases by guiding him with the bridle.

Notwithstanding all these arguments of the Indian, which carried
great appearance of probability, the king of Persia was terribly
frightened at the evident danger his son was in. I suppose, replied
he, it is very uncertain whether my son perceives the other peg, and
makes a right use of it: may not the horse, instead of lighting on
the ground, fall upon some rock, or tumble into the sea with him?

Sir, replied the Indian, I can deliver your majesty from this
apprehension, by assuring you that the horse crosses seas without
ever falling into them, and always carries his rider wherever he has
a mind to go. And your majesty may assure yourself, that, if the
prince does not find out the other peg which I mentioned, the horse
will carry him where he pleases to go. It is not to be supposed he
will go any where but where he can find assistance, and make himself
known.

Be it as it will, replied the king of Persia, as I cannot depend
upon the assurance you give me, your head shall answer for my
son’s life, if he does not return safe and sound in three days’
time, or that I can certainly hear that he is alive. Then he ordered
his officers to secure his person, and keep him close prisoner;
after which he retired to his palace, extremely grieved that the
feast of Nevrouz should afford him and his court so much sorrow.

In the mean time prince Firouz Schah was carried through the air
with prodigious swiftness, as was said before; and in less than an
hour’s time he had got so high, that he could not distinguish any
thing on the earth, but mountains and plains seemed confounded
together. It was then he began to think of returning from whence he
came, and thought to do it by turning the same peg the contrary way,
and pulling the bridle at the same time. But when he found that the
horse still rose with the same swiftness, his astonishment was
extremely great. He turned the peg several times, one way and the
other, but all in vain. It was then he grew sensible of his fault,
in not taking the necessary precautions to guide the horse, before
he mounted him. He immediately apprehended the great danger he was
in, but that apprehension did not deprive him of his reason. He
examined the horse’s head and neck with great attention, and
perceived behind the horse’s right ear another peg, smaller and
less discernible than the other. He turned that peg, and presently
perceived that he descended in the same oblique manner as he
mounted, but not so swiftly.

Night had overshadowed almost half an hour that part of the earth
over which the prince then was, when he found out and turned the
small peg; and as the horse descended, he by degrees lost sight of
the sun, till it grew quite dark; insomuch that, instead of choosing
what place he would go to, he was forced to let the bridle lie upon
the horse’s neck, and wait patiently till he alighted, though not
without the dread lest it should be in the desert, a river, or the
sea.

At last the horse alighted and stopped after midnight, and prince
Firouz Schah dismounted, very faint and hungry, having eaten nothing
since the morning when he came out of the palace with his father to
assist at the festival. The first thing he had to do in the darkness
of the night was to endeavour to find out where he was; when he
found himself to be on the terrace of a magnificent palace,
surrounded with a balustrade of white marble, breast high; and
groping about, found a pair of stairs which led down into the
palace, the door of which was half open.

None but prince Firouz Schah would have ventured to go down those
stairs, so dark as it was, and in the danger he exposed himself to
from friends or foes. But no consideration could stop him. I do not
come, said he to himself, to do any body any harm; and certainly,
whoever meets or sees me first, and finds that I have no arms in my
hands, will not attempt any thing against my life, before they hear
what I have to say for myself. After this reflection he opened the
door wider, without making any noise, and went softly down the
stairs, that he might not awaken any body; and when he came to a
landing place on the staircase, he found the door of a great hall,
that had a light in it, open.

The prince stopped at the door, and listening, heard no other noise
than the snoring of some people who were fast asleep. He advanced a
little into the room, and, by the light of a lantern, saw that those
persons whom he heard snore were black eunuchs, with naked sabres
laid by them; which was enough to inform him that this was the guard
chamber of some queen or princess: which latter it proved to be.

In the next room to this the princess lay, as appeared by the light
he saw, the door being open, through a thin silken curtain, which
drew before the door-way, whither prince Firouz Schah advanced on
tip-toe, without waking the eunuchs. He put by the curtain, and went
in; and without staying to observe the magnificence of the chamber,
which was what he did not much regard, he gave his attention to
something of greater importance. He saw a great many beds; only one
of them on a sofa, the rest on the floor. The princess lay in the
first, and her women in the others.

This distinction was enough to direct the prince in his choice. He
crept softly to the bed without waking either the princess or her
women, and beheld a beauty so extraordinary and surprising, that he
was charmed and inflamed with love at the first sight. O heavens!
said he to himself, has my fate brought me hither to deprive me of
my liberty, which hitherto I have always preserved? How can I avoid
a certain slavery, when those eyes shall open, since without doubt,
they complete the lustre of this assemblage of charms? I must
quickly resolve; since I cannot stir without being my own murderer;
for so has necessity ordained.

After these reflections on his situation, and on the princess’s
beauty, and examining the condition of his heart, he fell on his
knees, and taking hold of the princess’s shift sleeve, out of
which came an arm as white as snow, pulled it gently towards him.
The princess opened her eyes, and seeing a handsome, well-shaped,
comely man on his knees, she was in great surprise; yet seemed to
show no sign of fear.

The prince made use of this favourable moment, bowed his head down
to the ground, and, rising, said, Respectable princess, by the most
extraordinary and wonderful adventure imaginable, you see here at
your feet a suppliant prince, the son of the king of Persia, who was
yesterday morning with his father in his court, at the celebration
of a solemn feast, and is now in a strange country, in danger of his
life, if you have not the goodness and generosity to give him your
assistance and protection. These I implore, adorable princess, with
the confidence that you will not refuse me. I have the more ground
to persuade myself that so much beauty and majesty, and such charms,
cannot entertain the least inhumanity.

This princess, to whom prince Firouz Schah so happily addressed
himself, was the princess of Bengal, eldest daughter of the king of
that kingdom, who had built this palace a small distance from his
capital, whither she went to take the benefit of the country. After
she had heard the prince with all the candour he could desire, she
replied with equal goodness, Prince, you are not in a barbarous
country; take courage: hospitality, humanity, and politeness, are to
be met with in the kingdom of Bengal, as well as in that of Persia.
It is not I who grant you the protection you ask; you not only have
found it in my palace, but throughout the whole kingdom; you may
believe me, and depend upon what I say.

The prince of Persia would have thanked the princess of Bengal for
her civility, and the favour she did him, and had already bowed down
his head to return the compliment, but she would not give him leave
to speak. Notwithstanding I desire, said she, to know by what
miracle you have come hither from the capital of Persia in so short
a time, and by what enchantment you have been able to penetrate so
far as to come to my apartment, and to have deceived the vigilance
of my guards, yet as it is impossible but you must want some
refreshment, and looking upon you as a welcome guest, I will wave my
curiosity, and give orders to my women to regale you, and show you
an apartment, that you may rest yourself after your fatigue, and be
better able to satisfy my curiosity.

The princess’s women, who awaked at the first words which the
prince addressed to the princess, were in the utmost surprise to see
a man at the princess’s bolster, as they could not conceive how he
got thither without waking them or the eunuchs. They no sooner
comprehended the princess’s intentions, than they dressed
themselves presently, and were ready to obey her commands, as soon
as she gave them. They each took a wax candle, of which there were
great numbers lighted up in the room; and after the prince had taken
leave very respectfully, they went before him, and conducted him
into a handsome chamber; where, while some were preparing the bed,
others went into the kitchen; and notwithstanding it was so
unseasonable an hour, they did not make prince Firouz Schah wait
long, but brought him presently all sorts of meat; and when he had
eaten as much as he chose, they removed the table, and left him to
taste the sweets of repose, after showing him several presses, where
he might find whatever he wanted.

In the mean time, the princess of Bengal was so struck with the
charms, wit, politeness, and other good qualities which she
discovered in that short conversation with the prince, that she
could not sleep: but when her women came into her room to go to bed,
again asked them if they had taken care of him, and if he wanted any
thing; and particularly what they thought of him.

The women, after they had satisfied her as to the first articles,
answered as to the last: We do not know what you may think of him,
but, for our parts, we think you would be very happy if the king
your father would marry you to so amiable a prince; for there is not
a prince in all the kingdom of Bengal to be compared to him; nor can
we hear that any of the neighbouring princes are worthy of you.

This flattering discourse was not displeasing to the princess of
Bengal; but as she had no mind to declare her sentiments to them,
she imposed silence upon them, telling them they talked without
reflection, bidding them to go to bed and let her sleep.

The next day, the first thing the princess did as soon as she was
up, was to sit down to her toilet. She took more pains in dressing
and adjusting herself at the glass than ever she had done in her
life. She never had tried her women’s patience so much before, by
making them do and undo the same thing several times: Certainly,
said she to herself, if the prince, as I perceive, was taken with me
in my dishabille, he will be charmed with me when I am dressed. She
adorned her head, neck, arms, and waist, with the finest and largest
diamonds she had. The habit she made use of was one of the richest
stuffs of the Indies, of a most beautiful colour, and made only for
kings, princes, and princesses. After she had consulted her glass a
long time, and asked her women, one after another, if any thing was
wanting to her attire, she sent to know if the prince of Persia was
awake; and as she never doubted but that, if he was up and dressed,
he would ask leave to come and pay his respects to her, she charged
the messenger to tell him she would make him the visit, and she had
her reasons for this.

The prince of Persia, who by that night’s rest had recovered the
fatigue he had undergone the day before, had just dressed himself,
when he received the princess of Bengal’s compliments by one of
her women. Without giving the lady who brought the message leave to
communicate it, he asked her if it was proper for him then to go and
pay his respects to the princess; and when the lady had acquitted
herself of the errand, he replied, it shall be as the princess
thinks fit; I came here to be solely at her pleasure.

As soon as the princess of Bengal understood that the prince of
Persia waited for her, she immediately went to pay him a visit.
After mutual compliments on both sides, the prince asking pardon for
having waked the princess out of a profound sleep, and the princess
inquiring after his health, and how he rested, the princess sat down
on a sofa, as did also the prince, though at some distance, out of
respect.

Then the princess, resuming the discourse, said, I would have
received you, prince, in the chamber in which you found me in bed
last night; but as the chief of my eunuchs has the liberty of coming
into it, and never comes further without my leave, through my
impatience to hear the surprising adventure which procures me the
happiness of seeing you, I chose to come hither, that we may not be
interrupted; therefore I beg of you to give me that satisfaction,
which will highly oblige me.

Prince Firouz Schah, to gratify the princess of Bengal, began his
discourse with the solemn and annual feast of the Nevrouz, relating
all the sights worthy of her curiosity, which had amazed the court
of Persia and the whole town of Schiraz. Afterwards he came to the
enchanted horse; the description of which, with the account of the
wonders the Indian performed on him before so august an assembly,
convinced the princess that nothing of that kind could be imagined
more surprising in the world. You may well think, charming princess,
continued the prince of Persia, that the king my father, who cares
not what he gives for any thing that is rare and curious, would be
very desirous to purchase such a horse, as indeed he was. He asked
the Indian what he would have for him; who made him an extravagant
reply, telling him, that he had not bought him, but taken him in
exchange for his only daughter, and could not part with him but on
the like condition, which was, to have his consent to marry the
princess my sister.

The crowd of courtiers, who stood about the king my father, hearing
the extravagance of this proposal, laughed loudly at it; and I, for
my part, conceived so great indignation, that I could not disguise
it; and the more, because I saw that the king my father was
considering with himself what answer he should give him. In short, I
believe he would have granted him what he asked, if I had not in the
most lively terms represented to him how injurious it would be to
his honour; yet my remonstrance could not bring him entirely to quit
his design of sacrificing the princess my sister to so despicable a
person. He fancied he should bring me over to his opinion, if once I
could comprehend, as he imagined he did, the singular worth of his
horse. With this view he would have me look at him, and mount him,
and make a trial of him myself.

To please my father, I mounted the horse, and as soon as I was upon
his back I put my hand upon a peg, as I had seen the Indian do
before me, to make the horse mount into the air, never staying to
take instructions of the owner. The instant I touched the peg, the
horse mounted with me into the air as swift as an arrow shot out of
a bow, and I was presently at such a distance from the earth that I
could not distinguish any object. By the swiftness of the motion I
was for some time unapprehensive of the danger to which I was
exposed; but when I grew sensible of it, I endeavoured to turn the
peg the contrary way. But the experiment would not answer my
expectation, and still the horse mounted with me, and carried me a
greater distance from the earth. At last I perceived another peg,
which I turned, and then I grew sensible that the horse declined
towards the earth, and presently found myself so surrounded with
darkness, that it was impossible for me to guide the horse. In this
condition I laid the bridle on his neck, and trusted myself to the
will of God to dispose of my fate.

Not long after the horse alighted, and I got off his back, and
examining whereabouts I might be, perceived myself on the terrace of
this palace, and found the door of the staircase half open. I came
softly down the stairs, and seeing a door open by a small light, put
my head into the room, and saw some eunuchs asleep, and a great
light in another room. The necessity I was under, notwithstanding
the inevitable danger I was threatened with, if the eunuchs had
waked, inspired me with the boldness, or rather rashness, to cross
that room to get to the other.

It is needless, princess, added the prince, to tell you the rest,
since you are not unacquainted with all that passed afterwards. But
I am obliged in duty to thank you for your goodness and generosity,
and to beg of you to let me know how I may show my gratitude.
According to the law of nations, I am already your slave, and cannot
make you an offer of my person; there only remains my heart: but,
alas! princess, what do I say? My heart is no longer my own; your
charms have forced it from me, but in such a manner, as I will never
ask for it again, but yield it up: give me leave, therefore, to
declare you mistress both of my heart and inclination.

These last words of the prince Firouz Schah were pronounced with
such an air and tone, that the princess of Bengal never doubted a
moment of the effect she expected from her charms; neither did she
seem to resent the precipitate declaration of the prince of Persia.
Her blushes served but to heighten her beauty, and render her more
amiable in the eyes of the prince.

As soon as she had recovered herself, she replied, prince, you have
given me a sensible pleasure by telling me those surprising,
wonderful things. But, on the other hand, I can hardly forbear
shuddering, when I think on the height you was in the air; and
though I have the good fortune to see you here safe and well, I was
in pain till you came to that part where the Indian horse alighted
on my palace leads. The same thing might have happened in a thousand
other places. I am glad that chance has given me the preference to
the whole world, and the opportunity of letting you know that it
could not have conducted you to any place where you could have been
received more agreeably, and with greater pleasure.

But prince, continued she, I should think myself offended, if I
believed that the thought you mentioned of being my slave was
serious, and that it did not proceed from your politeness rather
than from a sincerity of sentiment; for, by the reception I gave you
yesterday, you might assure yourself, you are here as much at
liberty as in the midst of the court of Persia.

As to your heart, added the princess of Bengal, in a tone which
showed nothing less than a refusal, as I am persuaded that you have
not lived so long without disposing of it, and that you could not
fail of making choice of a princess who deserves it, I should be
very sorry to give you an occasion to be guilty of infidelity to her.

Prince Firouz Schah would have protested, that when he left Persia,
he was master of his own heart: but, at that instant, one of the
princess’s ladies in waiting came to tell her that dinner was
served up.

This interruption delivered the prince and princess from an
explanation, which would have been equally embarrassing to both of
them, and of which they stood not in need. The princess of Bengal
was fully convinced of the prince of Persia’s sincerity; and the
prince, though the princess had not explained herself, judged
nevertheless by some words she let fall, and the favourable manner
she heard him, that he had no reason to complain.

As the lady held the door open, the princess of Bengal said to the
prince of Persia, rising off her seat, as he did also from his, I am
not used to dine so early; but as I fancied you might have had but
an indifferent supper last night, I ordered dinner to be got ready
sooner than ordinary. After this compliment, she led him into a
magnificent hall, where a table was laid, and set off with great
plenty of choice and excellent viands; and as soon as they were sat
down, a great many beautiful slaves of the princess, richly dressed,
began a most agreeable concert of vocal and instrumental music,
which lasted the whole time of dinner.

This concert was so sweet and well managed, that it did not in the
least interrupt the prince and princess’s conversation. All
dinner-time their sole concern was to help and invite each other to
eat: the prince, for his part, served the princess with the choicest
of every thing, and strove to outdo her in civility, both by words
and actions, which she returned again, with a great many new
compliments: and in this reciprocal commerce of mutual civilities
and attentions, love made a greater progress in both, than a
concerted interview would have promoted.

When they rose from the table, the princess carried the prince into
a large and magnificent closet, finely embellished with paintings in
blue and gold, of a just symmetry, and richly furnished; there they
both sat down upon a sofa, which afforded a most agreeable prospect
into the palace garden, which prince Firouz Schah admired for the
vast variety of flowers, shrubs, and trees, which were full as
beautiful as those of Persia, but quite different. Here taking the
opportunity of entering into a conversation with the princess, he
said, I always believed, madam, that no part of the world but Persia
afforded such stately palaces and beautiful gardens; but now I see
that other great monarchs know as well how to build mansions
suitable to their power and greatness; and if there is a difference
in the manner of building, there is none in the grandeur and
magnificence.

Prince, replied the princess of Bengal, as I have no idea of the
palaces of Persia, I cannot judge of the comparison you have made of
mine, to tell you my opinion of it. But however sincere you seem to
be, I can hardly think it just, but rather incline to believe it a
compliment: I will not despise my palace before you: you have too
good an eye, too good a taste, not to form a sound judgment. But I
assure you I find it very indifferent, when I compare it with the
king my father’s, which far exceeds it for grandeur, beauty, and
richness: you shall tell me yourself what you think of it, when you
have seen it; for since a chance has brought you so nigh to the
capital of this kingdom, I do not doubt but you will see it, and
make my father a visit, that he may pay you all the honour due to a
prince of your rank and merit.

The princess flattered herself, that by exciting in the prince of
Persia a curiosity to see the Palace of Bengal, and to visit her
father in it, the king, seeing him so handsome, wise, and
accomplished a prince, might perhaps resolve to propose an alliance
with him, by offering her to him as a wife. And as she was well
persuaded she was not indifferent to the prince, and that he would
be pleased with the proposal, she hoped to attain to the utmost of
her wishes, and preserve all the decorum becoming a princess, who
would appear resigned to the will of her king and father; but the
prince of Persia did not return her an answer according to her
expectations.

Princess, replied the prince, the preference which you give to the
king of Bengal’s palace to your own, is enough for me to believe
it much exceeds it: but as to the proposal of my going and paying my
respects to the king your father, I should not only do myself a
pleasure, but an honour. But judge, princess, yourself, would you
advise me to present myself before so great a monarch, like an
adventurer, without attendants, and a train agreeable to my rank?

Prince, replied the princess, let not that give you any pain; if you
will but go, you shall want no money to have what train and
attendants you please: I will furnish you; and we have traders here
of all nations in great numbers, and you may make what choice you
please, to form your household.

Prince Firouz Schah penetrated into the princess of Bengal’s
intention, and this sensible mark she gave him of her love, still
augmented his passion, which, notwithstanding its violence, made him
not forget his duty. But without any hesitation he replied,
Princess, I should most willingly accept of the obliging offer you
make me, for which I cannot enough show my gratitude, if the
uneasiness my father must feel on account of my absence did not
prevent me. I should be unworthy of the goodness and tenderness he
has always had for me, if I should not return as soon as possible to
calm his fears. I know him so well, that while I have the happiness
of enjoying the conversation of so lovely a princess, I am persuaded
that he is plunged into the deepest grief, and has lost all hopes of
seeing me again. I hope you will do me the justice to believe, that
I cannot, without ingratitude, and being guilty of a crime, dispense
with going to restore to him that life, which a too long deferred
return may have endangered.

After this, princess, continued the prince of Persia, if you will
permit me, and think me worthy to aspire to the happiness of
becoming your husband, as the king my father has always declared
that he never would constrain me in my choice, I should find it no
difficult matter to get leave to return, not as a stranger, but as a
prince, to contract an alliance with him by our marriage; and I am
persuaded that he will be overjoyed when I tell him with what
generosity you received me, though a stranger in distress.

The princess of Bengal was too sensible, after what the prince of
Persia had said, to insist any longer in persuading him to pay a
visit to the king of Bengal, or to ask any thing contrary to his
duty and honour. But she was very much alarmed to find that he
thought of so sudden a departure; fearing, that if he took his leave
of her so soon, instead of remembering his promise, he would forget
her when he ceased to see her. To divert him from it, she said to
him, Prince, my intention of proposing a visit to my father was not
to oppose so just an excuse as that you give me, and which I did not
foresee. I should have rendered myself an accomplice of the crime,
had I thought of it, but I cannot approve of your thinking to go so
soon as you propose; at least, grant me the favour I ask, of a
little longer acquaintance; and since I have had the happiness to
have you alight in the kingdom of Bengal, rather than in the midst
of a desert, or on the top of some steep craggy rock, from which it
would have been impossible for you to descend, I desire you will
stay long enough to enable you to give a better account at the court
of Persia of what you have seen here.

The sole end the princess of Bengal had in this discourse was, that
the prince of Persia, by a longer stay, might become insensibly more
passionately enamoured of her charms, hoping thereby that his ardent
desire of returning would diminish, and then he might be brought to
appear in public, and pay a visit to the king of Bengal. The prince
of Persia could not well refuse her the favour she asked, after the
kind reception she had given him: but was so complaisant as to
comply with her request; and the princess’s thoughts were only how
to render his stay agreeable by all the diversions she could imagine.

Nothing went forward for several days but festivals and balls, and
concerts of music, accompanied with magnificent feasts, and
collations, walks in the gardens, or hunting-parties in the
palace-park, which abounded with all sorts of game, stags, hinds,
and fallow-deer, and other beasts peculiar to the kingdom of Bengal,
which the princess could pursue without danger. After the chase, the
prince and princess met in some beautiful spot in the park, where a
carpet was spread, and cushions laid for their accommodation. There
resting themselves, after their violent exercise, and recovering
themselves, they conversed on various subjects. The princess took
great pains to turn the conversation on the grandeur, power, riches,
and government of Persia; that from prince Firouz Schah’s
discourse she might have an opportunity to talk of the kingdom of
Bengal, and its advantages, and engage him to resolve to make a
longer stay there; but she was disappointed in her expectations.

In short, the prince of Persia, without the least exaggerations,
gave so advantageous an account of the extent of the kingdom of
Persia, its magnificence and riches, its military force, its
commerce by sea and land with the remote parts of the world, some of
which were unknown to him; the vast number of large cities it
contained, almost as populous as that which the king had chosen for
his residence, where he had palaces furnished ready to receive him
at all seasons of the year, so that he had his choice always to
enjoy a perpetual spring; that before he had done, the princess
found the kingdom of Bengal to be very much inferior to that of
Persia, in a great many instances. When he had finished his
relation, he begged of her to entertain him with a description of
Bengal; which, after a great deal of entreaty from the prince, she
complied with.

The princess gave prince Firouz Schah that satisfaction; but by
lessening a great many advantages the kingdom of Bengal was well
known to have over that of Persia, she let him know the disposition
she felt to accompany him, so that he believed she would consent at
the first proposition he should make; but he thought it would not be
proper to make it till he had showed her so much complaisance as to
stay with her long enough to make the blame fall on her, in case she
wished to detain him longer from returning to his father, as he was
in duty bound to do.

Two whole months the prince Firouz Schah abandoned himself entirely
to the will of the princess of Bengal, yielding to all the
amusements she contrived for him, for she neglected nothing to
divert him, as if she thought he had nothing else to do but to pass
his whole life with her in this manner. But after that time, he
declared seriously he could not stay any longer, and begged of her
to give him leave to return to his father; repeating again the
promise he had made her to return soon in a style worthy of her and
himself, and to demand her in form in marriage of the king of Bengal.

And princess, replied the prince of Persia, that you may not suspect
the truth of what I say; and that by my asking this leave, you may
not rank me among those false lovers who forget the objects of their
love as soon as they are absent from them; but to show that my
passion is real, and not feigned, and that life cannot be pleasant
to me when absent from so lovely a princess, whose love to me I
cannot doubt is mutual; I would presume, if I was not afraid you
would be offended at my request, to ask the favour of taking you
along with me.

As the prince Firouz Schah saw that the princess blushed at these
last words, and that without any mark of anger she hesitated at the
step she should take, he proceeded, and said, Princess, as for the
king my father’s consent, and the reception he will give you, I
venture to assure you he will receive you with pleasure into his
alliance; and as for the king of Bengal, after all the love and
tender regard he has always expressed for you, he must be the
reverse of what you have described him, an enemy to your repose and
happiness, if he should not receive in a friendly manner the embassy
which my father will send to him for his approbation of our marriage.

The princess of Bengal returned no answer to this discourse of the
prince of Persia; but her silence, and eyes cast down, were
sufficient to inform him that she had no reluctance to accompany him
into Persia, but consented. The only difficulty she had was, that
the prince knew not well enough how to govern the horse, and she was
apprehensive of being involved with him in the same difficulty as
when he made the experiment. But the prince soon removed her fear by
assuring her she might trust herself with him, for that after the
experience he had had, he defied the Indian himself to manage him
better. She thought therefore only of concerting measures to get off
with him so secretly, that nobody belonging to the palace should
have the least suspicion of their design.

The next morning, a little before daybreak, when all in the palace
were asleep, they went upon the terrace of the palace. The prince
turned the horse towards Persia, and placed him where the princess
could easily get up behind him; which she had no sooner done, and
was well settled with her arms about his waist, for her better
security, but he turned the peg, and the horse mounted into the air,
and making his usual haste, under the guidance of the prince, in two
hours’ time the prince discovered the capital of Persia.

He would not alight at the great square from whence he set out, nor
in the sultan’s palace, but directed his course towards a
pleasure-house at a little distance from the town. He led the
princess into a handsome apartment, where he told her, that to do
her all the honour that was due to her, he would go and inform his
father of their arrival, and return to her immediately. He ordered
the housekeeper of the palace, who was then present, to provide the
princess with what ever she had occasion for.

After the prince had taken his leave of the princess, he ordered a
horse to be saddled, which he mounted, after sending back the
housekeeper to the princess with orders to provide her breakfast
immediately, and then set forwards for the palace. As he passed
through the streets, he was received with acclamations by the
people, who were overjoyed to see him again. The sultan his father
was giving audience, when he appeared before him in the midst of his
council, who, as well as the sultan and the whole court, had been in
mourning ever since he had been absent. The sultan received him, and
embracing him with tears of joy and tenderness, asked him, What was
become of the Indian’s horse?

This question gave the prince an opportunity to tell him the
embarrassment and danger he was in when the horse mounted into the
air with him, and how he arrived at last at the princess of
Bengal’s palace, with the kind reception he met with there: that
the motive which obliged him to stay so long with her, was, the
complaisance she had shown not to disoblige him, so that after
promising to marry her, he had persuaded her to come with him into
Persia. But, sir, added the prince, I have promised that you would
not refuse your consent, and have brought her with me on the
Indian’s horse, to a palace where your majesty often goes for your
pleasure; and have left her there, till I could return and assure
her that my promise was not in vain.

After these words, the prince prostrated himself before the sultan
to gain his consent, but his father raised him up, embraced him a
second time, and said to him, Son, I not only consent to your
marriage with the princes of Bengal, but will go and meet her
myself, and thank her for the obligation I in particular have to
her, and will bring her to my palace, and celebrate your nuptials
this day.

Then the sultan gave orders for his court to go out of mourning, and
make preparations for the princess’s entry; that the rejoicings
should begin with a grand concert of military music, and that the
Indian should be fetched out of prison and brought before him. When
the Indian was brought before the sultan, he said to him, I secured
thy person, that thy life, though not a sufficient victim to my rage
and grief, might answer for that of the prince my son, whom, thanks
to God! I have found again: go, take your horse, and never let me
see your face more.

As the Indian had learned of those who fetched him out of prison,
that prince Firouz Schah was returned, and had brought a princess
behind him on his horse, and was also informed of the place where he
had alighted and left her, and that the sultan was making
preparations to go and bring her to his palace; as soon as he got
out of the sultan’s presence, he bethought himself of being
beforehand with him and the prince; and, without losing any time,
went directly to the palace, and addressing himself to the
housekeeper, told him, he came from the sultan and prince of Persia,
to fetch the princess of Bengal, and to carry her behind him through
the air to the sultan, who waited in the great square of his palace
to gratify the whole court and city of Schiraz with that wonderful
sight.

The housekeeper, who knew the Indian, and that the sultan had
imprisoned him, gave the more credit to what he said, because he saw
that he was at liberty. He presented him to the princess of Bengal;
who no sooner understood that he came from the prince of Persia,
than she consented to what that prince, as she thought, desired of
her.

The Indian, overjoyed at his success, and the ease with which he had
accomplished his villany, mounted his horse, took the princess
behind him, with the assistance of the housekeeper, turned the peg,
and presently the horse mounted into the air with him and the
princess.

At the same time the sultan of Persia, followed by his court, was on
the road from his own palace to the palace where the princess of
Bengal was left, and the prince of Persia was advanced before, to
prepare the princess of Bengal to receive him, when the Indian to
brave them both, and revenge himself for the ill-treatment he had
received, as he pretended, passed over their heads with his prize.

When the sultan of Persia saw the ravisher, he stopped. His surprise
and affliction was the more sensible, because it was not in his
power to make him repent of so high an affront. He loaded him with a
thousand imprecations, as also did all the courtiers, who were
witnesses of so signal a piece of insolence and unparalleled villany.

The Indian, little moved with their curses, which just reached his
ears, continued his way; while the sultan, extremely mortified at so
great an injury, and to find he could not punish the author,
returned back to his palace.

But what was prince Firouz Schah’s grief to see the Indian carry
away the princess of Bengal, whom he loved so passionately, that he
could not live without her! At the sight of an object so little
expected, he was thunderstruck, and before he could deliberate with
himself whether he should let fly all the reproaches his rage could
invent against the Indian, or bewail the deplorable fate of the
princess, or ask her pardon for not taking better precaution to
preserve her, who had trusted herself to his care in a manner
sufficiently expressive of her love, the horse was out of sight. He
could not resolve what to do, whether he should return to the
sultan’s palace, and shut himself up in his apartment to give
himself entirely up to his affliction, without attempting to pursue
the ravisher, to deliver the princess, and punish him as he
deserved. But as his generosity, love, and courage, would not suffer
this, he continued on his way to the palace where he had left his
princess.

When he came there, the housekeeper, who was by this time convinced
of his credulity, and that he was deceived by the Indian, threw
himself at his feet with tears in his eyes, and accused himself of
the crime, which he thought he had committed, and condemned himself
to die by his hand. Rise up, said the prince to him, I do not impute
the loss of my princess to thee, but to my own simplicity. But not
to lose time, fetch me a dervise’s habit, and take care you do not
give the least hint that it is for me.

Not far from this palace there stood a convent of dervises, the
scheik or superior of which was the palace-keeper’s particular
friend. He went to this scheik, and telling him that a considerable
officer at court, and a man of worth, to whom he had been very much
obliged, and wished to favour, by giving him an opportunity to
withdraw from the sultan’s rage, he easily got a complete
dervise’s habit, and carried it to prince Firouz Schah. The prince
immediately pulled off his own clothes, and put it on; and being so
disguised, and provided with a box of jewels, which he had brought
as a present to the princess, he left the palace in the evening,
uncertain which way to go, but resolved not to return till he had
found out his princess, and brought her back again.

But to return to the Indian: he governed his enchanted horse so well
that day, that he arrived early in a wood, near the capital of the
kingdom of Caschmire. Being hungry, and concluding the princess was
also, he alighted in that wood, in an open part of it, and left the
princess on a grassy spot, by a rivulet of clear fresh water.

During the Indian’s absence, the princess of Bengal, who knew that
she was in the power of a base ravisher, whose violence she dreaded,
thought of getting from him, and seeking out some sanctuary. But as
she had scarce eaten any thing on her arrival at the pleasant palace
in the morning, she was so faint, that she could not execute her
design, but was forced to abandon it, and to stay where she was,
without any other resource than her courage, and a firm resolution
rather to suffer death, than be unfaithful to the prince of Persia.
When the Indian returned, she did not wait to be asked twice, but
ate with him, and recovered herself enough to answer with courage to
the insolent language he began to hold to her when they had done.
After a great many threats, as she saw that the Indian was preparing
to use violence, she rose up to make resistance, and, by her cries
and shrieks, drew about them a company of horsemen, which happened
to be the sultan of Caschmire and his attendants, who, as they were
returning from hunting, happily for the princess of Bengal, passed
through that part of the wood, and ran to her assistance, at the
noise she made.

The sultan addressed himself to the Indian, and asked him who he
was, and what he pretended to do with the lady? The Indian, with
great impudence, replied, that she was his wife; and what had any
one to do with his quarrel with her?

The princess, who neither knew the rank nor quality of the person
who came so seasonably to her relief, told the Indian he was a liar;
and said to the sultan, Sir, whoever you are that Heaven has sent to
my assistance, have compassion on a princess, and give no credit to
that impostor. Heaven forbid that I should be the wife of so vile
and despicable an Indian! a wicked magician, that hath taken me away
from the prince of Persia, to whom I was going to be married, and
hath brought me hither on the enchanted horse that you see.

The princess of Bengal had no occasion to say any more to persuade
the sultan of Caschmire that what she told him was truth. Her
beauty, majestic air, and tears, spoke sufficiently for her. The
sultan of Caschmire, justly enraged at the insolence of the Indian,
ordered his guards to surround him, and cut off his head; which
sentence was immediately executed, the more easily, as the Indian,
just released from prison, was unprovided with any weapon to defend
himself.

The princess, thus delivered from the persecution of the Indian,
fell into another no less afflicting to her. The sultan, after he
had ordered her a horse, carried her with him to his palace, where
he lodged her in the most magnificent apartment, next his own, and
gave her a great number of women-slaves to attend her, and a guard
of eunuchs. He led her himself into the apartment he assigned her;
where, without giving her time to thank him for the great obligation
she had to him, he said to her, As I am certain, princess, that you
must want rest, I will here take my leave of you till to-morrow,
when you will be better able to give me all the circumstances of
this strange adventure; and then left her.

The princess of Bengal’s joy was inexpressible to find she was so
soon freed from the violence of a man she could not look upon
without horror. She flattered herself that the sultan of Caschmire
would complete his generosity by sending her back to the prince of
Persia, when she told him her story, and asked that favour of him;
but she was very much deceived in these hopes, for the sultan of
Caschmire resolved to marry her the next day; and for that end had
ordered rejoicings to be made by daybreak, by beating of drums and
sounding of trumpets, and other instruments expressive of joy, which
not only echoed through the palace, but throughout the city.

The princess of Bengal was awakened by those tumultuous concerts,
but attributed them to a very different cause from the true one.
When the sultan of Caschmire, who had given orders that he should be
informed when the princess was ready to receive a visit, came to pay
her one; and when he had inquired after her health, he acquainted
her that all those rejoicings were to render their nuptials more
solemn, and, at the same time, desired her to approve of them. This
discourse put her into so great consternation that she fainted away.

The women-slaves who were present ran to her assistance; and the
sultan did all he could to bring her to herself again, though it was
a long time before they could. But when she recovered, rather than
break the promise she had made to prince Firouz Schah, by consenting
to marry the sultan of Caschmire, who had proclaimed their nuptials
before he had asked her consent, she resolved to feign madness. She
began to say the most extravagant things before the sultan, and even
rose off her seat to fly upon him; insomuch that the sultan was very
much surprised and afflicted that he had made such a proposal so
unseasonably.

When he found that her frenzy rather increased than abated, he left
her with her women, charging them never to leave her alone, but to
take great care of her. He sent often that day to know how she did,
but received no other answer but that she was rather worse than
better. In short, at night she seemed much worse than she had been
all day, insomuch that the sultan of Caschmire was disappointed of
the happiness he promised himself.

The princess of Bengal continued to talk wildly, and show other
marks of a disordered mind, next day and the following ones; so that
the sultan was obliged to send for all the physicians belonging to
his court, to consult them about her disease, and to ask them if
they could cure her.

The physicians all agreed that there were several sorts and degrees
of this distemper, some curable and others not; and told the sultan
that they could not judge of the princess of Bengal’s, unless they
saw her: upon which the sultan ordered the eunuchs to introduce them
into the princess’s chamber, one after another, according to their
rank.

The princess, who foresaw what would happen, and feared that, if she
let the physicians come near her to feel her pulse, the least
experienced of them would soon know that she was in a good state of
health, and that her madness was only feigned, flew into such a rage
and passion, that she was ready to tear out their eyes who came near
her; so none of them durst approach her.

Some of them, who pretended to be more skilful than the rest, and
boasted of judging of diseases only by sight, ordered her some
potions, which she made the less difficulty to take, well knowing
she could be sick or well at pleasure, and that they could do her no
harm.

When the sultan of Caschmire saw that his court physicians could not
cure her, he called in the most noted and experienced of the city,
who had all no better success. Afterwards he sent for the most
famous in the kingdom, who met with no better reception than the
others from the princess, and what they ordered had no better
effect. Afterwards he despatched expresses to the courts of
neighbouring princes, with the princess’s case, to be distributed
among the most famous physicians, with a promise of a handsome
reward to any of them who should come and cure the princess of
Bengal, besides travelling charges.

A great many physicians came from all parts, and undertook the cure;
but none of them could boast of better success than their fellows,
or of restoring the princess’s faculties, since it was a case that
did not depend on their skill, but on the will of the princess
herself.

During this interval, prince Firouz Schah, disguised in the habit of
a dervise, had travelled through a great many provinces and towns,
full of grief; and having endured a great deal of fatigue, not
knowing which way to direct his course, or if he did not take the
very opposite road from what he ought, to hear the tidings he
sought. He made diligent inquiry after her at every place he came
to, till at last, passing through a great town in India, he heard
the people talk very much of a princess of Bengal, who ran mad on
the day of the celebration of her nuptials with the sultan of
Caschmire. At the name of the princess of Bengal, and supposing that
there was no other princess of Bengal than her upon whose account he
undertook his travels, he set forwards for the kingdom of Caschmire,
on this common report; and on his arrival at the capital city, he
went and lodged at a khan, where the same day he was told the story
of the princess of Bengal, and the unhappy fate of the Indian, which
he richly deserved. By all the circumstances, the prince knew he
could not be deceived, but that she was the same princess he had
sought so long after.

The prince of Persia, being informed of all these particulars,
provided himself against the next day with a physician’s habit,
and, having let his beard grow during his travels, he passed for a
physician; and, through the greatness of his impatience to see the
princess, went to the sultan’s palace, where, presenting himself
to the chief of the officers, he told him that perhaps it might be
looked upon as a very bold undertaking in him to offer himself as a
physician to attempt the cure of the princess after so many had
failed; but that he hoped some specifics, which he had had great
experience of, and success from, would effect the cure. The chief of
the officers told him he was very welcome, that the sultan would
receive him with pleasure, and that if he should have the good
fortune to restore the princess to her former health, he might
expect a considerable reward from the sultan his master’s
liberality: Stay a moment, added he, I will come to you again
presently.

It had been a long time since any physician had offered himself; and
the sultan of Caschmire with great grief had begun to lose all hope
of ever seeing the princess of Bengal restored to her former health,
that he might marry her, and show how much he loved her. He ordered
the officer to introduce to him the physician he had announced.

The prince of Persia was presented to the sultan of Caschmire in the
habit and disguise of a physician; and the sultan, without wasting
time in superfluous discourse, after having told him the princess of
Bengal could not bear the sight of a physician without falling into
the most violent transports, which increased her distemper, carried
him into a closet, from whence, through a window, he might see her
without being seen.

There prince Firouz Schah saw his lovely princess sit carelessly
singing a song with tears in her eyes, in which she deplored her
unhappy fate, which deprived her, perhaps for ever, of the object
she loved so tenderly.

The prince was so sensibly affected at the melancholy condition he
found his dear princess in, that he wanted no other signs to
comprehend that her distemper was feigned, and that it was for love
of him that she was under so grievous a constraint. When he came out
of the closet, he told the sultan that he had discovered the nature
of the princess’s distemper, and that she was not incurable; but
added withal, that he must speak with her in private, and by
himself; and, notwithstanding her violent fits at the sight of
physicians, he hoped she would hear and receive him favourably.

The sultan ordered the princess’s chamber door to be opened, and
prince Firouz Schah went in. As soon as the princess saw him,
(taking him by his habit to be a physician) she rose up in a rage,
threatening him, and giving him the most abusive language. He made
directly towards her; and when he was nigh enough for her to hear
him, for he did not wish to be heard by any one else, he said to
her, in a low voice, and in a most respectful manner, to make her
believe him, Princess, I am not a physician, but the prince of
Persia, and am come to procure you your liberty.

The princess, who presently knew the sound of the voice, and the
upper features of his face, notwithstanding he had let his beard
grow so long, grew calm at once, and a secret joy and pleasure
overspread her face, the effect of seeing the person she so much
desired so unexpectedly. Her agreeable surprise deprived her for
some time of the use of her speech, and gave prince Firouz Schah
time to tell her as briefly as possible how despair seized him when
he saw the Indian carry her away; the resolution he took afterwards,
to leave every thing to find her out wherever she was, and never to
return home till he had found her, and forced her out of the hands
of the perfidious wretch; and by what good fortune at last, after a
long and fatiguing journey, he had the satisfaction to find her in
the palace of the sultan of Caschmire. He then desired the princess
to inform him of all that happened to her from the time she was
taken away till that moment when he had the happiness to converse
with her, telling her, that it was of the greatest importance to
know this, that he might take the most proper measures to deliver
her from the tyranny of the sultan of Caschmire.

The princess of Bengal told the prince how she was delivered from
the Indian’s violence by the sultan of Caschmire, as he was
returning home from hunting; but how ill she was treated the next
day, by a declaration he had made of his precipitate design to marry
her that very day, without the least civil office of asking her
consent; that this violent and tyrannical conduct put her into a
swoon; after which, she thought she had no other way than what she
had taken to preserve herself for a prince to whom she had given her
heart and faith, or die rather than marry the sultan, whom she
neither loved, nor ever could love.

Then the prince of Persia asked her if she knew what was become of
the horse after the Indian’s death. To which she answered, that
she knew not what orders the sultan had given about it; but
believed, after the account she had given him of it, he would take
care of it.

As prince Firouz Schah never doubted but that the sultan had the
horse, he communicated to the princess his design of making use of
it to carry them both back into Persia; and after they had consulted
together on the measures they were to take, and that nothing might
prevent the execution of them, they agreed that the princess should
dress herself the next day, and receive the sultan civilly when he
brought him to her, but without speaking to him.

The sultan of Caschmire was overjoyed when the prince of Persia gave
him an account what effect his first visit had towards the cure of
the princess of Bengal. And the next day, when the princess received
him after such a manner as persuaded him her cure was far advanced,
he looked upon him as the greatest physician in the world; and
seeing her in this state, contented himself with telling her how
rejoiced he was to see her so likely soon to recover her health
completely. He exhorted her to follow the directions of so
thoughtful a physician, to complete what he had so well begun; and
then retired, without waiting for her answer.

The prince of Persia, who attended the sultan of Caschmire out of
the princess’s chamber, as he accompanied him, asked him if,
without failing in due respect, he misfit inquire, How the princess
of Bengal came into the dominions of Caschmire thus alone, since her
own country lies so far off? This he said on purpose to introduce
some discourse about the enchanted horse, and to know what was
become of it.

The sultan of Caschmire, who could not penetrate into the prince of
Persia’s motive for asking that question, concealed nothing from
him; but told him much the same story as the princess of Bengal had
done; adding, that he had ordered the enchanted horse to be kept
safe in his treasury as a great curiosity, though he knew not the
use of it.

Sir, replied the pretended physician, the information which your
majesty gives me affords me a means of curing the princess. As she
was brought hither on this horse, and the horse is enchanted, she
hath contracted something of the enchantment, which can be
dissipated only by certain incense which I am acquainted with. If
your majesty would be pleased to entertain yourself, your court, and
the people of your capital, with the most surprising sight that ever
was seen, let the horse be brought into the great square before the
palace, and leave the rest to me. I promise to show you, and all
that assembly, in a few moments’ time, the princess of Bengal as
well in body and mind as ever she was in her life. But, the better
to effect what I propose, it would be proper that the princess
should be dressed as magnificently as possible, and adorned with the
best jewels your majesty has. The sultan would have undertaken much
more difficult things to have arrived at the enjoyment of his
desires, as he expected to do soon.

The next day the enchanted horse was, by his order, taken out of the
treasury, and placed early in the great square before the palace. A
report was spread through the town, that there was something
extraordinary to be seen, and crowds of people flocked thither from
all parts, insomuch that the sultan’s guards were placed to
prevent disorder, and to keep space enough round the horse.

The sultan of Caschmire, surrounded with all his nobles and
ministers of state, was placed on a scaffold erected on purpose. The
princess of Bengal, attended by a vast number of ladies which the
sultan had assigned her, went up to the enchanted horse, and the
women helped her to get upon its back. When she was fixed in the
saddle, and had the bridle in her hand, the pretended physician
placed round the horse a great many vessels full of fire, which he
had ordered to be brought, and going round it, he cast a strong and
grateful perfume into those pots; then, collected in himself, with
downcast eyes, and his hands upon his breast, he ran three times
about the horse, making as if he pronounced certain words. The
moment the pots sent forth a dark cloud of pleasant smell, which so
surrounded the princess, that neither she nor the horse were to be
discerned, watching his opportunity, the prince jumped nimbly up
behind her, and, reaching his hand to the peg, turned it; and just
as the horse rose with them into the air, he pronounced these words,
which the sultan heard distinctly: Sultan of Caschmire, when you
would marry princesses who implore your protection, learn first to
obtain their consent.

Thus the prince of Persia recovered and delivered the princess of
Bengal, and carried her that same day to the capital of Persia,
where he alighted in the midst of the palace, before the king his
father’s apartment, who deferred the solemnization of the marriage
no longer than till he could make the preparations necessary to
render the ceremony pompous and magnificent, and express the
interest he took in it.

After the days appointed for the rejoicing were over, the king of
Persia’s first care was to name and appoint an ambassador to go to
give the king of Bengal an account of what was past, and to demand
his approbation and ratification of the alliance contracted by this
marriage; which the king of Bengal took as an honour, and granted
with great pleasure and satisfaction.




The Story of Prince Ahmed, and the Fairy Pari Banou. [103]


There was a sultan who had peaceably filled the throne of India many
years, and had the satisfaction in his old age to have three sons,
the worthy imitators of his virtues, who, with the princess his
niece, were the ornaments of his court. The eldest of the princes
was called Houssain, the second Ali, the youngest Ahmed, and the
princess his niece Nouronnihar. [104]

The princess Nouronnihar was the daughter of the younger brother of
the sultan, to whom the sultan in his lifetime allowed a
considerable revenue. But that prince had not been married long
before he died, and left the princess very young. The sultan, in
consideration of the brotherly love and friendship that had always
subsisted between them, besides a great attachment to his person,
took upon himself the care of his daughter’s education, and
brought her up in his palace with the three princes; where her
singular beauty and personal accomplishments, joined to a lively wit
and irreproachable virtue, distinguished her among all the
princesses of her time.

The sultan, her uncle, proposed to marry her when she arrived at a
proper age, and to contract an alliance with some neighbouring
prince by that means; and was thinking seriously on that affair,
when he perceived that the three princes his sons loved her
passionately. He was very much concerned, but his grief did not
proceed from a consideration that their passion prevented his
forming the alliance he designed, but the difficulty he foresaw to
make them agree, and that the two youngest should consent to yield
her up to their elder brother. He spoke to each of them apart; and
after having remonstrated on the impossibility of one princess being
the wife of three persons, and the troubles they would create if
they persisted in their passion, he did all he could to persuade
them to abide by a declaration of the princess in favour of one of
them; or to desist from their pretensions, and to think of other
matches, which he left them free liberty to choose, and suffer her
to be married to a foreign prince. But as he found them obstinate,
he sent for them altogether, and said to them, Children, since for
your good and quiet I have not been able to persuade you no longer
to aspire to marry the princess your cousin; and as I have no
inclination to make use of my authority, to give her to one
preferable before the other two, I fancy I have thought of a proper
expedient which will please you all, and preserve the union among
you, if you will but hear me, and follow my advice. I think it would
not be amiss, if every one travelled separately into different
countries, so that you might not meet each other: and as you know I
am very curious, and delight in every thing that is rare and
singular, I promise my niece in marriage to him that shall bring me
the most extraordinary rarity; so that as chance may lead you to
form your own judgment of the singularity of the things which you
bring, by the comparison you make of them, you will have no
difficulty to do yourselves justice by yielding the preference to
him who has deserved it; and for the expense of travelling, I will
give each of you a sum agreeable to your birth, and the purchase of
the rarity you shall go in search after; which shall not be laid out
in an equipage and attendants, which by discovering who you are,
would not only deprive you of the liberty to acquit yourselves of
the inquiry you go about, but prevent your observing those things
which merit your attention, and may be most useful to you.

As the three princes were always submissive and obedient to the
sultan’s will, and each flattered himself fortune might prove
favourable to him, and give him the possession of the princess
Nouronnihar, they all consented to it. The sultan gave them the
money he promised them; and that very day they issued orders for the
preparations for their travels, and took leave of the sultan, that
they might be ready to set out early next morning. They all went out
at the same gate of the city, each dressed like a merchant, attended
by a trusty officer, dressed like a slave, and all well mounted and
equipped. They went the first day’s journey together, and slept at
the first inn, where the road divided into three different tracks.
At night when they were at supper together, they all agreed to
travel for a year, and to make that inn their rendezvous; and that
the first that came should wait for the rest; that as they had all
three taken leave together of the sultan, they might all return
together. The next morning by break of day, after they had embraced
and wished each other reciprocally good success, they mounted their
horses, and took each a different road.

Prince Houssain, the eldest brother, who had heard wonders of the
extent, strength, riches, and splendour of the kingdom of Bisnagar,
bent his course towards the Indian coast; and, after three months’
travelling, joining himself to different caravans, sometimes over
deserts and barren mountains, and sometimes through populous and
fertile countries, arrived at Bisnagar, the capital of the kingdom
of that name, and the residence of its king. He lodged at a khan
appointed for foreign merchants, and having learnt that there were
four principal divisions where merchants of all sorts kept their
shops, in the midst of which stood the castle, or rather the
king’s palace, on a large extent of ground, as the centre of the
city, and surrounded with three courts, and each gate distant two
leagues from the other, he went to one of these quarters the next
day.

Prince Houssain could not view this quarter without admiration. It
was large, and divided into several streets, all vaulted and shaded
from the sun, and yet very light. The shops were all of the same
size and proportion; and all that dealt in the same sort of goods,
as well as all the artists, lived in one street.

The multitude of shops stocked with all kinds of merchandises, such
as the finest linens from several parts of India, some painted in
the most lively colours, and representing men, landscapes, trees,
and flowers; silks and brocades, from Persia, China, and other
places; porcelain from Japan and China; foot carpets of all sizes;
surprised him so much, that he knew not how to believe his own eyes;
but when he came to the shops of the goldsmiths and jewellers, (for
those two trades were exercised by the same merchants,) he was in a
kind of ecstasy, to behold such prodigious quantities of wrought
gold and silver, and was dazzled by the lustre of the pearls,
diamonds, rubies, emeralds, and other precious stones exposed to
sale. But if he was amazed at seeing so many riches in one place, he
was much more surprised when he came to judge of the wealth of the
whole kingdom, by considering, that except the bramins, and
ministers of the idols, who profess a life retired from worldly
vanity, there was not an Indian man or woman, through the extent of
that kingdom, but wore necklaces, bracelets, and ornaments about
their legs and feet, made of pearls, and other precious stones,
which appeared with the greater lustre, as they were blacks, which
colour admirably set off their brilliancy.

Another thing prince Houssain particularly admired, was the great
number of rose sellers, who crowded the streets; for the Indians are
so great lovers of that flower, that not one will stir without a
nosegay of them in his hand, or a garland of them on his head; and
the merchants keep them in pots in the shops, so that the air of the
whole quarter, however large, is perfectly perfumed.

After prince Houssain had run through that quarter, street by
street, his thoughts fully employed on the riches he had seen, he
was very much tired; which a merchant perceiving, civilly invited
him to sit down in his shop. He accepted his offer; but had not been
seated long before he saw a crier pass by with a piece of carpet on
his arm, about six feet square, and cry it at thirty purses. The
prince called to the crier, and asked to see the carpeting, which
seemed to him to be valued at an exorbitant price, not only for the
size of it, but the meanness of the stuff. When he had examined it
well, he told the crier, that he could not comprehend how so small a
piece of carpeting, and of so indifferent an appearance, could be
set at so high a price.

The crier, who took him for a merchant, replied, Sir, if this price
seems so extravagant to you, your amazement will be greater when I
tell you I have orders to raise it to forty purses, and not to part
with it under. Certainly, answered prince Houssain, it must have
something very extraordinary in it, which I know nothing of. You
have guessed it, sir, replied the crier, and will own it when you
come to know, that whoever sits on this piece of carpeting may be
transported in an instant wherever he desires to be, without being
stopped by any obstacle. [105]

At this discourse of the crier, the prince of the Indies,
considering that the principal motive of his travel was to carry the
sultan his father home some singular rarity, thought that he could
not meet with any which would give more satisfaction. If the
carpeting, said he to the crier, has the virtue you assign it, I
shall not think it too much; but shall make you a present besides.
Sir, replied the crier, I have told you the truth; and it will be an
easy matter to convince you of it, as soon as you have made the
bargain for forty purses, on condition I show you the experiment.
But as I suppose you have not so much with you, and to receive them
I must go with you to the khan where you lodge, with the leave of
the master of the shop, we will go into the back shop, and I will
spread the carpeting; and when we have both sat down, and you have
formed the wish to be transported into your apartment at the khan,
if we are not transported thither it shall be no bargain, and you
shall be at your liberty. As to your present, as I am paid for my
trouble by the seller, I shall receive it as a favour, and be very
much obliged to you for it.

On the credit of the crier, the prince accepted the conditions, and
concluded the bargain; and having obtained the master’s leave,
they went into his back-shop: they both sat down on the carpeting;
and as soon as the prince formed his wish to be transported into his
apartment at the khan, he presently found himself and the crier
there in the same situation; and as he wanted not a more sufficient
proof of the virtue of the carpeting, he counted to the crier forty
purses of gold, and gave him twenty pieces for himself.

In this manner prince Houssain became the possessor of the
carpeting, and was overjoyed that at his arrival at Bisnagar he had
found so rare a piece, which he never doubted would gain the
possession of Nouronnihar. In short, he looked upon it as an
impossible thing for the princes, his younger brothers, to meet with
any thing to be compared with it. It was in his power, by sitting on
this carpeting, to be at the place of rendezvous that very day; but
as he was obliged to stay there for his brothers, as they had
agreed, and as he was curious to see the king of Bisnagar and his
court, and to inform himself of the strength, laws, customs, and
religion of the kingdom, he chose to make a longer abode there, and
to spend some months in satisfying his curiosity.

It was a custom of the king of Bisnagar to give all strange
merchants access to his person once a week; and by that title prince
Houssain, who would not be known, saw him often: and as this prince
was handsome, witty, and extremely polite, he easily distinguished
himself among the merchants, and was preferred before them all by
the sultan, who addressed himself to him, to be informed of the
person of the sultan of the Indies, and of the government, strength,
and riches of his dominions.

The rest of his time the prince spent in seeing what was most
remarkable in and about the city; and among those things which were
most worthy of admiration, he visited a temple of idols, remarkable
for being built all of brass. It was ten cubits square, and fifteen
high; and the greatest ornament to it was an idol of the height of a
man, of massy gold; its eyes were two rubies, set so artificially,
that it seemed to look at those who looked at it, on which side
soever they turned: besides this, there was another not less
curious, in a village, in the midst of a plain of about ten acres,
which was a delicious garden full of roses and the choicest flowers,
surrounded with a small wall breast high, to keep the cattle out. In
the midst of this plain was raised a terrace, a man’s height, so
nicely paved, that the whole pavement seemed to be but one single
stone. A temple was erected in the middle of this terrace, with a
dome about fifty cubits high, which might be seen for several
leagues round. It was thirty cubits long, and twenty broad, built of
red marble, highly polished. The inside of the dome was adorned with
three rows of fine paintings, in good taste; and there was not a
place in the whole temple but what was embellished with paintings,
basso relievos, and figures of idols from top to bottom.

Every night and morning there were superstitious ceremonies
performed in this temple, which were always succeeded by sports,
concerts of music, dancing, singing, and feasts. The ministers of
the temple, and the inhabitants of the place, had nothing to subsist
on but the offerings of pilgrims, who came in crowds from the most
distant parts of the kingdom to perform their vows.

Prince Houssain was also spectator of a solemn feast, which was
celebrated every year at the court of Bisnagar, at which all the
governors of provinces, commanders of fortified places, all
governors and judges of towns, and the bramins most celebrated for
their learning, were obliged to be present; and some lived so far
off that they were four months in coming. This assembly, composed of
such innumerable multitudes of Indians, met in a plain of vast
extent, was a glorious sight, as far as the eye could reach. In the
centre of this plain was a square of great length and breadth,
closed on one side by a large scaffolding of nine stories, supported
by forty pillars, raised for the king and his court, and those
strangers he admitted to audience once a week; within it was adorned
and furnished magnificently; and on the outside were painted fine
landscapes, wherein all sorts of beasts, birds, and insects, even
flies and gnats, were drawn very naturally. Other scaffolds of at
least four or five stories, and painted almost all alike, formed the
other three sides. But what was more particular in these scaffolds,
they could turn them, and make them change their situation and
decorations every hour.

On each side of the square, at some little distance from each other,
were ranged 1000 elephants, sumptuously harnessed, and each having
upon his back a square wooden castle, finely gilt, in which were
musicians and stage-players. The trunks, ears, and bodies of these
elephants were painted with cinnabar and other colours, representing
grotesque figures.

But what prince Houssain most of all admired, as a proof of the
industry, address, and inventive genius of the Indians, was to see
the largest of these elephants stand with his four feet on a post
fixed into the earth, and standing out of it above two feet, playing
and beating time with his trunk to the music. Besides this, he
admired another elephant as big as this, set upon a board, which was
laid across a strong beam about ten feet high, with a great weight
at the other end, which balanced him, while he kept time, by the
motions of his body and trunk, with the music, as well as the other
elephant. The Indians, after having fastened on the counterpoise,
had drawn the other end of the board down to the ground, and made
the elephant get upon it.

Prince Houssain might have made a longer stay in the kingdom and
court of Bisnagar, where he would have been agreeably diverted by a
great variety of other wonders, till the last day of the year,
whereon he and his brothers had appointed to meet. But he was so
well satisfied with what he had seen, and his thoughts ran so much
upon the object of his love, that after his good success in meeting
with this carpeting, the beauty and charms of the princess
Nouronnihar increased every day the violence of his passion, and he
fancied he should be the more easy and happy the nearer he was to
her. After he had satisfied the master of the khan for his
apartment, and told him the hour when he might come for the key,
without telling him how he should go, he shut the door, put the key
on the outside, and spreading the carpeting, he and the officer he
had brought with him sat down on it, and as soon as he had formed
his wish, were transported to the inn at which he and his brothers
were to meet, and where he passed for a merchant till they came.

Prince Ali, prince Houssain’s second brother, who designed to
travel into Persia, in conformity to the intention of the sultan of
the Indies, took that road, having three days after he parted with
his brothers joined a caravan; and after four months travelling,
arrived at Schiraz, which was then the capital of the kingdom of
Persia; and having in the way contracted a friendship with some
merchants, passed for a jeweller, and lodged in the same khan with
them.

The next morning, while the merchants opened their bales of
merchandises, prince Ali, who travelled only for his pleasure, and
had brought nothing but necessaries with him, after he had dressed
himself, took a walk into that quarter of the town where they sold
precious stones, gold and silver works, brocades, silks, fine
linens, and other choice and valuable merchandises, and which was at
Schiraz called the bezestein. It was a spacious and well-built
place, arched over, and the arches supported by large pillars, round
which, as well as along the walls, within and without, were shops.
Prince Ali soon rambled through the bezestein, and with admiration
judged of the riches of the place by the prodigious quantities of
the most precious merchandises that were there exposed to view.

But among all the criers who passed backwards and forwards with
several sorts of goods, offering to sell them, he was not a little
surprised to see one who held in his hand an ivory tube, of about a
foot in length, and about an inch thick, and cried it at thirty
purses. At first he thought the crier mad, and to inform himself,
went to a shop, and said to the merchant, who stood at the door,
Pray, sir, is not that man (pointing to the crier, who cried the
ivory tube at thirty purses) mad? If he is not, I am very much
deceived. Indeed, sir, answered the merchant, he was in his right
senses yesterday; and I can assure you he is one of the ablest
criers we have, and the most employed of any, as being to be
confided in, when any thing valuable is to be sold; and, if he cries
the ivory tube at thirty purses, it must be worth as much, or more,
on some account or other which does not appear. He will come by
presently, and we will call him, and you shall satisfy yourself: in
the mean time, sit down on my sofa, and rest yourself.

Prince Ali accepted of the merchant’s obliging offer, and
presently afterwards the crier passed by. The merchant called him by
his name; and, pointing to the prince, said to him, Tell that
gentleman, who asked me if you were in your right senses, what you
mean by crying that ivory tube, which seems not to be worth much, at
thirty purses. I should be very much amazed myself, if I did not
know you were a sensible man. The crier, addressing himself to
prince Ali, said, Sir, you are not the only person that takes me for
a madman on the account of this tube: you shall judge yourself
whether I am or no, when I have told you its property; and I hope
you will value it at as high a price as those I have showed it to
already, who had as bad an opinion of me as you have.

First, sir, pursued the crier, presenting the ivory tube to the
prince, observe, that this tube is furnished with a glass at both
ends; and consider, that, by looking through one of them, you see
whatever object you wish to behold. I am, said the prince, ready to
make you all proper reparation for the scandal I have thrown on you,
if you will make the truth of what you advance appear; and, as he
had the ivory tube in his hand, after he had looked at the two
glasses, he said, Show me at which of these ends I must look, that I
may be satisfied. The crier presently showed him; and he looked
through, wishing, at the same time, to see the sultan his father,
whom he immediately beheld in perfect health, sitting on his throne,
in the midst of his council. Afterwards, as there was nothing in the
world so dear to him, after the sultan, as the princess Nouronnihar,
he wished to see her; and saw her sitting at her toilet, laughing,
and in a pleasant humour, with her women about her. [106]

Prince Ali wanted no other proof to persuade him that this tube was
the most valuable thing, not only in the city of Schiraz, but in all
the world; and believed that, if he should neglect to purchase it,
he should never meet again with such another rarity. He said to the
crier, I am very sorry that I should have entertained so bad an
opinion of you, but hope to make you amends by buying the tube, for
I should be sorry if any body else had it: so tell me the lowest
price the seller has fixed upon it; and do not give yourself any
farther trouble to hawk it about, but go with me, and I will pay you
the money. The crier assured him, with an oath, that his last orders
were to take no less than forty purses; and, if he disputed the
truth of what he said, he would carry him to his employer. The
prince believed him, took him with him to the khan where he lodged,
told him out the money, and received the tube.

Prince Ali was overjoyed at his bargain; and persuaded himself that,
as his brothers would not be able to meet with any thing so rare and
admirable, the princess Nouronnihar would be the recompense of his
fatigue and trouble. He thought now of only visiting the court of
Persia incognito, and seeing whatever was curious in and about
Schiraz, till the caravan with which he came returned back to the
Indies. He had satisfied his curiosity, when the caravan was ready
to set out. The prince joined them, and arrived happily without any
accident or trouble, otherwise than the length of the journey and
fatigue of travelling, at the place of rendezvous, where he found
prince Houssain, and both waited for prince Ahmed.

Prince Ahmed took the road of Samarcande; and the next day after his
arrival there, went, as his brothers had done, into the bezestein;
where he had not walked long, but he heard a crier, who had an
artificial apple in his hand, cry it at five-and-thirty purses. He
stopped the crier, and said to him, Let me see that apple, and tell
me what virtue or extraordinary property it has, to be valued at so
high a rate. Sir, said the crier, giving it into his hand, if you
look at the outside of the apple, it is very inconsiderable; but if
you consider its properties, virtues, and the great use, and benefit
it is of to mankind, you will say it is invaluable, and it is
certain that he who possesses it, is master of a great treasure. It
cures all sick persons of the most mortal diseases, whether fever,
pleurisy, plague, or other malignant distempers; and, if the patient
is dying, it will recover him immediately, and restore him to
perfect health: and this is done after the easiest manner in the
world, merely by the patient’s smelling to the apple.

If one may believe you, replied prince Ahmed, the virtues of this
apple are wonderful, and it is indeed invaluable: but what ground
has a plain man like myself, who may wish to become the purchaser,
to be persuaded that there is no disguise nor exaggeration in the
high praises you bestow on it. Sir, replied the crier, the thing is
known and averred by the whole city of Samarcande; but, without
going any farther, ask all these merchants you see here, and hear
what they say; you will find several of them will tell you, they had
not been alive this day if they had not made use of this excellent
remedy; and, that you may the better comprehend what it is, I must
tell you, it is the fruit of the study and experience of a
celebrated philosopher of this city, who applied himself all his
lifetime to the knowledge of the virtues of plants and minerals, and
at last attained to this composition, by which he performed such
surprising cures in this city as will never be forgotten; but died
suddenly himself, before he could apply his own sovereign remedy,
and left his wife and a great many young children behind him in very
indifferent circumstances; who, to support her family, and provide
for her children, has resolved to sell it.

While the crier was telling prince Ahmed the virtues of the
artificial apple, a great many persons came about them, and
confirmed what he said; and one among the rest said he had a friend
dangerously ill, whose life was despaired of, which was a favourable
opportunity to show prince Ahmed the experiment. Upon which prince
Ahmed told the crier, he would give him forty purses if he cured the
sick person by smelling to it.

The crier, who had orders to sell it at that price, said to prince
Ahmed, Come, sir, let us go and make the experiment, and the apple
shall be yours; and I say this with the greater confidence, as it is
an undoubted fact that it will always have the same effect as it
already has had as often as it has been employed to recover from
death so many sick persons whose life was despaired of. In short,
the experiment succeeded; and the prince, after he had counted out
to the crier forty purses, and the other had delivered the apple to
him, waited with the greatest impatience for the first caravan that
should return to the Indies. In the mean time he saw all that was
curious at and about Samarcande, and principally the valley of
Sogda, [107] so called from the river which waters it, and is
reckoned by the Arabians to be one of the four paradises of the
world, for the beauty of its fields and gardens, and the fine
palaces, and for its fertility in fruit of all sorts, and all the
other pleasures enjoyed there in the fine season.

At last prince Ahmed joined himself to the first caravan that
returned to the Indies, and, notwithstanding the inevitable
inconveniences of so long a journey, arrived in perfect health at
the inn where the princes Houssain and Ali waited for him.

Prince Ali, who came there some time before prince Ahmed, asked
prince Houssain, who got thither the first, how long he had been
there; who told him, three months: to which he replied, Then
certainly you have not been very far. I will tell you nothing now,
said prince Houssain, where I have been, but only assure you I was
above three months travelling to the place I went to. But then,
replied prince Ali, you made a short stay there. Indeed, brother,
said prince Houssain, you are mistaken: I resided at one place above
four or five months, and might have stayed longer. Unless you flew
back, replied prince Ali again, I cannot comprehend how you can have
been three months here, as you would make me believe.

I tell you the truth, added prince Houssain, and it is a riddle
which I shall not explain to you till our brother Ahmed comes; when
I will let you know what rarity I have brought home from my travels.
For your part, I know not what you have got, but believe it to be
some trifle, because I do not perceive that your baggage is
increased. And pray what have you brought? replied prince Ali; for I
can see nothing but an ordinary piece of carpeting, with which you
cover your sofa, and therefore I think I may return your raillery;
and, as you seem to make what you brought a secret, you cannot take
it amiss that I do the same with respect to what I have brought.

I look upon the rarity I have purchased, replied prince Houssain, to
excel all others whatever, and should not make any difficulty to
show it you, and make you agree that it is so, and at the same time
tell you how I came by it, without being in the least apprehensive
that that which you have got is to be preferred to it. But it is
proper that we should stay till our brother Ahmed arrives, that we
may all communicate our good fortune to each other.

Prince Ali would not enter into a dispute with prince Houssain on
the preference he gave his rarity, but was satisfied and persuaded,
that, if his perspective glass was not preferable, it was impossible
it should be inferior to it; and therefore agreed to stay till
prince Ahmed arrived, to produce his purchase.

When prince Ahmed came to his brothers, and they had embraced with
tenderness, and complimented each other on the happiness of meeting
together at the same place they set out from, prince Houssain, as
the elder brother, assumed the discourse, and said to them,
Brothers, we shall have time enough hereafter to entertain ourselves
with the particulars of our travels; let us come to that which is of
the greatest importance for us to know; and, as I do not doubt you
remember the principal motive which engaged us to travel, let us not
conceal from each other the curiosities we have brought home, but
show them, that we may do ourselves justice beforehand, and see to
which of us the sultan our father may give the preference.

To set the example, continued prince Houssain, I will tell you that
the rarity which I have brought from my travels to the kingdom of
Bisnagar, is the carpeting on which I sit, which looks but ordinary,
and makes no show; but, when I have declared its virtues to you, you
will be struck with admiration, and will confess you never heard of
any thing like it. In short, whoever sits on it, as we do, and
desires to be transported to any place, be it ever so far off, is
immediately carried thither. I made the experiment myself before I
paid down the forty purses, which I most readily gave for it; and
when I had fully satisfied my curiosity, at the court of Bisnagar,
and had a mind to return, I made use of no other carriage than this
wonderful carpet for myself and servant, who can tell you how long
we were coming hither. I will show you both the experiment whenever
you please. I expect that you shall tell me whether what you have
brought is to be compared with this carpet.

Here prince Houssain made an end of commending the excellency of his
carpet; and prince Ali, addressing himself to him, said, I must own,
brother, that your carpet is one of the most surprising things
imaginable, if it has, as I do not doubt in the least, that property
you speak of. But you must allow that there may be other things, I
will not say more, but at least as wonderful, in another way; and to
convince you there are, here is an ivory tube, which appears to the
eye no more a rarity than your carpet, and yet merits great
attention; it cost me as much, and I am as well satisfied with my
purchase as you can be with yours; and you will be so just as to own
that I have not been cheated, when you know by experience, that by
looking at one end, you see whatever object you wish to behold. I
would not have you take my word, added prince Ali, presenting the
tube to him; take it, make trial of it yourself.

Prince Houssain took the ivory tube from prince Ali, and clapped
that end to his eye which prince Ali showed him, with an intention
to see the princess Nouronnihar, and to know how she did; when
prince Ali and prince Ahmed, who kept their eyes fixed upon him,
were extremely surprised to see his countenance change on a sudden
in such a manner as expressed an extraordinary surprise and
affliction. Prince Houssain would not give them time to ask what was
the matter, but cried out, Alas! princes, to what purpose have we
undertaken so long and fatiguing journeys, but with the hopes of
being recompensed by the possession of the charming Nouronnihar,
when in a few moments that lovely princess will breathe her last. I
saw her in her bed, surrounded by her women and eunuchs, who were
all in tears, and seem to expect nothing less than to see her give
up the ghost. Take the tube, behold yourselves the miserable state
she is in, and mingle your tears with mine.

Prince Ali took the tube out of prince Houssain’s hand, and after
he had seen the same object with a sensible grief, presented it to
prince Ahmed, who took it, to behold the melancholy sight which so
much concerned them all.

When prince Ahmed had taken the tube out of prince Ali’s hands,
and saw that the princess Nouronnihar’s end was so near, he
addressed himself to his two brothers, and said, Princes, the
princess Nouronnihar, equally the object of our vows, is indeed just
at death’s door; but provided we make haste, and lose no time, we
may preserve her life. Then he took the artificial apple out of his
bosom, and showing it to the princes his brothers, said to them,
This apple which you see here, cost me as much and more than either
the carpet or tube. The opportunity which now presents itself to
show you its wonderful virtue, makes me not regret the forty purses
I gave for it. But, not to keep you longer in suspense, it has the
virtue, if a sick person smells it, though in the last agonies, to
restore him to perfect health immediately. I have made the
experiment, and can show you its wonderful effect on the person of
princess Nouronnihar, if we make all due haste to assist her.

If that is all, replied prince Houssain, we cannot make more
despatch than by transporting ourselves instantly into her chamber
by the means of my carpet. Come, lose no time; sit down on it by me;
it is large enough to hold us all three: but first let us give
orders to our servants to set out immediately, and join us at the
palace.

As soon as the order was given, prince Ali and prince Ahmed went and
sat down by prince Houssain, and as their interest was the same,
they all three framed the same wish, and were transported into the
princess Nouronnihar’s chamber.

The presence of the three princes, who were so little expected,
frightened the princess’s women and eunuchs, who could not
comprehend by what enchantment three men should be among them; for
they did not know them at first; and the eunuchs were ready to fall
upon them, as people who had got into a part of the palace where
they were not allowed to come; but they presently recollected and
found their mistake.

Prince Ahmed no sooner saw himself in Nouronnihar’s chamber, and
perceived that princess dying, but he rose off the tapestry, as did
also the other two princes, and went to the bed-side, and put the
apple under her nose. Some moments after, the princess opened her
eyes, and turned her head from one side to another, looking at the
persons who stood about her; she then rose up in the bed and asked
to be dressed, with the same freedom and recollection as if she had
awaked out of a sound sleep. Her women presently informed her, in a
manner that showed their joy, that she was obliged to the three
princes her cousins, and particularly to prince Ahmed, for the
sudden recovery of her health. She immediately expressed her joy to
see them, and thanked them altogether, and afterwards prince Ahmed
in particular. As she desired to dress, the princes contented
themselves with telling her how great a pleasure it was to them, to
have come soon enough to contribute each in any degree towards
relieving her out of the immediate danger she was in, and what
ardent prayers they had offered for the continuance of her life, and
afterwards they retired.

Whilst the princess was dressing, the princes went to throw
themselves at the sultan their father’s feet, and pay their
respects to him; but when they came before him, they found he had
been previously informed of their unexpected arrival by the chief of
the princess’s eunuchs, and by what means, used by them, the
princess had been perfectly cured. The sultan received and embraced
them with the greatest joy, both for their return and the wonderful
recovery of the princess his niece, whom he loved as if she had been
his own daughter, and who had been given over by the physicians.
After the usual compliments, the princes presented each the rarity
which he had brought: prince Houssain his carpet, which he had taken
care not to leave behind him in the princess’s chamber; prince Ali
his ivory tube, and prince Ahmed the artificial apple; and after
each had commended his present, when they put it into the sultan’s
hands, they begged of him to pronounce their fate, and declare to
which of them he would give the princess Nouronnihar for a wife,
according to his promise.

The sultan of the Indies having kindly heard all that the princes
had to say in favour of their rarities, without interrupting them,
and being well informed of what had happened in relation to the
princess Nouronnihar’s cure, remained some time silent, as if he
was thinking on what answer he should make. At last he broke
silence, and said to them, in terms full of wisdom, I would declare
for one of you, my children, with a great deal of pleasure, if I
could do it with justice; but consider whether I can. It is true,
prince Ahmed, the princess my niece is obliged to your artificial
apple for her cure; but let me ask you, whether you could have been
so serviceable to her, if you had not known by prince Ali’s tube
the danger she was in, and if prince Houssain’s carpet had not
brought you to her so soon? Your tube, prince Ali, informed you and
your brothers that you were likely to lose the princess your cousin,
and so far she is greatly obliged to you.

You must also grant that that knowledge would have been of no
service without the artificial apple and the carpet. And for you,
prince Houssain, the princess would be very ungrateful, if she
should not show her sense of the serviceableness of your carpet,
which was as necessary a means towards producing a cure. But
consider, it would have been of little use, if you had not been
acquainted with the princess’s illness by prince Ali’s tube, and
prince Ahmed had not applied his artificial apple. Therefore, as
neither the carpet, the ivory tube, nor the artificial apple, have
the least preference one before the other, but, on the contrary,
there is a perfect equality, I cannot grant the princess to any one
of you; and the only fruit you have reaped from your travels is the
glory of having equally contributed to restore her to health.

If this be true, added the sultan, you see that I must have recourse
to other means to determine me with certainty in the choice I ought
to make among you; and as there is time enough between this and
night, I will do it to-day. Go, and get each of you a bow and arrow,
and repair to the great plain out of the city, where the horses are
exercised. I will soon come to you; and I declare I will give the
princess Nouronnihar to him that shoots the farthest.

I do not, however, forget to thank you all in general, and each in
particular, for the present you brought me. I have a great many
rarities in my closet already, but nothing that comes up to the
singularity of the carpet, the ivory tube, and the artificial apple,
which shall have the first places among them, and shall be preserved
carefully, not only for pure curiosity, but to make an advantageous
use of them upon all occasions.

The three princes had nothing to say against the decision of the
sultan. When they were out of his presence, they each provided
themselves with a bow and arrow, which they delivered to one of
their officers, and went to the plain appointed, followed by a great
concourse of people.

The sultan did not make them wait long for him; and as soon as he
arrived, prince Houssain, as the eldest, took his bow and arrow, and
shot first. Prince Ali shot next and much beyond him; and prince
Ahmed last of all: but it so happened, that nobody could see where
his arrow fell; and notwithstanding all the diligence that was used
by himself and every body else, it was not to be found far or near.
And though it was believed that he shot the farthest, and that he
therefore deserved the princess Nouronnihar, it was however
necessary that his arrow should be found, to make the matter more
evident and certain; and, notwithstanding his remonstrances, the
sultan determined in favour of prince Ali, and gave orders for
preparations to be made for the solemnizing of the nuptials, which
were celebrated a few days after with great magnificence.

Prince Houssain would not honour the feast with his presence; his
passion for the Princess Nouronnihar was so sincere and lively, that
he could scarce support with patience the mortification of seeing
the princess in the arms of prince Ali, who, he said, did not
deserve her better, nor loved her more, than himself. In short, his
grief was so violent and insupportable, that he left the court, and
renounced all right of succession to the crown, to turn dervise, and
put himself under the discipline of a famous scheik, who had gained
a reputation for his exemplary life, and had taken up his abode, and
that of his disciples, whose number was great, in an agreeable
solitude.

Prince Ahmed, urged by the same motive, did not assist at prince Ali
and the princess Nouronnihar’s nuptials, any more than his brother
Houssain, but did not renounce the world as he had done. But as he
could not imagine what could become of his arrow, he stole away from
his attendants, and resolved to search after it, that he might not
have any thing to reproach himself with. With this intent, he went
to the place where the princes Houssain and Ali’s were gathered
up, and going straight forward from thence, looked carefully on both
sides of him. He went so far, that at last he began to think his
labour was in vain; yet he could not help going forwards, till he
came to some steep craggy rocks, which would have obliged him to
return, had he been ever so desirous to proceed. They were situated
in a barren country, about four leagues distant from whence he set
out.

When prince Ahmed came nigh to these rocks, he perceived an arrow,
which he gathered up, looked earnestly at it, and was in the
greatest astonishment to find it was the same he shot. Certainly,
said he to himself, neither I, nor any man living, could shoot an
arrow so far; and finding it laid flat, not sticking into the
ground, he judged that it had rebounded from the rock. There must be
some mystery in this, said he to himself again, and it may be to my
advantage. Perhaps fortune, to make me amends for depriving me of
what I thought the greatest happiness of my life, may have reserved
a greater blessing for my comfort.

As these rocks were full of sharp points and indentures between
them, the prince, full of these thoughts, entered into one of the
cavities, and looking about, cast his eyes on an iron door, which
seemed to have no lock. He feared it was fastened: but pushing
against it, it opened, and discovered an easy descent, but no steps,
which he walked down with his arrow in his hand. At first he thought
he was going into a dark place, but presently a quite different
light succeeded that which he came out of; and entering into a
spacious square, at about fifty or sixty paces distant, he perceived
a magnificent palace, the admirable structure of which he had not
time to look at: for at the same time, a lady of majestic port and
air, and of a beauty to which the richness of her clothes and the
jewels which adorned her person, added no advantage, advanced as far
as the porch, attended by a troop of ladies, of whom it was
difficult to distinguish which was the mistress.

As soon as prince Ahmed perceived the lady, he hastened to pay his
respects; and the lady on her part, seeing him coming, prevented
him. Addressing her discourse to him first, and raising her voice,
she said to him, Come near, prince Ahmed; you are welcome.

It was no small surprise to the prince to hear himself named in a
palace he had never heard of, though so nigh to his father’s
capital, and he could not comprehend how he should be known to a
lady who was a stranger to him. At last he returned the lady’s
compliment, by throwing himself at her feet, and rising up again,
said to her, Madam, I return you a thousand thanks for the assurance
you give me of a welcome to a place where I had reason to believe my
imprudent curiosity had made me penetrate too far. But, madam, may
I, without being guilty of rudeness, presume to ask you by what
adventure you know me? and that you, who live in the same
neighbourhood with me, should be so little known by me? Prince, said
the lady, let us go into the hall; there I will gratify you in your
request more commodiously for us both.

After these words, the lady led prince Ahmed into the hall, the
noble structure of which, and the gold and azure which embellished
the dome, and the inestimable richness of the furniture, appeared so
great a novelty to him, that he could not enough express his
admiration, by crying out that he had never in his life beheld any
thing like it, and believed that nothing was to be compared to it. I
can assure you, replied the lady, that this is but a small part of
my palace, and you will say so when you have seen all the
apartments. Then she sat down on a sofa; and when the prince at her
entreaty had seated himself by her, she said, You are surprised, you
say, that I should know you, and not be known by you; but you will
be no longer surprised when I inform you who I am. You cannot be
ignorant that your religion teaches you to believe that the world is
inhabited by genies as well as men: I am the daughter of one of the
most powerful and distinguished of these genies, and my name is Pari
Banou; therefore you ought not to wonder that I know you, the sultan
your father, the princes your brothers, and the princess
Nouronnihar. I am no stranger to your loves or your travels, of
which I could tell you all the circumstances, since it was I myself
who exposed to sale the artificial apple which you bought at
Samarcande, the carpet which prince Houssain met with at Bisnagar,
and the tube which prince Ali brought from Schiraz. This is
sufficient to let you know that I am not unacquainted with any thing
that relates to you. The only thing I have to add is, that you
seemed to me worthy of a more happy fate than that of possessing the
princess Nouronnihar; and that you might attain to it, I was present
when you drew your arrow, and foresaw it would not go beyond prince
Houssain’s. I took it in the air, and gave it the necessary
motion, to strike against the rocks near which you found it. It is
in your power to avail yourself of the favourable opportunity which
it presents to make you happy.

As the fairy Pari Banou pronounced these last words with a different
tone, and looked at the same time tenderly upon prince Ahmed, with
downcast eyes and a modest blush on her cheeks, it was not difficult
for the prince to comprehend what happiness she meant. He presently
considered that the princess Nouronnihar could never be his, and
that the fairy Pari Banou excelled her infinitely in beauty,
attractions, agreeableness, transcendant wit, and, as far as he
could conjecture by the magnificence of the palace where she
resided, in immense riches. He blessed the moment that he thought of
seeking after his arrow a second time, and yielding to his
inclination, which drew him towards the new object which had fired
his heart, Madam, replied he, should I, all my life, have had the
happiness of being your slave, and the admirer of the many charms
which ravish my soul, I should think myself the happiest of men.
Pardon me the boldness which inspires me to ask this favour, and do
not refuse to admit into your court a prince who is entirely devoted
to you.

Prince, answered the fairy, as I have been a long time my own
mistress, and have no dependence on my parents’ consent, it is not
as a slave that I would admit you into my court, but as master of my
person, and all that belongs to me, by pledging your faith to me,
and taking me to be your wife. I hope you will not take it amiss
that I anticipate you in making this proposal. I am, as I said,
mistress of my will; and must add, that the same customs are not
observed among fairies as among other ladies, in whom it would not
have been decent to have made such advances: but it is what we do,
and we suppose we confer obligation by it.

Prince Ahmed made no answer to this discourse, but was so penetrated
with gratitude, that he thought he could not express it better than
by coming to kiss the hem of her garment; which she would not give
him time to do, but presented her hand, which he kissed a thousand
times, and kept fast locked in his. Well, prince Ahmed, said she,
will you not pledge your faith to me, as I do mine to you? Yes,
madam, replied the prince, in an ecstasy of joy, what can I do
better, and with greater pleasure? Yes, my sultaness, my queen, I
will give it you with my heart, without the least reserve. Then,
answered the fairy, you are my husband, and I am your wife. Our
marriages are contracted with no other ceremonies, and yet are more
firm and indissoluble than those among men with all their
formalities. But as I suppose, pursued she, that you have eaten
nothing to-day, a slight repast shall be served up for you while
preparations are making for our nuptial feast this evening, and then
I will show you the apartments of my palace, and you shall judge if
this hall is not the smallest part of it.

Some of the fairy’s women who came into the hall with them, and
guessed her intentions, went immediately out, and returned presently
with some excellent meats and wines.

When prince Ahmed had eaten and drank as much as he cared for, the
fairy Pari Banou carried him through all the apartments, where he
saw diamonds, rubies, emeralds, and all sorts of fine jewels,
intermixed with pearls, agate, jasper, porphyry, and all kinds of
the most precious marbles; not to mention the richness of the
furniture, which was inestimable; the whole disposed with such
profusion, that the prince, instead of ever having seen any thing
like it, acknowledged that there could not be any thing in the world
that could come up to it. Prince, said the fairy, if you admire my
palace so much, which is indeed very beautiful, what would you say
to the palaces of the chief of our genies, which are much more
beautiful, spacious, and magnificent? I could also charm you with my
garden; but we will leave that till another time. Night draws near,
and it will be time to go to supper.

The next hall which the fairy led the prince into, and where the
cloth was laid for the feast, was the only apartment the prince had
not seen, and it was not in the least inferior to the others. At his
entrance into it, he admired the infinite number of wax candles
perfumed with amber, the multitude of which, instead of being
confused, were placed with so just symmetry, as formed an agreeable
and pleasant sight. A large beaufet was set out with all sorts of
gold plate, so finely wrought, that the workmanship was much more
valuable than the weight of the gold. Several chorusses of beautiful
women richly dressed, and whose voices were ravishing, began a
concert, accompanied with all kinds of the most harmonious
instruments he had ever heard. When they were set down to table, the
fairy Pari Banou took care to help prince Ahmed to the most
delicious meats, which she named as she invited him to eat of them,
and which the prince had never heard of, but found so exquisite and
nice, that he commended them in the highest terms, crying, that the
entertainment which she gave him far surpassed those among men. He
found also the same excellence in the wines, which neither he nor
the fairy tasted of till the dessert was served up, which consisted
of the choicest sweetmeats and fruits.

After the dessert, the fairy Pari Banou and prince Ahmed rose from
the table, which was immediately carried away, and sat on a sofa, at
their ease, with cushions of fine silk, curiously embroidered with
all sorts of large flowers, laid at their backs. Presently after a
great number of genies and fairies danced before them to the door of
the chamber where the nuptial bed was made; and when they came
there, they divided themselves into two rows, to let them pass, and
after that retired, leaving them to go to bed.

The nuptial feast was continued the next day; or rather the days
following the celebration were a continual feast, which the fairy
Pari Banou, who could do it with the utmost ease, knew how to
diversify, by new dishes, new meats, new concerts, new dances, new
shows, and new diversions; which were all so extraordinary, that
prince Ahmed, if he had lived a thousand years among men, could not
have imagined.

The fairy’s intention was not only to give the prince essential
proofs of the sincerity of her love, and the violence of her
passion, by so many ways; but to let him see, that as he had no
pretensions at his father’s court, he could meet with nothing
comparable to the happiness he enjoyed with her, independent of her
beauty and her charms, and to attach him entirely to herself, that
he might never leave her. In this scheme she succeeded so well, that
prince Ahmed’s passion was not in the least diminished by
possession; but increased so much, that if he had been so inclined,
it was not in his power to forbear loving her.

At the end of six months prince Ahmed, who always loved and honoured
the sultan his father, conceived a great desire to know how he did;
and as that desire could not be satisfied without his absenting
himself to go and hear it in person, he mentioned it to the fairy,
and desired she would give him leave.

This discourse alarmed the fairy, and made her fear it was only an
excuse to leave her. She said to him, What disgust can I have given
you to oblige you to ask me this leave? Is it possible you should
have forgotten that you have pledged your faith to me, and that you
no longer love one who is so passionately fond of you? Are not the
proofs I have repeatedly given you of my affection sufficient?

My queen, replied the prince, I am perfectly convinced of your love,
and should be unworthy of it, if I did not testify my gratitude by a
reciprocal love. If you are offended at the leave I asked, I entreat
you to forgive me, and I will make all the reparation I am capable
of. I did not do it with any intention of displeasing you, but from
a motive of respect towards my father, whom I wish to free from the
affliction my so long absence must have overwhelmed him in; which
must be the greater, as I have reason to presume he believes that I
am dead. But since you do not consent that I should go and afford
him that comfort, I will do what you will, and there is nothing in
the world that I am not ready to do to please you.

Prince Ahmed, who did not dissemble, and loved her in his heart as
much as he had assured her by these words, no longer insisted on the
leave he had asked; and the fairy expressed her satisfaction
thereat. But as he could not absolutely abandon the design he had
formed to himself, he frequently took an opportunity to speak to her
of the great qualifications of the sultan his father; and above all,
of his particular tenderness towards him, in hopes he might at
length be able to move her.

As prince Ahmed supposed, the sultan of the Indies, in the midst of
the rejoicings on account of prince Ali’s and princess
Nouronnihar’s nuptials, was sensibly afflicted at the absence of
the other two princes his sons, though it was not long before he was
informed of the resolution prince Houssain had taken to forsake the
world, and the place he had made choice of for his retreat. As a
good father, whose happiness consists in seeing his children about
him, especially when they are deserving of his tenderness, he would
have been better pleased had he stayed at his court, about his
person; but as he could not disapprove of his choice of the state of
perfection in which he had engaged, he supported his absence more
patiently. He made the most diligent search after prince Ahmed, and
despatched couriers to all the provinces of his dominions, with
orders to the governors to stop him, and oblige him to return to
court; but all the pains he took had not the desired success, and
his trouble, instead of diminishing, increased. He would often talk
with his grand vizier about it; and say to him, Vizier, thou knowest
I always loved Ahmed the best of all my sons; and thou art not
insensible of the means I have used to find him out, without
success. My grief is so lively, I shall sink under it, if thou hast
not compassion on me; if thou hast any regard for the preservation
of my life, I conjure thee to assist and advise me.

The grand vizier, no less attached to the person of the sultan, than
zealous to acquit himself well of the administration of the affairs
of state, considering how to give his sovereign some ease, bethought
himself of a sorceress, of whom he had heard wonders, and proposed
to send for her to consult her. The sultan consented, and the grand
vizier, after he had sent for her, introduced her to him himself.

The sultan said to the magician, The affliction I have been in since
the marriage of my son prince Ali to the princess Nouronnihar, my
niece, on account of the absence of prince Ahmed, is so well known,
and so public, that undoubtedly thou canst be no stranger to it. By
thy art and skill canst thou tell me what is become of him? If he is
alive, where he is? What he is doing, and if I may hope ever to see
him again? To this the sorceress made answer, It is impossible, sir,
for me, though ever so skilful in my profession, to answer
immediately the questions your majesty asks me; but if you allow
till to-morrow, I will give an answer. The sultan granted her the
time, and sent her away, with a promise to recompense her well, if
her answer proved according to his desire.

The magician returned the next day, and the grand vizier presented
her a second time to the sultan. Sir, said she, notwithstanding all
the diligence I have used in applying the rules of my art, to obey
your majesty in what you desire to know, I have not been able to
discover any thing more than that prince Ahmed is alive. This is
very certain, and you may depend on it; but as to the place where he
is I cannot find it out.

The sultan of the Indies was obliged to be satisfied with this
answer; which left him in the same uneasiness as before as to the
prince’s fate.

To return to prince Ahmed. He so often entertained the fairy Pari
Banou with talking about the sultan his father, without speaking any
more of his desire to see him, that she fully comprehended what he
meant; and perceiving this restraint he put upon himself, and his
fear of displeasing her after her first refusal, she first inferred
that his love for her was, by the repeated proofs he had given her,
sincere; and then judging by herself the injustice she was guilty of
in opposing a son’s tenderness for his father, and endeavouring to
make him renounce that natural inclination, she resolved to grant
him the leave which she saw he always so ardently desired. One day
she said to him, Prince, the leave you have asked me to go and see
the sultan your father, gave me a just fear that it was only a
pretext to show your inconstancy, and to leave me, and that was the
sole motive for my refusing you; but now I am so fully convinced by
your actions and words, that I can depend on your constancy, and the
steadiness of your love. I change my resolution, and grant you that
leave, upon condition that you will swear to me first, that your
absence shall not be long. You ought not to be concerned at this
condition, as if I asked it out of distrust. I do it only because I
know that it will give you no uneasiness, convinced as I am, as I
have already told you, of the sincerity of your love.

Prince Ahmed would have thrown himself at the fairy’s feet, to
show his gratitude, but she prevented him. My sultaness, said he, I
am sensible of the great favour you grant me, but want words to
return the thanks I wish. Supply this defect, I conjure you, and
whatever you can suggest to yourself, be persuaded I think much
more. You may believe that the oath will give me no uneasiness, and
I take it more willingly, since it is not possible for me to live
without you. I go, but the haste I shall make to return shall show
you, that it is not for fear of being foresworn, but that I follow
my inclination, which is to live with you for ever; and if I am
absent some time with your consent, I shall always avoid the trouble
a too long absence will create me.

Pari Banou was the more charmed with these sentiments of prince
Ahmed, because they removed the suspicions she had entertained of
him, fearing that his earnest desire to go to see the sultan his
father was only a pretext to break his faith with her. --Prince,
said she, go when you please; but first do not take it amiss that I
give you some advice how you shall behave yourself where you are
going. First, I do not think it proper for you to tell the sultan
your father of our marriage, nor of my quality, nor the place where
you are settled. Beg of him to be satisfied with knowing you are
happy, and that you desire no more; and let him know that the sole
end of your visit is to make him easy about your fate.

She appointed twenty horsemen, well mounted and equipped, to attend
him. --When all was ready, prince Ahmed took his leave of the fairy,
embraced her, and renewed his promise to return soon. Then his
horse, which was most finely caparisoned, and was as beautiful a
creature as any in the sultan of the Indies’ stables, was brought
to him, and he mounted him with an extraordinary grace, with great
pleasure to the fairy; and after he had bid her adieu, set forward
on his journey.

As it was not a great way to his father’s capital, prince Ahmed
soon arrived there. The people, glad to see him again, received him
with acclamations of joy, and followed him in crowds to the
sultan’s apartment. --The sultan received and embraced him with
great joy; complaining at the same time, with a fatherly tenderness,
of the affliction his long absence had been to him, which he said
was the more grievous, for that fortune having decided in favour of
prince Ali his brother, he was afraid he might have committed some
act of despair.

Sir, replied prince Ahmed, I leave it to your majesty to consider,
if, after having lost the princess Nouronnihar, who was the only
object of my desires, I could resolve to be a witness of prince
Ali’s happiness. If I had been capable of so unworthy an action,
what would the court and city have thought of my love, or what your
majesty? Love is a passion we cannot throw off when we will; it
rules and governs us, and will not give a true lover time to make
use of his reason. --Your majesty knows, that when I shot my arrow,
the most extraordinary thing that ever befell any body happened to
me, that in so large and level a plain as that where the horses are
exercised, it should not be possible to find my arrow. I lost the
cause, the justice of which was as much due to my love as to that of
the princes my brothers. --Though thus vanquished by the caprice of
fate, I lost no time in vain complaints; but, to satisfy my
perplexed mind, in the adventure which I could not comprehend, I
gave my attendants the slip, and returned back again alone to look
for my arrow. I sought all about the place where prince Houssain’s
and prince Ali’s arrows were found, and where I imagined mine must
have fallen; but all my labour was in vain. I was not discouraged,
but continued my search on the same ground in a direct line, and
looked carefully about where I could guess it might have fallen; and
after this manner had gone above a league, without being able to
meet with any thing like an arrow, when I reflected that it was not
possible that mine should fly so far. I stopped, and asked myself
whether I was in my right senses, to flatter myself with having
strength enough to shoot an arrow so much farther than any of the
greatest heroes in the world were able to do. After I had argued
thus with myself, I was ready to abandon my enterprise; but when I
was on the point of putting my resolution in execution, I found
myself drawn forward almost against my will; and after having gone
four leagues to that part of the plain where it is bounded by rocks,
I perceived an arrow. I ran and took it up, and knew it to be the
same which I had shot, but which had not been found in the time or
place that it should have been. Far from thinking your majesty had
done me any injustice in declaring for my brother prince Ali, I
interpreted what had happened to me quite otherwise, and never
doubted but there was a mystery in it to my advantage; the discovery
of which I ought not to neglect, and which I found out without going
farther from the spot. But as to this mystery, I beg your majesty
will not take it ill that I am silent, and that you will be
satisfied to know from my own mouth that I am happy, and content
with my fate.

In the midst of all my happiness, the only thing that troubled me,
or was capable of disturbing me, was the uneasiness I feared your
majesty was in, upon account of my leaving the court, and your not
knowing what was become of me. I thought it my duty to satisfy you
in this point. This was the only motive which brought me hither; the
only favour I ask of your majesty is to give me leave to come often
and pay you my respects, and inquire after your health.

Son, answered the sultan of the Indies, I cannot refuse you the
leave you ask me, but, I should much rather you would resolve to
stay with me. At least, tell me were I may hear of you, if you
should fail to come, or when I may think your presence necessary.
Sir, replied prince Ahmed, what your majesty asks of me is part of
the mystery I spoke to your majesty of. I beg of you to give me
leave to remain silent on this head; for I shall come so frequently
where my duty calls, that I am afraid I shall sooner be thought
troublesome, than be accused of negligence in my duty, when my
presence may be necessary.

The sultan of the Indies pressed prince Ahmed no more, but said to
him, Son, I penetrate no farther into your secrets, but leave you at
your liberty. I can only tell you, that you could not do me a
greater pleasure than to come, and, by your presence, restore to me
the joy I have not felt for a long time; and that you shall always
be welcome when you come, without interrupting your business or your
pleasure.

Prince Ahmed stayed but three days at the sultan his father’s
court, and the fourth returned to the fairy Pari Banou, who received
him with the greater joy, as she did not expect him so soon. His
diligence made her condemn herself for suspecting his want of
fidelity. She never dissembled in the least, but frankly owned her
weakness to the prince, and asked his pardon. So perfect was the
union of these two lovers, that they had but one will between them.

A month after prince Ahmed’s return from paying a visit to his
father, as the fairy Pari Banou had observed, that since the time
that the prince gave her an account of his journey, and his
conversation with his father, in which he asked his leave to come
and see him from time to time, he had never spoken of the sultan, as
if there had been no such person in the world, whereas before he was
always speaking of him, she thought he forbore on her account; and
therefore took an opportunity to say to him one day, Tell me,
prince, have you forgotten the sultan your father? Do not you
remember the promise you made to go and see him from time to time?
For my part, I have not forgotten what you told me at your return,
and put you in mind of it, that you may not be long before you
acquit yourself of your promise for the first time.

Madam, replied prince Ahmed, with the same lively tone as the fairy
spoke to him, as I know I am not guilty of the forgetfulness you
speak of, I rather choose to be thus reproached, however
undeservedly, than expose myself to a refusal, by showing
unseasonably a desire for what it might have given you pain to
grant. Prince, said the fairy, I would not have you in this affair
have so much consideration for me, since it is a month since you
have seen the sultan your father. I think you should not be longer
than a month before you renew your visits. Pay him another visit
to-morrow, and after that, go and see him once a month, without
speaking to me, or waiting for my leave. I readily consent.

Prince Ahmed went the next morning with the same attendants as
before, but much finer, and himself more magnificently mounted,
equipped, and dressed, and was received by the sultan with the same
joy and satisfaction. For several months he constantly paid him
visits, and always in a richer and more brilliant equipage.

At last some viziers, the sultan’s favourites, who judged of
prince Ahmed’s grandeur and power by the figure he made, abused
the liberty the sultan gave them of speaking to him, to make him
jealous of his son. They represented to him that it was but common
prudence to know where the prince had retired, and how he could
afford to live at such a rate, since he had no revenue nor income
assigned him, and that he seemed to come to court only to brave him,
by affecting to show that he wanted nothing of him to live like a
prince, and that it was to be feared he might stir up the people’s
favour, and dethrone him.

The sultan of the Indies was so far from thinking that prince Ahmed
could be capable of so wicked a design, as his favourites would make
him believe, that he said to them, You are mistaken; my son loves
me, and I am the more assured of his tenderness and fidelity, as I
have given him no reason to be disgusted.

Upon these last words, one of the favourites took an opportunity to
say, Your majesty, in the opinion of the most sensible people, could
not have taken a better method than what you have done with the
three princes, respecting their marriage with the princess
Nouronnihar; but who knows whether prince Ahmed has submitted to his
fate with the same resignation as prince Houssain? May not he
imagine that he alone deserved her, and that your majesty, by
leaving that matter to be decided by chance, has done him injustice?

Your majesty may say, added the malicious favourite, that prince
Ahmed has given no sign of dissatisfaction; that our fears are vain;
that we are too easily alarmed, and are to blame to suggest to you
suspicions of this sort, which may, perhaps, be unfounded, against a
prince of your blood. But, sir, pursued the favourite, it may be
also these suspicions may be well grounded. Your majesty is
sensible, that in so nice and important an affair, you cannot be too
much upon your guard, and should take the safest course. Consider,
it is the prince’s business to dissemble, amuse, and deceive you;
and the danger is the greater, as the prince resides not far from
your capital; and if your majesty give but the same attention that
we do, you may observe that every time he comes, he and his
attendants are fresh, and their clothes and their horses’ housings
are clean and bright, as if they were come from the maker’s hands,
and their horses look as if they had only been walked out. These are
sufficient signs that prince Ahmed does not come a great way; so
that we should think ourselves wanting in our duty if we did not
make our humble remonstrances, that, for your own preservation and
the good of your people, you might take such measures as you shall
think fit.

When the favourite had made an end of this long speech, the sultan
said, Be it as it will, I do not believe my son Ahmed is so wicked
as you would persuade me he is; however, I am obliged to you for
your good advice, and do not doubt that it proceeds from a good
intention.

The sultan of the Indies said this, that his favourites might not
know the impressions their discourse had made on his mind. He was,
however, so much alarmed by it, that he resolved to have prince
Ahmed watched, unknown to his grand vizier. For this end, he sent
for the female magician, who was introduced by a private door into
his closet. You told me the truth, said he, when you assured me my
son Ahmed was alive, for which I am obliged to you. You must do me
another pleasure. I have seen him since, and he comes to my court
every month; but I cannot learn from him where he resides, and I did
not wish to force his secret out of him, but believe you are capable
of satisfying my curiosity, without letting him, or any of my court,
know any thing of the matter. You know that at this present time he
is here with me, and is used to go away without taking leave of me,
or any of my court. Go immediately upon the road, and watch him so
well, as to find out where he retires, and bring me word.

The magician left the sultan, and knowing the place where prince
Ahmed found his arrow, went immediately thither, and hid herself
near the rocks, so that nobody could see her.

The next morning prince Ahmed set out by day-break, without taking
leave either of the sultan or any of his court, according to custom.
The magician seeing him coming, followed him with her eyes, till on
a sudden she lost sight of him and his attendants.

The steepness of the rocks formed an insurmountable barrier to men,
whether on horseback or on foot, so that the magician judged that
there were but two ways; either that the prince retired into some
cavern, or into some place under ground, the abode of genies or
fairies. When she thought the prince and his attendants were out of
sight, and returned into the cavern or subterraneous place she
imagined, she came out of the place where she had hid herself, and
went directly to the hollow way where she had seen them go in. She
entered it, going and returning several times, and proceeding to the
spot where it terminated in many windings, looking carefully about
on all sides. But notwithstanding all her diligence, she could
perceive no opening, nor the iron gate which prince Ahmed
discovered: for this door was to be seen by and opened to none but
men, and only to such men whose presence was agreeable to the fairy
Pari Banou, and not at all to women.

The magician, who saw it was in vain for her to search any farther,
was obliged to be satisfied with the discovery she had made, and
returned to give the sultan an account. When she had told him what
she had done, she added, Your majesty may easily understand, after
what I have had the honour to tell you, it will be no difficult
matter to give you the satisfaction you desire concerning prince
Ahmed’s conduct. I will not tell you now what I think, but choose
to let you know in a way that will not suffer you to doubt of it. To
do this, I only ask time, and that you will have patience, and give
me leave to do it, without inquiring what measures I design to take.

The sultan was very well pleased with the magician’s conduct, and
said to her, Do you as you think fit; I will wait patiently the
event of your promises. And to encourage her, he made her a present
of a diamond of great value, telling her it was only an earnest of
the ample recompense she should receive when she had done him that
important piece of service, which he left to her management.

As prince Ahmed, after he had obtained the fairy Pari Banou’s
leave to go to the sultan of the Indies’ court, never failed once
a month, and the magician knowing the time, went a day or two before
to the foot of the rock, where she lost sight of the prince and his
attendants, and waited there with an intention to execute the
project she had formed.

The next morning prince Ahmed went out as usual at the iron gate,
with the same attendants as before, and passed by the magician, whom
he knew not to be such; and seeing her lie with her head upon the
rock, and complaining as if she was in great pain, he pitied her,
turned his horse about, and went to her, and asked her what was the
matter with her, and what he could do to relieve her.

The artful sorceress, without lifting up her head, looked at the
prince in a manner to increase his compassion, already excited, and
answered in broken words and sighs, as if she could hardly fetch her
breath, that she was going to the city, but in the way thither was
taken with so violent a fever, that her strength failed her, and she
was forced to stop and lie down where he saw her, far from any
habitation, and without any hopes of assistance.

Good woman, replied prince Ahmed, you are not so far from help as
you imagine. I am ready to assist you, and convey you where you
shall not only have all possible care taken of you, but where you
will find a speedy cure; only get up, and let one of my people take
you behind him.

At these words, the magician, who pretended sickness only to know
where the prince lived, what he did, and what was his situation, did
not refuse the charitable offer he made her so freely; and, to show
her acceptance of it rather by her actions than by her words, she
made many affected efforts to get up, pretending that the violence
of her illness prevented her. At the same time, two of the
prince’s attendants alighting off their horses, helped her up, and
set her behind another. They mounted their horses again, and
followed the prince, who turned back to the iron gate, which was
opened by one of his retinue, who rode before. When he came into the
outward court of the fairy’s palace, without dismounting himself,
he sent to tell her he wanted to speak with her.

The fairy Pari Banou came with all imaginable haste, not knowing
what made prince Ahmed return so soon; who, not giving her time to
ask him the reason, said, My princess, I desire you would have
compassion on this good woman, pointing to the magician, who was
taken off the horse by two of his retinue: I found her in the
condition you see her in, and promised her the assistance she stands
in need of. I recommend her to your care, and am persuaded that you,
from inclination, as well as at my request, will not abandon her.

The fairy Pari Banou, who had her eyes fixed upon the pretended sick
woman all the time that the prince was talking to her, ordered two
of her women who followed her to take her from the two men that held
her, and carry her into an apartment of the palace, and take as much
care of her as of herself.

Whilst the two women executed the fairy’s commands, she went up to
prince Ahmed, and whispering him in the ear, said, Prince, I commend
your compassion, which is worthy of you and your birth. I take great
pleasure in gratifying your good intention; but give me leave to
tell you, I am afraid it will be but ill rewarded. This woman is not
so sick as she pretends to be; and I am very much mistaken if she is
not sent hither on purpose to occasion you great trouble. But do not
be concerned, let what will be devised against you; be persuaded
that I will deliver you out of all the snares that shall be laid for
you. Go and pursue your journey.

This discourse of the fairy’s did not in the least alarm prince
Ahmed. My princess, said he, as I do not remember I ever did, or
designed to do, any body an injury. I cannot believe any body can
have a thought of doing me one; but if they have, I shall not
forbear doing good, whenever I have an opportunity. So saying, he
took leave of the fairy, and set forward again for his father’s
capital, where he soon arrived, and was received as usual by the
sultan, who constrained himself as much as possible, to disguise the
trouble arising from the suspicions suggested by his favourites.

In the mean time, the two women to whom the fairy Pari Banou had
given her orders carried the magician into a very fine apartment,
richly furnished. First, they set her down upon a sofa, with her
back supported with a cushion of gold brocade, while they made a bed
on the same sofa before her, the quilt of which was finely
embroidered with silk, the sheets of the finest linen, and the
coverlid cloth of gold. When they had put her into bed, (for the old
sorceress pretended that her fever was so violent, she could not
help herself in the least,) one of the women went out, and returned
soon again with a china cup in her hand, full of a certain liquor,
which she presented to the magician, while the other helped her to
sit up. Drink this liquor, said she; it is the water of the fountain
of lions, and a sovereign remedy against all fevers whatsoever. You
will find the effect of it in less than an hour’s time.

The magician, to dissemble the better, took it, after a great deal
of entreaty, as if she was very much averse to take that potion; but
at last she took the china cup, and shaking her head as if she did
great violence to herself, swallowed the liquor. When she was laid
down again, the two women covered her up. Lie quiet, said she who
brought her the china cup, and get a little sleep if you can: we
will leave you, and hope to find you perfectly cured when we come an
hour hence.

The magician, who came not to act a sick part long, but only to
discover prince Ahmed’s retreat, and what made him leave his
father’s court, being fully satisfied in what she wanted to know,
would willingly have declared that the potion had then had its
effects, so great was her desire to return to the sultan, to inform
him of the success of her commission: but as she had been told that
the potion did not operate immediately, she was forced to wait the
women’s return.

The two women came again at the time they said they should, and
found the magician up and dressed, and seated on the sofa; who, when
she saw them open the door of the apartment, cried out, O the
admirable potion! it has wrought its cure much sooner than you told
me it would, and I have waited a long time with impatience, to
desire you to carry me to your charitable mistress, to thank her for
her kindness, for which I shall always be obliged to her, since
being thus cured as by a miracle, I would not lose time, but
prosecute my journey.

The two women, who were fairies as well as their mistress, after
they had told the magician how glad they were that she was cured so
soon, walked before her, and conducted her through several
apartments, all more superb than that wherein she lay, into a large
hall, the most richly and magnificently furnished of all the palace.

Pari Banou was seated in this hall, on a throne of massy gold,
enriched with diamonds, rubies, and pearls of an extraordinary size,
and attended on each hand by a great number of beautiful fairies,
all richly dressed. At the sight of so much majesty, the magician
was not only dazzled, but was so struck, that after she had
prostrated herself before the throne, she could not open her lips to
thank the fairy, as she proposed. However, Pari Banou saved her the
trouble, and said to her, Good woman, I am glad I had an opportunity
to oblige you, and to see you are able to pursue your journey. I
will not detain you; but perhaps you may not be displeased to see my
palace: follow my women, and they will show it you.

The old sorceress, who had not power nor courage to say a word,
prostrated herself a second time, with her head on the carpet that
covered the foot of the throne, and so took her leave, and was
conducted by the two fairies through all the same apartments which
were shown to prince Ahmed at his first arrival there, and at sight
of their uncommon magnificence, she made frequent exclamations. But
what surprised her most of all was, that the two fairies told her,
that all she saw and admired so much was a mere sketch of their
mistress’s grandeur and riches; and that in the extent of her
dominions she had so many palaces that they could not tell the
number of them, all of different plans and architecture, and equally
magnificent and superb. In talking of many other particulars, they
led her at last to the iron gate at which prince Ahmed brought her
in, and after she had taken her leave of them, and thanked them for
their trouble, they opened it, and wished her a good journey.

After the magician had gone a little way, she turned back again to
observe the door and know it again, but all in vain; for, as was
before observed, it was invisible to her and all other women. Except
in this circumstance, she was very well satisfied with executing the
commission she had undertaken, and posted away to the sultan. When
she came to the capital, she went by a great many by-ways to the
private door of the palace. The sultan being informed of her
arrival, sent for her into his apartment, and perceiving a
melancholy hang upon her countenance, he thought she had not
succeeded, and said to her, By your looks I surmise that your
journey has been to no purpose, and that you have not made the
discovery I expected from your diligence. Sir, replied the magician,
your majesty must give me leave to represent to you, that you ought
not to judge by my looks whether or no I have acquitted myself well
in the execution of the commands you were pleased to honour me with;
but by the faithful report I shall make you of all that has happened
to me, and by which you will find that I have not neglected any
thing that could render me worthy of your approbation. The
melancholy you observe in my face proceeds from another cause than
the want of success, which I hope your majesty will have all the
reason in the world to be content with. I do not tell you the cause;
the relation I am going to give will, if you have patience, inform
you of it.

Then the magician related to the sultan of the Indies how she
pretended to be sick, prince Ahmed compassionating her, had her
carried into a subterraneous abode, and presented and recommended
her himself to a fairy of incomparable beauty, desiring her by her
care to restore her health. Then she told him with how much
condescension the fairy presently ordered two fairies that attended
her, to take care of her, and not to leave her till she was
recovered; which great condescension, said she, could proceed from
no other person but from a wife to a husband. Afterwards the old
sorceress failed not to exaggerate on her surprise at the front of
the palace, which she said had not its fellow in the world, while
the two fairies held her by each arm, like a sick person, as she
feigned to be, that could not walk or support herself. She gave a
particular account of the care they took of her, after they had led
her into another apartment; of the potion they made her drink, and
of the quickness of her cure, which she pretended as well as her
sickness, though she doubted not the virtue of the draught; the
majesty of the fairy seated on a throne, brilliant with jewels, the
value of which exceeded all the riches of the kingdom of the Indies,
and all the other riches, beyond computation, contained in that vast
palace.

Here the magician, finishing the relation of the success of her
commission, and continuing her discourse, said, What does your
majesty think of these unheard-of riches of the fairy? Perhaps you
will say, you are struck with admiration, and rejoice at the good
fortune of prince Ahmed your son, who enjoys them in common with the
fairy. For my part, sir, I beg of your majesty to forgive me, if I
take the liberty to remonstrate to you, that I think otherwise, and
that I shudder when I consider the misfortunes which may happen to
you from it. And this is the cause of the melancholy which I could
not so well dissemble, but that you soon perceived it. I would
believe that prince Ahmed, by his own good disposition, is incapable
of undertaking any thing against your majesty; but who can answer
that the fairy, by her attractions and caresses, and the influence
she has already over him, may not inspire him with a dangerous
design of dethroning your majesty, and seizing the crown of the
Indies? This is what your majesty ought to consider as a serious
affair of the utmost importance.

Though the sultan of the Indies was very well persuaded that prince
Ahmed’s natural disposition was good, yet he could not help being
moved at the discourse of the old sorceress, and said, I thank you
for the pains you have taken, and your wholesome caution. I am so
sensible of the great importance it is to me, that I shall take
advice upon it.

He was consulting with his favourites, when he was told of the
magician’s arrival. He ordered her to follow him to them. He
acquainted them with what he had learnt, and communicated to them
also the reason he had to fear the fairy’s influence over the
prince, and asked them what measures they thought most proper to be
taken to prevent so great a misfortune. One of the favourites,
taking upon himself to speak for the rest, said, Your majesty knows
who must be the author of this mischief. In order to prevent it, now
he is in your court, and in your power, you ought not to hesitate to
put him under arrest; I will not say, take away his life, for that
would make too much noise; but make him a close prisoner while he
lives. This advice all the other favourites unanimously applauded.

The magician, who thought it too violent, asked the sultan leave to
speak, which being granted, she said, Sir, I am persuaded the zeal
of your counsellors for your majesty’s interest makes them propose
arresting prince Ahmed: but they will not take it amiss if I offer
to your and their consideration, that if you arrest the prince you
must also detain his retinue. But they are all genies. Do they think
it will be so easy to surprise, seize, and secure their persons?
Will they not disappear, by the property they possess of rendering
themselves invisible, and transport themselves instantly to the
fairy, and give her an account of the insult offered her husband?
And can it be supposed she will let it go unrevenged? But would it
not be better, if by any other means, which might not make so great
a noise, the sultan could secure himself against any ill designs
prince Ahmed may have against him, and not involve his majesty’s
honour, or any body suspect him of any ill design? If his majesty
has any confidence in my advice, as genies and fairies can do things
impracticable to men, he will pique prince Ahmed’s honour, and
engage him by means of the fairy to procure certain advantages,
under pretence of deriving a great return, --for which he will be
obliged to him. For example, every time your majesty takes the
field, you are obliged to be at a great expense, not only in
pavilions and tents for yourself and army, but likewise in mules and
camels, and other beasts of burden, to carry their baggage. Might
not you engage him to use his interest with the fairy, to procure
you a tent which might be carried in a man’s hand, and which
should be so large as to shelter your whole army.

I need say no more to your majesty. If the prince brings such a
tent, you may make a great many other demands of the same nature, so
that at last he may sink under the difficulties and the
impossibility of executing them, however fertile in means and
inventions the fairy, who has enticed him from you by her
enchantments, may be; so that in time he will be ashamed to appear,
and will be forced to pass the rest of his life with his fairy,
excluded from any commerce with this world; and then your majesty
will have nothing to fear from him, and cannot be reproached with so
detestable an action as the shedding of a son’s blood, or
confining him in a prison for life.

When the magician had finished her speech, the sultan asked his
favourites if they had any thing better to propose; and finding them
all silent, determined to follow the magician’s advice, as the
most reasonable and most agreeable to his mild manner of government.

The next day, when the prince came into his father’s presence, who
was talking with his favourites, and had sat down by him, after a
conversation on different subjects, the sultan addressing himself to
prince Ahmed, said, Son, when you came and dispelled those clouds of
melancholy which your long absence had brought upon me, you made the
place you had chosen for your retreat a mystery to me. I was
satisfied with seeing you again, and knowing that you was content
with your condition, and wished not to penetrate into your secret,
which I found you did not care I should. I know not what reason you
had thus to treat a father, who ever did and still continues to
express what interest he takes in your happiness. I know your good
fortune. I rejoice with you, and very much approve of your conduct
in marrying a fairy so worthy of your love, and so rich and
powerful, as I am informed. Powerful as I am, it was not possible
for me to have procured so great a match for you. Now you are raised
to so high a rank, as to be envied by every body, but a father like
me, I not only desire you to preserve the good understanding we have
lived in hitherto, but that you will use all your credit with your
fairy to obtain for me her assistance, when I may want it. I
therefore will make a trial of your interest this day.

You are not insensible at what a great expense, not to say trouble
to my generals, officers, and myself, every time I take the field,
they provide tents and pavilions, and mules and camels, and other
beasts of burden, to carry them. If you consider the pleasure you
would do me, I am persuaded you could easily procure from her a
pavilion that might be carried in a man’s hand, and which would
extend over my whole army; especially when you let her know it is
for me. Though it may be a difficult thing, she will not refuse you.
All the world, knows fairies are capable of doing most extraordinary
things.

Prince Ahmed never expected that the sultan his father would have
asked such a thing, which at first sight appeared to him so
difficult, not to say impossible. Though he knew not absolutely how
great the power of genies and fairies was, he doubted whether it
extended so far as to furnish such a tent as his father desired.
Moreover he had never asked any thing like it of the fairy Pari
Banou, but was satisfied with the continual proofs she had given him
of her passion, that he forgot nothing to persuade her that his
heart perfectly corresponded without any views of interest, beyond
maintaining himself in her good graces; therefore he was in the
greatest embarrassment what answer to make. At last, he replied, If,
sir, I have concealed from your majesty what happened to me, and
what course I took after the finding my arrow, the reason was, that
I thought it was of no great importance to you to be informed of
them; and though I know not how this mystery has been revealed to
you, I cannot deny but your information is very just. I have married
the fairy you speak of. I love her, and am persuaded she loves me.
But I can say nothing as to the influence your majesty believes I
have over her. It is what I have not yet made an experiment of, nor
thought of, and should be very glad you would dispense with my
undertaking it, and let me enjoy the happiness of loving and being
beloved, with all the disinterestedness I proposed to myself. But
the demand of a father is a command upon every child, who, like me,
thinks it his duty to obey him in every thing. And though it is with
the greatest reluctance imaginable, I will not fail to ask my wife
the favour your majesty desires, but will not promise you to obtain
it; and if I should not have the honour to come again to pay you my
respects, that shall be the sign that I have not had success: but
beforehand, I desire you to forgive me, and consider that you
yourself have reduced me to this extremity.

Son, replied the sultan of the Indies, I should be very sorry that
what I ask of you should give you reason to cause me the grief of
never seeing you more. I find you do not know the power a husband
has over a wife; and yours would show that her love to you was very
indifferent, if she, with the power she has as a fairy, should
refuse you so trifling a request as this I desire you to ask of her
for my sake. Lay aside your fears, which proceed from your believing
yourself not to be loved so well as you love her. Go; only ask her.
You will find the fairy loves you better than you imagine; and
remember, that people, for want of asking, often lose great
advantages. Think with yourself, that as you love her, you could
refuse her nothing; therefore, if she loves you, she will not deny
your requests.

All this discourse of the sultan of the Indies could not persuade
prince Ahmed, who would rather he would have asked any thing else,
than to expose him to the hazard of displeasing his dear Pari Banou;
and so great was his vexation, that he left the court two days
sooner than he used to do.

When he returned, the fairy, to whom he always before appeared with
a gay countenance, asked him the cause of the alteration she
perceived in his looks; and finding, that instead of answering her,
he inquired after her health, to avoid satisfying her, she said to
him, I will answer your question when you have answered mine. The
prince declined it a long time, protesting that nothing was the
matter with him; but the more he denied it, the more she pressed
him, and said to him, I cannot bear to see you in this condition:
tell me what makes you so uneasy, that I may remove the cause of it,
whatever it may be; for it must be very extraordinary if it is out
of my power, unless it be the death of the sultan your father; in
that case, time, with all that I will contribute on my part, will
comfort you.

Prince Ahmed could not long withstand the pressing instances of the
fairy. Madam, said he, God prolong the sultan my father’s life,
and bless him to the end of his days. I left him alive, and in
perfect health; therefore that is not the cause of the melancholy
you perceive in me. The sultan is the occasion of it, and I am the
more concerned, because he has imposed upon me the disagreeable
necessity of importuning you. First, you know the care I have taken,
with your approbation, to conceal from him the happiness I have to
see you, to love you, to deserve your favour and love, and to have
received the pledge of your faith, after having pledged my faith
with you. How he has been informed of it I cannot tell.

Here the fairy Pari Banou interrupted prince Ahmed, and said, But I
know. Remember what I told you of the woman who made you believe she
was sick, on whom you took so much compassion. It is she who has
acquainted the sultan your father with what you have taken so much
care to hide from him. I told you she was no more sick than you or
I, and she has made it appear so; for, in short, after the two
women, whom I charged to take care of her, had given her the water
sovereign against all fevers, which, however, she had no occasion
for, she pretended that water had cured her, and was brought to take
her leave of me, that she might go the sooner to give an account of
the success of her undertaking. She was in so much haste, that she
would have gone away without seeing my palace, if I had not, by
bidding my two women show it her, given her to understand that it
was worth her seeing. But go on, and tell me what is the necessity
your father has imposed on you to be so importunate, which I desire
you will be persuaded you can be.

Madam, pursued prince Ahmed, you may have observed that hitherto I
have been content with your love, and have never asked you any other
favour: for what, after the possession of so amiable a wife, can I
desire more? I know how great your power is, but I have taken care
not to make trial of it. Consider then, I conjure you, that it is
not me, but the sultan my father, who, indiscreetly, as I think,
asks of you a pavilion large enough to shelter him, his court, and
army, from the violence of the weather, when he takes the field, and
which a man may carry in his hand. Once more, remember, it is not I,
but the sultan my father, who asks this favour.

Prince, replied the fairy, smiling, I am sorry that so small a
matter should disturb you, and make you so uneasy as you appeared to
me. I see plainly two things have contributed towards it: one is,
the law you have imposed upon yourself, to be content with loving
me, and being beloved by me, and to deny yourself the liberty of
asking me the least favour that might try my power. The other, I do
not doubt, whatever you may say, was, you thought that what your
father asked of me was out of my power. As to the first, I commend
you for it, and shall love you the better, if possible, for it; and
for the second, I must tell you, that what the sultan you father
asks of me is a trifle; and upon occasions. I can do much more
difficult things. Therefore be easy, and persuaded, that far from
thinking myself importuned, I shall always take a great deal of
pleasure in whatever you can desire me to do for your sake. Then the
fairy sent for her treasurer, to whom, when she came, she said,
Nourgihan, [108] (which was her name,) bring me the largest pavilion
in my treasury. Nourgihan returned presently with a pavilion, which
could not only be held, but concealed in the palm of the hand, when
it was closed, and presented it to her mistress, who gave it prince
Ahmed to look at.

When prince Ahmed saw the pavilion which the fairy called the
largest in her treasury, he fancied she had a mind to banter him,
and his surprise appeared presently in his countenance, which Pari
Banou perceiving, burst out a laughing. What! prince, cried she, do
you think I jest with you? You will see presently that I am in
earnest. Nourgihan, said she to her treasurer, taking the tent out
of prince Ahmed’s hand, go and set it up, that the prince may
judge whether the sultan his father will think it large enough.

The treasurer went out immediately with it from the palace, and
carried it to such a distance, that when she had set it up, one end
reached to the palace. The prince, so far from thinking it small,
found it large enough to shelter two armies as numerous as that of
the sultan his father, and then said to Pari Banou, I ask my
princess a thousand pardons for my incredulity: after what I have
seen, I believe there is nothing impossible to you. You see, said
the fairy, that the pavilion is larger than your father may have
occasion for; but you are to observe, that it has one property, that
it becomes larger or smaller, according to the army it is to cover,
without applying any hands to it.

The treasurer took down the tent again, reduced it to its first
size, and brought it and put it into the prince’s hands. He took
it, and without staying any longer than till the next day, mounted
his horse, and went with the usual attendants to the sultan his
father.

The sultan, who was persuaded that such a tent as he asked for was
beyond all possibility, was in great surprise at the prince’s
diligence. He took the tent, and after he had admired its smallness,
his amazement was so great that he could not recover himself when he
had set it up in the great plain before mentioned, and found it
large enough to shelter an army twice as large as he could bring
into the field. Looking upon this circumstance to be a superfluity
that might be troublesome in the use, prince Ahmed told him, that
its size would always be in proportion to his army.

To outward appearance the sultan expressed great obligations to the
prince his son for so noble a present, desiring him to return his
thanks to the fairy Pari Banou; and to show what a value he set on
it, he ordered it to be carefully laid up in his treasury. But
within himself he conceived a greater jealousy than what his
flatterers and the magician had suggested to him; considering that
by the fairy’s assistance, the prince his son might perform things
that were infinitely above his own power notwithstanding his
greatness and riches, therefore, more intent upon his ruin, he went
to consult the magician again, who advised him to engage the prince
to bring some of the water of the fountain of lions.

In the evening, when the sultan was surrounded as usual by all the
court, and the prince came to pay his respects among the rest, he
addressed himself to him in these words: Son, said he, I have
already expressed to you how much I am obliged to you for the
present of the tent you have procured me, which I look upon as the
most valuable thing in my treasury; but you must do one thing more
for me, which will be no less agreeable to me. I am informed that
the fairy your spouse makes use of a certain water, called the water
of the fountain of lions, which cures all sorts of fevers, even the
most dangerous; and as I am perfectly well persuaded my health is
dear to you, I do not doubt but you will ask her for a bottle of
that water for me, and bring it me, as a sovereign remedy which I
may make use of when I have occasion. Do me this other important
piece of service, and thereby complete the duty of a good son
towards a tender father.

Prince Ahmed, who believed that the sultan his father would have
been satisfied with so singular and useful a tent as that which he
had brought, and that he would not have imposed any new task upon
him which might hazard the fairy’s displeasure, was thunderstruck
at this new request, notwithstanding the assurance she had given him
of granting him whatever lay in her power. After a long silence, he
said, I beg of your majesty to be assured, that there is nothing I
would not undertake to procure you, which may contribute to the
prolonging of your life, but I could wish it might not be by the
means of my wife. For this reason I dare not promise to bring the
water. All I can do is, to assure you I will ask it of her; but it
will be with as great reluctance as when I asked for the tent.

The next morning prince Ahmed returned to the fairy Pan Banou, and
related to her sincerely and faithfully all that had passed at the
sultan his father’s court, from the giving of the tent, which he
told her he received with the utmost gratitude for the favour she
had done him, to the new request he had charged him to make for him.
And when he had done, he added: But, my princess, I only tell you
this is a plain account of what passed between me and my father. I
leave you to your own pleasure, whether you will gratify or reject
this his new desire. It shall be as you please.

No, no, replied the fairy Pari Banou, I am glad that the sultan of
the Indies knows that you are not indifferent to me. I will satisfy
him, and whatever advice the magician can give him, (for I see that
he hearkens to her) he shall find no fault with you or me. There is
a great deal of wickedness in this demand, as you will understand by
what I am going to tell you. The fountain of lions is situated in
the middle of a court of a great castle, the entrance into which is
guarded by four fierce lions, two of which sleep alternately, while
the other two are awake. But let not that frighten you. I will give
you means to pass by them without any danger.

The fairy Pari Banou was at that time very hard at work with her
needle; and as she had by her several clues of thread, she took up
one, and presenting it to prince Ahmed, said, First take this clue
of thread; I will tell you presently the use of it. In the second
place, you must have two horses; one you must ride yourself, and the
other you must lead, which must be loaded with a sheep cut into four
quarters, that must be killed to-day. In the third place, you must
be provided with a bottle, which I will give you, to bring the water
in. Set out early to-morrow morning, and when you have passed the
iron gate, throw before you the clue of thread, which will roll till
it comes to the gates of the castle. Follow it, and when it stops,
as the gates will be open, you will see the four lions. The two that
are awake will, by their roaring, wake the other two. Be not
frightened, but throw each of them a quarter of the sheep, and then
clap spurs to your horse, and ride to the fountain. Fill your bottle
without alighting, and then return with the same expedition. The
lions will be so busy eating, they will let you pass by them.

Prince Ahmed set out the next morning at the time appointed him by
the fairy, and followed her directions punctually. When he arrived
at the gates of the castle, he distributed the quarters of the sheep
among the four lions, and passing through the midst of them with
intrepidity, got to the fountain, filled his bottle, and returned as
safe and sound as he went. When he had got a little distance from
the castle gates he turned about, and perceiving two of the lions
coming after him, he drew his sabre, and prepared himself for
defence. But as he went forwards, he saw one of them turned out of
the road at some distance, and showed by his head and tail that he
did not come to do him any harm, but only to go before him, and that
the other stayed behind to follow. He therefore put his sword again
into its scabbard. Guarded in this manner, he arrived at the capital
of the Indies: but the lions never left him till they had conducted
him to the gates of the sultan’s palace; after which they returned
the same way they came, though not without frightening all that saw
them, who fled or hid themselves to avoid them, though they walked
gently, and showed no signs of fierceness.

A great many officers came to attend the prince while he dismounted,
and conducted him to the sultan’s apartment who was at that time
conversing with his favourites. He approached the throne, laid the
bottle at the sultan’s feet, and kissed the rich carpet which
covered the footstool, and, rising, said, I have brought you, sir,
the salutary water, which your majesty so much desired to keep among
your other rarities in your treasury; but at the same time wish you
such extraordinary health, as never to have occasion to make use of
it.

After the prince had made an end of his compliment, the sultan
placed him on his right hand, and then said to him, Son, I am very
much obliged to you for this valuable present; as also for the great
danger you have exposed yourself to on my account, which I have been
informed of by the magician, who knows the fountain of lions; but do
me the pleasure, continued he, to inform me by what address, or
rather, by what incredible power, you have been preserved.

Sir, replied prince Ahmed, I have no share in the compliment your
majesty is pleased to make me; all the honour is due to the fairy my
spouse, and I take no other merit than that of having followed her
good advice. Then he informed the sultan what that advice was by the
relation of this his expedition, and how he had conducted himself.
When he had done, the sultan, who showed outwardly all the
demonstrations of joy, but secretly became more and more jealous,
retired into an inward apartment, where he sent for the magician.

The magician, at her arrival, saved the sultan the trouble to tell
her of the success of prince Ahmed’s journey, which she had heard
of before she came, and therefore was prepared with the infallible
means. This thought she communicated to the sultan, who declared it
the next day to the prince, in the midst of all his courtiers, in
these words: Son, said he, I have one thing more to ask of you,
after which, I shall expect nothing more from your obedience, nor
your interest with your wife. This request is, to bring me a man not
above a foot and a half high, and whose beard is thirty feet long,
who carries upon his shoulders a bar of iron of five hundred weight,
which he uses as a quarter-staff, and who can speak.

Prince Ahmed, who did not believe that there was such a man in the
world as his father described, would gladly have excused himself;
but the sultan persisted in his demand, and told him the fairy could
do more incredible things.

Next day the prince returned to the subterraneous kingdom of Pari
Banou, to whom he told his father’s new demand, which, he said, he
looked upon to be a thing more impossible than the two first: for,
added he, I cannot imagine there is or can be such a man in the
world: without doubt, he has a mind to try whether I am silly enough
to go about to seek it; or if there is such a man, he seeks my ruin.
In short, how can he suppose that I should lay hold of a man so
small, armed as he describes? what arms can I make use of to reduce
him to submission? If there are any means, I beg you will tell me
how I may come off with honour this time also.

Do not affright yourself prince, replied the fairy; you ran a risk
in fetching the water of the fountain of lions for your father; but
there is no danger in finding out this man. It is my brother,
Shaibar, who is so far from being like me, though we both had the
same father, that he is of so violent a nature, that nothing can
prevent his giving bloody marks of his resentment for a slight
offence; yet, on the other hand, is so good as to oblige any one in
whatever they desire. He is made exactly as the sultan your father
has described him; and has no other arms than a bar of iron of five
hundred pounds weight, without which he never stirs, and which makes
him respected. I will send for him, and you shall judge of the truth
of what I tell you; but be sure to prepare yourself not to be
frightened at his extraordinary figure when you see him. What! my
queen, replied prince Ahmed, do you say Schaibar is your brother?
Let him be ever so ugly or deformed, I shall be so far from being
frightened at the sight of him, that I shall love and honour him,
and consider him as my nearest relation.

The fairy ordered a gold chafing-dish to be set with a fire in it
under the porch of her palace, with a box of the same metal, which
was a present to her, out of which, taking some incense, and
throwing it into the fire, there arose a thick cloud of smoke.

Some moments after, the fairy said to prince Ahmed, Prince, there
comes my brother; do you see him? The prince immediately perceived
Schaibar, who was but a foot and a half high, coming gravely with
his heavy bar on his shoulder; his beard thirty feet long, which
supported itself before him, and a pair of thick mustaches in
proportion, tucked up to his ears, and almost covering his face: his
eyes were very small, like a pig’s, and deep sunk in his head,
which was of an enormous size, and on which he wore a pointed cap:
besides all this, he had a hump behind and before.

If prince Ahmed had not known that Schaibar was Pari Banou’s
brother, he would not have been able to look at him without fear;
but knowing first who he was, he waited for him with the fairy, and
received him without the least concern.

Schaibar, as he came forwards, looked at the prince with an eye that
would have chilled his soul in his body, and asked Pari Banou, when
he first accosted her, who that man was? To which she replied, He is
my husband, brother; his name is Ahmed; he is son to the sultan of
the Indies. The reason why I did not invite you to my wedding was, I
was unwilling to divert you from the expedition you were engaged in,
and from which I heard with pleasure you returned victorious; on his
account I have taken the liberty now to call for you.

At these words, Schaibar, looking on prince Ahmed with a favourable
eye, which however, diminished neither his fierceness nor savage
look, said, Is there any thing, sister, wherein I can serve him? he
has only to speak. It is enough to me that he is your husband, to
engage me to do for him whatever he desires. The sultan his father,
replied Pari Banou, has a curiosity to see you, and I desire he may
be your guide to the sultan’s court. He needs but lead me the way;
I will follow him, replied Schaibar. Brother, replied Pari Banou, it
is too late to go to-day, therefore stay till to-morrow morning; and
in the mean time, as it is fit you should know all that has passed
between the sultan of the Indies and prince Ahmed since our
marriage, I will inform you this evening.

The next morning, after Schaibar had been informed of all that was
proper for him to know, he set out with the prince Ahmed, who was to
present him to the sultan. When they arrived at the gates of the
capital, the people no sooner saw Schaibar, but they ran and hid
themselves in the shops and houses, shutting their doors; while
others, taking to their heels, communicated their fears to all they
met, who staid not to look behind them, but ran too; insomuch that
Schaibar and prince Ahmed, as they went along, found all the streets
and squares desolate, till they came to the palace, where the
porters, instead of preventing Schaibar from entering, ran away too;
so that the prince and he advanced without any obstacle to the
council-hall, where the sultan was seated on his throne and giving
audience. Here likewise the officers, at the approach of Schaibar,
abandoned their posts, and gave them free admittance.

Schaibar, carrying his head erect, went fiercely up to the throne,
without waiting to be presented by prince Ahmed, and accosted the
sultan of the Indies in these words: You have asked for me, said he:
see, here I am: what would you have with me?

The sultan, instead of answering him, clapt his hands before his
eyes, and turned away his head, to avoid the sight of so terrible an
object. Schaibar was so much provoked at this uncivil and rude
reception, after he had given him the trouble to come so far, that
he instantly lifted up his iron bar, and saying, Speak, then let it
fall on his head and killed him, before prince Ahmed could intercede
in his behalf. All that he could do was to prevent his killing the
grand vizier, who sat not far from him on his right hand,
representing to him that he had always given the sultan his father
good advice. These are they then, said Schaibar, who gave him bad;
and as he pronounced these words, he killed all the other viziers on
the right and left, flatterers and favourites of the sultan, who
were prince Ahmed’s enemies. Every time he struck, he killed some
one or other, and none escaped but they who, not rendered motionless
by fear, saved themselves by flight.

When this terrible execution was over, Schaibar came out of the
council-hall into the midst of the court-yard with the iron bar upon
his shoulder, and looking at the grand vizier, who owed his life to
prince Ahmed, he said, I know here is a certain female magician, who
is a greater enemy of the prince my brother-in-law than all those
base favourites I have chastized; let her be brought to me
presently. The grand vizier immediately sent for her, and as soon as
she was brought, Schaibar said, knocking her down with the iron bar,
Take the reward of thy pernicious counsel, and learn to feign
sickness again: he then left her dead on the spot.

After this he said, This is not yet enough; I will treat the whole
city after the same manner, if they do not immediately acknowledge
prince Ahmed my brother-in-law for their sultan, and sultan of the
Indies. Then all that were present made the air ring with the
repeated acclamations of Long life to sultan Ahmed; and immediately
after he was proclaimed through the whole town. Schaibar made him be
clothed in the royal vestments, installed him on the throne, and
after he had made all swear homage and fidelity to him, went and
fetched his sister Pari Banou, whom he brought with great pomp, and
made her to be owned sultaness of the Indies.

As for prince Ali and princess Nouronnihar, as they had no hand in
the conspiracy against prince Ahmed, who was now avenged, nor knew
of any such conspiracy, prince Ahmed assigned them a considerable
province, with its capital, where they spent the rest of their
lives. Afterwards he sent an officer to prince Houssain, to acquaint
him with the change, and make him an offer of which province he
liked best; but that prince thought himself so happy in his
solitude, that he bid the officer return the sultan his brother
thanks for the kindness he designed him, assuring him of his
submission; and that the only favour he desired of him was to give
him leave to live retired in the place he had made choice of for his
retreat.




The Story of the Sisters who envied their younger Sister.


There was a prince of Persia, named Khosrouschah, [109] who, when he
first came to his crown, in order to obtain a knowledge of the
world, took great pleasure in night adventures. He often disguised
himself, attended by a trusty minister, disguised like him, and
rambled through the whole city, and met with a great many particular
adventures, which, said Scheherazade to the sultan, I shall not at
present entertain your majesty with; but I hope you will hear with
pleasure what happened to him upon his first ramble, which was in a
little time after his accession to his father’s throne, who dying
in a good old age, left him heir to the kingdom of Persia.

After the ceremonies of his deceased father’s funeral-rites, and
his own coronation, were over, the new sultan Khosrouschah, as well
from inclination as duty, went out one evening, attended by his
grand vizier, disguised like himself, to observe what passed. As he
went through a street in that part of the town inhabited only by the
meaner sort of people, he heard some people talking very loud; and
going up close to the house, from whence the noise came, and looking
through a crack in the door, perceived a light, and three sisters
sitting on a sofa, conversing together after supper. By what the
eldest said, he presently understood the subject of their discourse
was wishes; For, said she, since we have got upon wishes, mine shall
be to have the sultan’s baker for my husband, for then I shall eat
my fill of that bread, which by way of excellence is called the
sultan’s bread: let us see if your tastes are as good as mine. For
my part, replied the second sister, I wish I was the sultan’s
chief cook’s wife; for then I should eat of the most excellent
ragouts; and as I am persuaded that the sultan’s bread is common
in the palace, I should not want any of that; therefore you see,
sister, addressing herself to her eldest sister, that I have a
better taste than you.

Then the youngest sister, who was very beautiful, and had more
charms and wit than the two eldest, spoke in her turn: For my part,
sisters, said she, I shall not limit my desires to such trifles, but
take a higher flight; and since we are upon wishing, I wish to be
the sultan’s wife. I would make him father of a prince, whose hair
should be gold on one side of his head, and silver on the other;
when he cries, the tears that fall from his eyes shall be pearl; and
when he smiles, his vermilion lips shall look like a rose-bud fresh
blown.

The three sisters’ wishes, particularly the youngest’s, seemed
so singular to the sultan Khosrouschah, that he resolved to gratify
them in their desires; and without communicating this his design to
his grand vizier, he charged him only to take notice of the house,
and bring the three sisters before him the next day.

The grand vizier, in executing the sultan’s orders, would but just
give the three sisters time to dress themselves to appear before
him, without telling them the reason. He brought them to the palace,
and presented them to the sultan, who said to them, Do you remember
the wishes you made last night, when you were all in so pleasant a
mood? Speak the truth; I must know what they were.

At these unexpected words of the sultan, the three sisters were very
much confounded. They cast down their eyes and blushed, and the
colour which rose in the cheeks of the youngest quite captivated the
sultan’s heart. Modesty, and fear lest they might have offended
the sultan by their discourse, kept them silent. The sultan
perceiving it, to encourage them, said, Fear nothing, I did not send
for you to distress you; and since I see that is the effect of the
question I ask you, without my intending it, and I know the wish of
each, I will relieve you from your fears. You, added he, that wished
to be my wife, you shall have your desire this day; and you,
continued he, addressing himself to the two eldest sisters, you
shall also be married to my chief baker and cook.

As soon as the sultan had declared his pleasure, the youngest
sister, setting the eldest an example, threw herself at the
sultan’s feet, to express her gratitude. Sir, said she, my wish,
since it has come to your majesty’s knowledge, was only by way of
conversation and amusement. I am unworthy of the honour you do me,
and ask pardon for my boldness. The two other sisters would have
excused themselves also; but the sultan interrupting them, said, No,
no; it shall be so; every one’s wish shall be fulfilled.

The nuptials were all celebrated that day, as the sultan had
resolved, but after a different manner. The youngest sister’s were
solemnized with all the rejoicings usual at the marriages of the
sultans of Persia; and those of the other two sisters according to
the quality and distinction of their husbands; the one as the
sultan’s chief baker, and the other as head cook.

The two elder sisters felt strongly the disproportion of their
marriages to that of their younger sister. This consideration made
them far from being content, though they were arrived at the utmost
height of their wishes, and much beyond their hopes. They gave
themselves up to an excess of jealousy, which not only disturbed
their joy, but was the cause of great troubles and afflictions to
the sultaness their younger sister. They had not an opportunity to
communicate their thoughts to each other upon the preference the
sultan had given her to their prejudice, but were altogether
employed in preparing themselves for the celebration of their
marriages. Some days afterwards, when they had an opportunity of
seeing each other at the public baths, the eldest sister said to the
other, Well, sister, what say you to our sister’s great fortune?
Is not she a fine person to be a sultaness! I must own, said the
other sister, I cannot conceive what charms the sultan could
discover in her, to be so bewitched by a young jade. You know in
what a state we have both seen her. Was it a reason sufficient for
him not to cast his eyes on you, because she was somewhat younger
than us? You were as worthy of his bed; and in justice he ought to
have preferred you.

Sister, said the elder, I should not have said any thing, if the
sultan had but pitched upon you; but that he should choose that
hussy, is what grieves me. But I will revenge myself; and you, I
think, are as much concerned as I; therefore I would have us
contrive measures together, that we may act in concert in a common
cause, and communicate to me what you think the likeliest way to
mortify her, while I, on my side, will inform you what my desire of
revenge shall suggest to me.

After this wicked plot, the two sisters saw each other very
frequently, and always consulted how they might disturb and
interrupt the happiness of the sultaness their younger sister. They
proposed a great many ways, but in deliberating about the manner of
executing them, they found so many difficulties, that they durst not
attempt them. In the mean time, they often went together to make her
visits with a detestable dissimulation, and every time gave her all
the marks of friendship they could imagine, to persuade her how
overjoyed they were to have a sister raised to so high a fortune.
The sultaness, on her part, always received them with all the
demonstrations of esteem and value they could expect from a sister
who was not puffed up with her high dignity, and loved them as
cordially as before.

Some months after her marriage, the sultaness found herself to be
with child. The sultan expressed great joy, which was communicated
to all the court, and spread throughout the capital of Persia. Upon
this news, the two sisters came to pay their compliments, and
entering into discourse with her sister about her lying-in, they
proffered their service to deliver her, desiring her, if she was not
provided with a midwife, to accept of them.

The sultaness said to them most obligingly, Sisters, I should desire
no better, if it was absolutely in my power to make choice of you. I
am however obliged to you for your good-will, but must submit to
what the sultan shall order on this occasion. Let your husbands
employ their friends to make interest, and get some courtier to ask
this favour of the sultan; and if he speaks to me about it, be
assured that I shall not only express the pleasure he does me, but
thank him for making choice of you.

The two husbands applied themselves to some courtiers their patrons,
and begged of them to use their interest to procure their wives the
honour they aspired to. Those patrons exerted themselves so much in
their behalf, that the sultan promised them to consider of it, and
was as good as his word; for in conversation with the sultaness, he
told her that he thought her sisters were the most proper persons to
assist her in her labour; but would not name them before he asked
her consent. The sultaness, sensible of the deference the sultan so
obligingly paid her, said to him, Sir, I was prepared to do as your
majesty shall please to command me. But since you have been so kind
as to think of my sisters, I thank you for that regard you have
shown them for my sake; and therefore I shall not dissemble, that I
had rather have them than strangers.

Then the sultan Khosrouschah named the sultaness’s two sisters to
be her midwives; and from that time they went backwards and forwards
to the palace, overjoyed at the opportunity they should have of
executing the detestable wickedness they had meditated against the
sultaness their sister.

When the sultaness’s reckoning was out, she was safely delivered
of a young prince, as bright as the day; but neither his innocence
nor beauty were capable of moving the cruel hearts of the merciless
sisters. They wrapped him up carelessly in his blankets, and put him
into a basket, which they abandoned to the stream of a small canal
which ran under the sultaness’s apartment, and declared she was
delivered of a little dead dog, which they produced. This
disagreeable news was announced to the sultan, who conceived so much
anger thereat, as might have proved fatal to the sultaness, if his
grand vizier had not represented to him that he could not, without
injustice, make her answerable for the caprices of nature.

In the mean time, the basket in which the little prince was exposed
was carried by the stream beyond a wall which bounded the prospect
of the sultaness’s apartment, and from thence floated with the
current down the gardens. By chance the intendant of the sultan’s
garden, one of the principal and most considerable officers of the
kingdom, walking in the garden by the side of this canal, and
perceiving a basket floating, called to a gardener, who was not far
off, and bid him come presently to him, and reach him that basket,
which he showed him that he might see what was in it. The gardener,
with a spade which he had in his hand, brought the basket to the
side of the canal, took it up, and gave it to him.

The intendant of the gardens was extremely surprised to see in the
basket a child, which, though he easily knew it to be but just born,
had very fine features. This officer had been married several years,
and though he had always been desirous of having children, Heaven
had never blessed him with any. This accident interrupted his walk:
he made the gardener follow him with the child; and when he came to
his own house, which was situated at the entrance into the gardens
of the palace, he went into his wife’s apartment. Wife, said he,
as we have no children of our own, God has sent us one. I recommend
him to you; provide him a nurse presently, and take as much care of
him as if he were our own son; for, from this moment, I acknowledge
him as such. The intendant’s wife received the child with great
joy, and took particular pleasure in the care of him. The intendant
himself would not inquire too narrowly whence the child came. He saw
plainly it came not far off the sultaness’s apartment; but it was
not his business to examine too closely into what had passed, nor to
create disturbances in a place where peace was so necessary.

The year after the sultaness was brought to bed of another prince,
on whom the unnatural sisters had no more compassion than on his
brother; but exposed him likewise in a basket, and set him adrift in
the canal, pretending this time that the sultaness was delivered of
a cat. It was happy also for this child that the intendant of the
gardens was walking by the canal side, who had it carried to his
wife, and charged her to take as much care of it as of the first;
which suited as well her inclination, as it was agreeable to the
intendant.

The sultan of Persia was more enraged this time against the
sultaness than before, and she had felt the effects of his anger, if
the grand vizier’s remonstrances had not prevailed.

The third time the sultaness lay in she was delivered of a princess,
which innocent babe underwent the same fate as the princes her
brothers; for the two sisters being determined not to put an end to
their detestable schemes, till they had seen the sultaness their
younger sister at least cast off, turned out, and humbled, exposed
this child also on the canal. But the princess was preserved from
certain death by the compassion and charity of the intendant of the
gardens, as well as the two princes her brothers.

To this inhumanity the two sisters added a lie and deceit as before.
They produced a piece of wood, and affirmed it to be a false birth
which the sultaness was delivered of.

The sultan Khosrouschah could no longer contain himself, when he was
informed of the new extraordinary birth. What! said he, this woman,
unworthy of my bed, will fill my palace with monsters, if I let her
live any longer! No, it shall not be, added he: she is a monster
herself, and I must rid the world of her. He pronounced this
sentence of death, and ordered the grand vizier to see it executed.

The grand vizier, and the courtiers who were present, cast
themselves at the sultan’s feet, to beg of him to revoke that
sentence. Your majesty, I hope, will give me leave, said the grand
vizier, to represent to you, that the laws which condemn persons to
death were made to punish crimes: the three extraordinary labours of
the sultaness are not crimes; for in what can she be said to have
contributed towards them? A great many other women have had, and
have the same every day, and are to be pitied; but not punished.
Your majesty may abstain from seeing her, and let her live. The
affliction in which she will spend the rest of her life after the
loss of your favour, will be a punishment great enough.

The sultan of Persia considered with himself, and found that it was
injustice in him to condemn the sultaness to death for extraordinary
births, and said, Let her live then; I will give her life; but it
shall be on this condition, that she shall desire to die more than
once every day. Let a wooden shed be built for her at the gate of
the principal mosque, with iron bars to the windows, and let her be
put into it, in the coarsest habit; and every Mussulman that shall
go into the mosque to prayers shall spit in her face. --If any one
fail, I will have him exposed to the same punishment; and that I may
be punctually obeyed, I charge you, vizier, to appoint persons to
see this done.

The sultan pronounced this last sentence in such a tone, that the
grand vizier durst not open his mouth; and it was executed, to the
great satisfaction of the two envious sisters. A shed was built, and
the sultaness, truly worthy of compassion, as soon as her month was
up, was put into it, and exposed ignominiously to the contempt of
the people; which usage, as she did not deserve, she bore with a
constancy which excited the admiration, as well as compassion, of
those who judged of things better than the vulgar.

The two princes and the princess were nursed and brought up by the
intendant of the gardens and his wife, with all the tenderness of a
father and mother; and as they advanced in age, they all showed
marks of superior greatness, (and the princess in particular, a
charming beauty,) which discovered itself every day by their
docility and good inclinations above trifles, and different from
those of common children, and by a certain air which could only
belong to princes and princesses. All this increased the affections
of the intendant and his wife, who called the eldest prince Bahman,
and the second Perviz, both of them names of the most ancient
sultans of Persia, and the princess Parizade, which name also had
been borne by several sultanesses and princesses of the kingdom.
[110]

As soon as the two princes were old enough, the intendant provided
proper masters to teach them to read and write; and the princess
their sister, who was often with them when they were learning their
lessons, showing a great desire to learn to read and write, though
much younger than they, the intendant was so much taken with that
disposition of hers, that he employed the same master to teach her
also. Her emulation, vivacity, and piercing wit, made her in a
little time as great a proficient as her brothers.

From that time, the brothers and sister had all the same masters in
all the other arts, in geography, poetry, history, even the secret
sciences; all which came so easily to them, and in a little time
they made so wonderful a progress, that their masters were amazed,
and frankly owned, that if they held on so but a little longer, they
could teach them no farther. At the hours of recreation, the
princess learned to sing, and play upon all sorts of instruments;
and when the princes were learning to ride, she would not permit
them to have that advantage over her, but went through all exercises
with them, learning to ride, bend the bow, and dart the reed or
javelin, and oftentimes outstrip them in the race.

The intendant of the gardens was so overjoyed to find his adopted
children so accomplished in all the perfections of body and mind,
and that they answered so well the charge he had been at upon their
education, that he resolved to be still at a greater expense; for
whereas he had till then been content only with his lodge at the
entrance of the garden, and kept no country-house, he purchased a
country-seat at a small distance from the city, surrounded with a
large tract of arable land, meadows, and woods. As the house was not
sufficiently handsome nor convenient, he pulled it down, and spared
no expense to make it magnificent. He went every day to hasten, by
his presence, the great number of workmen he employed; and as soon
as there was an apartment ready to receive him, he passed several
days together there, when his presence was not necessary at court;
and by the same exertions, the house was furnished in the richest
manner, answerably to the magnificence of the edifice. Afterwards he
made gardens, according to the plan drawn by himself, after the
manner of the great lords in Persia. He took in a large compass of
ground for a park, which he walled round, and stocked with fallow
deer, that the princes and princess might divert themselves with
hunting when they pleased.

When this country-seat was finished and fit for habitation, the
intendant of the gardens went and cast himself at the sultan’s
feet, and, after representing to him how long he had served him, and
the infirmities of age which he found growing upon him, he begged he
would permit him to resign his charge into his majesty’s hands,
and retire. The sultan gave him leave with the more pleasure,
because he was satisfied with his long services, both in his
father’s reign and his own; and when he granted it, he asked him
what he should do to recompense him. Sir, replied the intendant of
the gardens, I have received so many obligations from your majesty,
and the late sultan your father, of happy memory, that I desire no
more than the honour of dying in your favour.

He took his leave of the sultan Khosrouschah, and afterwards
returned to the country retreat he had built, with the two princes,
Bahman and Perviz, and the princess Parizade. His wife had been dead
some years, and he himself had not lived above six months with them,
before he was surprised by so sudden a death, that he had not time
to give them the least account of their birth, which he had resolved
to do, as necessary to oblige them to continue to live, as they had
then done, agreeably to their rank and condition, and the education
he had given them, and to their own inclination.

The princes Bahman and Perviz, and the princess Parizade, who knew
no other tether than the intendant of the sultan’s gardens,
regretted and bewailed him as such, and paid him all the honours in
his funeral obsequies which their love and filial gratitude required
of them. Content with the plentiful fortune he left them, they lived
together in the same perfect union, free from the ambition of
distinguishing themselves at court, with a view to places of honour
and dignity, which they might easily have obtained.

One day, when the two princes were hunting, and the princess
Parizade stayed at home, a religious old woman came to the gate, and
desired leave to go in to say her prayers, it being then the hour.
The servants went and asked the princess’s leave, who ordered them
to show her into the oratory, which the intendant of the sultan’s
gardens had taken care to fit up in his house, for want of a mosque
in the neighbourhood. She bade them also, after the good woman had
finished her prayers, show her the house and gardens, and then bring
her to her.

The religious old woman went into the oratory, said her prayers, and
when she came out again, two of the princess’s women, who waited
on her, invited her to see the house and gardens; which civility she
accepted of, and followed them from one apartment to another, and
observed, as a person who understood what belonged to furniture, the
nice arrangement of every thing. They conducted her also into the
garden, the disposition of which she found so new and well planned,
that she admired it, observing that the person who drew it, must
have been an excellent master of his art. Afterwards she was brought
before the princess, who waited for her in the great hall, which, in
propriety, beauty, and richness, exceeded all she had admired before
in the apartments.

As soon as the princess saw the devout woman, she said to her, My
good mother, come near and sit down by me. I am overjoyed at the
happiness of having the opportunity of profiting for some moments by
the good example and discourse of such a person as you, who has
taken the right way, by dedicating yourself to the service of God. I
wish every body were as wise.

The religious woman, instead of sitting upon a sofa, would only sit
upon the edge of it. The princess would not permit her to do so, but
rising from her seat, and taking her by the hand, obliged her to
come and sit by her. The good woman, sensible of the civility, said,
Madam, I ought not to have so much respect shown me; but since you
command me, and are mistress of your own house, I obey you. When she
had sat down, before they entered into any conversation, one of the
princess’s women brought a little low table of mother of pearl and
ebony, with a china dish full of cakes upon it, and a great many
others set round it full of fruits in season, and wet and dry
sweetmeats.

The princess took up one of the cakes, and presenting her with it,
said, Eat, good mother, and make choice of what you like best; you
had need to eat after coming so far. Madam, replied the good woman,
I am not used to eat such nice things; but will not refuse what God
has sent me by so liberal a hand as yours.

While the religious woman was eating, the princess ate something
too, to bear her company, and asked her a great many questions upon
the exercise of devotion which she practised, and how she lived; all
which questions she asked with great modesty. Talking of several
things, at last she asked her what she thought of the house, and how
she liked it.

Madam, answered the devout woman, I must certainly have very bad
taste to disapprove any thing in it, since it is beautiful, regular,
and magnificently furnished with exactness and judgment, and all its
ornaments adjusted in the best manner. Its situation is an agreeable
spot, and no garden can be more delightful; but yet if you will give
me leave to speak my mind freely, I will take the liberty to tell
you, that this house would be incomparable, if it had three things
which are wanting to it. My good mother, replied the princess
Parizade, what are those three things? I conjure you, in God’s
name, to tell me what they are: I will spare nothing to get them if
it be possible.

Madam, replied the devout woman, the first of these three things, is
the speaking bird, which is called Bulbulkezer, and is so singular a
creature that it can draw round it all the singing birds of the
neighbourhood, which come to accompany his song. The second is, the
singing tree, the leaves of which are so many mouths which form a
harmonious concert of different voices, and never cease. The third
is the yellow water of gold colour, a single drop of which being
poured in a vessel properly prepared in whatever part of the garden,
it increases so that it fills it immediately, and rises up in the
middle like a fountain, which continually plays in it, and yet the
basin never overflows.

Ah! my good mother, cried the princess, how much I am obliged to you
for the knowledge of these things! They are surprising, and I never
before heard there were such curious and wonderful things in the
world; but as I am well persuaded that you know where they are, I
expect that you should do me the favour to tell me.

Madam, replied the good woman, I should be unworthy the hospitality
you have with so much goodness shown me, if I should refuse to
satisfy your curiosity in that point; and am glad to have the honour
to tell you that these three things are to be met with in the same
spot on the confines of this kingdom towards India. The road to it
lies before your house, and whoever you send needs but to follow it
for twenty days, and on the twentieth let him but ask the first
person he meets, where the speaking bird, singing tree, and yellow
water are, and he will be informed. After these words, she rose from
her seat, took her leave, and went her way.

The princess Parizade’s thoughts were so taken up with what the
religious woman had told her of the speaking bird, singing tree, and
yellow water, that she never perceived she was gone, till she wanted
to ask her some question for her better information; for she thought
that what she had told her was not a sufficient reason for exposing
herself by undertaking a long journey possibly to no purpose.
However, she would not send after her to fetch her back, but
endeavoured to remember all she had told her; and when she thought
she had recollected every word, she took real pleasure in thinking
of the satisfaction she should have, if she could get these
wonderful things into her possession; but the difficulties she
apprehended, and the fear of not succeeding, made her very uneasy.

She was lost in these thoughts, when her brothers returned from
hunting; who, when they entered the great hall, instead of finding
her lively and gay, as she used to be, were amazed to see her so
pensive, and hang down her head as if something troubled her.

Sister, said prince Bahman, what is become of all your mirth and
gayety? Are you not well? or has some misfortune befallen you? Has
any body given you reason to be so melancholy? Tell us, that we may
know how to act, and give you some relief. If any body has affronted
you, we will resent it.

The princess Parizade remained in the same posture some time without
answering; but at last lifted up her eyes to look at her brothers,
and then held them down again, telling them nothing disturbed her.

Sister, said prince Bahman, you conceal the truth from us; there
must be something of consequence. It is impossible, for the short
time we have been absent, we could observe so sudden a change, if
nothing was the matter with you. You would not have us satisfied
with the unsatisfactory answer you have given us: do not conceal any
thing from us, unless you would have us believe that you renounce
the friendship and strict union which have hitherto subsisted
between us from our infancy.

The princess, who had not the smallest intention to break with her
brothers, would not suffer them to entertain such a thought, but
said, When I told you nothing disturbed me, I meant, nothing that
was of any great importance to you; but to me it is of some
consequence; and since you press me to tell you by our strict union
and friendship, which are so dear to me, I will. You think, and I
always believed so too, that this house, which our late father built
for us, was complete in every thing, and that nothing was wanting.
But this day I have learned that it wants three things, which would
render it so perfect, that no country-seat in the world could be
compared with it. These three things are, the speaking bird, the
singing tree, and the yellow water. After she had informed them
wherein consisted the excellency of these three rarities, A
religious woman, added she, has made this discovery to me, and told
me the place where they are to be found, and the way thither.
Perhaps you may imagine these things to be trifles, and of little
consequence to render our house complete, and that, without these
additions, it will always be thought fine enough with what it
already contains, and that we can do without them. You may think as
you please; but I cannot help telling you that I am persuaded they
are absolutely necessary, and I shall not be easy without them.
Therefore, whether you value them or not, I desire you to give me
your opinion, and consider what person you may think proper for me
to send on this conquest.

Sister, replied prince Bahman, nothing can concern you in which we
have not an equal interest. It is enough you have an earnest desire
for the things you mention, to oblige us to take the same interest;
but if you had not, we feel ourselves inclined of our own accord,
and for our own particular satisfaction. I am persuaded my brother
is of the same opinion, and therefore we ought to undertake this
conquest, as you call it; for the importance and singularity of it
deserves that name. I will take that charge upon myself; only tell
me the place, and the way to it, and I will defer my journey no
longer than till to-morrow.

Brother, said prince Perviz, it is not convenient that you, who are
the head and support of the family, should be absent so long. I
desire my sister would join with me to oblige you to abandon your
design, and allow me to undertake it. I hope to acquit myself as
well as you, and it will be a more regular proceeding. --I am
persuaded of your good-will, brother, replied prince Bahman, and
that you will acquit yourself as well as me in this journey; but I
have resolved on it, and will do it. You shall stay at home with our
sister, and I need not recommend her to you. He spent the remainder
of that day in making preparations for his journey, and informing
himself from the princess of the directions the devout woman left
her, that he might not miss his way.

The next morning early, prince Bahman mounted his horse, and prince
Perviz and the princess Parizade, who would see him set out,
embraced, and wished him a good journey. But in the midst of their
adieus, the princess recollected one thing, which she had not
thought on before. Brother, said she, I had quite forgotten the
accidents which attend travellers. Who knows whether I shall ever
see you again? Alight, I beseech you, and give up this journey. I
would rather be deprived of the sight and possession of the speaking
bird, singing-tree, and yellow water, than run the risk of never
seeing you more.

Sister, replied prince Bahman, smiling at the sudden fears of the
princess Parizade, my resolution is fixed, and was it not, I should
determine upon it now, and you must allow me to execute it. The
accidents you speak of befall only those who are unfortunate. It is
true, I may be of that number; but there are more who are not so
than who are, and I may be of the former number. But as events are
uncertain, and I may fall in this undertaking, all I can do is to
leave you this knife.

Then prince Bahman pulled a knife out of his pocket, and presenting
it in the sheath to the princess, said, Take this knife, sister, and
give yourself the trouble sometimes to pull it out of the sheath:
while you see it clean as it is now, it shall be a sign that I am
alive; but if you find it stained with blood, then you may believe
me dead, and indulge me with your prayers.

The princess Parizade could obtain nothing more of prince Bahman. He
bade adieu to her and prince Perviz for the last time, and rode away
well mounted, armed, and equipped. When he got into the road, he
never turned to the right hand nor to the left, but went directly
forwards toward India. The twentieth day he perceived on the road
side a hideous old man, who sat under a tree some small distance
from a thatched house, which was his retreat from the weather.

His eyebrows were as white as snow, and so was the hair of his head;
his whiskers covered his mouth, and his beard and hair reached down
to his feet. The nails of his hands and feet were grown to an
extensive length; his flat broad hat, like an umbrella, covered his
head. He had no clothes, but only a mat thrown round his body.

This old man was a dervise, who had for many years retired from the
world, and had neglected himself to give himself up entirely to the
service of God; so that at last he was become what we have described.

Prince Bahman, who had been all that morning very attentive to see
if he could meet with any body that could give him information of
the place he was going to, stopped when he came near the dervise, as
the first person he had met and alighted from off his horse, in
conformity to the directions the religious woman had given the
princess Parizade; and leading his horse by the bridle, advanced
towards him, and saluting him, said, God prolong your days, good
father, and grant you the accomplishment of your desires.

The dervise returned the prince’s salutation, but so
unintelligibly, that he could not understand one word he said:
prince Bahman perceiving that this difficulty proceeded from the
dervise’s whiskers hanging over his mouth, and unwilling to go any
farther without the instructions he wanted, he pulled out a pair of
scissors he had about him, and having tied his horse to a branch of
the tree, said to the dervise, Good dervise, I want to have some
talk with you; but your whiskers prevent my understanding what you
say; and if you will consent, I will cut off some part of them and
of your eyebrows, which disfigures you so much, that you look more
like a bear than a man.

The dervise did not oppose the prince, but let him do it; and when
the prince had cut off as much hair as he thought fit, he perceived
that the dervise had a good complexion, and that he did not seem so
old as he really was. Good dervise, said he, if I had a glass, I
would show you how young you look: you are now a man, but before,
nobody could tell what you were.

The kind behaviour of prince Bahman made the dervise smile, and
return his compliment. Sir, said be, whoever you are, I am
infinitely obliged to you for the good office you have done me, and
am ready to show my gratitude, by doing any thing in my power for
you. You must have alighted here upon some account or other. Tell me
what it is, and I will endeavour to serve you if I can.

Good dervise, replied prince Bahman, I have come a great way, and am
in search after the speaking bird, the singing tree, and the yellow
water; I know these three things are not far from hence, but cannot
tell exactly the place where they are to be found: if you know, I
conjure you to show me the way, that I may not mistake it, and lose
my labour after so long a journey.

The prince, while he spoke, observed that the dervise changed
countenance, held down his eyes, and looked very serious, and,
instead of making any reply, remained silent; which obliged him to
say to him again, Good father, I fancy you heard me; tell me whether
you know what I ask you, that I may not lose my time, and inform
myself somewhere else.

At last the dervise broke silence. Sir, said he to prince Bahman, I
know the way you ask of me; but the friendship which I conceived for
you the first moment I saw you, and which is grown stronger by the
service you have done me, kept me in suspense, whether I should give
you the satisfaction you desire. What motive can hinder you? replied
the prince; and what difficulties do you find in so doing? I will
tell you, replied the dervise; the danger you are going to expose
yourself to is greater than you can believe. A great number of
gentlemen, of as much bravery and courage as you can have, passed by
here, and asked me the same question you do now. When I had used all
my endeavours to persuade them to desist, they would not believe me;
at last, I have yielded to their importunities; I was compelled to
show them the way, and I can assure you they have all perished, and
I have not seen one come back again. Therefore, if you have any
regard for your life, take my advice, go no farther, return home.

Prince Bahman persisted in his resolution. I will not believe, said
he to the dervise, but that your advice is sincere. I am obliged to
you for the friendship you express for me; but whatever may be the
danger you tell me of, nothing shall make me change my intention:
whoever attacks me, I am well armed, and can say I am as brave as
any one. But they who shall attack you are not to be seen, replied
the dervise, for there are a great many of them; how will you defend
yourself against invisible persons? It is no matter, answered the
prince; all you say shall not persuade me to do any thing contrary
to my duty. Since you know the way, I conjure you once more to tell
me, and not refuse me that favour.

When the dervise found he could not prevail upon prince Bahman, and
that he was obstinately bent to pursue his journey, notwithstanding
the wholesome advice he gave him, he put his hand into a bag that
lay by him, and pulled out a bowl, which he presented to him. Since
I cannot prevail on you to hear me and take my advice, said he, take
this bowl, and when you are on horseback throw it before you, and
follow it to the foot of a mountain, where it will stop. As soon as
the bowl stops, alight, and leave your horse with the bridle over
his neck, and he will stand in the same place till you return. As
you go up the hill, you will see on your right and left hand a great
quantity of large black stones, and will hear on all sides of you a
confusion of voices, which will say a thousand injurious things to
you to discourage you, and prevent your climbing up to the top of
the hill: but take care, and be not afraid; and, above all things,
do not turn your head to look behind you; for in that instant you
will be changed into such a black stone as those you see, which are
all so many gentlemen, who have failed in this enterprise, as I told
you. If you escape the danger which I give you but a slight
description of, that you might reflect on it, and get to the top of
the mountain, you will see a cage, and in that cage is the bird you
seek: ask him where are the singing tree and the yellow water, and
he will tell you. I have nothing more to say; this is what you have
to do, and the danger you have to avoid; but if you would believe
me, you would take my advice, and not expose your life. Consider
once more while you have time, that the difficulty is almost
insuperable, and attached to a condition which may be counteracted
even by inadvertence, as you may easily comprehend.

I am very much obliged to you for your repeated advice, replied
prince Bahman, after he had received the bowl, but I cannot follow
it. However, I will endeavour to conform myself to that part of it
which bids me not to look behind me as I go up, and I hope to come
and see you again soon, and thank you more when I have got what I am
in search after. After these words, to which the dervise made no
other answer than that he should be overjoyed to see him again, and
wished that might be the case, he mounted his horse, took his leave
of the dervise with a low bow, and threw the bowl before him.

The bowl rolled away to the last with as much swiftness as when
prince Bahman first delivered it out of his hand, which obliged him
to put his horse to the same pace to follow it without losing sight
of it, and when it came to the foot of the mountain which the
dervise named, it stopped. The prince alighted from off his horse,
which never stirred from the spot, though he had the bridle on his
neck; and having first surveyed the mountain, and seen the black
stones, he began to climb up it; but he had not gone four steps,
before he heard the voices mentioned by the dervise, though he could
see nobody. Some said, Where is that fool going? where is he going?
what would he have? do not let him pass. Others, Stop him, catch
him, kill him; and others with a voice like thunder, Thief!
assassin! murderer! while some in a gibing tone, cried, No, no, do
not hurt him; let the pretty fellow pass; the cage and bird are kept
for him.

Notwithstanding all those troublesome voices, prince Bahman mounted
with courage and resolution for some time, but the voices increasing
with so loud a din so near him, both behind and before, at last he
was seized with fear, his legs trembled under him, he staggered, and
presently finding that his strength failed him, he forgot the
dervise’s advice, turned about to run down the hill, and was that
instant changed into a black stone, --a metamorphosis which had
happened to so many before him, who had attempted the same thing.
His horse likewise underwent the same change.

From the time of prince Bahman’s departure, the princess Parizade
always wore the knife and sheath in her girdle, and pulled it out
several times in a day to know whether her brother was alive. She
had the consolation to understand he was in perfect health, and to
talk of him frequently with prince Perviz, who sometimes prevented
her by asking her what news.

On the fatal day that prince Bahman was metamorphosed into a stone,
as prince Perviz and the princess were talking together in the
evening, as usual, the prince desired his sister to pull out the
knife, to know how their brother did. The princess drew out the
knife, and looking upon it, and seeing the blood run down the point,
was seized with so much horror and grief, that she threw it down.
Ah! my dear brother, cried she; I have been the cause of your death,
and shall never see you more! How unhappy am I! Why did I tell you
of the speaking bird, singing tree, and yellow water? or rather, of
what importance was it to me to know whether the religious woman
thought this house ugly or handsome, or complete or not? I wish to
heaven she had never addressed herself to me! Deceitful hypocrite!
added she, is this the return you have made me for the kind
reception I gave you? Why did you tell me of a bird, a tree, and a
water, which, imaginary as I am persuaded they are, by my dear
brother’s death, yet disturb me, by your enchantment.

Prince Perviz was as much afflicted at the death of prince Bahman as
the princess; but not to waste time in needless regret, as he knew
by the princess’s sorrow that she still passionately desired the
possession of the speaking bird, the singing tree, and the golden
water, he interrupted her, and said, Sister, our regret for our
brother Bahman is vain and useless, for our grief and lamentations
cannot restore him to life; it is the will of God, and we must
submit to it, and adore the decrees of the Almighty, without
searching into them. Why should you now doubt of the truth of what
the holy woman told you? do you think she spoke to you of three
things that were not in being? and that she invented them on purpose
to deceive you, who had given her no cause to do so, but received
her with so much goodness and civility? Let us rather believe that
our brother’s death is owing to some fault of his, or some
accident, which we cannot conceive. It ought not therefore to
prevent us from pursuing our object. I offered to go this journey,
and am in the same mind still; his example has no effect upon my
resolution; to-morrow I will go myself.

The princess did all she could to dissuade prince Perviz, conjuring
him not to expose her to the danger of losing two brothers instead
of one; but he was resolved, and all the remonstrances she could
urge had no effect upon him. Before he went, that she might know
what success he had, as she did that of his brother by the knife, he
left her a string of a hundred pearls, telling her, that if they
would not run when she told them upon the string, but remain fixed,
that should be a certain sign he had undergone the same late as his
brother; but at the same time told her, he hoped that would never
happen, but that he should have the happiness to see her again, to
their mutual satisfaction.

Prince Perviz, on the twentieth day from his setting out, met with
the same dervise in the same place his brother Bahman had done
before him. He went directly up to him, and after he had saluted
him, asked him if he could tell him where to find the speaking bird,
the singing tree, and the golden water? The dervise made the same
difficulties and remonstrances he had done to prince Bahman, telling
him, that a young gentleman, who very much resembled him, was with
him a short time before; that, overcome by his importunity and
pressing instances, he showed him the way, gave turn a guide, and
told him how he should act to succeed; but that he had not seen him
since, and doubted not but he had shared the same fate as all before
him.

Good dervise, answered prince Perviz, I know whom you speak of; he
was my elder brother, and I am informed of the certainty of his
death, but know not what it was. I can tell you, replied the
dervise: he was changed into a black stone, as all I speak of have
been; and you must expect the same change, unless you observe more
exactly than he has done the good advice I gave him, in case you
persist in your resolution, which I once more entreat you to
renounce.

Dervise, said prince Perviz, I cannot enough express how much I am
obliged to you for the care you take of my life, who am a stranger
to you, and have done nothing to deserve your kindness: but I must
tell you, I have thoroughly considered this enterprise before I
undertook it, and I cannot give it up: therefore I beg of you to do
me the same favour you have done my brother. Perhaps I may have
better success in following the directions I expect from you. Since
I cannot prevail with you, said the dervise, nor persuade you to
give up your obstinate resolution, if my age did not prevent me, and
I could stand, I would get up to reach you a bowl I have here, which
will show you the way.

Without giving the dervise time to say more, the prince alighted
from his horse, and went up to the dervise, who had taken a bowl out
of his bag, in which he had a great many others, and gave it him,
with the same directions he had given prince Bahman; and, after
warning him not to be frightened at the voices he should hear,
without seeing any body, however threatening they might be, but to
continue his way up the hill till he saw the cage and bird, he let
him go.

Prince Perviz thanked the dervise, and when he had remounted his
horse, and taken his leave, he threw the bowl before his horse, and
spurring him at the same time, followed it. When the bowl came to
the bottom of the hill, it stopped, and the prince got off his
horse, and stood some time to recollect the dervise’s directions.
He encouraged himself, and began to walk up with a resolution to
reach the top; but before he had gone above six steps, he heard a
voice, which seemed to be very near him, as of a man behind him,
say, in an insulting tone, Stay, rash youth, that I may punish you
for your boldness.

Upon this affront, the prince forgetting the dervise’s advice,
clapped his hand upon his sword and drew it, and turned about to
revenge himself; but had scarce time to see that nobody followed
him, before he and his horse were changed into black stones.

In the mean time the princess Parizade, several times a day after
her brother Perviz set out, strung over her chaplet which she
received from his hand the day he set out; and when she had nothing
else to do, she told the grains over her fingers, one after another.
She did not omit it at night, but when she went to bed put it about
her neck; and in the morning when she awoke, counted over the pearls
again to see if they would slide.

The day that prince Perviz was changed into a stone, she was pulling
over the pearls as she used to do, when all of a sudden she could
not stir them, and never doubted that it was a certain token that
the prince her brother was dead. As she had determined before what
to do, in case it should so happen, she lost no time in outward show
of grief, which she concealed as much as possible; but having
disguised herself in man’s apparel, armed and equipped, she
mounted her horse the next morning, having told her servants she
should return in two or three days, and took the same road her
brothers had done before her.

The princess, who had been used to ride on horseback in hunting,
supported the fatigue of so long a journey better than other ladies
could have done; and as she made the same days’ journeys as her
brothers, she also met with the dervise on the twentieth day. When
she came near him, she alighted off her horse, and leading him by
the bridle, went and sat down by the dervise, and after she had
saluted him, she said, Good dervise, give me leave to rest myself by
you; and do me the favour to tell me if you have not heard that
there are somewhere hereabouts a speaking bird, a singing tree, and
golden water.

Madam, answered the dervise, for so I must call you, since by your
voice I know you to be a woman disguised in man’s apparel, I thank
you for your compliment, and receive the honour you do me with great
pleasure. I know the place very well where these things you speak of
are to be found: but what makes you ask me this question?

Good dervise, replied the princess, I have had such an advantageous
relation of them given me, that I have a very great desire to
possess them. --Madam, replied the dervise, you have been told the
truth. These things are more singular and surprising than they have
been represented to you, but you have not been acquainted with the
difficulties which must be surmounted in order to obtain them. If
you had been fully informed of them, you would not have undertaken
so troublesome and dangerous an enterprise. Take my advice; go no
farther; return, and do not urge me to contribute towards your ruin.

Good father, said the princess, I have come a great way, and should
be sorry to return home without executing my design. You talk of
difficulties, and danger of my life; but you do not tell me what
those difficulties are, and wherein the danger consists. This is
what I desire to know, that I may consider of it, and judge whether
I can or cannot trust my courage and strength to undertake it.

Then the dervise repeated to the princess Parizade what he had said
to the princes Bahman and Perviz, exaggerating the difficulties of
climbing up to the top of the mountain, where she was to make
herself mistress of the bird, which would inform her of the singing
tree and golden water; the noise and din of the terrible threatening
voices which she would hear on all sides of her, without seeing any
body; and in short, the great quantity of black stones, alone
sufficient to strike terror into her and every one else. He
entreated her to reflect, that those stones were so many brave
gentlemen, so metamorphosed, for omitting to observe the principal
condition for success in that undertaking, which was, not to look
behind them before they had got possession of the cage.

When the dervise had done, the princess replied, By what I
comprehend from your discourse, the difficulty of succeeding in this
affair is, first, the getting up to the cage, without being
frightened at the terrible din of voices I shall hear; and secondly,
not to look behind me: for this last, I hope I shall be mistress
enough of myself to observe it. As to the first, I own that those
voices, such as you represent them to be, are capable of striking
terror into the most undaunted; but as in all enterprises and
dangers every one may use contrivance, I desire to know of you if I
may make use of it in one of so great importance to me? And what is
that you would make use of, said the dervise. To stop my ears with
cotton, answered the princess, that the voices, however loud and
terrible they may be, may make less impression on my imagination,
and my mind may remain free from that disturbance which might make
me lose the use of my reason.

Madam, replied the dervise, of all the persons who have addressed
themselves to me, to ask the way, I do not know that ever any one
made use of the contrivance you propose. All I know is, they all
perished. If you persist in your design, you may make the
experiment. You will be fortunate if it succeeds; but I would advise
you not to expose yourself to the danger.

My good father, replied the princess, nothing prevents my persisting
in my design. I am sure my contrivance will succeed, and am resolved
to try the experiment. Nothing remains for me but to know which way
I must go, a favour I conjure you not to refuse me. The dervise
exhorted her again, for the last time, to consider well what she was
going to do; but finding her resolute, he took out a bowl, and
presenting it to her, said, Take this bowl; mount your horse again,
and when you have thrown it before you, follow it through all its
windings, till it stops at the bottom of the mountain, and there do
you stop, light off your horse, and ascend the mountain. Go, you
know the rest; but be sure not to forget to avail yourself of what I
have told you.

After the princess Parizade had thanked the dervise, and taken her
leave of him, she mounted her horse, threw the bowl before her, and
followed it till it stopped at the foot of the mountain.

The princess alighted from her horse, stopped her ears with cotton;
and after she had well examined the way she was to keep to get up to
the top, she began with a moderate pace, and walked up with
intrepidity. She heard the voices, and perceived the great service
the cotton was to her. The higher she went, the louder and more
numerous the voices seemed; but they were not capable of making any
impression on her. She heard a great many affronting speeches, and
raillery very disagreeable to a woman, which she only laughed at. I
mind not, said she to herself, all that can be said, were it worse;
I only laugh at them, and shall pursue my way. At last she got so
high, that she began to perceive the cage and bird, which
endeavoured, with the voices, to frighten her, crying in a
thundering voice, notwithstanding the smallness of its size, Retire,
fool, and come no higher.

The princess, encouraged more by this object, redoubled her haste,
and soon saw herself just at her journey’s end; she got to the top
of the mountain, where the ground was level; and running directly to
the cage, and clapping her hand upon it, cried, Bird, I have you, in
spite of you, and you shall not escape me.

When the princess Parizade was pulling the cotton out of her ears,
the bird said to her, Brave lady, be not angry with me for joining
with those who exerted themselves to preserve my liberty. Though
kept in a cage, I was content with my condition; but since I am
destined to be a slave, I would rather be yours than any other
person’s in the world, since you have obtained me so courageously
and so worthily. From this instant I swear inviolable fidelity to
you, and an entire submission to your commands. I know who you are,
and will tell you. You do not know yourself who you are; but the
time will come when I shall do you a piece of service, which I hope
you will think yourself obliged to me for. For a proof of my
sincerity, tell me what you desire, and I am ready to obey you.

The princess’s joy was the more inexpressible, because the
conquest she had made had cost her the lives of two beloved
brothers, and given her more trouble and danger than she could have
imagined before she tried it, notwithstanding what the dervise had
represented to her. Bird, said she, it was my intention to have told
you that I wish for many things which are of the last importance to
me; and am overjoyed that you have shown your good will, and
prevented me. I have been told that there is not far off a golden
water, the property of which is very wonderful; before all things, I
ask you to tell me where it is. The bird showed her the place, which
was just by, and she went and filled a little silver flagon which
she had brought along with her. She returned to the bird, and said,
Bird, this is not enough; I want also the singing tree: tell me
where it is. Turn about, said the bird, and you will see behind you
a wood, where you will find this tree. The princess went into the
wood, and by the harmonious concert she heard, soon knew the tree
among many others, but it was very large and high. She came back to
the bird, and said to it, Bird, I have found the singing tree, but I
can neither pull it up by the roots nor carry it. The bird replied,
It is not necessary that you should take it up by the roots; it is
enough that you break off a branch, and carry it to plant in your
garden: it will take root as soon as it is put into the earth, and
in a little time will grow to as fine a tree as this you see.

When the princess Parizade had in her hand the three things which
the religious woman had told her of, and for which she had conceived
so great a desire, she said again to the bird, Bird, all you have
done for me yet is not enough. You have been the cause of the death
of my two brothers, who must be among the black stones which I saw
as I came up the hill. I wish to take them home with me.

The bird seemed reluctant to satisfy the princess in this point,
and, indeed, made some difficulty to do it. Bird, said the princess,
remember you told me that you were my slave. You are so; and your
life is at my disposal. I cannot controvert that truth, answered the
bird; but, although what you now ask of me is more difficult than
all the rest, yet I will do it for you. --Cast your eyes around,
added he, and look if you can see a little pitcher. I see it
already, said the princess. Take it, then, said he, and as you go
down the hill, spill a little of the water that is in it upon every
black stone, and that will be the way to find your brothers again.

The princess Parizade took up the pitcher, and carried with her the
cage and bird, the flagon of golden water, and the branch of the
singing tree; and as she went down the hill, spilt a little of the
water on every black stone, which was changed immediately into a
man; and as she did not miss one stone, all the horses, both of the
princes her brothers, and of the other gentlemen, resumed their
former shape. She presently knew prince Bahman and prince Perviz, as
they did her, and ran to embrace her. She returned their embraces,
and expressed her amazement. What do you here, my dear brothers?
said she. They told her they had been asleep. Yes, replied she, and
if it had not been for me, perhaps you might have slept till the day
of judgment. Do not you remember that you came here to fetch the
speaking bird, the singing tree, and the yellow water? and did not
you see, as you came along, the place covered with black stones?
Look and see if there be any now. The gentlemen you see here, and
their horses which surround us, and you yourselves, were these black
stones. If you desire to know how this wonder was performed,
continued she, showing the pitcher, which she set down at the foot
of the mountain, having no further use for it, it was done by virtue
of the water which was in this pitcher, with which I sprinkled every
stone. After I had made this speaking bird (which you see in this
cage) my slave, by his directions I found out the singing tree, a
branch of which I have now in my hand, and the yellow water, which
this flagon is filled with; but being still unwilling to return home
without taking you with me, I constrained the bird, by the power I
had over him, to afford me the means. He told me where to find this
pitcher, and the use I was to make of it.

Prince Bahman and prince Perviz knew by this discourse the
obligation they had to the princess their sister, as did all the
other gentlemen, who were collected round, and heard all that was
said; and expressed to the princes, that, far from envying her
happiness in the conquest she had made, and which they all aspired
to, they thought that they could not any otherwise acknowledge the
favour she had done them, or better express their gratitude to her
for restoring them to life again, than by declaring themselves all
her slaves, and that they were ready to obey her in whatever she
should command.

Gentlemen, replied the princess, if you had given any attention to
my discourse, you might have observed, that I had no other intention
in what I have done than to find out my brothers again; therefore,
if you have received any benefit, you have no obligation to me for
it, and I have no further share in your compliment than your
politeness towards me, and I return you my thanks, as I ought. In
other respects, I look upon each of you individually as persons
free, as you were before your misfortunes; and I rejoice with you
for the happiness which has accrued to you by my means. Let us,
however, stay no longer in a place where we have nothing to detain
us, but mount our horses, and return to our respective homes.

The princess Parizade showed them the way. She went and took her
horse, which stood in the same place where she left him. Before she
mounted, prince Bahman, who would help her, desired her to give him
the cage to carry. Brother, replied the princess, the bird is my
slave, and I will carry him myself; if you will take the pains to
carry the branch of the singing tree, there it is; only hold the
cage while I get on horseback. When she had mounted her horse, and
prince Bahman had given her the cage, she turned about, and said to
prince Perviz, I leave the flagon of golden water to your care, if
it will not be too much trouble for you to carry. Prince Perviz took
charge of it with pleasure.

When prince Bahman and prince Perviz, and all the gentlemen, had
mounted their horses, the princess Parizade waited for some of them
to lead the way. The two princes paid that compliment to the
gentlemen, and they again to the princess, who, finding that none of
them would accept of the honour, but that it was reserved for her,
addressed herself to them, and said, Gentlemen, I expect that some
of you should lead the way; to which one who was nearest to her, in
the name of the rest, replied, Madam, were we ignorant of the
respect due to your sex, yet, after what you have done for us, there
is no respect we would not willingly pay you, notwithstanding your
modesty; we entreat you no longer to deprive us of the happiness of
following you.

Gentlemen, said the princess, I do not deserve the honour you do me,
and accept it only because you desire it. At the same time, she led
the way, and the two princes and gentlemen followed her without the
least distinction.

This illustrious company called upon the dervise, as they passed by,
to thank him for his good reception and wholesome advice, which they
all found to be sincere. But he was dead; whether of old age, or
because he was no longer necessary to show the way to the obtaining
the three rarities which the princess Parizade was possessed of, did
not appear. They pursued their way, but lessened in their numbers
every day. The gentlemen, who, as we said before, had come from
different countries, after severally repeating their obligations to
the princess and her brothers, took leave of them one after another
as they approached the road by which they had come. The princess and
the two princes made the best of their way home.

As soon as the princess came home, she placed the cage in the
garden, just by the hall; and the bird no sooner began to sing, but
he was surrounded by nightingales, chaffinches, larks, linnets,
goldfinches, and a great many birds of the country. As for the
branch of the singing tree, it was no sooner set in the midst of the
parterre, a little distance from the house, but it took root, and in
a short time became a large tree; the leaves of which soon gave as
harmonious a concert as those of the tree from which it was
gathered. As to the flagon of the yellow golden water, a large basin
of beautiful marble was made in the midst of the parterre; and when
it was finished, the princess poured into it all the yellow water
that was in the flagon, which increased and swelled so much, that it
soon reached up to the edges of the basin, and afterwards formed in
the middle a fountain twenty feet high, which fell again into the
basin perpetually, without running over.

The report of these wonders was presently spread abroad in that
neighbourhood; and as the doors of the house and those of the
gardens were shut to nobody, a great number of people came to admire
them.

Some days after, when the princes Bahman and Perviz had recovered
from the fatigue of their journeys, they resumed their former way of
living; and as their usual diversion was hunting, they mounted their
horses, and went for the first time since their return, not in their
own park, but two or three leagues from their house. As they pursued
their sport, the sultan of Persia came up hunting on the same spot
of ground that they had made choice of. When they perceived by the
number of horsemen in different places that he would soon be up,
they resolved to leave off their chase, and retire to avoid meeting
him; but in the very road they took, they chanced to meet him in so
narrow a way, that they could not turn away nor retreat without
being seen. In their surprise, they had only time to alight, and
prostrate themselves before the sultan, without lifting up their
heads to look at him. The sultan, who saw they were as well mounted
and dressed as if they had belonged to his court, had the curiosity
to see their faces. He stopped, and commanded them to rise. The
princes rose up, and stood before the sultan with an easy and
graceful air, accompanied with respectful, modest countenances. The
sultan took some time to view them from head to foot, before he
spoke; and after he had admired their good air and mien, he asked
them who they were, and where they lived.

Sir, said prince Bahman, we are the sons of your majesty’s late
intendant of your gardens; and we live in a house which he built, a
little before he died, for us to live in, till we should be fit to
serve your majesty, and ask of you some employment when opportunity
offered.

By what I perceive from you, replied the sultan, you love hunting.
Sir, answered prince Bahman, it is our common exercise, and what
none of your majesty’s subjects, who intend to bear arms in your
armies, ought, according to the ancient custom of the kingdom, to
neglect. The sultan, charmed with so prudent an answer, said, Since
it is so, I should be glad to see you hunt game; make choice of what
you like.

The princes mounted their horses again, and followed the sultan; but
had not gone far before they met a great many wild beasts together.
Prince Bahman chose a lion, and prince Perviz a bear; and pursued
them with so much intrepidity, that the sultan was surprised. They
came up with their game nearly at the same time, and darted their
javelins with so much skill and address, that they pierced, the one
the lion, and the other the bear, through and through, so that the
sultan, with his own eyes, saw them fall a little time one after the
other. Immediately afterwards prince Bahman pursued another bear,
and prince Perviz another lion, and killed them in a short time, and
would have beat out for fresh game, but the sultan would not let
them, but sent to them to come to him. When they came near him, he
said, If I would have given you leave, you would soon have destroyed
all my game: but it is not that which I would preserve, but your
persons; for I am so very well assured your bravery may one time or
other be serviceable to me, that from this moment your lives will be
always dear to me.

The sultan Khosrouschah, in short, conceived so great a kindness for
the two princes, that he invited them immediately to make him a
visit; to which prince Bahman replied, Your majesty does us an
honour we do not deserve; and we beg you will excuse us.

The sultan, who could not comprehend what reason the princes could
have to refuse this token of his favour, asked and pressed them to
tell him why they excused themselves. Sir, said prince Bahman, we
have a sister younger than us, with whom we live in so perfect a
union, that we undertake and do nothing before we consult her, nor
she any thing without asking our advice. I commend your brotherly
affection, answered the sultan. Consult your sister, meet me here
to-morrow hunting, and give me an answer.

The princes went home; but not only forgot to speak of their
adventure in meeting the sultan, and hunting with him, but to tell
the princess the honour he had done them, by asking them to go home
with him; yet did not the next morning fail to meet him at the place
appointed. Well, said the sultan, have you spoken to your sister?
And has she consented to the pleasure I expect of seeing you? The
princes looked at each other and blushed. Sir, said prince Bahman,
we beg your majesty to excuse us; for both my brother and I forgot.
Then remember to-day, replied the sultan, and be sure to bring me an
answer to-morrow.

The princes were guilty of the same fault a second time, and the
sultan was so good-natured as to forgive their negligence; but to
prevent their forgetfulness the third time, he pulled three little
golden balls out of a purse, and put them into prince Bahman’s
bosom. These balls, said he, smiling, will prevent your forgetting a
third time what I wish you to do for my sake; since the noise they
will make by falling on the floor, when you undress yourself, will
remind you, if you do not recollect it before. The event happened
just as the sultan foresaw; and without these balls the princes had
not thought of speaking to their sister of this affair. For as
prince Bahman unloosed his girdle to go to bed, the balls dropped on
the floor, and thereupon he ran into prince Perviz’s chamber, and
both went to princess Parizade’s apartment before she was got into
bed, and after they had asked her pardon for coming at so
unseasonable a time, they told her all the circumstances of their
meeting the sultan.

The princess Parizade was somewhat surprised at this news. Your
meeting with the sultan, said she, is very happy and honourable, and
may in the end be very advantageous to you, but it is very
disagreeable and distressing to me. It was on my account, I know,
you refused the sultan, and I am infinitely obliged to you for it. I
know by this your friendship is perfectly consistent with mine,
since you would rather be guilty of incivility towards the sultan,
than break the brotherly union we have sworn to each other. You
judged right, that if you had once gone, you would insensibly have
been engaged to leave me, to devote yourselves to him. But do you
think it an easy matter absolutely to refuse the sultan what he
seems so earnestly to desire? Sultans will be obeyed in their
desires, and it may be dangerous to oppose them; therefore, if to
follow my inclination, I should dissuade you from showing the
complaisance he expects from you, it may expose you to his
resentment, and may render myself and you miserable. These are my
sentiments: but before we conclude on any thing, let us consult the
speaking bird, and hear what he says; he is penetrating, and has
promised his assistance in all difficulties.

The princess Parizade sent for the cage, and after she had related
the fact to the bird in the presence of her brothers, she asked him
what they should do in this perplexity. The bird answered, The
princes your brothers must conform to the sultan’s pleasure, and
in their turn invite him to come and see your house.

But, bird, replied the princess, my brothers and I love one another,
and our friendship is unparalleled: will not this step be injurious
to that friendship? Not at all, replied the bird; it will become
stronger thereby. Then, answered the princess, the sultan will see
me. The bird told her it was necessary he should see her, and that
every thing would go better afterwards.

Next morning the princes met the sultan hunting, who, at as great a
distance as he could make himself be heard, asked them, if they had
remembered to speak to their sister. Prince Bahman drew near, and
answered, Sir, your majesty may dispose of us as you please; we are
ready to obey you; for we have not only obtained our sister’s
consent with great ease, but she took it amiss that we should pay
her that deference in a matter wherein our duty to your majesty was
concerned. But she is so deserving of it, that if we have offended,
we hope you will pardon us. Do not be uneasy upon that account,
replied the sultan; so far from taking amiss what you have done, I
approve of it, and hope you will have the same deference and
attachment to my person, if I have ever so little share in your
friendship. The princes, confounded at the sultan’s goodness,
returned no other answer but by a low bow, to show the great respect
with which they received it.

The sultan, contrary to his usual custom, did not hunt long that
day. Presuming that the princes possessed wit equal to their courage
and bravery, he longed with impatience to discourse with them more
at liberty. He made them ride on each side of him, an honour which,
without speaking of the principal courtiers who accompanied him, was
envied by the grand vizier, who was very much mortified to see them
preferred before him.

When the sultan entered his capital, the eyes of the people, who
stood in crowds in the streets, were fixed only upon the two princes
Bahman and Perviz; and they were earnest to know who they might be,
whether foreigners or natives.

All, however, agreed in wishing that the sultan had been blessed
with two such handsome lovely princes, and said, he might have had
children as old, if the sultaness, who had suffered the punishment
of her misfortune, had been more fortunate in her lyings-in.

The first thing that the sultan did when he arrived at the palace,
was to carry the princes into the principal apartments; who praised,
without affectation, like persons conversant in such matters, the
beauty and symmetry of the rooms, and the richness of the furniture
and ornaments. Afterwards a magnificent repast was served up, and
the sultan made them sit at the same table with him, which they at
first refused; but finding that it was his pleasure they obeyed.

The sultan, who had himself a great deal of wit, and had made a
considerable progress in the sciences, and particularly in history,
foresaw that the princes, out of modesty and respect, would not take
the liberty of beginning any conversation. Therefore, to give them
an opportunity, he began, and furnished them with subjects all
dinner-time. But whatever he turned the discourse on, they showed so
much wit, judgment, and discernment, that he was struck with
admiration. Were these my own children said he to himself, and I had
improved their talents by suitable education, they could not have
been more ingenious or better informed. In short, he took so great
pleasure in their conversation, that after having sat at table
longer than usual, he went into his closet, where he discoursed a
long time with them, and at last said to them, I never believed that
there were, among my subjects in the country, young gentlemen so
well brought up, so lively, so capable; and I never was better
pleased in my life with any conversation than yours: but it is time
now we should regale our minds with some diversions of my court; and
as nothing is more capable of enlivening the mind than music, you
shall hear a vocal and instrumental concert, which may not be
disagreeable to you.

The sultan no sooner spoke for them, but the musicians, who had
orders to attend, entered, and answered fully the expectations the
princes had entertained of their abilities. After the concerts, an
excellent farce was acted, and the entertainment was concluded by
dancers of both sexes.

The two princes, seeing night drawing on apace, prostrated
themselves at the sultan’s feet; and having first thanked him for
the favours and honours he had heaped on them, asked his leave to
retire; which was granted them by the sultan, who, dismissing them,
said, I give you leave to go; but remember I brought you to the
palace myself only to show you the way; you will be always welcome,
and the oftener you come, you will do me the greater pleasure.

Before they went out of the sultan’s presence, prince Bahman said,
Sir, may we presume to request that your majesty will do us and our
sister the favour to pass by our house, and rest and refresh
yourself after your fatigue, the first time you take the diversion
of hunting in that neighbourhood? It is not worthy your presence;
but monarchs sometimes have vouchsafed to take shelter in a cottage.
Gentlemen, replied the sultan, your house cannot be otherwise than
beautiful, and worthy of you. I will call and see it with pleasure,
which will be the greater, to have for my hosts you and your sister,
who is already dear to me before I have seen her, from the account
you give me of the rare qualities with which she is endowed: and
this satisfaction I will defer no longer than to-morrow morning. I
will be early there to-morrow morning, at the same place where I
shall never forget that I first saw you. Meet me, and you shall be
my guides.

When the princes Bahman and Perviz went home, they gave the princess
Parizade an account of the honourable reception the sultan had given
them; and withal told her that they had invited him to do them the
honour, as he passed by, to call at their house; and that he had
appointed the next day.

If it be so, replied the princess, we must think presently of
preparing a repast fit for his majesty; and for that end, I think it
would be proper we should consult the speaking bird; he will tell
us, perhaps, what meats the sultan likes best. The princes approved
of her thought, and after they retired she consulted the bird alone.
Bird, said she, the sultan will do us the honour to-morrow to come
and see our house, and we are to entertain him; tell us what we
shall do to acquit ourselves to his satisfaction.

Good mistress, replied the bird, you have excellent cooks, let them
do the best they can; but above all things, let them prepare a dish
of cucumbers, stuffed full of pearls, which must be set before the
sultan in the first course before all other meats.

Cucumbers stuffed full of pearls! cried princess Parizade, with
amazement; surely, bird, you do not know what you say; it is an
unheard-of dish. The sultan may admire it as a piece of
magnificence, but he will sit down to table to eat, and not to
admire pearls; besides, the pearls I am worth are not enough for
such a dish.

Mistress, said the bird, do what I say, and be not uneasy at what
shall happen. Nothing but good will follow. As to the pearls, go
early to-morrow morning to the foot of the first tree on your right
hand, in the park, and dig under it, and you will find more than you
want.

That night the princess ordered a gardener to be ready to wait on
her, and the next morning early took him with her, and carried him
to the tree the bird told her of, and bade him dig at its foot. When
the gardener came to a certain depth, he found some resistance to
the spade, and presently discovered a gold box about a foot square,
which he showed the princess. This, said she, is what I brought you
for; take care not to hurt it with the spade.

When the gardener took up the box, he gave it into the princess’s
hands, who, as it was only fastened with neat little hasps, soon
opened it, and found it full of pearls of a moderate size; but equal
and fit for the use that was to be made of them. Very well satisfied
with having found this treasure, after she had shut the box again,
she put it under her arm, and went back to the house, while the
gardener threw the earth into the hole at the foot of the tree as
before.

The princes Bahman and Perviz, who, as they were dressing themselves
in their own apartments, saw the princess their sister in the garden
earlier than usual, as soon as they could get out, went to her, and
met her as she was coming back, with a gold box under her arm, which
very much surprised them. Sister, said Bahman, you carried nothing
with you when we saw you before with the gardener, and now we see
you have got a golden box: is this some treasure found by the
gardener, and did he come and tell you of it?

No, brother, answered the princess, I carried the gardener to the
place where this coffer was hid, and showed him where to dig: but
you will be more amazed when you see what it holds.

The princess opened the box, and when the princes saw it was full of
pearls, which, though small, were of great value, they asked her how
she came to the knowledge of this treasure. Brothers, said she, if
nothing more pressing calls you elsewhere, come with me, and I will
tell you. What more pressing business, said prince Perviz, can we
have than to be informed of what concerns us so much? We have
nothing to do but meet you. The princess, as they returned back to
the house, gave them an account of her consulting the bird, as they
had agreed she should, and the answer he gave her; the objection she
raised to preparing a dish of cucumbers stuffed full of pearls, and
pointed out the manner of doing it, and how he had told her where to
find this box. The princes and princess formed many conjectures to
penetrate into what the bird could mean by ordering them to prepare
such a dish; and after much conversation, though they could not by
any means guess at his reason for so doing, they nevertheless agreed
to follow his advice exactly.

As soon as the princess got into the house, she called for the head
cook; and after she had given him directions about the entertainment
for the sultan, she said to him, Besides all this you must dress an
extraordinary dish for the sultan’s own eating, which nobody else
must have any thing to do with besides yourself. This dish must be
of cucumbers stuffed with these pearls; and at the same time she
opened the box, and showed him the pearls.

The chief cook, who had never heard of such a dish, started back,
and showed by his looks his thoughts; which the princess penetrating
into, said, I see you take me to be mad to order such a dish, which
you never heard of, and which one may say with certainty was never
made. I know this as well as you; but I am not mad, and give you
these orders with the most perfect recollection. You must go and
invent and do the best you can, and bring me back what pearls are
left. The cook could make no reply, but took the box and went away
with it: and afterwards the princess gave directions to all the
servants to have every thing in order, both in the house and
gardens, to receive the sultan.

Next day the two princes went to the place appointed; and as soon as
the sultan of Persia came, the chase began, which lasted till the
heat of the sun obliged him to leave off. While prince Bahman stayed
to conduct the sultan to their house, prince Perviz rode before to
show the way, and when he came in sight of the house, spurred his
horse, to inform the princess Parizade that the sultan was coming;
but she had been told by some servants whom she placed to give
notice before, and the prince found her waiting ready to receive him.

When the sultan entered the court-yard, and alighted at the portico,
the princess Parizade came and threw herself at his feet, and the
two princes informed him she was their sister, and besought him to
accept of her respects.

The sultan stooped to help her up, and after he had gazed some time
on her beauty, and, struck with her good person, noble air, and a
_je ne scai quoi_, which seemed different from the country where she
lived, he said, The brothers are worthy of the sister, and she
worthy of them; and to judge of her understanding by her person, I
am not amazed that the brothers would do nothing without their
sister’s consent; but, added he, I hope to be better acquainted
with you, madam, after I have seen the house.

Sir, said the princess, it is only a plain country-house, fit for
such people as we are, who live retired from the great world. It is
not to be compared with houses in great cities, much less with
magnificent palaces of sultans. I cannot perfectly agree with you in
opinion, said the sultan, very obligingly, for its first appearance
makes me suspect you; however, I will not pass my judgment upon it
till I have seen it all; therefore be pleased to conduct me through
the apartments.

The princess led the sultan through all the rooms but the hall; and,
after he had considered them all very attentively, and admired their
variety, My fair one, said he to the princess Parizade, do you call
this a country-house? The finest and largest cities would soon be
deserted, if all country-houses were like yours. I am no longer
surprised that you take so much delight in it, and despise the town.
Now let me see the garden, which I doubt not is answerable to the
house.

The princess opened a door which led into the garden; and the first
object that presented itself to the sultan’s view was the golden
fountain. Surprised at so rare a sight, he asked from whence came
that wonderful water, which gave so much pleasure to behold; where
was its source? and by what art it was made to play so high, that he
thought nothing in the world was to be compared to it? He said he
would presently take a nearer view of it.

Then the princess led him to the spot where the harmonious tree was
planted; and there the sultan heard a concert, which was different
from all the concerts he had ever heard in his life: and stopping to
see where the musicians were, he could discern nobody far nor near;
but still distinctly heard the music, which ravished his senses. My
fair one, said he, to the princess Parizade, where are the musicians
whom I hear? Are they under ground, or invisible in the air? Such
excellent, charming voices, will hazard nothing by being seen; on
the contrary, they would please the more.

Sir, answered the princess smiling, it is not musicians, but the
tree your majesty sees before you, which forms this concert; and if
you will give yourself the trouble to go a little nearer to it, you
will not doubt it, and the voices will be the more distinct.

The sultan went nearer, and was so charmed with the sweet harmony,
that he would never have been tired with hearing it, but that his
desire to have a nearer view of the fountain of yellow water forced
him away. Fair one, said he, tell me, I pray you, whether this
wonderful tree was found in your garden by chance, or if it was a
present made to you, or have you procured it from some foreign
country? It must certainly have come a great way off, otherwise,
curious as I am after natural rarities, I should have heard of it.
What name do you call it by?

Sir, replied the princess, this tree has no other name than that of
the singing tree, and is not a native of this country. It will be
too long to tell you by what adventures it came here; its history is
connected with the yellow water and the speaking bird, which came to
me at the same time, and which your majesty may see after you have
taken a nearer view of the golden water. But if it be agreeable to
your majesty, after you have rested yourself, and recovered the
fatigue of hunting, which must be the greater because of the sun’s
intense heat, I will do myself the honour of relating it to you.

My fair one, replied the sultan, my fatigue is so well recompensed
by the wonderful things you have shown me, that I do not feel it in
the least. I think only of the trouble I give you. Let us finish by
seeing the yellow water. I am impatient to see and admire the
speaking bird.

When the sultan came to the yellow water, his eyes were fixed so
stedfastly upon the fountain, that he could not take them off. At
last, addressing himself to the princess, he said, As you tell me,
fair one, that this water has no spring or communication hereabouts,
by any means whatsoever, I conclude that it is foreign, as well as
the singing tree.

Sir, replied the princess, it is as your majesty says; and to let
you know that this water has no communication with any spring, I
must inform you, that the basin is one entire stone, so that the
water cannot come in at the sides or underneath. But what your
majesty will think most wonderful is, that all this water proceeded
but from one flagon, which I emptied into this basin, which
increased of itself to the quantity you see, by a property peculiar
to itself, and formed this fountain. Well, said the sultan, going
from the fountain, this is enough for one time. I promise myself the
pleasure to come and visit it very often; but now let us go and see
the speaking bird.

As he went towards the hall, the sultan perceived a prodigious
number of singing birds in the trees thereabouts, (filling the air
with their songs and warblings,) and asked why there were so many
there, and none on the other trees in the garden? The reason, sir,
answered the princess, is, because they come from all parts around
to accompany the song of the speaking bird, which your majesty may
perceive in a cage on one of the windows of the hall we are going
into; and if you attend, you will perceive that his notes are
sweeter than those of all the other birds, even the nightingale’s.

The sultan went into the hall; and as the bird continued singing,
the princess raised her voice, and said, My slave, here is the
sultan; pay your compliments to him. The bird left off singing that
instant, and all the other birds ceased alternately, and said, The
sultan is welcome here: God prosper him, and prolong his life! As
the entertainment was served on the sofa near the window where the
bird was, the sultan replied, as he was sitting down at the table,
Bird, I thank you, and I am overjoyed to find in you the sultan and
king of birds.

As soon as the sultan saw the dish of cucumbers set before him,
thinking it was stuffed in the best manner, he reached out his hand
and took one; but when he cut it, he was in an extreme surprise to
find it dressed with pearls. What novelty is this? said he; and with
what design were these cucumbers stuffed thus with pearls, since
pearls are not to be eaten? Then he looked at the two princes and
princess, to ask them the meaning of it: when the bird, interrupting
him, said, Can your majesty be in so great astonishment at cucumbers
stuffed with pearls, which you see with your own eyes, and yet could
so easily believe that the sultaness your wife was delivered of a
dog, a cat, and a piece of wood? I believed it, replied the sultan,
because the midwives assured me of it. Those midwives, sir, replied
the bird, were the sultaness’s two sisters, who, envious of her
happiness in being preferred by your majesty before them, to satisfy
their envy and revenge, have abused your majesty so easily. If you
interrogate them, they will confess their crime. The two brothers
and the sister whom you see before you, are your own children, whom
they exposed, and who were taken in by the intendant of your
gardens, who provided nurses for them, and took care of their
education.

This discourse of the bird’s presently cleared up the sultan’s
understanding. Bird, cried he, I easily believe the truth which you
discover to me. The inclination which drew me to them, and the
tenderness I have always had for them, told me but too plainly they
are my own blood. Come then, my children, come, my daughter, let me
embrace you, and give you the first marks of a father’s love and
tenderness. Then he rose up, and after having embraced the two
princes and the princess, and mingled his tears with theirs, he
said, It is not enough, my children; you must embrace each other,
not as the children of the intendant of my gardens, to whom I have
been very much obliged for preserving your lives, but as my own
children, of the royal blood of the sultans of Persia, whose glory,
I am persuaded, you will maintain.

After the two princes and princess had embraced each other mutually
with new satisfaction, the sultan sat down to table again with them,
and finished his meal in haste; and when he had done, he said, My
children, you see in me your father: tomorrow I will bring the
sultaness your mother, therefore prepare to receive her.

Afterwards the sultan mounted his horse, and returned in all haste
to his capital. The first thing he did, as soon as he alighted and
entered his palace, was to command the grand vizier to try the
sultaness’s two sisters. They were taken from their houses
separately, convicted, and condemned to be quartered; which sentence
was put into execution within an hour.

In the mean time, the sultan Khosrouschah, followed by all the lords
of his court who were then present, went on foot to the door of the
great mosque; and after he had taken the sultaness out of the strict
confinement she had languished under for so many years, embracing
her in the miserable condition she was then in, he said to her with
tears in his eyes, I come, madam, to ask your pardon for the
injustice I have done you, and to make you the reparation I ought to
do; which I have begun, by punishing the persons who put the
abominable cheat upon me; and I hope you will look upon it as
complete, when I present to you two accomplished princes, and a
charming lovely princess, our children. Come and resume your former
rank, with all the honours which are your due. All this was done and
said before great crowds of people, who flocked from all parts at
the first news of what was passing, and immediately spread the news
through the town.

Next morning early, the sultan and sultaness, whose mournful
humiliating dress was changed into magnificent robes suitable to
her, went with all their court to the house built by the intendant
of the gardens, where the sultan presented the princes Bahman and
Perviz, and the princess Parizade, to the sultaness. These, madam,
said he, are the two princes your sons, and this princess your
daughter; embrace them with the same tenderness I have done, since
they are worthy both of me and you. The tears flowed plentifully
down their cheeks at these tender embraces, especially the
sultaness’s, for the comfort and joy of having two such princes
for her sons, and such a princess for her daughter, on whose
accounts she had endured such afflictions so long.

The two princes and the princess had prepared a magnificent repast
for the sultan and sultaness, and their court. As soon as that was
over, the sultan led the sultaness into the garden, and showed her
the harmonious tree and the beautiful effect of the yellow fountain.
As for the bird, she had seen him in his cage, and the sultan had
spared no panegyric in his praise during the repast.

When there was nothing to detain the sultan any longer, he took
horse again, and with the princes Bahman and Perviz on his right and
left hand, and the sultaness and the princess at his left, preceded
and followed by all the officers of his court, according to their
rank, returned to his capital. Crowds of people came out to meet
them, and with acclamations of joy ushered them into the city, where
all eyes were fixed not only upon the sultaness, the two princes,
and the princess, but also upon the bird, which the princess carried
before her in his cage, admiring his sweet notes, which had drawn
all the other birds about him, which followed him, flying from tree
to tree in the country, and from one house-top to another in the
city. The princes Bahman and Perviz, and the princess Parizade, were
at length brought to the palace with this pomp, and nothing was to
be seen or heard all that night but illuminations and rejoicings
both in the palace and in the utmost parts of the city, which lasted
many days.

The sultan of the Indies could not but admire the prodigious and
inexhaustible memory of the sultaness his wife, who had entertained
him so many nights with so many different stories.

A thousand and one nights had passed away in those innocent
amusements, which contributed so much towards removing the
sultan’s unhappy prejudice against the fidelity of women. His
temper was softened. He was convinced of the merit and great wisdom
of the sultaness Scheherazade. He remembered with what courage she
exposed herself voluntarily to be his wife, without fearing the
death to which she knew she subjected herself, as the many
sultanesses did before her.

These considerations, and the many other good qualities he knew her
to be mistress of, induced him at last to forgive her. I see, lovely
Scheherazade, said he, that you can never be at a loss for this sort
of little stories which have so long diverted me. You have appeased
my anger. I freely renounce, in your favour, the cruel law I had
imposed on myself. I restore you completely to my favour, and will
have you be looked upon as the deliverer of the many damsels I had
resolved to have sacrificed to my unjust resentment.

The sultaness cast herself at his feet, and embraced them tenderly
with all the marks of the most lively and perfect gratitude.

The grand vizier was the first that learned this agreeable news from
the sultan’s own mouth. It presently was carried to the city,
towns, and provinces; and gained the sultan, and the lovely
Scheherazade, his consort, universal applause, and the blessings of
all the people of the large empire of the Indies.

THE END





Footnotes:


[1] This game is played on horseback.

[2] This introduction is not in the last French edition.

[3] A sort of Mahometan Monks.

[4] It is remarkable that the names of “Sindbad” and
“Hindbad” are both derived from the old Persian language.
“Bad” signifies a city; “Sind” and “Hind” are the
territories on either side of the Indus. “Sind,” indeed, is its
original name, but “Hind” is of those countries which lie
betwixt it and the Ganges. --Hole

[5] A port in the Persian gulf.

[6] These islands, according to the Arabians, are beyond China, and
are so called from a tree which bears a fruit of that name. They
are, without doubt, the isles of Japan; which are not, however, far
from Abyssinia.

[7] Mr. Hole, p. 27, says this is probably one of the three islands
near Ceylon, called Ilhas de Cavalos, from the wild horses, to which
the Dutch annually send mares to improve the breed. --Wolf’s
Account of Ceylon; but p. 256 he alters his opinion.

[8] We meet with king Mihrage in the accounts of India and China by
two Mahomedan travellers in the ninth century, and the island of
Zapage, and the Friendly Islands, answers to Borneo. --Hole.

[9] The same in one of the islands of Eolus. Perhaps the roaring of
the waves among the rocks. --Hole. Like the cave in Britain,
mentioned by Clemens Alexandrinus, where the wind produced a sound
as of cymbals.

[10] Degial, with the Mahometans, is the same as Antichrist with us.
According to them, he is to appear about the end of the world, and
will conquer all the earth, except Mecca, Medina, Tarsus, and
Jerusalem, which are to be preserved by angels which he shall set
round them.

[11] The sea serpents on the Malabar coast. --Hole.

[12] Martini mentions fishes with birds’ faces in the China seas.
--Hole.

[13] The Turkish sequin is about nine shillings sterling.

[14] Marco Paolo, in his Travels, and Father Martini, in his History
of China, speak of this bird called “Ruch,” and say it will take
up an elephant and a rhinoceros. See also Vigafetto, in Ramusio’s
Collection of Voyages, 1369. The combat between eagles and elephants
is to be found in Pliny, Solinus, and Diodorus Siculus. --Hole.

[15] Of serpents devoured by eagles, see Marco Paolo, hereafter
cited. --Hole.

[16] Epiphanius, in a treatise on the twelve stones in the Jewish
high priest’s breast-plate, tells a like story of the Jacinths in
the deserts of Scythia. Marco Paolo places it beyond Malabar, in a
situation which would suit Golconda. See also Benjamin of Tudela,
who travelled between 1160 and 1173. --Hole.

[17] Ptolemy places the island of Satyrs, inhabited by cannibals, to
the eastward of the island of Sunda. --Hole.

[18] These are described by William de Rubruquis, 1253, and supposed
to be apes. --Hole.

[19] The long-eared people, mentioned by Strabo and Pliny, vii. 2;
and Marsden’s History of Sumatra, p. 47. --Hole.

[20] Without going back to the Cyclops in the ninth book of the
Odyssey, Sir John Mandeville will furnish such one-eyed giants in
one of the Indian islands. --Hole.

[21] It would seem the Arabian author has taken this story from
Homer’s Odyssey.

[22] Possibly Timor, which Linschoten celebrates for its woods and
wildernesses of sanders. Purchas’ Pilgrims, ii. p. 1784. --Hole.

[23] Ellian, Hist. An. xvi. 16. describes tortoises fifteen cubits
long, the shells big enough to cover a house; and Mandeville says
three men might hide under them in the island of Calonah, not far
from Java. --Hole.

[24] The hippopotamus.

[25] The manatre.

[26] In the sea of Andaman, or bay of Bengal, the Mahometan
travellers, in the ninth century, mention negro cannibals. Ptolemy
places them in the same bay in the Nicobar island. -- Hole.

[27] The lotus of Homer’s Odyssey, the intoxicating “seed” of
Sumatra, mentioned by Davis, 1597; and the herb “dutroa” of
Linschoten, or “dutro” of Lobo: “dutry” and “bung,” or
“bang,” of Fryer. --Hole.

[28] Sunda islands and Sumatra produce plenty of pepper and
cocoa-nuts. -- Hole.

[29] Mandeville mentions the burying the wives alive with the dead
husband, in the island of Calanack; and Jerom, the husband with the
wives in Scythia. --Hole.

[30] He was a Mahometan, and they allow polygamy.

[31] See the escape of Aristomenes, in his life by Rowe. --Hole.

[32] Now Ceylon. Serendib is Ceylon, and Kela is Cala or Calabar,
where the Arabians touched in their way to China; so that it must
have been somewhere about the point of Malabar. --Renaudot.

[33] Sugar-canes, or bamboo trees.

[34] Bochart (Hieroz, vol. ii. p. 854) tells a story exactly
similar, from Demur or Damur an Arabian writer, who died in 1405.

[35] An ourang-outang. --Hole.

[36] Grapes grow in the isles of Banda. Hain’s Collect. i. 464.
--Hole.

[37] In the straits of Sunda. --Hole.

[38] This island, or peninsula, ends at the cape which we now call
cape Comorin. It is also called Comar, and Camor. The Mahometan
travellers say the king of Comar (whence they bring aloes) was
subdued by Mihrage. The inhabitants are very virtuous, and
debauchery with women, and the use of wine, are forbidden them.
Accounts of India and China, p. 63.

[39] There still is, and has been from time immemorial, a pearl
fishery in the neighbourhood of cape Comorin. See Marco Paolo.
--Hole.

[40] Mr. Ives mentions wells of fresh water under the sea in the
Persian gulf, near the island of Barien. --Hole.

[41] Such fountains are not unfrequent in India and Ceylon, and the
Mahometan travellers speak of ambergris swallowed by whales, who are
made sick by, and regorge it. --Hole.

[42] Ceylon.

[43] Geographers place it on this side the line, in the first
climate. Diodorus Siculus, and Ptolemy, place it in the same island
as Sindbad, though not the true one.

[44] The eastern geographers made a parasang longer than a French
league.

[45] Knox and Wolf confirm this account of the situation of Ceylon,
and the productions of its mountains. Pico d’Adam is the high
mountain here described.

[46] Yellow vellum, or the skin of the hog deer, from Prince’s
Island, in the straits of Sunda. The elephants, rubies, &c. are
illustrated by Mr. Hole.

[47] Ceylon is known to produce large rubies, and the Indian ocean
abounds in pearls of extraordinary size. --Hole.

[48] There is a snake in Bengal, whose skin is esteemed a cure for
external pains, by applying it to the part affected. --Hole.

[49] Solomon.

[50] An ancient king of a great island of the same name in the
Indies, and very much famed among the Arabians for his power and
wisdom.

[51] A port on the Red Sea.

[52] A town of Arabia.

[53] A regular wind that blows six months from the east, and as many
from the west.

[54] This is the last interruption the stories will receive by being
divided into portions related on successive nights. The reader is
therefore to suppose that Scheherazade now continues speaking
without being interrupted.

[55] The Bermecides were a family that came out of Persia, and of
them the grand vizier was descended.

[56] This word signifies in Arabic, Basilick, an odoriferous plant:
and the Arabians call their slaves by this name, as the custom in
France is to give the name of Jessamin to a footman.

[57] Nourreddin signifies in Arabic the light of religion.

[58] Bedreddin signifies the full moon of religion.

[59] That is to say, the sun of religion.

[60] All the eastern nations lie in their drawers, but this
circumstance will stand him in stead in the sequel of the story.

[61] The town of Moussoul is in Mesopotamia, built over against old
Nineveh.

[62] This word in Arabic signifies wonderful.

[63] That is, of the caliphs that reigned after the four first
successors of Mahomet, and were so named from one of their
ancestors, whose name was Ommiah.

[64] This prayer is always said two hours and a half before sun-set.

[65] The Mahometans having a custom of washing their hands five
times a day, when they go to prayers, they reckon they have no
occasion to wash before eating, but they always wash after eating,
because they eat without forks.

[66] This is done all over the Levant, for making their drink cool.

[67] The Mahometans give this name generally to the black eunuchs.

[68] Here the Arabian author plays upon the Jews: this ass is that
which, as the Mahometans believe, Esdras rode upon when he came from
the Babylonian captivity to Jerusalem.

[69] A bezestein is a public place, where silk stuffs and other
precious things are exposed for sale.

[70] This is called in English, Saltwort.

[71] There is a fountain at Mecca, which, according to the
Mahometans, is the spring that God showed to Hagar, after Abraham
was obliged to put her away. The water of this spring is drank by
way of devotion, and is sent in presents to the princes and
princesses.

[72] A sherif is the same with a sequin. This word occurs in our
ancient authors.

[73] This year 653 is one of the Hegira, the common epocha of the
Mahometans, and answers to the year 1255 from the nativity of
Christ; from whence we may conjecture that these computations were
made in Arabia about that time.

[74] As for the year 7320, the author is mistaken in that
computation. The year 653 of the Hegira, and the 1255 of Christ,
coincide only with the 1557 of the era or epocha of the Seleucides,
which is the same with that of Alexander the Great, who is called
Iskender with two horns, according to the expression of the
Arabians. This name he has from his father, Jupiter Ammon, in memory
of whom he is represented sometimes with the horns of a ram on his
head.

[75] A public place in the towns of the Levant, where strangers
lodge.

[76] He was raised to this dignity in the year of the Hegira 623,
and Anno Dom. 1226, and was the 36th caliph of the race of the
Abassides.

[77] The Barmecides, as has been said already, were a noble family
of Persia, who settled at Bagdad.

[78] The Easterns, and particularly the Mahometans, do not drink
till after meals.

[79] Or vagabond Arabs, who wander in the deserts, and plunder the
caravans when they are not strong enough to resist them.

[80] This word signifies in Arabic, “the sun of the day.”

[81] The Arabians, Persians, and Turks, when they write, hold the
paper commonly upon their knee with their left hand, and write with
their right, with a little reed or cane, cut and slit like our pens.
The cane is hollow, and resembles our reeds, but is harder.

[82] A city on the Tigris, 20 leagues below Bagdad.

[83] That is to say, in Persian, King of the Time, or King of the
Age.

[84] A scheme of her nativity, drawn from the constellations of
heaven.

[85] There is an adventure like this in the romance of Peter of
Provence and the fair Magdalena, which was taken from the Arabic.

[86] This is an Arabic word, which signifies the life of the soul.

[87] This incident is also much the same in the romance of Peter of
Provence and the fair Magdalena.

[88] A famous player on the lute, who lived in Bagdad in the reign
of the caliph.

[89] Gulnare, in Arabic, is a rose or pomegranate flower.

[90] Saleh, in Arabic, signifies good.

[91] “Giauhara,” in Arabic, signifies a “precious stone.”

[92] Sequins.

[93] “Mobarec” is the name of a Mahommedan saint, and of several
Arabian writers mentioned by l’Herbelot.

[94] Given of God.

[95] Master of the world above and below.

[96] Ballas rubies are rubies of the brightest colour.

[97] Which is to say, the Full Moon of Full Moons.

[98] “Reml” or “Raml” signifies “sand prepared,” or a
preparation of sand, on which are marked certain points serving for
a kind of divination, which we call “Geomancy;” and the Arabs,
Romans, and Turks, “e’ con alraml.” These points, disposed in
a certain number on many unequal lines, are described also with a
pen on paper; and the person who practises divination by this art is
called “Rammal.” --D’Herbelot, art. Raml.

[99] In the French it is Sidi Noman, and Noman is the name of a king
of one of the dynasties in Herbelot.

[100] “Sesame” is a sort of corn.

[101] “Nevrouz,” or the New Day, is the name which the ancient
Persians gave to the first day of their year, which was solar.
Giarischid, king of the first dynasty of the Pischdadians,
instituted the solemnity of the Nevrouz, which is still celebrated
by the Persians, though they are Mahometans, and consequently
obliged to use the Arabian year, which is lunar. The first day was
fixed in the vernal equinox, at the point when the sun enters into
the first degree of Aries. There is another Nevrouz of the autumnal
equinox. --D’Herbelot.

[102] Chaucer’s Squire’s Tale, the poem by which Milton
describes and characterises him, is founded on this adventure. The
imagination of this story consists in Arabian fiction, engrafted on
Gothic chivalry. Nor is this Arabian fiction purely the sport of
arbitrary fancy; it is, in a great measure, founded on Arabian
learning. The idea of a horse of brass took its rise from the
mechanical knowledge of the Arabians, and their experiments in
metals. The poets of romance, Lydgate, and Gower, who deal in
Arabian ideas, describe the Trojan horse to be made of brass.
--Wharton’s Hist. of English Poetry, vol. i. p. 398-400. Chaucer
has borrowed only the description of the horse and the two pins, the
ascending one in his ear, and the use to be made of him. That
Chaucer never finished the story is more than probable, from
Milton’s speaking of it as ‘left untold,’ which does not apply
to loss after finishing.

[103] Two Persian words, which signify the same, the “female
fairy,” or “genie.” See the preface.

[104] An Arabian word that signifies “daylight.”

[105] This circumstance has been also brought into Europe, and
copied by the Normans. Duke Richard, surnamed “Richard sans
peur,” walking one evening in the forest of Moulineaux near one of
his castles, on the banks of the Seine, with his courtiers, hearing
a prodigious noise coming towards him, sent one of his esquires to
know what was the matter, who brought him word, that it was a
company of people under a leader or king. Richard, with five hundred
of his bravest Norman, went out to see a sight which the peasants
were so accustomed to that they viewed it two or three times a week
without fear. The sight of the troop, preceded by two men who spread
a cloth on the ground, made all the Normans run away, and leave the
duke alone. He saw the strangers form themselves into a circle on
the cloth, and on asking who they were, was told, they were the
spirits of Charles V. king of France and his servants, condemned to
expiate their sins by fighting all night against the wicked and the
damned. Richard desired to be of their party, and receiving a strict
charge not to quit the cloth, was conveyed with them to mount Sinai,
where leaving them without quitting the cloth, he said his prayers
in the church of St. Catherine’s abbey there, while they were
fighting, and returned with them. In proof of the truth of this
story, he brought back half the wedding-ring of a knight in that
convent, whose wife, after six years, concluded him dead, and was
going to take a second husband.

[106] From such a story as this was probably borrowed the strange
knight’s ‘Mirror of Glass,’ mentioned by Chaucer in the
Squire’s Tale, brought with the Indian with the wonderful horse.
The virtues of that mirror were, that men might see when any
adversity befell the kingdom or the king, and who is a friend, or
foe; and any lady might see if the object of her love were false.
This mirror was carried up into the principal tower, and there fixed
for use. Such an one Gower ascribes to Virgil, who set it upon a
marble pillar at Rome for similar purposes; and with this
corresponds Merlin’s Glassie Mirror, in Spenser, F. Q. ii. 24, and
the globe shown to de Gama in the Lusiad. Warton’s History of
English Poetry, i. 406, 407. Such a mirror is said by the oriental
writers to have been possessed by Giamschid, one of their kings, by
which he and his people knew natural and supernatural things.
(Herbelot in voce.) Our great countryman, Roger Bacon, in his
‘Opus Majus,’ a work entirely founded on the Aristotelian and
Arabian Philosophy, describes a variety of specula, and explains
their construction and uses. This is the most curious and
extraordinary part of Bacon’s book, written about 1270. His Optic
Tube, in which he pretended to see future events, was famous in his
time, and long afterwards, and chiefly contributed to give him the
name of a magician. He asserts that ‘all things are known by
perspective.’ A mirror in the head of a monstrous fowl showed the
Mexicans their future invaders the Spaniards; and C. Agrippa, in
such a mirror, showed the earl of Surrey, Geraldine sick on a couch.
Warton, ib.

[107] ‘Sogd Samarcand,’ or the plain of Samarcand, is on the
north side of that city, and from it the province called by the
ancients ‘Sogdiana’ took its name. The oriental writers say,
that this plain or valley is one of the four paradises or most
delightful places in the world, as well as the plain and valley of
Damascus, which is called ‘Gauthah.’ They make it eight days
journey in extent; and it is covered on every side with gardens full
of fruit of admirable beauty and variety, or corn-fields and
pastures ever green, the soil being watered by springs and rivulets
issuing from a large and principal river called ‘Cai,’ running
through the middle of the plain. A number of populous towns and
villages, full of industrious cultivators of the soil, over-spread
this rich valley. --Herbelot.

[108] Nourgihan signifies ‘Light of the world,’ and was the name
of the wife of Gehanghir, son of Akbar, king of India, whom she
governed by her prudence. --Herbelot.

[109] ‘Khosrou,’ ‘Khosrau’ or ‘Khosrev,’ is a name
common to many kings of Persia, and the ‘Chosroes’ of the Greek
historians.

[110] “Bahaman” was the name of the sixth king of Persia of the
second dynasty of the Caianides, and signifies “just” and
“beneficent,” being, according to some writers, only an epithet
of “Ardschir Dirazdest” or “Artaxerxes Longimanus.” He is
said to have reigned 112 years, and to have been contemporary with
Hippocrates and Galen. --Herbelot. “Parizadeh,” the
“Parisatis” of the Greeks, signifies “born of a fairy.”
--Idem. “Pervis” has the same origin.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Arabian Nights' Entertainments, by Anonymous

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 62687 ***
