*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 67266 ***

                           Dogs Always Know

       INTO THIS DIGNIFIED LOVE STORY HUGE CAPTAIN MACGREGOR
               BARGES WITH A GRAND CARGO OF HUMOR TO
                 MATCH LITTLE LEROY’S DRAMATIC DOG

                     By Elisabeth Sanxay Holding


The lovely little Miss Selby came from Boston, and the large and not
unhandsome Mr. Anderson came from New York, and they did not like each
other.

Indeed, Miss Selby was not very fond, just then, of any one who did
not come from Boston. Sometimes she even went so far as to declare to
herself that she did not like any one at all except the members of one
certain household in Boston.

It was at night, after she had gone to bed, that she usually made this
somewhat narrow-minded declaration, because it was at that time, when
she was lying in the dark, that she would most vividly imagine that
especial household. Her mother, her grandmother, and her two aunts;
they were the kindest, wittiest, most delightful, lovable people who
ever breathed, and she compared all other persons with them. And, so
compared, Mr. Anderson came out very badly.

As for Mr. Anderson, the reason he did not like Miss Selby was because
she obviously did not like him. He was a little sensitive about being
liked.

He almost always had been, in the past, and when he saw Miss Selby’s
eyes resting on him, with that look which meant that she was mentally
comparing him with her mother, her grandmother, and her two aunts, he
felt chilled to the bone. Not that he looked chilled; on the contrary,
his face grew red, and he fancied that his neck, his ears, and his
hands did also.

He justly resented this. It was not his fault that he was sitting at
her table. It wasn’t her table, anyhow; purely by luck had she sat
alone at it so long. It was the only place left in the dining room,
and the landlady told him to sit there.

As he pulled out his chair he said, “Good evening,” with a friendly
and unsuspicious smile, and Miss Selby glanced up at him as if she
were surprised to hear a human voice issuing from this creature, and
bent her head in something probably intended to be a nod.

Naturally, he did not speak again. But, as he sat facing her, and with
his back to the room, he could not help his eyes resting upon her from
time to time, and it was then that he had encountered that chilly
look.

It was very pitiful, he thought, to see one as young as she behaving
in such a way—really pitiful. Because she was not unattractive; even a
casual glance had informed him of that.

Dark-browed, she was, and dark-eyed; but with hair that was bright and
soft and almost blond, and a lovely rose color in her cheeks; the sort
of girl a man would admire, if there had been the true womanly
gentleness in her aspect. But after that look, it was impossible to
admire; he could only pity.

Strange as it may seem, Miss Selby pitied him, and for a somewhat
illogical reason. She saw pathos in the man because he was so large—so
much too large. His great shoulders towered above the table; knives
and forks looked like toys in his lean, brown hands, and his face was
invisible, unless she raised her eyes, which she did not intend to do
again.

She had seen him, though, as he crossed the room, and she might have
thought him not bad looking, if he had not come to sit at her table.
It was an honest and alert young face, healthily tanned, with warm,
gray eyes, and a crest of wheat-colored hair above his forehead. But
when he did sit down at her table, she immediately began her usual
comparisons.

She imagined this young man in that sitting room in Boston, and she
saw clearly how much too large he was. It was a small room, and her
mother and her grandmother and her two aunts were all of a nice, neat,
polite size.

“Like a bull in a china shop,” she thought, imagining him among them.

This was unjust. It is never fair to judge bulls by their possible
behavior in china shops, anyhow; they seldom go into them, and when
seen in the fields, or in bullfights, and so on, they are really noble
animals.

But that is what she did think, and as soon as she could finish her
dinner, she arose, with another of those almost imperceptible nods,
and went away. She went up to her own room, and began to study
shorthand.

She did this every evening, with great earnestness, for she was very
anxious to get a better position than the one she now had, and she was
so far advanced in her study that she could write absolutely anything
in shorthand—if you gave her time enough. She could often read what
she had written, too.

As for Mr. Anderson, he also went up to his room, but not to study. He
had had all he wanted of that at college. Nor did he need to worry
about a better position.

The one he had was good, and he was confident that he would have a
better one next year, and a still better one the year after that, and
so on and on, until he was one of the leading paper manufacturers in
the country—if not the leading one. He had just been made assistant
superintendent of a paper mill in this little town, and he had come
out in the most hopeful and cheerful humor.

The hope and cheer had fled, now. He felt profoundly dejected. He had
no friends here, and if other people were like that girl, he never
would have any. For all he knew, there might be something repellent in
his manner, which his old friends had kindly overlooked.

He began to think sorrowfully of those old friends, of the little flat
he had had in New York with two other fellows—such nice fellows—such a
nice flat. When you looked out of the window there you saw a facade of
other windows, with shaded lamps in them, and the shadows of people
passing back and forth, and down below in the street more people, and
taxis, and big, quiet, smooth-running private cars, and all the
familiar city sounds. And here, outside this window, there were
trees—nothing but trees.

He had heard, often enough, about the loneliness of country dwellers
when in a great city, but he felt that it was not to be compared with
the loneliness of a city dweller among trees. He got up and went to
the window, and he couldn’t even see a human creature, only those
sentinel trees, moving a little against the pale and cloudy sky.

It was a May night, and the air that blew on his face was May air, a
wonderful thing, filled with tender and exquisite perfumes, so cool
and sweet that he grew suddenly sick of his tobacco-scented room, and
decided to go out on the veranda.

What happened was a coincidence, but it would surely have happened,
sooner or later. He met Miss Selby. As soon as he had stepped outside,
she opened the door and came out, too.

There was an electric light in the ceiling of this veranda, which gave
it a singularly cheerless appearance, rather like the deck of a
deserted ship, with the chairs all drawn up along the wall. There was
nobody else there, and Mr. Anderson stood directly under the light, so
that she could see him very plainly.

She said: “Oh!” and drew back hastily, putting her hand on the
doorknob.

This was a little too much!

“Look here!” said Mr. Anderson crisply. “Don’t go in on _my_ account.
I’ll go, myself.”

Now, Miss Selby was not really haughty or disagreeable. Simply, she
had been brought up on all sorts of Red Riding-hood tales, in which
all the trouble was caused by giving encouragement to strangers.

She had been taught that it was a mad, reckless thing to acknowledge
the existence of persons whose grandparents had not been known, and
favorably known, to her grandparents. But certainly she had no desire
to offend any one, and this stranger did seem to be offended. So she
said:

“Oh, no! You mustn’t think of such a thing!”

She meant it kindly, but unfortunately she was utterly unable to speak
in a natural way to a stranger. In reality she was a poor, homesick,
affectionate, kind-hearted young girl of twenty, who, not fifteen
minutes before, had been weeping from sheer loneliness.

But she spoke in what seemed to him an obnoxiously condescending and
superior tone. He was a young man of many excellent qualities, but
meekness was not one of them, and he resented this tone.

So he spoke with an air of amused indulgence, as if he thought her
such a funny little thing:

“I don’t want to drive you away, you know.”

She raised her eyebrows.

“Why, of course not!” she said, just as much amused as he was, and sat
down in one of the chairs against the wall.

She sat there, and he stood opposite her, leaning against the railing,
both of them silently not liking each other. Presently the silence
became unbearable.

“The spring has come early this year,” observed Miss Selby.

Mr. Anderson, the city dweller, knew precious little about what was
expected of spring, but he was determined to say something, anything.

“Yes,” he agreed. “They were selling violets in the streets
yesterday.”

Miss Selby looked at him with a sort of horror. Was _that_ his idea of
spring—violets being sold on street corners?

“But that doesn’t mean anything!” she cried. “They were probably
hothouse violets, anyway. You can’t possibly see the real spring
unless you go in the woods.”

She needn’t think she owned the spring. Every year of his life he had
spent several weeks in the country at various hotels. He had seen any
number of woods, had walked in them, and admired them, too, with
moderation, however.

“Yes, I know,” he admitted. “Last June I motored up through
Connecticut—”

“Oh, but that’s different!” she explained. “Motoring—that’s not the
same thing at all! There’s a little wood near here—I go there almost
every Sunday—I wish you could see it!”

“I’d like to,” he replied, without realizing the step implied.

They were both dismayed by what had happened. Miss Selby arose
hastily.

“Well—good night!” she said, and fled upstairs to her room in a panic.

“Heavens!” she thought. “Did he think I wanted him to come with me
tomorrow? Oh, dear! How—how awfully awkward! Oh, I do hope it will
rain!”

Mr. Anderson, left by himself, lit his pipe.

“After that,” he mused, “of course I’ll have to ask her to let me go
with her tomorrow. That’s only common courtesy.”

Very well, he was willing to make the sacrifice.


                                  II

It did not rain the next day. On the contrary, it was as bright and
blithe a day as ever dawned. There was no plausible reason why a
person who went into the woods almost every Sunday should not go
today.

“It would be too rude, just to walk off, if he thinks I meant him to
come along,” thought Miss Selby. “But perhaps he won’t say anything
more about it.”

He did not appear in the dining room while she ate her breakfast.

“Probably he’s still asleep,” she thought, with that pardonable pride
every one feels at being up before some one else.

He was not asleep. On the contrary, he was looking at her that very
moment, as she sat down at her precious table, eating the Sunday
morning coffee ring. He had breakfasted early on purpose, hoping that
by so doing he would avoid her, for the more he meditated upon her
behavior, the more sternly did he disapprove of it, and he had come
downstairs this morning resolved to be merely polite.

He could not help sitting at her table; certainly he didn’t want to,
and she had no right to treat him as if he were an annoying intruder.
But, no matter what she did, he intended to be polite.

And, as he sat on the veranda railing and observed her through the
window, he thought that perhaps it would not be so very difficult to
be polite to her. She looked rather nice this morning, in her neat,
dark dress, with the sun touching her brown hair to a warm brightness,
and a sort of Sunday tranquillity about her. He felt a chivalrous
readiness to take a walk in the woods with her; she might even point
out all the flowers and tell him facts about them, if she liked.

She arose, and he turned his head and contemplated the landscape, so
that he would not be looking at her when she came out of the door.
Only, she didn’t come. Although he kept his head turned aside for a
long time, he heard no sound of a door opening or of footsteps,
nothing but the subdued voices of the four old ladies who sat on the
veranda, enjoying the sunshine.

He glanced toward the dining room. She was not there. Very well;
probably she had changed her mind, and he would not be called upon to
be chivalrous, after all. He would have the whole day to himself, the
whole immensely long, blank, solitary day.

Miss Selby, however, had simply gone upstairs to put on her hat. Or,
rather, she put on three hats, one after the other, two rather old
ones, and one quite new. She decided in favor of an old one, and felt
somewhat proud of herself for this, because didn’t it show how little
she cared about strangers? If it happened to be a singularly becoming
hat, she couldn’t help it.

She went downstairs and out on the veranda, and there he was, even
bigger, she thought, than he had been last evening; a tremendous
creature, fairly towering above all the old ladies, and looking most
alarmingly masculine and strange.

Something like panic seized her. He was so absolutely a stranger; she
knew nothing whatever about him; he might be the most undesirable
acquaintance that ever breathed.

But when he said “Good morning,” she had to answer, and, in answering,
had to look at him, and was obliged to admit that his face was not
exactly sinister.

“Off for a stroll?” he asked.

“Yes,” she answered. “Yes, I am.”

There was a silence, then chivalry required Mr. Anderson to speak.

“Well—” he said. “If you don’t mind—I mean—I’d be very pleased—”

“Oh! Certainly!” said Miss Selby.

So off they went, together. They went across the lawn and down the
road, and after the first moment of awkwardness, they got on very
well.

Indeed, it was extraordinary to see upon how many topics they thought
alike. They both agreed that it was a beautiful morning; that the
spring was the best time of the year, that the smell of pine needles
warm in the sun was unique and delightful, and that Mrs. Brown’s
coffee was very, very bad.

Then, according to Miss Selby’s directions, they turned off the
highway and entered the wood. It was not a thick and somber wood, but
a lovely little glade where slim silver birches grew, among bigger and
more stalwart trees, standing well spaced, so that the sun came
through the budding branches, making a delicate arabesque of light and
shadow.

And it was all so fresh, so verdant, so joyous, like one of those
half-enchanted forests through which knights used to ride, long ago,
when the world was younger. It was so serene, and yet so gay, that
even Mr. Anderson, the champion of cities, was captivated.

He walked through that wood with Miss Selby, he saw how she looked
when she found violets growing, saw her, so to speak, in her natural
habitat, where she belonged, and that seemed to him something not
easily to be forgotten. There was Miss Selby, down on her knees,
picking violets; Miss Selby looking up at him, with that lovely color
in her cheeks, and her clear, candid eyes, asking him if they weren’t
the “prettiest things?”

He answered: “No!” with considerable emphasis, but somehow she did not
trouble to ask him what he meant.

She fancied that Mr. Anderson appeared to better advantage in the
woods. Seen among the trees he didn’t seem too large; indeed, with his
blond crest, his mighty shoulders, his long, easy stride, he was not
in the least like a bull in a china shop, but a notably fine-looking
young fellow.

In short, when Miss Selby and Mr. Anderson returned to the boarding
house for the midday dinner, they no longer disliked each other.


                                 III

The old ladies had noticed this at once, and it pleased them. They saw
Miss Selby and Mr. Anderson talking cheerfully to each other at the
little table, and they said to one another: “Young people—young
people,” and they were old enough to understand what that meant.

The “young people” themselves did not understand. They didn’t even
know that they were especially young, and certainly they saw nothing
charming or interesting in the fact that they were sitting at a small
table and talking to each other.

They were, at heart, a little uneasy because they had stopped
disliking each other. Dislike was such a neat, definite, vigorous
thing to feel, and when it melted away, it left such a disturbing
vagueness. Of course, Miss Selby knew that she could not possibly like
a stranger; the most she would allow herself was—not to dislike him,
and simply “not disliking” a person is a very unsatisfactory state of
mind.

It couldn’t be helped, however. The dislike was gone. And there they
sat, not disliking each other, every single evening at that little
table. Naturally, they talked, and naturally, being at such close
quarters, they watched each other what time they talked, and when you
do that, it is extraordinary what a number of things you learn without
being told.

The little shadow that flits across a face, the smile that is on the
lips and not in the eyes, the brave words and the anxious glance—these
things are eloquent.

For instance, Miss Selby talked about that unique household in Boston.
She did not say much, that wasn’t her way; yet Mr. Anderson deduced
that the mother, the grandmother, and the two aunts were, so to speak,
besieged in their Bostonian home, that the wolf was at their door, and
that Miss Selby was engaged in keeping him at a safe distance. And
that she was probably the pluckiest, finest girl who had ever lived,
struggling on all by herself, homesick and lonely, and _so_ young and
little.

As for him, he talked chiefly about the manufacture of paper. Until
now this subject had not been a particular hobby of Miss Selby’s, but
the more she heard about it, the more she realized what an interesting
and fascinating topic it was. What is more, while Mr. Anderson talked
about paper, he told her, without knowing it, many other things.

She learned that he was a very likable young fellow, with a great many
friends, and yet was sometimes a little lonely, because he had no one
of his own; that he was prodigiously ambitious, yet found his
successful progress in the paper business a little melancholy
sometimes, because no one else was very much affected by it. He said
he had been brought up by an aunt who had given him an expensive
education and a great many advantages; he spoke most dutifully of this
aunt, and of all that he owed to her, yet Miss Selby felt certain that
this aunt was a very disagreeable sort of person, who never let people
forget what they owed her.

Very different from Miss Selby’s aunts! She had even begun to think
that perhaps her aunts, together with her mother and grandmother,
might like Mr. Anderson, in spite of his size.

And then he spoiled everything. To be sure, he thought it was she who
spoiled everything, but she knew better. It was his lamentable, his
truly deplorable, masculine vanity. This man, who appeared so
independent, so intelligent—

This disillusioning incident took place on the second Sunday of their
acquaintance—the Sunday after that first walk. Almost as a matter of
course they set forth upon another walk, and as it was a bright, windy
day, rather too cool for sauntering in the woods, they went along the
highway at a brisk pace.

The spring had capriciously withdrawn. The burgeoning branches were
flung about wildly against a sky blue, clear and cold; the ground
underfoot felt hard; everything gentle, promising and beguiling had
gone out of the world. And perhaps this affected Miss Selby; her
cheeks were very rosy, her eyes shining, and she was in high spirits,
even to the point of teasing Mr. Anderson a little.

He found this singularly agreeable. For the most part, he could see
nothing but the top of her hat, coming along briskly beside him; but
every now and then she glanced up, and each time she did so he felt a
little dazzled, because of the radiance there was about her this day.
He thought—but how glad he was, later on, that he had kept his
thoughts to himself!

There was a steep hill before them, and they went at it with that
feeling of pleasant excitement one has about new hills; they wanted to
get to the top and see what was on the other side. And very likely
they were a sort of allegory of youth, which always wants to get to
the top of hills and hopes to find something much better on the other
side; but this idea did not occur to them. And, alas, they never
reached the top!

Halfway up that hill there was a garden with a stone wall about it; a
wide lawn, ornamented with dwarf firs, a fine garden of the formal
sort, but not very interesting, and Miss Selby and Mr. Anderson were
not interested. They would have passed by with no more than a casual
glance, but as they drew near the gate a dog began to bark in a
desperate and violent fashion. And a sweet and plaintive voice said:

“Oh, Sandy! Stop, you naughty boy!”

Naturally they both turned their heads then, and they saw Mrs. Granger
standing behind the gate. At that time they did not know her name was
Mrs. Granger, or any other facts about her; but Miss Selby always
believed that, at that first glance, she learned more about Mrs.
Granger than—well, than certain other people ever learned, in weeks of
acquaintance.

A charming little lady, Mrs. Granger was—dark and fragile, very
plaintive, very gentle, the sort of woman a really chivalrous man
feels sorry for. Especially at that moment when she was having such a
very bad time with that dog.

It was a rough and unruly young dog—a collie, and a fine specimen,
too, but ill trained. She was holding him by the collar, and he was
struggling to get free, and barking furiously, his jaws snapping open
and shut as if jerked by a string, his whole body vibrating with his
unreasonable emotional outburst.

“Keep quiet!” said she, with a pathetic attempt at severity, and when
he did not obey, she gave him a sort of dab on the top of the head. It
was more than his proud spirit would endure; he broke away from her,
jumped over the low gate, and flew at Mr. Anderson.

But not in anger; on the contrary, he was wild with delight; he rushed
round and round the young man, lay down on his shoes, licked his
hands. And when Mr. Anderson patted him, he was fairly out of his
mind, and rolled in the dust.

“Oh!” cried Mrs. Granger. “But—how wonderful!” She turned to Miss
Selby. “_Isn’t_ it wonderful?”

“Isn’t what?” inquired Miss Selby. “I’m afraid I don’t—”

“That strange instinct that animals have!” Mrs. Granger explained
solemnly.

“What instinct?” asked Miss Selby, politely. “I thought he was just a
friendly little dog.”

“Oh, but he’s not friendly with every one!” cried Mrs. Granger. “Not
by any means!”

It was at this point that Miss Selby’s disillusionment began. She
looked at Mr. Anderson, expecting to find him looking amused, and
instead of that, he was pleased—a little embarrassed, but certainly
pleased!

Then the charming little lady spoke again, addressing Miss Selby:

“What darling wild roses!” she exclaimed. “I do wish I could find
some!”

“They’re azaleas,” said Miss Selby. “And the woods at the foot of the
hill—next to your garden—are full of them.”

Mr. Anderson was not looking at them just then, but only heard their
voices, and he was very much impressed by the contrast. One of them
sounded so gentle and sweet, and the other so chill, so curt. It was
deplorable that Miss Selby should be so ungracious; he was
disappointed.

So he thought that he, at least, would be decently civil to the poor
little woman, and he turned toward her with that intention, only he
could think of nothing to say. He smiled, though, and Mrs. Granger
smiled at him, and Miss Selby observed this.

And Mrs. Granger knew that Miss Selby observed this, and she smiled at
Miss Selby. It was a smile that Mr. Anderson would never understand.

“I wish you’d both come in and look at my garden!” said Mrs. Granger,
wistfully.

“We—” began Mr. Anderson, cheerfully, but Miss Selby interrupted.

“Thank you!” she said. “But I must go home now. Good morning.”

And she actually set off, down the hill. Mr. Anderson, of course, was
obliged to follow, and the dog, Sandy, had the same idea.

“Go home, old fellow!” the young man commanded.

Sandy gave a yelp of joy at being addressed, and stood expectantly
beside him, grinning dog wise into his face. Mr. Anderson again
ordered him home, and Mrs. Granger called him, but he did not go. He
had to be dragged back by the collar and held, while Mrs. Granger
fastened a leash to his collar.

“I never saw anything like it,” she declared. “He’s simply devoted to
you.”

“Dogs generally take to me,” the young man admitted.

Mrs. Granger raised her soft dark eyes to his face.

“I think that’s a very wonderful thing!” said she, quietly. “Because
I’m sure they know. I’d trust Sandy’s judgment against any human
being’s.”

“Oh—well—” Mr. Anderson remarked, grown very red.

“You must come and see Sandy again some day,” she suggested. “Poor
little doggie!”

“I will!” said he. “Yes. Thanks, very much. I will!”

All this had taken considerable time, and Miss Selby was nowhere to be
seen. He hurried after her and, turning the corner at the foot of the
hill, saw her marching briskly along ahead of him. She must have known
that he would follow, yet she did not look back once, and when he
reached her side she said nothing—neither did he. They went on.

Presently Miss Selby began to talk, making a very obvious effort to be
polite. Mr. Anderson did not like this, but he, too, made an equally
obvious effort at politeness, and succeeded quite as well as she did,
and they continued in this formal, almost stately tone, for some time.

When she looked back upon it, Miss Selby was always at a loss to
understand just how and when this correct tone had vanished from their
conversation, and the quarrel had begun. For it was a quarrel—a
genuine and a hearty one. And although Mrs. Granger was never once
mentioned, yet the quarrel was about her.

Miss Selby declared flatly that dogs did not have any “wonderful
instinct” for judging people. Mr. Anderson said he _knew_ they did.

“What?” she cried. “You don’t mean to say you think a dog knows by
instinct whether any one is—good or bad?”

“That’s exactly what I do mean,” he declared.

Then Miss Selby laughed. She regretted it afterward, but it was done.
She had laughed at Mr. Anderson, and he resented it, deeply.

They walked side by side for half a mile, and never said one single
word, and by the time they reached the boarding house they had firmly
established that worst of all complications, an angry silence. It was
now impossible for either of them to speak.


                                  IV

It was impossible to break that silence without an intolerable
sacrifice of pride. Yet, so very, very small a thing would have
sufficed; one entreating glance from Mr. Anderson, and Miss Selby
would have responded willingly; just a shade of warmth in her smile,
and the young man would have made an impetuous apology. But he was not
going to give entreating glances to persons who laughed at him, and
her smile showed no warmth at all, but instead an extreme chilliness.

They smiled when they met every evening in the dining room, simply to
keep up appearances—and it was a complete failure. The old ladies
noticed at once that something had gone wrong; they discussed it with
unflagging interest all week, wondering what had happened, and whose
fault it was. They all hoped that matters would be adjusted by Sunday.

Sunday came, and it was a sweet, bright, warm day. The hour for taking
walks came, and Mr. Anderson went out—alone. The old ladies were truly
sorry to see this.

Miss Selby also saw it. She came out on the veranda just as he was
going down the steps and, although she did not turn her head, she had
caught a glimpse of his tall, broad-shouldered figure going off—alone.
She had a book with her, and, sitting down in a sheltered corner, she
began to read.

It was impossible. On this gay spring morning nothing printed in books
could interest her. Not that she cared what Mr. Anderson did or where
he went. Only, she was homesick and so very lonely. There was nobody
to talk to, and it would be such a long, long time before she could
afford to take a vacation and go back to Boston to see her own people.

“Er—good morning!” said Mr. Quincey, in his apologetic way.

For two months Mr. Quincey had been apologetically making attempts to
talk to Miss Selby. He was a most inoffensive young man, a teller in
the local bank; he had virtually all the virtues there are: thrift,
industry, sobriety, honesty—and he knew people in Boston. Yet hitherto
Miss Selby had discouraged him, for no good reason at all, but simply
because she wished so to do.

Imagine his surprise and delight when this morning she replied to him
with something like cordiality. The old ladies saw him sit down on the
railing near her chair, they saw his pleased smile, and they decided
that Miss Selby was a fickle and a heartless girl.

Then presently they saw Miss Selby go out for a walk with Mr. Quincey.

In the meantime, Mr. Anderson was striding along the quiet country
roads at a tremendous pace. No; he did not like the country.

Except for his unique and wonderful paper mill, he could wish with all
his heart that he were back in the city, where there were numbers of
people he knew, friendly faces to see, jolly voices to hear. He could
think of no particular person he was especially anxious to see, yet it
seemed to him that he missed somebody, badly.

So, he went up that hill again. Again Sandy was there, and Mrs.
Granger; again he was invited to look at the garden, and this time he
accepted.


                                  V

Mrs. Granger was a widow, and she admitted herself that the loss of
Mr. Granger had made her very sympathetic. She told Mr. Anderson that
she “understood,” and he firmly believed this, without exactly knowing
what there was to be understood.

Anyhow, her manner was wonderfully soothing to one who had recently
been laughed at, and the young man appreciated it. Twice they strolled
round the garden, followed by Sandy, and Mrs. Granger, in a charming
and playful way, made a chaperon of Sandy.

“You know you’re Sandy’s friend,” she said. “He discovered you.”

Mr. Anderson found this very touching.

Then, when they had come round to the gate for the second time, she
said that she would be very pleased to see him if he would like to
come in for a cup of tea that afternoon.

“Thank you!” he replied heartily. “That’s very kind of you.”

And he really did think it was very kind of her, and that she was a
charming, gracious, kindly little lady, yet he had not said definitely
whether he would come to tea or not.

For all the time, in the back of his mind, there was a queer,
miserable feeling he could not define, a sense of guilt, as if he had
been very careless about something very dear to him. He thought that
he would not make up his mind until—well, until he saw—

What he saw was Miss Selby coming home from a walk with Mr. Quincey.
She was carrying a small bouquet of violets, so he supposed that she
had been in the woods—in those same woods—and with Mr. Quincey. So Mr.
Anderson did go to tea with Mrs. Granger.

Mrs. Granger said he might come on Wednesday evening, and he went. She
played on the piano and sang for him, and he praised her music so much
that she was charmingly confused. Never did she guess that it was not
admiration that moved him, but pity because she made so many mistakes
in technique.

And he accounted all these mistakes to her credit; he thought, like
many another man, that the worse her performance in any art, the more
domestic and womanly she must be. He felt a fine, chivalrous regard
for the poor thing.

But still he kept waiting for some sign of relenting on the part of
Miss Selby. Every evening, as he crossed the dining room to the little
table he thought that perhaps tonight it would be different; perhaps
tonight it would be as it had been during that time when they had
talked to each other.

Of course, if she didn’t care, he wasn’t going to force his unwelcome
conversation upon her. She was a woman; it was her place to make the
first move.

What had he done, anyhow? Maybe he had been a little hasty, but at
least he hadn’t laughed at her, or ever had the slightest desire to do
such a thing. And if, in her unreasonable feminine way, she wanted him
to apologize for things he hadn’t done, he was ready so to do—if she
would make the first move.

“Very well!” thought Miss Selby every evening when she saw him. “If
he’s satisfied to—to let things go on like this, I’m sure I don’t
care.”

She was much better able to wear a calm expression of not caring than
he was. He looked dejected and sulky. But when out of the public eye,
he did better than she, for he merely walked up and down his room, or
gazed out gloomily upon those depressing trees, while she, locked in
her own room, often cried.

The next Sunday it rained, but nevertheless he went out early in the
afternoon, and Miss Selby knew very well where he was going.

“Let him!” she said to herself. “If he’s so easily taken in by
that—that designing woman and her dog, _I_ don’t care! She’s probably
trained the dog to behave like that.”

This was unjust. Mrs. Granger had no need to train dogs to bring
guests into her house. Undoubtedly she liked Mr. Anderson, but if he
had not come there would still have been Captain MacGregor, whom she
had been liking for a good many years. Mr. Anderson was soon made
aware of the captain’s existence by Leroy.

Now, there is no denying that Leroy himself was a shock to the young
man. To begin with, it seemed incredible that any one who looked as
young as Mrs. Granger should have a son eight years old, and in the
second place, if she did have a son, it should have been a different
kind of child.

Leroy was a nice enough boy in his way, but completely lacking in the
plaintive and poetic charm of the mother. Indeed, he seemed more akin
to Sandy, a rough, cheerful, headstrong young thing. But he had none
of Sandy’s admirable instinct for judging human nature, and in the
beginning he did not like Mr. Anderson.

He was frank about it. He said that Mr. Anderson’s watch was markedly
inferior to Captain MacGregor’s, and he expressed a belief that
Captain MacGregor could, if he wished, lick Mr. Anderson. He said a
good many things of this sort, so that the young man was badly
prejudiced against this unknown captain some time before he met him.

And when he did meet him, on that rainy Sunday, nothing occurred to
soften the prejudice. He found MacGregor installed as an old friend.
He found also that the man had brought to Mrs. Granger, as a gift,
_six_ silk umbrellas.

Six! It was an overwhelming gift. Anderson himself had brought a box
of chocolates, but this was completely overshadowed by the umbrellas,
just as he himself was overshadowed by the impressive silence of the
other man.

A big, weather-beaten fellow of forty-five or so was this MacGregor,
with the face and the manner of a gigantic Sphinx; he was neither
handsome nor entertaining, but it was impossible to ignore or despise
him. The solid worth of him, the honest self-respect, and the massive
obstinacy, were plainly apparent.

He was not worried by the appearance of a strange young man; on the
contrary, he seemed mildly amused. He let Anderson do all the talking,
and just sat in a corner of the veranda, smoking his pipe.

This aroused in Anderson an unworthy spirit of emulation. He did not
enjoy being so completely overshadowed by this man and his six
umbrellas, and he returned the very next evening with four superb
phonograph records. He found MacGregor there, just opening a paper
parcel containing fourteen pairs of white gloves.

He waited until Wednesday, and then he arrived with a long box of the
most costly roses. The captain was not there, but Mrs. Granger showed
Anderson a little gift she had received from him the night before—five
mahogany clocks.

The unhappy young man was almost ready to give up then, until Mrs.
Granger casually explained that Captain MacGregor was a marine
insurance adjuster and, in the course of his business, was often able
to buy articles which had been part of damaged cargoes and yet were
themselves in nowise damaged.

“So that he sometimes brings me the most wonderful things,” she said.
“He _is_ so thoughtful and generous. Don’t you like him, Mr.
Anderson?”

“Well, you see, I don’t know him very well,” Anderson replied.

He went home somewhat comforted. Not only had Mrs. Granger been
unusually sympathetic and charming, but her words had inspired him
with a new idea.

On Friday evening he arrived with a very large package, which he left
in the hall. He then entered the sitting room, and found Mrs. Granger
sweetly admiring the captain’s latest gift—seven handsome black silk
blouses, all exactly alike.

He let her go on admiring, and even generously said himself that they
were “very nice.” Then, after a decent interval—“By the way,” he
remarked, and went out into the hall and fetched in his package.

It was pretty imposing. He had spoken to the foreman of the paper
mill, and the foreman had shown a friendly interest, so that he was
now able to present to Mrs. Granger:

1 ream of the finest cream vellum writing paper, with envelopes.

2 reams of gray note paper, with blue envelopes.

1 ream of thin white writing paper, the envelopes lined with dark
purple.

And a vast number of small memorandum pads; pink, blue, and yellow.

“Those are for Leroy,” he said, with a modest air which failed to
conceal his triumph. This time he had won; there was no doubt about
it.


                                  VI

On Saturday night Miss Selby did not appear at the little table.

“Gone out to dinner,” he thought.

Why shouldn’t she go out to dinner? He simply hoped that she was
enjoying herself. And, as he ate his solitary dinner, he thought about
this; he imagined Miss Selby enjoying herself somewhere, sitting at
some other table, and probably with some other young man sitting
opposite her.

He knew how she would look if she were enjoying herself, with that
lovely color in her cheeks, and that wonderful smile of hers. Well, it
was none of his business—absolutely none of his business.

And yet, after dinner, he found occasion to stop the landlady in the
hall, and to say, with an air of courteous indifference:

“That young lady who sits at my table—didn’t see her tonight. Has she
gone away?”

“No, Mr. Anderson!” answered Mrs. Brown, with stern solemnity. “She
has not. She’s lying upstairs, sick, at this very moment that I’m
speaking to you. And _I_ think it’s pneumonia, that’s what _I_ think.”

“Pneumonia!” he cried. “But only last night—”

“It takes you sudden,” Mrs. Brown asserted. “And Miss Selby—well,
people have often said to me how blooming she looked, but well I knew
it was nerve, and nerve alone, that kept her going. Nerve strength!”
she sighed. “It’s a treacherous thing, Mr. Anderson. You live on your
nerves, and then, all of a sudden, they snap—like that!”

And her bony fingers snapped loudly, a startling sound in the dimly
lit hall. The young man was in no condition to judge of the value of
Mrs. Brown’s medical opinion; he was simply panic-stricken.

He went out of the house in a sort of blind haste, and began to walk
along roads strange to him, under a cloudy and somber sky. He heard
the voice of the wind in the trees, and to his unaccustomed ears it
held no solace, but was a voice infinitely mournful.

Pneumonia! That little, little pretty thing—so far from home—ill and
alone in a boarding house. Such a young, little thing.

He remembered that morning in the woods—her face when she had looked
up at him from the violets she was picking—that radiant face,
clear-eyed as a child’s.

“It’s my fault!” he cried aloud. “I ought to have known she couldn’t
take care of herself properly. It’s my fault! The poor little thing!
She’s done some fool trick—got her feet wet—probably makes her lunch
of an ice cream soda—perhaps she can’t afford any lunch. And
now—pneumonia! She had no _right_ to get pneumonia! It’s—”

He stopped short, in a still, dark little lane, clenched his hands,
stood there shaken by pain, by anger, by all the unreason of grief and
anxiety.

“She ought to have known better!” he shouted.


                                 VII

When he came downstairs the next morning, Mrs. Brown regarded his
strained and haggard face with profound interest, and she observed to
one of the old ladies that she believed Mr. Anderson was “coming down
with something.”

He made inquiries about Miss Selby’s health, and obtained very vague
and confused replies, which he interpreted as people jaded and
despondent from a bad night are apt to interpret things. He went into
the dining room, but he could eat no breakfast. Who could, sitting
alone at a little table, opposite an empty chair? Then he went out
again.

It was a rainy day, but that was so fitting that he scarcely noticed
it. He remembered having seen a greenhouse not far away, and he went
there. It was not open on Sunday, but he made it be open. He banged so
loud and so long on the door that at last an old man came out of a
near-by cottage.

“It’s a case of pneumonia!” said the young man, fiercely. “I’ve got to
have some flowers.”

So he was admitted to the greenhouse, and he bought everything there
was, and then sat down at a little desk to write a card. He never
forgot the writing of that card, the rain drumming down on the glass
roof, the palms and rubber trees standing about him, and the hot,
moist, steamy smell like a jungle. He never forgot what he wrote, or
how he felt while he wrote it.

But there would be no use in repeating what he wrote, for nobody ever
read that card.

He put it with the flowers, and set off home. When he got there he
gave the bouquet, very sodden now, to Mrs. Brown’s servant, and said
to her:

“Please give this to Miss Selby. Give it to her yourself; don’t send
it.”

Then he went up to his own room and locked the door. And the room was
all filled with the gray light of a rainy day.

The clang of the dinner bell startled him; he jumped up, scowling, and
muttered: “Oh, shut up!” But, just the same, he had to obey it. He had
to go downstairs, and had to sit at the little table.

Scarcely had he sat down when he saw Miss Selby enter the room—Miss
Selby in a new dark green linen dress, looking unusually pretty, and
not even pale.

He arose; he was pale enough. He couldn’t speak. She must have
received that card; she must have read it. As she glanced at him, he
saw the color deepen in her cheeks, and her smile was uncertain. She
was so lovely.

“I thought—” he began.

She sat down, and he did, too. Again their eyes met.

“It’s a miserable day,” she observed.

He didn’t think so. He thought it was the most beautiful day that had
ever dawned; and he might have said something of the sort if he had
not just at that moment seen an awful thing. He stared, appalled,
almost unbelieving.

The waitress was coming across the room, carrying his immense bouquet.

“No!” he cried, half rising.

But it was too late; she had come; she presented the bouquet to Miss
Selby with a pleased and kindly smile.

“For you!” she announced.

Every one in the room was watching with deep interest.

“See here!” said the young man, in a low and unsteady voice. “I—I only
got them because I thought—they—she told me—you had pneumonia. I
thought— Give them back to her. Throw them away! I—I’m sorry—”

“Sorry I haven’t got pneumonia?” asked Miss Selby. “It’s too bad, but
perhaps I can manage it some other time.”

Her tone and her smile hurt him terribly. He wished that he could
snatch the flowers away from her. She was laughing at him again; every
one in the room was laughing at him.

And it didn’t occur to him that Miss Selby couldn’t possibly know how
he felt, but was a very young and inexperienced creature who was also
hurt by his strange manner of giving bouquets. She thought he wanted
her to know that, unless she were very ill, he wouldn’t dream of
giving her flowers. She was even more hurt than he was.

“Will you bring a vase, please, Kate?” she asked.

Katie did bring a vase, and the hateful and offensive flowers were set
up between them, like a hedge. He leaned over, and with his penknife
deliberately cut off the card tied to the stems and put it into his
pocket. And not one more word did they speak all through that dreadful
meal.


                                 VIII

In his pain and anger and humiliation he turned blindly to Mrs.
Granger, the charming little lady who never laughed at any one. He
couldn’t get to her fast enough; he strode on through the mud in the
steady downpour of rain, simply longing to see her, and to hear her
soft, gracious voice, and to be within the shelter of her friendly
home.

That card was still in his pocket; he took it out, and as he walked
along, tore it into bits and strewed them behind him. They fell into
puddles, where they would lie to be trampled on, those words he had
written—a suitable end for them.

He pushed open the gate of Mrs. Granger’s garden, and was very much
comforted by Sandy’s ecstatic welcome. Dogs _did_ know. They
appreciated it when you meant well; they were not suspicious, not
mocking. When you gave them something they accepted it in good faith.

He went on toward the house, walking rapidly, impatient to get in
there to the gentle serenity of Mrs. Granger’s presence. He rang the
bell, and directly the parlor-maid opened the door he knew he was not
going to have peace and solace.

Something had gone wrong. He could hear Leroy’s voice raised in a
loud, forlorn bellow, and Mrs. Granger’s voice, tearful and trembling,
and Captain MacGregor’s voice, with a slightly exasperated note in it.
He entered the sitting room, and there was Mrs. Granger, weeping, and
Leroy sobbing. Sandy began to bark.

“Oh, Mr. Anderson!” cried Mrs. Granger. “How can you let him do that?
Oh, please keep him quiet!”

Anderson put the dog outside, and then returned.

“But what’s the matter?” he asked.

“Leroy’s been bitten by a m-mad d-dog!” cried Mrs. Granger.

“Was _not_ a mad dog!” Leroy asserted.

“See! Here on his leg!” she went on.

“And he never told me! It happened late yesterday!”

“There’s no reason to assume that the dog was mad,” interrupted the
captain.

“It was! Animals adore Leroy! Only a rabid dog would dream of biting
him!”

“Was _not_ a rabid dog,” Leroy insisted sullenly.

“Well, see here!” said Anderson. “If you think—if you’re worried—why
not have his leg cauterized?”

“Oh, I can’t!” she cried. “My child burned with red-hot irons!”

Leroy began to bellow at this inhuman suggestion, and Mrs. Granger
clasped him in her arms.

“Don’t cry, darling!” she sobbed.

“Mother won’t let them hurt you!” And she looked at Captain MacGregor
and Mr. Anderson with unutterable reproach.

They were silent for a time.

“Well, see here!” Anderson suggested. “If you could find the dog,
and—keep it under observation for a few days—”

This idea appealed to the child.

“Sure!” he said. “I’ll find him, mom. You just let me alone, and I’ll
find him for you, all right!”

“You said you couldn’t remember what the dog was like.”

“Yes, I know. But I remember the street where it was, an’ I’ll go back
there tomorrow,” Leroy declared. “I could stay out o’ school jist in
the mornin’ and jist—ferret it out. I got lots of clews. An’ I bet
you—”

“I’ll go with you now,” said Anderson.

The agitated mother didn’t even thank him.

“Perhaps that would be a good idea,” she admitted. “You might try it,
anyhow, and see.”

So Leroy was fortified against the rain in oilskins and rubbers, and
he and Mr. Anderson set forth together in quest of the dog. The small
boy was highly pleased with the adventure; he did not often have an
opportunity to frolic in the rain, and he made the most of it,
caracoling before Anderson like a sportive colt. Sandy, too, would
have enjoyed it, but he was tied up.

“One dog at a time,” said Anderson.

“Now, young feller, let’s hear about it.”

“Aw, it was nothin’,” Leroy replied with admirable nonchalance. “Jist
a dog ran up an’ bit me. I mean, I was runnin’, an’ I guess I stepped
on his paw an’ he bit me.”

“Did you tell your mother you stepped on the dog?”

“I dunno what all I told her,” Leroy admitted. “Anyway, what’s it
matter? Had to do somethin’ to keep her quiet.”

Anderson considered that it was not his place to rebuke this child,
and he let the disrespect pass.

“Where did it happen?”

“Long ways from here, all right!” said the boy, triumphantly.

He spoke no more than the truth. It was a very long way. They went on
and on, down long, quiet suburban streets, lined with dripping trees
and houses with no signs of life. They went on and on.

At first Leroy was talkative and cheerful, and found great
satisfaction in splashing in puddles, but as time went on he grew
silent, and tramped through the puddles more as a matter of principle
than through enjoyment.

“What was the name of the street?” asked Anderson.

“Well, I don’t know,” the boy answered, “but I guess I’d know it if I
saw it. Somewheres around here, it was. Might be around the next
corner.”

They went round the corner, and there was a candy store.

“That’s it!” Leroy announced. “It’s open, too.”

Mr. Anderson said nothing, but walked steadily forward, and Leroy
trotted by his side.

“They sure did have good lollypops in there,” observed Leroy. “Best I
ever tasted.”

Still no response from the adult, possessor of all power and wealth.
Leroy sighed. And Anderson turned to look at him, and discovered a wet
and not very clean face upturned to his, with brown eyes very like
Sandy’s. Poor little kid, tramping along so bravely in his oilskins!
He looked tired, too.

“All right!” said Anderson. “We’d better go back and get a few
lollypops.”

After that Leroy went on, much encouraged in spirit.

“Here’s the street!” he cried at last. “The lil dog ran out o’ one of
those houses—I don’t know which one.”

Mr. Anderson rang the bell of the first house. The occupants owned no
dog, never had, and never intended so to do. In the second house he
was confronted by a very disagreeable old lady. She admitted that she
had a dog, and she said, with unction, that her dog could and would
bite any persons unlawfully trespassing on her property, as was any
dog’s right.

“I dare say Rover did bite the boy,” she suggested, “if he came in
here trampling and stampling all over my flower beds. And serve him
right, I say!”

“I did not!” said Leroy, indignantly. “And that’s not the dog, Mr.
Anderson. I can see him out the window. He’s a police dog, and my dog
was a little one.”

They proceeded to the next house. Nobody came to the door at all.
There was only one more house left on the street.

“Well, I hope the right dog’s in there,” said Leroy, “but—” He paused,
then he laid his hand on Anderson’s sleeve. “Most any lil dog would
_do_,” he said, very low, “for _her_.”

Mr. Anderson was about to protest sternly against such a dishonest and
immoral suggestion, but somehow he didn’t. The child’s hand looked so
very small, and his manner was so trusting. He said nothing at all,
simply walked up the path to this last house.

He rang the bell, and the door was opened with startling suddenness by
a little man with spectacles and a neatly pointed white beard. He
looked like a professor, and he was a professor—of Romance
Languages—and because of his scholarly unworldliness, he had been
cheated and swindled so many times that he had become fiercely
suspicious. He glared.

“This boy has been bitten by a dog,” Mr. Anderson explained. “And we
want to find the dog, to see—”

“Ha!” said the little man. “And what has this to do with me, pray?”

“I thought perhaps you had a dog here—”

The professor folded his arms.

“Very well!” said he. “I have. And what of it?”

“If you’ll let us see the dog—”

“Aha!” said the professor. “I see! A blackmailing scheme! You wish to
see my dog. You will then cause this child to identify the dog as the
one which bit him, in order that you may collect damages. A ve-ry
pret-ty little scheme, I must admit!”

Anderson had had a singularly trying day, and he was very weary of
this quest, anyhow.

“Nothing of the sort!” he said curtly. “If you’ll be good enough to
let us see your dog—or if you’ll give me your assurance that the
animal is perfectly healthy—”

“Don’t you give him a penny, Joseph!” cried a quavering female voice
from the dark depths of the hall.

The professor laughed ironically.

“Ve-ry pret-ty!” he repeated. “But you may as well understand, once
and for all, that I absolutely refuse to allow you to see my dog, or
to give you any assurance of any kind whatsoever.”

And nothing could move him. Mr. Anderson argued with him with as much
tact and politeness as he could manage just at that time, but in vain.

“See here!” he said at last. “Let me see the dog, and if it’s the
right one, I’ll _buy_ it. Now will you believe—”

But the professor would not believe until Anderson had signed a
document which he drew up, solemnly promising that, if the dog were
identified by Leroy as the dog which had bitten him, he, Winchell
Anderson, would purchase the said dog for the sum of twenty-five
dollars.

Then, and then only, was the dog brought into the room. And Leroy
instantly, loudly and fervently asserted that it was _the_ dog. By
this time Mr. Anderson was perfectly willing to believe him. He paid
the money and stooped to pick up the dog, a small animal, of what
might be called the spaniel type.

It snapped at him. He could not pick it up, because on the next
attempt his hand was bitten. At last, upon his paying in advance for
the telephone call, the professor summoned a taxi. Mr. Anderson could
not get the dog into the taxi, but Leroy had no trouble at all with
it. It seemed to like Leroy.

They rode home in silence, because every time Anderson uttered a word
the animal growled and struggled in the boy’s arms.

They reached Mrs. Granger’s house, and while Leroy ran ahead with the
dog in his arms, Anderson delayed a minute to pay the taxi with the
last bill remaining in his pockets. Then he followed. It had been a
costly and a wearisome quest, but Mrs. Granger’s relief and gratitude
would be sufficient reward.

In the doorway of the sitting room he paused a moment, smiling to
himself at the scene before him. Leroy was down on his knees, playing
with this quite unexpected and delightful new dog, and Mrs. Granger
knelt beside him, one arm about her son’s neck.

Captain MacGregor was there, but in a corner, so that one need not
consider him in the picture—the peaceful lamp-lit room, the gentle
mother and her child.

“I’m very glad—” he began, when, at the sound of his voice, the dog
sprang up and rushed at him, and was caught by Leroy just in the nick
of time. He growled threateningly.

“I guess I’d better tie him up,” said Leroy. “He doesn’t like Mr.
Anderson.”

“Why, how very strange!” Mrs. Granger exclaimed.

Leroy did tie him up to the leg of a table.

“But why doesn’t the poor little doggie like Mr. Anderson?” pursued
Mrs. Granger, and there was something in her voice that dismayed the
young man.

“I don’t know,” he replied, briefly.

“It’s very strange,” she remarked. “Very! But sit down, Mr. Anderson.
Perhaps you were just a little bit rough in handling him—without
meaning to be.”

“No, he wasn’t!” Leroy asserted, indignantly. “He—”

At this point the dog broke loose, flew at Anderson, and would have
bitten him if Anderson had not prevented him—with his foot.

“Oh!” cried Mrs. Granger. “Oh, Mr. Anderson, how could you! You kicked
the poor little doggie!”

“I—I simply pushed him—with my foot,” said Anderson. “He’s a
bad-tempered little brute.”

“Dogs are never bad-tempered unless they’re badly treated,” Mrs.
Granger declared, with severity. “They always know a friend from a
foe.”

“All right!” the young man agreed. “Then I’m afraid I’m a foe.” He
turned toward the door. “If you’ll excuse me,” he said, “I’ll be
getting along. I’m—I’m tired. Good evening!”

“Good evening!” said Mrs. Granger and Captain MacGregor in unison.

She let him go! He opened the front door and stepped out into the rain
again, and never in his life had he felt so bitter, so disappointed,
so cruelly, intolerably depressed. After all he had done, she let him
go like this! Not even a word of thanks. Poor little doggie, eh?

Halfway down the path he heard a shout; it was Leroy, rushing after
him bareheaded through the rain.

“Say!” he shouted. “You’re—”

Words failed him, and he stretched out his hand, a rough, warm little
hand, wet from the rain, sticky from lollypops. Yet Anderson was very
glad to clasp it tight.

“Good-by, old fellow!” he said.

“Good-by, old fellow, yourself!” answered Leroy.

And he sat on the gatepost, watching, and waving his hand as Anderson
went down the road in the rainy dusk.


                                  IX

Mr. Anderson had finished with women forever. And this resolve gave to
his face a new and not unbecoming sternness; the old ladies noticed it
directly he entered the dining room that evening. Miss Selby noticed
it, too, but pretended not to; she smiled that same chilly, polite
smile, and said never a word—neither did he.

Supper was set before them, and they began to eat, still silent. And
then she spoke suddenly.

“What’s the matter with your hand, Mr. Anderson?” she asked.

“Oh, nothing; thanks!” he answered.

Again a silence. But she could not keep her eyes off that
clumsily-tied bandage on his hand.

“I wish you’d tell me!” she said.

It was an entirely different tone, but he was no longer to be trifled
with like that. He smiled, coldly.

“No doubt you’ll be very much amused,” he remarked, “to learn that
I’ve been bitten by a dog!”

He waited.

“Why don’t you laugh, Miss Selby?” he inquired. “It’s funny enough,
isn’t it? After I said that dogs always know. It’s what you might call
‘biting irony,’ isn’t it?”

“I—don’t want to laugh,” said she. “I’m—just sorry.”

He looked at her.

“Miss Selby!” he cried.

“I took your flowers upstairs,” she said. “I think—they’re the
prettiest—the prettiest flowers—I—ever saw.”

“Miss Selby!” he exclaimed again. “See here! Please! When I thought
you were ill—”

“I only had a little cold.”

“I wrote a note,” he said. “I tore it up. I—I wish I hadn’t.”

Miss Selby was looking down at her plate.

“I wish you hadn’t, too,” she agreed.

The old ladies had all finished their suppers, but not one of them
left the room. They were watching Miss Selby and Mr. Anderson. Surely
not a remarkable spectacle, simply a nice looking young man and a
pretty young girl, sitting, quite speechless, now, at a little table.

Yet one old lady actually wiped tears from her eyes, and every one of
them felt an odd and tender little stir at the heart, as if the
perfume of very old memories had blown in at the opened window.

“Let’s go out on the veranda,” said Mr. Anderson to Miss Selby, and
they did.

The rain was coming down steadily, and the wind sighed in the pines.
But it was a June night, a summer night, a young night.

Not an old lady set foot on the veranda that evening, not another
human being heard what Miss Selby from Boston, and Mr. Anderson from
New York had to say to each other.

Only Mrs. Brown, opening the door for a breath of fresh air, did
happen to hear him saying something about the “best sort of paper for
wedding announcements.”


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the March 1926 issue of
Munsey’s Magazine.]

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 67266 ***
