The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tom Swift and his big dirigible
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tom Swift and his big dirigible
        or, Adventures over the forest of fire

Author: Victor Appleton

Release date: January 1, 2026 [eBook #77599]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Grosset & Dunlap, 1930

Credits: Delphine Lettau, Greg Weeks, Cindy Beyer, Mary Meehan & the online Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG DIRIGIBLE ***




                    TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG DIRIGIBLE

                                   OR

                   Adventures Over the Forest of Fire

                                   BY
                            VICTOR  APPLETON
                               AUTHOR OF
                    “TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTORCYCLE,”
                 “TOM SWIFT AMONG THE DIAMOND MAKERS,”
                 “TOM SWIFT AND HIS TALKING PICTURES,”
                        “THE DON STURDY SERIES,”
                                  ETC.


                             _ILLUSTRATED_


                                NEW YORK
                           GROSSET  &  DUNLAP
                               PUBLISHERS
                  Made in the United States of America


                         COPYRIGHT,  1930,  BY
                       GROSSET  &  DUNLAP,  INC.
                _Tom  Swift  and  His  Big  Dirigible_




                                CONTENTS


          CHAPTER                                           PAGE
                I SPOUTING FIRE                                1
               II A TREMENDOUS UNDERTAKING                    12
              III THE “SILVER CLOUD”                          21
               IV OFF TO MT. CAMON                            31
                V THE STRANGE DWARF                           40
               VI A MERRY PARTY                               51
              VII THE LANDSLIDE                               59
             VIII MR. DAMON ARRIVES                           69
               IX A FLASHING KNIFE                            79
                X UGLY THREATS                                87
               XI SHADOWS OF THE NIGHT                        93
              XII BAD NEWS                                   102
             XIII A CHANGE OF PLANS                          111
              XIV BUCKING A HURRICANE                        120
               XV CAUGHT IN THE FOG                          130
              XVI A GIANT’S STRENGTH                         137
             XVII MIDNIGHT VISITORS                          147
            XVIII THE ESCAPE                                 152
              XIX THE FOREST OF FIRE                         157
               XX SPEEDING THROUGH THE AIR                   165
              XXI IN DIRE PERIL                              171
             XXII A MESSAGE OF HOPE                          181
            XXIII THE METAL CAGE                             189
             XXIV OUT OF THE FLAMES                          196
              XXV A JOY RIDE                                 204




[Illustration: THE BIG DIRIGIBLE HAD RAMMED HER NOSE INTO THE TREE.]




                               TOM SWIFT
                         AND HIS BIG DIRIGIBLE




                               CHAPTER I


                             SPOUTING FIRE

“SUCH a big dirigible would cost a barrel of money, Mr. Jardine.”

“I know it, Mr. Swift. But my company is prepared to go the limit. We
want the finest and fastest dirigible ever built, capable of carrying at
least fifty passengers and enough supplies to travel ten thousand
miles.”

A short, stout, fussy man, attired in a natty gray business suit, arose
and nervously paced the office of the Swift Construction Company as he
uttered these specifications. Tom Swift and his aged father looked at
their visitor, but neither spoke. Tom’s face had just the suggestion of
puzzled doubt. Mr. Swift was interested, but not unusually so. He was
approaching the twilight of life and even great projects did not
interest him as they once had done. He left them to Tom.

“Yes, it must be the biggest dirigible ever built!” exclaimed Martin
Jardine. “And you must build it, Tom Swift!”

“That’s easier said than done,” returned Tom, with a smile.

“Oh, you can do it if anybody can,” snapped Mr. Jardine. That was his
way of talking—snappily. He seemed to be all business from his brightly
polished tan shoes to the top of his crisp, brown hair. As he continued
to pace up and down, now and then shooting a glance at the Swifts,
father and son, who were seated, he pulled out a cigar, snapped off the
end, flicked out a pocket lighter, set it aglow with an impatient
movement of his thumb and, a moment later, was puffing a cloud of smoke
about the office.

“Oh, excuse me!” he exclaimed a moment later, his right hand slipping to
the left upper pocket of his vest. “Have a cigar.”

He held out two, twins to the one he was smoking, and offered one to Mr.
Swift.

“No, thank you,” said the aged inventor. “I don’t smoke.”

“Then you, Mr. Tom?” The cigars went in that direction.

“Thanks, but I don’t indulge,” Tom answered, with a smile. “And if I did
I’d be afraid to tackle one of yours. They look particularly deadly, if
you’ll excuse my saying so.”

“Well, they are a bit strong,” said the fussy little business man, who
appeared to have called on a very important errand. “But I like to taste
something when I smoke. It quiets my nerves.”

However, his nerves did not appear to be under very good control just
then, for, in spite of his notion of a quieting smoke, this devotee of
my Lady Nicotine was having all he could do to repress himself.

“Well, what about this proposition?” he asked, coming back to his seat
and brushing aside a cloud of his own smoke.

“Do you really want us to undertake a big, expensive dirigible like
this?” asked Tom, tapping some papers on his desk, papers of which the
top one bore a rough sketch of a great airship, in shape like the _Graf
Zeppelin_, but larger and differing radically in some of its parts.

“Of course! Why not?” demanded Mr. Jardine. He was out of his chair
again, and had taken a fresh cigar from his pocket, though the one he
had lighted only a few minutes before still contained much smokable
material. “You haven’t any doubt of the ability of my company to foot
the bills, have you, Mr. Swift?”

“Oh, no,” Tom answered. He had taken the precaution of having a
commercial agency look up the rating of the Jardine company before one
of its heads called on him, and the report was satisfactory. “But you
don’t seem to realize, Mr. Jardine, that an airship of this size would
take a long time to construct and you are evidently in a hurry.”

“I’m always in a hurry!” snapped the fussy little man. “But this is to
be an all metal plane, and, as I told you, we can supply the metal. Have
a cigar!” he shot at Mr. Swift who was examining some sketches and blue
prints the visitor had brought with him.

“No, thank you. I don’t smoke.”

“Oh, so you don’t! I forgot! Excuse me! Then you, Mr. Tom.”

He held another out to the young inventor.

“I am still not smoking,” chuckled Tom.

“Oh, yes! Well, now let’s get down to business. When can you finish this
dirigible for me?”

He sat down in the chair again and leaned back as if for a protracted
visit, but as Tom paused before answering Mr. Jardine was up again and
pacing the floor, while smoke came from his mouth like a small furnace
under forced draft.

“Ten thousand miles,” murmured Tom, his gaze concentrated on nothing in
particular, a trick he had when intently thinking.

“At least that,” stipulated Mr. Jardine.

“And fifty passengers,” went on Tom.

“More, if possible,” snapped the caller.

“Well——” began Tom Swift, but he was interrupted by the ringing of a
telephone bell. His father picked up the receiver, he being nearest the
instrument, and spoke into the transmitter while Tom reached out to take
up one of the blue prints.

“It’s your wife, Tom,” said old Mr. Swift, handing the instrument to his
son.

“Oh, hello, Mary!” Tom called into the mouthpiece. “Yes! No, I’m not too
busy to talk. Oh, yes, about our Mt. Camon trip. It’s all arranged. I
just got word about the hotel reservations. Yes, I’ll have the House on
Wheels thoroughly gone over. Of course! Yes, my dear. All right! I’ll be
over in a little while and show you the choice of rooms we can have.
Good-bye.”

During this interruption Mr. Jardine had tried not to show his
impatience, but it was difficult. He paced the floor more nervously and
faster than before, while lighting another cigar, the third in less than
fifteen minutes, and not one of them smoked more than half way.

“Excuse me,” said the young inventor to his caller. Tom put the phone
back on the desk and added: “That was my wife, and we have just
completed our plans for a summer vacation. We are going to Mt. Camon.
Hope to get off next week.”

“Mt. Camon. I know it! Beautiful spot. Wonderful hotel there, but in the
middle of a great wilderness. Wonderful food, though! Best meals I ever
ate! How they manage it I don’t know. But you can’t be going there!”

“Why not?” asked Tom Swift with a half smile.

“Because you are going to undertake the construction of this big
dirigible for us and that will take all your time and attention.”

“Oh, I don’t know,” replied Tom easily. “I haven’t fully decided to
undertake the work.”

“Oh, but you must!” insisted Mr. Jardine. “Excuse me for being so
emphatic,” he went on, tossing the almost fresh cigar aside, “but you
are the only one who can do it. You must do it!”

“Well, I’ll think about it,” said Tom, once more reaching for some blue
prints. “But I must also take my wife on a vacation.”

“Tom hasn’t been married long,” observed old Mr. Swift, smiling.

“Congratulations,” murmured Mr. Jardine. “It’s a big contract, I know.”

“Do you mean marriage?” asked Tom, with a smile.

“No, I’m speaking of this big dirigible. When can you let me know?”

Tom was doing some mental calculations, having as much to do with the
individual who had called on him as on the actual construction of the
giant of the air. There had been some correspondence prior to the visit.
Martin Jardine had first written guardedly of what he wanted the Swift
Construction Company to undertake. Tom had had Ned Newton, his financial
manager, look up the concern’s rating and, finding they were big
producers of metals and machinery, at last consented to an interview
which was now taking place.

At this talk Mr. Jardine had gone more into details than in his letters,
and for the first time had given some definite idea of what he desired
as to the size of the dirigible, the number of passengers and crew she
could carry, and her cruising range. These figures rather surprised Tom
Swift, accustomed as he was to gigantic undertakings.

“Now let’s go over it all again,” proposed Mr. Jardine, as Tom finished
some hasty calculations in pencil. “There are one or two points I must
insist on.”

Tom raised his eyebrows slightly at the word “insist,” but politely
inquired:

“What are they?”

“This must be an all metal ship,” said Mr. Jardine.

“That is not impossible,” replied Tom. “We have made some ourselves for
experimental work, and the United States Government has proved that a
metal dirigible is feasible.”

“Another point,” went on Mr. Jardine, in his rather snappy manner.

“What is it?” Tom asked.

“The metal used for the gas bag—envelope I should say, as it will not
be a fabric bag—this metal must be oralum.”

“Oralum?” questioned Tom.

“Yes,” went on Mr. Jardine. “That is a new, secret-process metal we have
developed in our works. One of my objects in having you build this big
dirigible for us is to advertise our oralum. It is much lighter and
stronger than duralumin which, up to the present, was the only metal
sheets that could be used in constructing dirigible envelopes. Aside
from these points, you can use your own ideas on the craft, Mr. Swift.”

“Thank you,” said Tom, and if his caller had not been busy lighting
another cigar he might have noticed a tinge of sarcasm in the words.

“When can you start?” snapped Mr. Jardine, puffing out more smoke.

“Well,” said Tom slowly, “I haven’t exactly made up my mind to start at
all. Oh, I’m not turning down your order,” he was quick to add to
forestall a vehement objection. “It’s just that my father and I must
talk this over further before reaching a decision.”

“Then you can’t let me know now?”

“No, we must have a further conference. I will let you know when. And
now, if you will excuse me, I must run over to the house to see my wife.
She is anxious about our vacation plans.”

“Tom is just married,” said Mr. Swift, again, as if to excuse to the
caller the young man’s rather precipitate closing of the interview.

“Oh, that’s all right. I understand,” and Mr. Jardine smiled. “The
ladies first, always. I’m quite fond of ’em myself. Well, be sure to let
me know when I can see you again, Mr. Swift.”

“I will. Good day!”

Mr. Jardine had not long left the office, hurrying away with his nervous
air, his cigars and his smoke, when Ned Newton came in as Tom was about
to depart for the Swift mansion where his wife, who had been Mary
Nestor, was waiting for him.

“Hello, Ned!” Tom greeted his financial manager.

“Hello, Tom. Wasn’t that Martin Jardine I passed in the hall?”

“I suppose so. He just left here. Came in to have me sign that contract
for building him a big dirigible.” Tom tossed a sheaf of typewritten
sheets to Ned.

“Oh, yes, from the Jardine company. Um!” Ned picked up the documents.

“You’ve seen them before,” Tom reminded him. “You said the contract was
well drawn, legal in every way, and properly safeguarded us.”

“Yes, I did,” Ned admitted. “It’s a perfectly legal contract as far as
it goes.”

“Doesn’t it go far enough?” asked Tom.

“Well, yes,” Ned had to admit. “Oh, the contract is all right. It’s this
Martin Jardine I was thinking about.”

“What’s the matter with him?” asked Tom.

“He smokes too much,” broke in Mr. Swift, with a chuckle. “Not that I
object to smoking, though.”

“That isn’t it,” Ned stated slowly. “It’s just that to me Jardine seems
to strike a false note. He’s snappy, businesslike, and up to snuff. For
all that, I think there is something not quite true about him.”

“He’s eccentric, I’ll admit,” said Tom musingly. “But so is Mr. Damon.”

“Mr. Damon doesn’t want you to sink hundreds of thousands of dollars in
building a freak dirigible,” remarked Ned.

“No, that’s true. But the Jardine company assumes half the risk and
expense—even more,” Tom added, “for they will supply the oralum metal
plates, and that’s a big item.”

“All the same, Tom,” went on Ned, “I’d go a bit slow about this, if I
were you.”

“I intend to,” Tom said, looking out of the window of his office into
the April sunshine. It was this warm, early spring sunshine that had set
his blood and that of his wife tingling, so they had made plans for an
early vacation. “Yes,” went on the young inventor, “nothing is settled
yet. We are to have another conference and then——”

There came a sudden interruption in the shape and form of a veritable
giant of a man who burst into the private office without any warning.

“What’s the matter, Koku?” asked Tom, for, obviously, something was
wrong.

“O, Master!” cried the giant in a booming voice. “Him House on Wheels
all bust up! Him spout fire! All blaze! Look!”

Tom, Mr. Swift, and Ned Newton peered from a back window. They saw a
cloud of smoke and spurting streaks of fire near the garage where the
wonderful traveling auto, a small house in itself, was kept. As they
looked, they heard a sharp explosion.




                               CHAPTER II


                        A TREMENDOUS UNDERTAKING

“THERE she goes, Tom!” cried Ned Newton, as an even greater cloud of
smoke enveloped the House on Wheels, following the sharp blast. “What
caused the blaze?”

“It must be the fireworks I brought in last night!” cried Tom Swift, as,
followed by Ned and Mr. Swift, he hurried from the office to the yard of
the plant.

“Fireworks?” cried Ned.

“Yes. I meant to put them in a safe place, but I forgot them and left
them in the House on Wheels. But what made them go off, I wonder?”

“What are you doing with fireworks at this time of year?” Ned wanted to
know, as he hurried along beside his chum. “Independence Day is three
months off.”

“I know it,” Tom replied. “But it’s Mary’s birthday to-morrow and ever
since she was a little girl she has had fireworks on that occasion. I
couldn’t omit it the first year she’s married to me.”

“Of course you couldn’t,” agreed Ned. “So you were going to have a
fireworks display for Mary’s birthday. Well, the fireworks picked a good
day for themselves.”

“What do you mean?” Tom exclaimed.

“To-day is April Fool’s day,” answered Ned.

“Well, it’s a poor joke to set off fireworks in my House on Wheels, even
if it is April first,” declared Tom. “Look at ’em!”

By this time he and Ned were running directly toward the famous House on
Wheels. Workmen from the shop were also congregating there, some
carrying portable fire extinguishers.

From all appearances, these would be needed. Skyrockets, Roman candles,
pinwheels, aerial bombs, and other pyrotechnics were making a grand
display from within and about the House on Wheels.

“She’s a goner I’m afraid!” sighed Tom.

“Looks bad,” agreed Ned, and then both ran on to help put out the blaze.

While they are doing this, it might be mentioned, for the benefit of new
readers, who Tom Swift was and something told about him.

In the first book of this series, named “Tom Swift and His Motor Cycle,”
Tom Swift was introduced. He was a young inventor, living with his
father, Barton Swift, in the small city of Shopton where the Swift works
were located. Tom’s mother was dead, but he and his father were looked
after by Mrs. Baggert, their housekeeper.

As a lad Tom was interested in mechanics, and that he could develop
ideas and invent machinery was proved when, after Wakefield Damon, of
the neighboring town of Waterford, smashed his motor cycle by running up
a tree, Tom bought the wreck, repaired it, and made it better than ever.
Since then he and Mr. Damon, a most eccentric man, had been good
friends.

In time Tom developed into a great inventor, like his father, and, as
Mr. Swift grew infirm, Tom assumed entire charge of the plant.

The shops where new inventions were tried out and various machines
manufactured now covered many acres of ground and, as the plant had
grown, had been removed from near the Swift homestead, in which
comfortable house Tom and his father lived with Mary Nestor, whom Tom
had recently married. Tom frequently urged his chum, Ned Newton, to
marry Helen Morton, a girl friend of Mary Nestor. But, somehow, Ned
could not make up his mind to this. He said he was too busy managing
Tom’s financial matters to think of getting married.

Tom and Ned were each in their early twenties now and were doing a fine
business. For repairing a broken motor cycle was only one of Tom Swift’s
achievements. He perfected motor boats, submarines, an aerial warship,
an electric locomotive, and was one of the first to develop talking
pictures.

The latest invention of the young mechanic had been a great auto, which
he called his traveling home, and in the book immediately preceding this
full details are given. That volume is called “Tom Swift and His House
on Wheels; or, A Trip to the Mountain of Mystery.”

It was on this Mountain of Mystery that the young inventor solved some
strange puzzles and had some breath-taking adventures, during which he
nearly lost his queer House. It was right after this that he and Mary
Nestor decided to get married.

Tom Swift brought his bride to the old homestead, and while he and Mary
lived in one wing of the big place, with Koku, the giant, as a sort of
bodyguard, Mr. Swift, well looked after by Mrs. Baggert and Eradicate,
an aged Negro, lived in another part of the mansion.

Tom had only just returned from a short trip he and Mary had made in
their House on Wheels when he received a letter from the Jardine company
about building a big dirigible. There was some correspondence and the
first interview was just over when Koku gave the alarm of fire.

“What started it, Koku?” asked Tom, as, with Ned and the giant, he stood
in front of the House which was still spouting fireworks.

“No can tell. All of a quick go Boom!” answered the giant, whom Tom had
brought back with him after a perilous trip to a wonderful land.

“Must have been spontaneous combustion!” gasped Ned, as a big skyrocket
whizzed over their heads.

“I hope that’s the last!” cried Garret Jackson, the shop manager, as he
edged in closer with a fire extinguisher.

“I bought an awful lot of fireworks,” Tom admitted, with a sort of groan
as he saw what danger his precious House was in. “They can’t a quarter
of them have gone off yet!”

“Some birthday celebration!” laughed Ned. “You ought to get Mary here!”

But it was no time for talking. There was great danger. However, the
workmen in the Swift plant were accustomed to dealing with emergencies
of this nature, and some well directed streams from the chemical
containers soon had the worst of the fire out. A few crackers and some
pinwheels continued to ignite, but the greatest danger, from some
powerful aerial bombs, had been averted.

“But I can’t understand it,” murmured Tom as he went into the House on
Wheels to view the damage. “Though I put the fireworks in here
hurriedly, I was careful to see that there was nothing near that could
set them off.”

“Was the motor running just before you put the Roman candles in here?”
asked Ned. “If so, there might have been some heat in that.”

“The House wasn’t in use yesterday,” Tom said. “It was being put in
shape for the trip Mary and I are to take.”

“What trip is that?” asked Ned.

“To Mt. Camon,” was the answer. “It’s quite a wonderful mountain resort
in a big piece of woods. Mary’s father and mother used to go there and
she thought she’d like to go back. Dad, too, needs a change, and I
thought of running up there with him, Mary, and her parents and leaving
them for a month or so. I’d have to come back, especially if I undertake
this big dirigible.”

“Have you decided on that yet?” Ned wanted to know.

“Not yet,” Tom answered. “But now it looks as if I’d be busy getting
this House in shape,” and he gazed ruefully about the blackened and
still smoke-filled interior of the odd conveyance.

“It will need some repairs,” agreed Ned. “But perhaps not many. It’s
lucky it wasn’t all blown apart.”

“Yes,” Tom assented.

“What possessed you to store fireworks in here?” Ned wanted to know.

“Well,” Tom said, “it may have been foolish; but as I came in with them
last night, I thought I was followed by some one. It seemed as if some
man was sneaking around the plant. I spoke to some of the watchmen and
even got Koku on the job. Then I got to thinking even a stray cigarette
in this mass of fireworks would set them off, and I judged that if I
stuck them in this House no one would know where they were. So I did.”

“And did that mysterious individual who followed you set them off?”
asked Ned.

“That I can’t tell. Koku and I and a watchman looked about the place
after I had put the fireworks away, but we found no one. Perhaps I was
mistaken.”

“Well, there wasn’t any mistake about this fire,” said Ned grimly.

“Unfortunately, no,” agreed Tom. “But I’ll rush the repairs.”

The next few days were busy ones for Tom Swift. For one thing, he had to
attend to his wife’s natal anniversary and this was a successful affair,
in spite of the fact that most of the fireworks had gone off
prematurely. There were enough left for a small display.

After the birthday party, Tom Swift spent much time superintending
repairs to the big traveling home, in which he hoped to take his wife,
his father, and the Nestors to Mt. Camon. In the midst of these busy
operations fussy Mr. Jardine came back, at the time appointed, to get
Tom’s decision regarding the big dirigible.

“Well, have you decided yet, Mr. Swift?” asked the caller, nervously
lighting another cigar.

“I will soon,” Tom replied, with a smile. “We’ll go into a conference
now. My father will be here in a moment and I will send for Mr. Newton.”

The conference was rather long and very important. Mr. Jardine was
enthusiastic and insistent and urged that the work be started at once
and rushed to completion before fall. He had the oralum metal plates all
ready to use, he said.

“Even with them, we’ll need a lot of special machinery and motors,”
objected Tom. “It’s going to be a big job.”

“That’s why I came to a big inventor,” said Mr. Jardine, with ready
tact. “I know you can do it!”

“What do you say, Ned?” Tom asked.

“The financial end seems to be all right,” stated the manager. But he
did not look at Mr. Jardine as he said this. Though keeping silent, Ned
had not changed his opinion about the stout, fussy little man.

“What’s your word, Dad?” Tom asked his father.

Mr. Swift was slow and careful and, in spite of his age, had a keen
business and inventive sense.

“I think it can be done, Tom, if you want to do it,” answered Mr. Swift.

“There’s no question about my wanting to do it,” Tom said. “I’d ask
nothing better than to turn out a craft like that if we can do it at a
fair profit. It will be a big advertisement for us.”

“And us. We appreciate that,” said Mr. Jardine. “We expect big things of
our new metal, once it gets to be known as ideal for dirigible
envelopes. We think we have a wonderful thing in oralum. I do hope you
will go on with this, Mr. Swift.”

Tom was silent for a few seconds and then he made a momentous decision.
He reached for his pen to sign the contracts and said:

“Yes, we’ll build the big dirigible.”

“Good!” cried Mr. Jardine.




                              CHAPTER III


                           THE “SILVER CLOUD”

“WELL, Ned, there she is!” exclaimed Tom Swift, several weeks after the
disastrous explosion of fireworks and the following decision to
undertake the construction of the big dirigible. “What do you think of
her?”

“Who? What? Where?” asked the financial manager, who had come into Tom’s
private workshop to discuss some business matters.

“The _Silver Cloud_,” Tom replied, with a wave of his hand.

“_Silver Cloud?_”

“Yes. The new dirigible I’m building for the Jardine company.”

“Dirigible!” cried Ned. “I don’t see her,” and he looked around the
room.

“You poor fish!” chuckled the young inventor, “you don’t suppose I have
the giant dirigible in here, do you? I’m speaking of the model I just
completed.”

He pointed to a shelf where a good view could be had of a wonderfully
complete but small model of what would eventually be the big all-metal
dirigible.

“I’ve named her the _Silver Cloud_,” went on Tom, and the reason was
obvious, for while the model was constructed of fabric, it was painted
with an aluminum preparation which made it look like a silver mass of
vapor in a blue sky. A further semblance to a cloud was in several flat,
wave-shaped fins protruding from the sides of the long gas bag, at the
point of greatest diameter.

“What are those dinguses for?” asked Ned.

“To keep her on a steady keel when we’re speeding along about two
hundred miles an hour,” Tom answered.

“As fast as that?” exclaimed the manager.

“Faster, maybe,” was his chum’s answer.

“So that’s how she’s going to look, is it?” murmured Ned, putting his
hands, containing several papers for Tom’s attention, behind him and
standing in front of the model. “Nice lines to her!”

“It’s the most scientifically constructed dirigible I ever built.
Planned to build, I should say,” Tom said, “for we’ve barely begun work
on the frame. Things have got to rush to get her ready by fall.”

“Can you do it?”

“Got to! Luckily, I can buy ready-made many of the motor and other
parts. The Jardine company has on hand all the oralum plates I’ll need,
so the greatest problem is fitting the _Silver Cloud_ together.”

“It’s a good name,” decided Ned. “I only hope the company will turn out
to be as good as this model.”

“What company?” asked Tom quickly.

“The Jardine company,” was the reply.

“I thought you looked them up.”

“I did, and they are reported O. K. But every time I try to get a line
on this Martin Jardine personally, I’m met with evasive answers or else
silence. Tom, I’m afraid there’s something wrong about him.”

“But he has met his advance payments to the dot and he says if I need
more money to call on him.”

“It isn’t all a question of money, though that’s usually the most
important factor,” Ned stated, as he sat down in Tom’s private
experimental office. “The company is all right. But it’s this nervous,
fussy, eternal-cigar-smoking stout little man in the gray suit that I’m
uncertain about, Tom.”

“Oh, I think you’re too fussy yourself, Ned. He seems all right. A bit
dictatorial and impatient, but he and I have got along so far without
difficulty.”

“Well, I hope it keeps up. Now about these papers. Here are some for you
to sign.”

“All right. Let’s get through with them, and then I’ve got to go out in
the shop and see how they’re coming on with the frame of the _Silver
Cloud_. She’s going to be a great ship, Ned!” and Tom’s eyes sparkled
with enthusiasm.

“I believe you,” said the manager.

The _Silver Cloud_ was, indeed, the most ambitious piece of aircraft
work ever undertaken by Tom Swift and his associates. Not only the great
size, but the cruising radius and the accommodations for passengers
exceeded anything ever before attempted.

When the routine business was disposed of, Ned went out to the main shop
with Tom and watched the workmen getting ready for the first step in the
construction of the great airship.

Briefly, it may be said that while the generally familiar cigar-shaped
envelope to hold the lifting gas was the design followed, there were
some radical departures in construction. The stabilizing fins, for one
item, were a novelty.

Instead of having the powerful motors suspended in more or less unstable
gondolas protruding from and beneath the oralum frame and envelope, the
driving apparatus was within the outer skin. Only the powerful
propellers, six in all, were exposed. Each motor was accessible from the
interior of the oralum envelope.

Within the metal envelope were the quarters for the crew and
accommodations for passengers. The latter were forward, and were to be,
in miniature, as elaborate as the living quarters on a palatial ocean
liner.

The gasoline and oil for the motors, the stores of food and water that
would be needed on a ten-thousand-mile voyage, and tools and spare parts
for use in an emergency, were to be carried near the quarters for the
crew and officers.

The greater part of the oralum envelope, of course, was filled with a
new and powerful lifting gas, perfected by Tom Swift and his father. It
was not as explosive as nitrogen, but not quite as safe as helium.
However, it was easier and cheaper to make. One reason that Martin
Jardine had come to them to build his giant dirigible, was because the
Swifts held the secret of this gas. The craft was to be built on a
cost-plus basis and would be the property of the Jardine company when
finished, though of course much credit would accrue to Tom Swift for his
work on it.

“She’s going to be big!” gasped Ned as he took in the lines of the
skeleton, as yet only partly in place.

“She sure is!” admitted Tom. “Wait until we begin to fasten on the
outside oralum plates and she’ll dwarf the Graf.”

“That’s going some!” exclaimed Ned. “But will she be as comfortable to
ride in?”

“More so,” Tom promised. “Wait until you see the passengers’ staterooms,
the electrically equipped kitchen, the dining room, and the recreation
gymnasium. Why, this ship will be so big and steady you’ll never know
she’s moving.”

“Even in a storm?”

“It will take some storm to bother the _Silver Cloud_!” declared Tom.
“She’ll be as steady as a church!”

The days that followed were exceptionally busy ones for Tom Swift. Never
before had he agreed to construct a craft for such a fussy individual as
Martin Jardine. That representative of the company which furnished the
oralum plates seemed to live in Shopton, he was there so often. More
than once he got Tom out of bed by sunrise to ascertain how the work was
coming on, or to make some new suggestions about the craft.

But as Tom was working for him, and as all payments had, so far, been
promptly met, and as there was to be a good profit in the enterprise,
Tom found no great fault.

“We’re in business to do business,” he said to Ned, who criticized Mr.
Jardine. “I might as well have his money, as any of our competitors.”

“Well, he needn’t be so fidgety.”

“He is a bit fussy,” Tom admitted. “But then, this is a big
undertaking.”

Tom Swift found the work more and more exacting and vexatious as the
days went on, for many and troublesome matters cropped up in connection
with the construction of the big dirigible. At one time a shipment of
oralum plates would be held up. Another time the wrong kind would be
sent and delays ensued from that fact. Then, too, there were
disappointments in getting motor and other parts from outside sources.
But the Swift plant, big as it was, never could have undertaken to build
the ship by fall if all the work had been done in Shopton.

“Well, how’s the _Silver Cloud_ coming?” asked Ned one day, as he and
Tom sat in the private office, talking.

“Good,” Tom answered. “She’ll be ready by September. I hope, in a few
days, to leave with Mary and the others on that little vacation to Mt.
Camon.”

“Going in the House on Wheels?”

“Yes. Mary wants to travel that way because the House was so intimately
associated with our wedding trip.”

“How is Mary?” Ned asked.

“Just fine,” Tom answered. “She——”

The telephone interrupted him, and as he answered it he smiled and said:

“Ned’s here, Mary. He was just asking me how you are, so I’ll let you
tell him yourself. Yes, I’ll slip out while you’re doing that and see
when the House will be ready.”

Work at repairing the damage done by the fireworks explosion had been
proceeding on the House on Wheels while Tom was busy with the _Silver
Cloud_.

“Keep Mary there until I come back,” Tom said to his friend, as he
turned the telephone over to him and went out to the building where the
House was being renovated.

“Hear you’re going to Mt. Camon,” Ned said to Mary.

“Oh, yes. Don’t you wish you were coming?”

“Indeed, I do! But I’m too busy. What sort of place is it up there?”

“Oh, wild scenery, mountains, great stretches of uncleared woods—quite
isolated, in short.”

“Good place for a honeymoon then, or is yours over?”

“Indeed it isn’t!” laughed Mary. “Tom is wonderful!”

“Well, I’ll let you talk to the wonderful man,” chuckled Ned, as he gave
the phone to Tom who hurried in. There was a rather serious look on the
young inventor’s face as he spoke to his wife and said:

“I’m sorry, Mary; but it will have to be postponed.”

“What, Tom?”

“Our trip to Mt. Camon.”

“Oh! Why?”

“The House is worse damaged than I had any idea of and it will take at
least a month, maybe more, to get it in shape to use. I’m sorry!”

“Oh, well, let’s go by airship, Tom. In the new, big dirigible.”

“That will hardly be ready, either. We’ll have to make some other plans,
my dear. I’ll be home soon, and we’ll talk it over. Bring Ned to dinner?
Why, of course. How about it?” he looked away to ask his chum.

“I’m on,” Ned answered.

There was a little more talk between Tom and his wife and as he hung up
the receiver Eradicate, the aged colored man who now did nothing much
but look after Mr. Swift, shuffled into the office with a look of
concern on his face.

“What’s the matter, Rad?” asked Tom jokingly. “Have you and Koku been
having another run in?”

The giant and the Negro were always more or less at swords’ points
because of each one’s devotion to the Swifts.

“No, sah, Massa Tom, ’tain’t dat big, silly giant dis time!”

“What is it then? Are you mourning over your old mule Boomerang?”

“No, sah, ’tain’t dat, Massa Tom. It’s yo’ pa!”

“Dad! What’s the matter?” and Tom jumped to his feet.

“He’s tuck mighty bad, dat’s whut’s de mattah,” said Eradicate. “I
didn’t want him to come down heah to-day, but he did, an’ now he’s tuck
bad! Yo’ all better come an’ see to him.”

“Of course I’ll come at once.”

Tom hurried from his private office, followed by Ned, and hastened to
that part of the plant where Mr. Swift had his own rooms, though he
seldom came to them now.

“I hope nothing serious has happened!” mused Ned, as he followed his
chum and the shuffling Eradicate.




                               CHAPTER IV


                            OFF TO MT. CAMON

SEVERAL thoughts were in the mind of Tom Swift as he hastened to see
what had happened to his father, following the alarm of Eradicate. The
colored man, kind and faithful as he was, did not seem to know anything
more than that Mr. Swift was “tuck mighty bad.”

“Poor dad is getting old,” was one of Tom’s thoughts. “I can see him
failing. But maybe when I get him to Mt. Camon it will build him up. I’m
glad I’ve got Mary, she’ll look after him.”

Then an ugly suspicion came into the mind of the young inventor. Like a
flash which might have come from one of the skyrockets, Tom remembered
the night he had brought home the fireworks and had felt a suspicion
that he was being followed.

“Maybe,” mused Tom, as he hurried on to his father’s quarters, “some of
the gangs that we put out of business in the past have come back to try
their dirty work!”

The feeling that any one would dare attack his aged father sent a hot
wave of resentment through Tom Swift and he clenched his hands as if
eager to wreak vengeance on the scoundrels.

“But it couldn’t have been that,” Tom reasoned. “Eradicate wouldn’t
stand for anything of the sort. He’d even call in Koku, jealous as he is
of the giant, before he’d let dad be hurt.”

When Tom and Ned, with Eradicate shuffling in the rear, reached Mr.
Swift’s private workshop and laboratory, they found the aged inventor
lying on a couch, pale and evidently weak, but showing no sign of
injury.

“What’s the matter, Dad?” asked Tom, hurrying over to kneel at his side.

“Oh, it isn’t anything, really, Tom,” was the answer in a low voice. “I
just sort of keeled over.”

“Dat’s whut he done!” said Eradicate. “He were lookin’ at some papers
an’ I were dustin’ de bookcases an’, all of a suddint like, I heahs him
moan an’ he were on de flo’. I picked him up an’ ran to git yo’ all,
Massa Tom.”

“That was the right thing to do. But what happened, Dad?”

“I guess I overdid myself a bit, and the weather is rather warm. I felt
a bit faint and dizzy and then everything got black. The next I knew I
was on the couch and Rad was giving me some water.”

“Dat’s how it were,” said the old colored man.

“But what made you keel over?” Tom wanted to know. “You didn’t see
anybody, did you?”

“What do you mean—‘see anybody,’ Tom?”

“I mean no one came in to attack you.”

“Of course not,” and Mr. Swift smiled a little. “Who would attack me?”

“Oh, maybe some of our old enemies.”

“No, Tom, no one came in except Mr. Jardine. By the way, he seemed in a
hurry for some calculations that must be made before we can finish the
big dirigible, so I offered to make them for him, as he said you were
too busy.”

“That’s nervy on his part!” exclaimed Tom. “He should let you alone,
Dad. I can manage this end of the business.”

“Oh, he meant no harm, Tom. And you know the calculations used to be my
greatest strength. But I guess I’m getting old,” and Mr. Swift spoke
sadly.

“You’re a lot younger than most men of your age,” said Ned.

“Of course,” Tom agreed, looking about the room. In spite of what his
father had said, Tom had not given over his suspicions. But there were
no signs of any intruder and Mr. Swift bore no marks of any wound. It
must have been too much concentration over intricate mathematical
formulae that had caused the aged inventor to faint—that and the hot
weather.

He was soon himself again, and wanted to go on with his work, but Tom
insisted that he at once go home and took him up to the house, in
company with Ned, in the electric runabout.

“Is anything the matter?” cried Tom’s wife, when she saw him come home
from the shop at this unusual hour.

“Nothing serious, Mary,” he replied. “Dad is a little under the weather.
He needs looking after, I guess. I’ll leave him with you and Mrs.
Baggert.”

“I couldn’t be in better hands,” said the old gentleman, with a kind
smile and glance at his son’s pretty young wife.

In spite of Mr. Swift’s assertions that he felt “fine,” Tom insisted on
sending for the nearest doctor, who, after looking his patient over,
announced:

“He needs rest, quiet, and freedom from work, worry, and excitement for
a while.”

“I thought of taking him to Mt. Camon,” announced Tom.

“When?” the doctor wanted to know.

“In a few days I had hoped, but my plans are rather upset because a
certain car I wanted to use will have to be repaired.”

“I wouldn’t move Mr. Swift for a while yet,” the physician went on. And
when he said that Tom felt the case to be rather serious. “Just let him
rest here. Later, perhaps in the fall, you can go to Mt. Camon.”

“That will be all right,” Mary said. “It’s lovely up there in the fall,
Tom. Anyhow, if we can’t use the House on Wheels for a while it’s just
as well to wait.”

“I guess we’ll have to wait for the House to be repaired,” Tom said.
“But that’s no reason for not going to Mt. Camon. I can use any other
machine, or even a plane.”

“I wouldn’t take your father in an airplane if I were you,” said the
medical man, and his voice was rather serious. “Wait until fall and then
go in that House you speak of. It will be cooler then. I’m sure that by
September or October he will be all right.”

It seemed the only thing to do, and so it was decided, though Tom Swift
hated to disappoint his wife and her parents. But the Nestors, when
telephoned to about the change of plans, said it suited them, as Mr. and
Mrs. Nestor wanted to go to the seashore for a time.

“Then you go with them, Mary,” Tom urged. “When you come back dad will
be all right and we can go to Mt. Camon together.”

“No,” said Mary in a low voice.

“Why not?” asked Tom.

“Because,” was all she said aloud, but as he leaned over to kiss her she
whispered: “I don’t want to leave you, my dear.”

“Ahem!” exclaimed Ned Newton loudly, as he unexpectedly started to enter
the room as Tom was kissing his wife. “I beg your pardon!”

“Oh, come on in!” chuckled Tom. “Well, I guess I’ll have more time to
rush work on the big dirigible,” he added, for Ned had been out of the
room during the talk by which the decision was reached.

“Maybe it’s all for the best,” Ned went on after he had been told the
situation. “I know, Mary, if Tom went to Mt. Camon with you, leaving a
half-finished dirigible in the shop, you wouldn’t have a good time. He’d
be thinking of nothing but motors, oralum plates, and so on.”

“I know it,” said the girl, with a laugh. “It will be a lot nicer in the
fall. The forest is lovely then and the woods about the Mt. Camon hotel
extend for miles and miles without a break.”

So the mountain trip was postponed until autumn and, meanwhile, Tom
Swift worked busily on the _Silver Cloud_. Mr. Swift was under strict
orders to remain at home and not go near the shop, and Martin Jardine
was as strictly forbidden to see the aged inventor.

“But I don’t want this to be delayed!” he said to Tom, nervously pacing
up and down the office, alternately puffing at and relighting one of his
strong cigars.

“There will be no delay,” Tom promised. “I expect to work the men in a
double shift beginning next week, and if you keep rushing the oralum
plates to me I’ll guarantee to deliver the ship on time.”

“Good!” exclaimed Mr. Jardine. “Have a cigar! Oh, I forgot, you don’t
use tobacco. Well, give it to your father,” and, thrusting it into Tom’s
hand, the nervous man hurried away.

“I wonder if it’s real or if he’s putting on,” thought Tom, as he put
the cigar on his desk. “Maybe Ned was right about him. But, anyhow,
we’re getting the cash so far. He’s keeping up his payments.”

The weeks passed and the _Silver Cloud_ was fast approaching completion.
Even Mr. Jardine was satisfied. Then came a spell of hot weather and Tom
saw that his father was suffering from it. Mary, too, though saying
nothing, missed her usual summer vacation at some mountain or shore
resort.

Then Tom Swift came to a sudden decision. The work on the big dirigible
was well under way and the House on Wheels had been repaired and
renovated.

“We’ll go to Mt. Camon at once if you say so,” Tom told his wife one
evening.

“Oh, Tom, can we?”

“Of course. Dr. Potter said dad could stand the trip now, and your
mother and father are back from the shore. We’ll start to-morrow if you
want and can get ready.”

“Of course I can. But what about your work—I mean on the big, new
airship?”

“That will go along all right. Garret Jackson and Ned will be on the job
until I get back. I can start for Mt. Camon to-morrow if you and your
father and mother can.”

They did this, making an early start before the usual morning visit of
Mr. Jardine to the plant. This would forestall any nervous objection on
his part to Tom’s going away for a few days. The young inventor intended
to leave his father, his wife, and her parents at the mountain hotel and
return to the works to finish the _Silver Cloud_. As a matter of fact,
the labor was so far along that Mr. Jardine really had no occasion to
find fault. But he was so fussy he might do so.

The House on Wheels was a delightful vehicle in which to travel, and
made its owner independent of hotels along the way.

Mt. Camon was the summit of a series of big hills, about two days’
journey by automobile from Shopton. It was in a wild region of forests
and there was no other resort near the one Tom’s wife and her parents
had picked out for their fall sojourn.

“I wish you could stay with us and didn’t have to go back, Tom,” said
Mary, as she sat beside him on the front seat of the House on Wheels,
Tom doing the driving. His father and Mr. and Mrs. Nestor were within.

“I wish I didn’t, myself,” Tom answered. “But I have to. I have signed a
contract to finish the _Silver Cloud_ for the Jardine company and I must
keep my word.”

“Of course. But you’ll come back as soon as you can, won’t you?”

Tom Swift did not answer, and Mary looked at him for a reason. They were
proceeding along a road that bordered part of the big Swift plant and
Tom’s eyes were fixed on a man he saw digging a hole, apparently in
order to crawl under the fence.

“What’s he up to, I wonder?” muttered the young inventor, as he guided
the big car toward the intruder who was evidently seeking a
surreptitious entrance. “Hey, you!” Tom Swift called. “Snap out of
that!”




                               CHAPTER V


                           THE STRANGE DWARF

WITH a suddenness that showed how completely he had been taken by
surprise, the figure that had been burrowing under the fence slipped
from the hole partly dug beneath the barrier and stood upright at the
side of the road.

“Why, Tom, he’s only a boy!” exclaimed Mary. “Look!” and she gazed a
little reproachfully at her husband because of the rather harsh words he
had used toward the intruder.

“A boy!” exclaimed the young inventor.

“Yes,” answered Mary. “He probably lost a ball over your big fence and
he wanted to crawl under to get it.”

“If he’s a boy, I’m an infant in arms,” chuckled Tom. “His ball days
were over long ago. There’s something queer going on here,” he said in a
lower voice. “That’s a dwarf, Mary. A man dwarf!”

Then Mary saw that, indeed, this was so. The fellow was a dwarf, and not
a pleasant one, either.

“What’s the game?” asked Tom, as the short, squatty fellow, powerful in
build, but only a boy in height, waddled, rather than walked, toward the
House on Wheels.

“Game?” questioned the dwarf in surly tones. “I wasn’t playing any
game.”

“It looked so,” went on Tom. “Why were you trying to crawl under the
fence? There’s no game inside there, and if you lost your golf ball
you’ll have to let it go. What’s the idea?”

“Do I have to tell you?” The dwarf’s voice was surly.

“Well, seeing that this is my place and my fence, I don’t think it’s out
of order to ask why you’re burrowing under it,” and Tom let a note of
sarcasm inject itself.

“Oh, you’re Mr. Swift, are you?” and the manner of the dwarf changed as
if by magic. “Well, I beg your pardon. I have a message for you.”

“A message for me?” exclaimed Tom, in surprise.

“Yes, a letter.”

“Well, the least I can say is that this is a queer way to deliver it.
Why didn’t you go around to the entrance and see the watchman? Where is
this letter?”

Tom’s voice showed his disbelief. The stopping of the House on Wheels
and the talk had brought Mr. Swift and the Nestors from where they were
conversing on the rear observation platform to the little vestibule
behind the front seat where Tom and Mary rode.

“What is it, Tom?” asked his father.

“I found this—this man trying to get under our fence,” the young
inventor answered. “He says he was coming in to hand me a letter.
But——”

“And here’s the letter, Mr. Swift,” the dwarf broke in, waddling closer
to the auto and reaching up with an envelope in his hand. He was not
tall enough, and Tom could not stoop low enough to get the missive, so
the young inventor descended from his seat, first making sure that there
was no chance for an ambush.

For Tom Swift had a distinctly unpleasant feeling, one not unmixed with
apprehension, at the sight of the dwarf, a feeling which was increased
by what the fellow was doing and his surly manner. This, coupled with
Ned Newton’s suspicion of Martin Jardine, made Tom careful.

More than once in the past some clever tricks had been worked against
Tom Swift and his father, and he was well aware that all their enemies
were not disposed of. This dwarf, however, was a new one.

To Tom’s surprise, the letter was not only addressed to him, but was in
an envelope bearing the imprint of the Jardine company which had its
headquarters in a large city not far off.

“Read it,” urged the dwarf, with what passed for a smile on his queer
face, a man’s face on a boy’s body.

“All right,” Tom assented, after turning the missive over. The envelope
contained but a single sheet of paper and a hasty look at the bottom
showed that it was signed by Martin Jardine. The letter said:

    “Dear Mr. Swift: This will introduce to you a very clever little
    man—a dwarf as you will see—by name James Chock. I have known
    him for some time. I think you will find him very useful when
    you get to flying the _Silver Cloud_. Jim, as I call him, is
    very powerful, but small. He can get into the tight corners of
    the dirigible and be of service in that way in case we have to
    make repairs when sailing. I am sending him to you with the
    suggestion that you hire him and keep him until we are ready to
    get in the air. Then make him a member of the crew. You will
    find him rather eccentric but reliable. He is a great contrast
    to your giant Koku, isn’t he?”

Tom read the letter twice, and then said:

“Humph!”

“Is it all right, dear?” asked Mary anxiously.

“Seems to be,” Tom answered, as he passed the letter to his father. Then
addressing the dwarf he said:

“I certainly didn’t intend to speak harshly to you, Mr. Chock——”

“Call me Jim. Everybody does,” interrupted the dwarf, with one of his
grotesque smiles. “You won’t hurt my feelings. But you did give me a
start.”

“And you greatly surprised me by burrowing under my fence,” Tom said
more genially. “What’s the idea? Why didn’t you go around to the gate
and hand in this letter for me?”

“Too far,” said the dwarf, with an uncanny chuckle. “My legs are short
and it takes me twice as long to walk a mile as it would you. I didn’t
want to go all the way around to the gate, so I started to crawl under
your fence. I didn’t think there was any harm.”

“There might have been some harm to you,” Tom stated rather grimly.
“Usually both the upper and lower edges of my fence are guarded by a
wire carrying a heavy charge of electricity. It just happens the juice
is off now, or you might have been tied in a double bowknot as you dug
under.”

“I’m glad I wasn’t!” chuckled the dwarf. “I can’t stand being shrunk any
more. But I didn’t mean any harm. I was taking the shortest way on
account of my legs. I couldn’t climb over your fence, Mr. Swift, so I
had to go under. Excuse me!”

“All right,” Tom said. “You seem to have the proper credentials. What
about it, Dad?” he asked his father, who had read the note.

“Well,” said Mr. Swift, “this is up to Jardine. If he wants this little
man aboard the craft he is paying for, I don’t see that we can object.
As he says in the letter, this Mr. Chock may be useful getting into
corners. Send him on to the works, Tom. But,” he added in a low voice,
“send word to have him watched. Don’t take any chances.”

“I won’t,” said Tom, in a voice equally low. Then to the dwarf he said:
“All right, Jim. Take this letter to Mr. Jackson. He’s my foreman. Tell
him I’ve seen it.”

“You’d better make an endorsement on the note to that effect, Mr.
Swift,” said the dwarf, thus showing he had some business sense. “Mr.
Jackson might not take my word that you had seen me and had read Mr.
Jardine’s note. Especially if any of your men see me crawling in under
the fence.”

“I wouldn’t go in that way if I were you,” and Tom spoke gravely. “Go
around by the main gate. I’ll write a line on this note. By the way,
where is Mr. Jardine? I haven’t seen him these last two days.”

“He’s very busy,” the dwarf said. “That’s why he sent me with this note
instead of bringing me around personally. I have worked in his oralum
factory,” he said. “I’m a good machinist and I can get in places other
men can’t.”

“That’s so,” admitted Tom, writing a brief note to his foreman on the
back of Jardine’s letter. “Well, you may be of use to us. But next time
please don’t come in like a boy under a fence at a ball game. It’s
rather unusual and may be dangerous.”

“I like to do unusual things,” chuckled the dwarf in a rather strange
voice—a man’s tones coming from a child’s body. “But it’s a long way
around to your front gate,” he said, rather wistfully.

“Oh, Tom, don’t make him walk all the way back,” urged Mary, in a low
voice. “It’s such a hot day and so far. We aren’t in any hurry. Turn the
House back!”

“Well,” Tom began, “I suppose——” Just then he saw a flivver containing
one of his workmen who had been to the neighboring city of Mansburg for
some supplies coming down the road. The workman was on his way back to
the factory.

“Here, Kelly, take Mr. Chock to the works with you,” Tom requested,
halting his man. “He has a letter for Mr. Jackson.”

“All right, Mr. Swift,” Kelly answered. “Hop in, son,” he went on,
evidently thinking the dwarf was a boy. “Oh!” he exclaimed, when he saw
his mistake.

“All right, Kelly, step on it!” chuckled the uncanny little fellow, as
he scrambled nimbly up to a seat beside the workman. With a farewell
wave of his hand containing the endorsed letter of introduction he was
off down the road, calling back:

“See you later, Mr. Swift!”

“That’s rather a queer proceeding,” remarked Mr. Nestor.

“A little too queer,” commented Tom. “But maybe it’s all right.”

“Poor fellow!” murmured Mary. “It must be hard to go through life as he
is.”

“He seemed jolly enough,” Mrs. Nestor said. “I think he could make money
in a circus.”

“Do you think that letter was genuine, Tom?” asked his father.

“Oh, yes. It was Jardine’s signature, and we can easily check up on it.
I’ll get word to Jackson before that dwarf arrives.”

“Are you going back, Tom?” Mary asked.

“No,” the young inventor answered. “I can telephone to him from here.”
He went to a place in the high fence where there was a telephone outlet.
This was one of several in the barrier about the Swift plant. Tom
carried a portable telephone in his House on Wheels and he was soon in
communication with Mr. Jackson, telling him of the occurrence.

“Put the dwarf to work, but watch him,” was Tom’s final instruction.
“I’ll be back in a few days.”

“All right, Mr. Swift,” the foreman said. “Kelly hasn’t come in yet with
this bird you speak of, but I’ll be on the watch. Don’t worry.”

Nevertheless, Tom Swift did worry a bit. It seemed very strange that
Martin Jardine would send such a dwarf to be taken up in _Silver Cloud_
when that great dirigible should be ready to sail. Yet there was reason
in the request.

“Only I didn’t like his crawling under the fence,” Tom said, as he
talked his doubts over with Mary and the others while they journeyed
along in the House on Wheels.

“Oh, I think he showed good sense,” Mary said. “He knew he had a proper
letter of introduction and that everything was in order.”

“If the current had been on the lower wire,” remarked Tom grimly,
“everything would have been in disorder for a while. Well, maybe it’s
all right. I’ll see Jardine when I get back and make sure.”

“Aren’t you going to stay with us at Mt. Camon, Tom?” asked Mrs. Nestor.

“Only a few days this time,” was the answer. “I must get back and rush
work on the dirigible. After that is finished I’ll spend the rest of the
summer up there resting.”

“It will be lovely,” Mary said, leaning against him as he drove the big
car rapidly over the road.

They stopped for lunch at a pretty little tea room, for, though they
could well have cooked in the House on Wheels, for they had supplies
with them, it was decided not to take the time to do their own cooking
just now. After a rest, they went on again, planning to stop at a hotel
if night found them near one, or if not, to camp out in the House on
Wheels, which was equipped with comfortable beds.

The afternoon was drawing to a close, and they were some miles from a
city where they might stop if they wished when, as they went around a
turn in the road, they saw just ahead of them a small auto van which had
come to grief.

The van, built on the chassis of a flivver, was turned on its side.
Standing looking at it were a man and a woman, both young and evidently
Italians. The man, with a gesture of despair as Tom and his friends
approached, said pathetically:

“Well, Maria, this is the end!”

“So it seems, Pietro,” said the woman, or rather, girl, for she was no
older than Tom’s wife. “Oh, what are we to do?” There were tears in her
voice and tears in her eyes as Tom Swift and his friends plainly saw
when the House on Wheels was stopped opposite the overturned van.

“What’s the matter?” Tom asked. “You’ve had an accident—I can see
that,” he went on. “Is anybody hurt?”

“I am much afraid so,” answered the man. “All my poor children are in
there, and I much fear that some have been crushed!”

“Oh, how terrible!” cried Mary.

“Come on, Dad! Mr. Nestor! We’ve got to help those children!” cried Tom,
springing from his seat, followed by the two men.




                               CHAPTER VI


                             A MERRY PARTY

TOM SWIFT caught hold of one edge of the overturned van and started to
right it. At the same time he called out:

“Take hold here alongside of me, Dad! You too, Mr. Nestor! You lift over
there, Mr. Pietro,” he added to the Italian standing beside the weeping
young woman.

“Pardon, my name is Notine—Pietro Notine,” said the foreigner, with a
smile that showed his white, even teeth. “And there is no need to be in
such a rush. I thank you kindly for your offer. But I think if you have
a lifting jack it will be better so to raise my car.”

“Get out a jack when the poor children are crushed inside?” cried Tom.
“What’s the matter with you? Get hold here, everybody! Maybe you can
help a little, Mary, and you too, Mrs. Nestor! And if your wife——”

Tom paused questioningly and eased his lifting efforts for a moment.

“Yes, Maria is my wife,” said Pietro Notine. “But, a thousand pardons,
my kind friend, there is no need to so rapidly exert yourself. The
damage is done!”

“You must be crazy!” cried Tom. “Children crushed in there and you want
to wait!”

“Oh, Pietro, there you do it again!” cried the young woman, suddenly
drying her eyes and smiling. “I told you everybody doesn’t understand
your poetical talk. Calling them children!”

“Why, aren’t there children in that wreck?” asked Tom, hardly knowing
what to think.

“I call them my children,” said the Italian man, with a sigh.

“But they are only marionettes—animated dolls that we use in giving our
plays,” explained the young woman.

“Marionettes?” murmured Tom Swift.

“Plays! Oh, how lovely!” exclaimed his wife.

“Animated dolls!” ejaculated Mr. Nestor.

“Like Punch and Judy, I suppose?” asked Mrs. Nestor.

“Somewhat, and yet different,” explained Mrs. Notine. “We like to think
our marionettes are different from dear Mr. Punch.”

“Oh, but my dear children are all killed, I know!” sighed the Italian.
“It was such a crash!”

“Look here! Let me get this right!” said Tom, desisting from his efforts
to right the van. “Do you travel about giving Punch and—I mean
marionette shows?” he asked, for he knew the difference between the two
performances.

“That’s it!” exclaimed Mr. Notine, who was peering first into one end of
his overturned van and then the other. “I am sorry if I unduly alarmed
you by calling the marionettes my children. But they are very dear to
me. I made them—every one—with the help of my wife. Now—alas!”

“But, Pietro dear,” murmured his wife, “they may not be as badly damaged
as you fear. I am sure if these kind people will help us right the van
we may save something and be able to give our show.”

“Of course we’ll help you get things to rights!” exclaimed Tom. “I don’t
believe your chariot is badly damaged,” he went on, looking with
critical eyes at the overturned flivver. “These busses can stand a lot
of punishment. How did it happen?”

“I turned to one side quickly, to avoid running over a dog,” explained
the Italian puppet master. “Then—poof—over we went! Oh, what a crash
for my poor children! We jumped and saved ourselves. But——”

“Do not grieve, my dear!” cried his wife, putting her arms around him
like a mother.

“Tom, aren’t they dear?” whispered Mary. “We must help them!”

“Of course,” he responded.

Then, when the traveling show people were calmer and a survey had been
made of the situation, Tom Swift saw that it would be very easy for him
to attach a rope to the top of the van and pull it back on its wheels,
for the road here was very wide.

“I’ll soon have you in shape,” the young inventor told Mr. Notine. “Mr.
Nestor, will you lend a hand?”

“Of course, Tom.”

“Count me in!” cried Mr. Swift.

“You’d better take it easy, Dad,” Tom said. But his father insisted on
doing at least some of the lighter tasks, and in a short time, with the
pull exerted by the powerful House on Wheels, the marionette van was
righted, little the worse for its mishap.

Mary murmured in delight when she saw that the van was like a little
traveling theater—in effect a glorified Punch and Judy show. The sides
of the van opened outward, a little stage was made, and from behind it
the Italian and his wife could manipulate the strings that worked the
puppets, or animated dolls.

“Ah, my dear children! My little ones!” murmured the Italian when the
van was righted and he delved into its interior. He came out with
several long, calico bags, their necks tied with strings. From each bag
stuck out a curious wooden contrivance with many black strings wound
about it.

“Try some of them, Pietro, and see if they are damaged,” suggested his
wife. “I think most of them are all right.”

“May the good fairies grant it!” murmured the puppet master. He whisked
off the calico bag from a grotesque figure representing a clown, and in
a trice he had stepped into his van, behind some scenery representing a
forest. Then, to the wondering eyes of Tom, Mary, and the others, the
clown with its painted wooden face seemed to come to life, dancing
about, cutting up antics, while the puppet master’s voice came out with
such effect that it seemed the clown was speaking.

“Oh, how wonderful!” cried Mary.

“Clever!” murmured Tom.

“Where are you going to give a show?” asked Mrs. Nestor. “I should like
to see it.”

“We planned to exhibit at the hotel in Colchester,” said Mrs. Notine.
“But if our car is so damaged that it cannot go on——” she paused, and
made a gesture of resignation.

“We’ve going to Colchester,” Tom said. “If your machine won’t go I’ll
either make it go or take you there in ours.”

“It is kind of you,” the Italian said. “But I need my scenery, my
effects, and——”

“Perhaps our van will go on, though,” interrupted his wife, more
hopefully.

“That’s the way to talk!” cried Tom. “I’ll have a look, and we’ll give
it a trial.”

So while the Italian puppet master examined his characters, which is to
say his various marionettes, Tom went over the mechanism of the van. He
found that a few broken wires of the ignition system constituted the
total damage, except for some scratches, and he soon had the car in
working order.

“A thousand thanks!” exclaimed the enthusiastic Mr. Notine. “Now we can
go on!”

“It was wonderful of you!” murmured the pretty Italian woman. And she
made such “eyes” at Tom that later Mary laughingly said she would soon
have been jealous.

“I should like very much to see a marionette show,” said Mrs. Nestor.

“Nothing is easier,” returned Tom. “We planned at least to call at the
Colchester hotel, for I told Mr. Jackson if he had any messages he could
reach me there. So we’ll stop, anyhow, and if you like you can spend the
night there and see this performance.”

So it was arranged, and after Tom Swift and his party had seen the
marionette van start off, they followed in the House on Wheels and both
soon arrived at Colchester. The House on Wheels was put in a garage for
the night and the hotel proprietor warmly welcomed the traveling
marionette company to his establishment. He was in need of a night’s
entertainment for his guests, and a good crowd was assured. For be it
known that marionettes are as much a source of amusement to adults as
they are to children. The plays Mr. Notine and his wife gave with the
puppets were poetical and historical and not juvenile plays.

So it was a merry party that gathered in the hotel parlor that evening
to watch the marionette show, a temporary stage having been set up and
the scenery and effects brought in from the van.

Tom was thoroughly enjoying himself and so was his wife. There was
plenty of applause for the marionette show and its picturesque
proprietors, and a goodly sum was realized for their benefit.

After the show there was a jolly gathering about the Italian and his
wife, and they made much of the “rescue,” as Pietro Notine termed it, on
the part of Tom Swift.

“Without my benefactor I should never be here!” said the Italian, with
dramatic gestures.

“Oh, cut it out!” chuckled Tom.

The hotel guests were examining the workings of the marionettes from
“behind the scenes,” and Mary, who had met a few acquaintances among the
persons in the audience, was talking and laughing with them when a
bellboy came along calling:

“Telegram! Telegram for Mr. Swift!”

“Here!” exclaimed Tom, slipping the lad a quarter.

“Oh,” murmured Mary, as her husband tore open the yellow envelope, “I
hope there is no bad news.”




                              CHAPTER VII


                             THE LANDSLIDE

LITTLE could be gathered from the expression on Tom Swift’s face as to
the import of the telegraph message he hurriedly read. But then the
young inventor was accustomed to concealing his feelings.

“Tom has a regular sphinx face,” Ned Newton used to say.

However, schooled as Tom was in the art of hiding his emotion when
necessary, it was evident to Mary, at least, that the telegram contained
news of importance, if not of trouble.

“I didn’t know Tom expected any messages here,” said Mrs. Nestor, as she
and her husband stood among the hotel guests that were marveling at the
clever ability shown by the marionette performer and his wife.

“Tom always leaves word at the shop where he can be found,” said Mr.
Swift, as his son was conversing in a low tone with his wife. “So
whether he is here or there they can always communicate with him.”

“They couldn’t do it very well when Tom was on some of his submarine
trips,” suggested Mrs. Nestor, with a smile.

“They did when we were wrecked on Earthquake Island,” her husband
answered, with a chuckle. “Don’t you remember how Tom rigged up a
machine and sent a wireless message that brought us help?” he asked.

“So he did!” agreed Mary’s mother. “But I wonder what’s the matter now?”

“Anything wrong, Tom?” asked his father, with the privilege his
relationship entailed.

“Not so much wrong, as a puzzle,” and Tom laughed a little, but
uneasily. “It’s that dwarf, Chock,” he added.

“What did he do?” asked Mr. Swift quickly.

“Did he try to wreck the dirigible?” Mary wanted to know. For in times
past she knew unscrupulous enemies had taken even such desperate methods
as this to cripple Tom Swift.

“It isn’t so much what he did as what he didn’t do,” said Tom. “He
didn’t stay—quit suddenly, Mr. Jackson wires me. It looks a bit queer,
after he made such an effort to get in the plant.”

“What do you think it means?” Tom’s father asked.

“I don’t know, Dad.”

“Did he take away any of your things—I mean secret plans or anything
having to do with the dirigible?”

“I think not, or Jackson would have said so. But I’ll get him on the
long distance wire and find out.”

A little later Tom was talking to his foreman over the telephone and
later still the young inventor told his father the details.

“Queerly enough, it was Koku and the dwarf that clashed,” Tom said. “My
giant made such fun of the little man that Jackson says Chock flew into
a rage, tried to beat Koku up, got well threshed for his pains, and then
quit in a fit of temper.”

“I don’t know that you can blame him,” remarked Mr. Nestor. “Small
people are more touchy about their size than big ones.”

“But is everything all right at the plant, Tom?” Mr. Swift asked, and it
was evident that he was nervously apprehensive.

“Everything is all right as far as they can tell. As I warned Jackson,
they kept a careful watch over the dwarf, though not letting him suspect
it. In spite of Jardine’s letter of introduction, I was suspicious.
However, I don’t believe he got a chance to do anything or take
anything. He just left because Koku got on his nerves, I guess. Well,
I’m glad it was no worse.”

“I am, too,” Mary said. “I’d hate to have anything happen to the big
dirigible, Tom, after all your work.”

“Oh, well, we can’t always have good luck,” Tom said, with a smile. “And
now you must be tired, Mary. What about going upstairs?”

“Yes, it has been rather an exciting day, what with thinking we had come
upon an overturned van of children,” and Mary laughed a little at the
recollection of the marionettes.

“Neat little show he has,” commented Tom. “I’m glad we could help them.
They’re going to travel in their van until cold weather sets in, so
Notine told me. Then they go about in different theaters on a vaudeville
circuit. Well, by this time to-morrow we ought to be at Mt. Camon.”

“I shall love it there,” Mary said, as she and Tom went up in the hotel
elevator to their rooms. “Only I wish you could stay longer.”

“I’ll be with you as soon as I get this dirigible off my mind,” he
promised her.

When he had seen Mary safely settled in their quarters, Tom said he
would go downstairs and look over the evening papers.

The marionette show had been put away, the guests who had gathered to
witness the performance had dispersed, but Tom saw the poetical little
Italian puppet master in the smoking room.

“Excuse me, Mr. Swift,” said Pietro Notine, beckoning to Tom to enter
and making room for him on a leather settee. “Did I hear you speak of a
certain dwarf named Chock?”

“Yes,” Tom answered wonderingly. “I engaged a dwarf of that name early
to-day for my plant on my way from home. But I just had a telegram from
my shop superintendent saying that this evening he took French leave, so
to speak—that is, he went away suddenly.”

“I understand, Mr. Swift,” said the Italian, and his voice was grave.
“Perhaps it is as well for you that he did leave, and with no great harm
to anything of yours, as I could not help overhearing you say to your
friends.”

“No, he didn’t take anything or do any damage,” Tom said. “But what do
you mean that it is just as well he has left my plant? What do you know
about this dwarf, Chock?”

“I know little good of him,” was the earnest and almost whispered
answer, as the Italian slid nearer to Tom along the settee. “You have
been a good friend to me. Let me repay you in a small way, by advising
you to have nothing to do with this dwarf!”

“You surprise me!” Tom said. “I had no idea you knew him. Can you tell
me more?”

“Not much more, except to repeat my warning.”

“How did you happen to know Chock? Do you know anything about why he
went to my place with a letter from a man I am building a big dirigible
for?”

“I know nothing of your works, Mr. Swift. I have heard of you, but I
never met you before. Only, if I had a place where ships of the air were
made I would not let this dwarf come near them.”

“Look here!” exclaimed Tom, hardly knowing whether or not to credit the
Italian. “You’ve said either too much or too little. Tell me first how
you know James Chock.”

“He is a clever little dwarf,” was the answer. “Clever, but of such a
character as not to be trusted. He has exhibited himself in many
theaters where my wife and I have also given our marionette shows.”

“I thought he would make a good theater attraction,” Tom said. “But do
you know anything of him personally?”

“To my sorrow,” replied the Italian. “I once engaged him, for, being
small, I thought he could get around easily behind the scenery of our
miniature stage where, as you have seen, we have little room to spare.
For a time Chock did well and helped us. But in the end I had to
discharge him for getting drunk, if you will excuse me, and one night he
tried to set fire to my van and burn it with all my children!”

Tom knew now what the puppet master meant by “children” and was not as
shocked as he would have been at first. But he was sufficiently
impressed as it was.

“You don’t mean it!” he exclaimed.

“Truly, I am telling you,” said Pietro Notine solemnly. “But for my
wife’s alertness, this dwarf would have destroyed all my marionettes.
That is why I say he is vindictive, not to be trusted, and one who must
be watched. You are well rid of him.”

“I should say so!” murmured Tom. “I wonder if Jardine knows that? He
recommended him. I must look farther into this. I’ll write Jackson a
letter and send it by the air mail so he’ll be on the watch to-morrow. I
don’t want to get him out of bed to the telephone again. But I’m obliged
to you for letting me know this, Mr. Notine.”

“The obligation is still on my side,” said the Italian, with a friendly
smile and a characteristic gesture.

He and Tom sat up talking for half an hour longer, but the puppet master
could tell little more of the dwarf than he had already disclosed.

“Only I beg of you to have nothing to do with him,” he concluded.

“I should say not!” agreed Tom.

He wrote the letter to his foreman and went up to where Mary was
sleepily awaiting him. But he said nothing to her about what had been
told him, for he did not want her to worry over what were as yet only
rumor and suspicion, even though very disquieting ones.

“I guess the folks back at the plant can look after things until I
return,” Tom thought.

The puppet folks had departed next morning when Tom and his party were
ready to resume their trip in the House on Wheels, and they were soon
traveling along the road at a fast rate, hoping to reach Mt. Camon
before nightfall.

But just after they left one city, after a bountiful lunch, they came
upon a detour sign, and when they took the cut-off road it was soon
evident that they were not going to make good time, for the highway was
very rough. At last Tom, in despair, stopped at a crossroad hot-dog
stand and asked the young fellow in charge whether there was any other
route to Falkenberg, which was the town they must go through in order to
get on the road to Mt. Camon.

“Why, yes,” said the stand-keeper. “If you go back along this road to
the last turn,” and he indicated, “and bear to the right, you’ll get on
an old logging road that runs along the side of the cliff. That’s a
short cut, but it’s a bad grade.”

“I’ve yet to see the grade my machine won’t take,” Tom said. “But is it
wide enough on the shoulder of the cliff?”

“Oh, yes, two cars can pass, even counting one as wide as yours,” for
Tom’s House on Wheels was not small.

“Then I’m going to take that cut-off,” Tom decided. “If we keep on this
way it means another night at some hotel or sleeping in the House, and I
want to get you settled, Dad, at the Mt. Camon hotel where you can
rest.”

So Tom swung his big machine off the detour and they were soon climbing
up a fairly good road, one that was quite wide enough for any motorist,
but with a very steep grade.

“She’d take it on high if I forced her,” Tom said proudly as he guided
the House around one turn after another. “But we don’t need to. We’ll
soon be there now.”

“I hope so,” murmured Mary. “It seems dangerous.”

Tom laughed at her fears, and went on and on and up and up. They reached
the summit of the cut-off, and swung around a place where the descending
road had been literally dug through a shoulder of a great hill, really a
small mountain. Tom threw the motor into low gear, to save his brakes,
and was congratulating himself on saving time and not meeting with any
traffic when there was a sudden strange rumble and tremor behind him.

“What’s that?” cried Mr. Nestor.

“Another car coming, I guess,” Tom said. “Sounds like a big truck.”

His father glanced back and cried:

“Tom, it’s a landslide! This road is slipping away back of us and we’re
going down with it! It’s a new road and hasn’t been well settled. Look
out for yourself, Tom!”

Alarmed by his father’s excited voice and by a scream of fear from Mrs.
Nestor, Tom shot a look back around the edge of the front seat. He saw
great cracks appearing in the roadway over which he had just traveled.
Looking ahead, he saw a big piece of the towering cliff above him break
off and crash to the road in front with a thundering roar.

There was a sickening lurch, a swaying of the House on Wheels. As Mary
gave a cry of alarm, the whole side of the mountain and Tom’s great
conveyance went down with the landslide.




                              CHAPTER VIII


                           MR. DAMON ARRIVES

“WHAT shall I do, Tom?” called Mary Swift in a tense voice into the ear
of her husband beside whom she sat on the seat of the House on Wheels.
“Is this the end?”

For it seemed that only death awaited them at the foot of the mountain
down which they were sliding, beyond control, gripped in the mass of
earth, trees, and rocks that formed the great slide.

“Sit still, Mary dear!” exclaimed Tom. He did not turn his eyes to look
at her, much as he wished to, for he must keep a steady hand on the
wheel and keep his eyes in front to avoid, if possible, crashing into
some great boulder. He realized that he could still steer the House on
Wheels, though to hold it back or send it forward out of danger on top
of that slide was beyond human power.

“Don’t fear for me. I’ll sit still,” Mary answered quietly and,
white-lipped, she braced herself on the seat, waiting for the great
crash she expected to come at any moment.

Mrs. Nestor, clinging to her husband back in the big car, was terrified,
and with reason; but she was a woman of great common sense and not
panicky. Her experience on Earthquake Island with Tom Swift had taught
her that he was to be relied upon in an emergency. So, though she clung
to her husband and moaned a little, she did not try to leap out of a
window or the door at the rear, as some might have done.

“Steady!” murmured Mr. Nestor, holding his wife to him. “If we are to
come out of this alive, Tom Swift will accomplish it. If it is to be the
end we must meet it bravely,” he said, though there was a tremor in his
voice as he looked at Mary sitting beside her husband.

“Tom, do you want any help?” asked his father. “I can do a lot yet.”

“No. Stay where you are—all of you!” Tom called over his shoulder. “And
keep to the rear as far as you can, to hold the back wheels down. If we
don’t up-end I think we’ll be all right.”

“What did the car do—leave the road?” asked Mr. Nestor.

They all had to shout to be heard above the rumble, roar, crash,
clatter, bang, and rattle of the landslide.

“No, we didn’t leave the road,” Tom said grimly. “The road tried to
leave us and I’m not sure yet but what it may. But, so far, we have
stuck together.”

What had happened was that a section of the side of the mountain, into
which the highway was cut, had suddenly broken off, either because of
much rain or because there was a fault in the rock and earth of which it
was composed. This big piece, weighing thousands of tons, had broken off
the road itself, and the portion of the highway, on which the House on
Wheels rested, began to slip down into the valley below. Fortunately,
none of the falling earth, stones and trees had struck the big auto. But
the House on Wheels was being carried down the slope as an integral part
of the landslide, even as were some of the gigantic boulders and tall
trees.

“Do you think we can come through it safely, Tom?” asked Mary softly,
her face close against his shoulder.

“I think so—I hope so. Steady now! If we can get past that big rock I
think we’ll make it.”

Ahead of them was a great boulder, as big, if not bigger, than the House
on Wheels itself. It was moving more slowly than was Tom’s car, for the
reason that the latter had wheels.

Closer and closer to the great rock the House on Wheels slid. Tom was
pulling with all his might on the steering wheel. Mary saw that he was
using his last ounce of strength, and she quickly put her hands beside
his and helped him turn the front wheels, which were hard to move, in
spite of being arranged on a gear, for they were now embedded deep in
sand and gravel.

“Oh, we’re going to hit!” cried Mrs. Nestor nervously.

“Pull, Mary!” shouted Tom.

The wheel slowly turned—oh, so slowly.

But when it seemed that there must be a crash, the great House slid past
the immense rock and came to rest against a bank of sand in the valley
below the broken road. The gigantic boulder rolled off to one side. The
House on Wheels quivered and was still.

“Safe!” cried Mr. Nestor, looking out of a window as he gently released
himself from his wife’s arms.

“Safe, but stuck,” murmured Tom, his hands white and tensed from the
strain of pulling around the steering wheel. Mary sank against her
husband limply, game but “all in,” as she expressed it.

“What do you mean, ‘stuck,’ Tom?” asked his father.

“I mean we’ve run her nose into a sand bank. Nothing is broken, I think,
but we’ll have to be dug out before we can get back on the road. I guess
it means staying here for the night.”

“And we can be very thankful,” said Mrs. Nestor, “that we have such a
wonderful house to stay in, Tom Swift. You’re a dear boy!” and she
kissed him.

“Yes, we can put up at this hotel!” chuckled Mr. Nestor. “It will be
rather fun, I think. For I’m a bit shaky and I’d just as soon stop where
we are as fuss up for a regular hotel dining room.”

Tom was out of the car looking around, over, and under it. He could see
nothing wrong except that all four wheels were buried deep in sand,
gravel, and rocks. The landslide had reached bottom, carrying the great
car with it, but not damaging it.

“All right. Here’s where we stay until I can get a gang of men with
shovels in the morning to dig us out,” Tom said. “It’s lucky we have our
beds and kitchen with us.”

“Yes, and mother and I will get the meal!” offered Mary. “You’re to do
nothing but rest, Tom!”

“That won’t be a bad idea!” he chuckled. Really the danger had been
great and the strain on him terrific. For he thought that Mary and all
of them would be killed, or at least badly hurt. But they were now safe
and sound.

It did not take long to prepare the meal and get ready to spend the
night. The car rested on almost a level “keel,” if that expression is
permissible, and there was a little stream of clear, sparkling water in
the valley where they had come to rest.

So they made not such a bad night of it after all, as the beds, though
small, were comfortable. Tom soon recovered his nerve, but he was more
than a little anxious, though he did not say so, about the grotesque
dwarf and what he had heard about him from Mr. Notine.

“I wonder if Jardine is playing some game,” mused Tom, as he fell
asleep. “Well, I’ll find out when I get back home.”

The next day when men from the state highway department came out to
investigate the landslide, they were much surprised to see the big House
on Wheels standing where it had been caught in the slipping earth.

“That road around the cliff wasn’t supposed to be used,” one of the
engineers said to Tom. “How’d you come to take it?”

“A young fellow at a hot-dog stand told me it was a short cut. But this
was a little too short,” and Tom glanced significantly up the side of
the mountain down which they had literally slid.

“I should say so!” remarked the engineer. “Well, we’ll dig you out and
then I’ll have a talk with that lad. He might have sent you all to your
deaths.”

“I wondered why we didn’t meet other cars,” Tom said.

It did not take long to dig out the House, though afterward it had to
proceed slowly over rough ground to get back to a hard road. But after
all no great damage was done, proving that when Tom Swift built a
machine he built it well.

A little later they were well on their road to the great hotel in the
big woods of Mt. Camon and reached their stopping place before noon.

“Isn’t this a wonderful hotel, Tom?” cried Mary, when the car had been
run around to a garage and they were being shown to their rooms.

“Great!” he said. “I didn’t know there were so many trees in the world!”

The Mt. Camon Hotel was situated on a mountain top, girt around by
immense forest stretches in every direction.

“I am glad you like it here,” said Mr. Thorndyke, the hotel manager, as
he greeted the Nestors, who had been his guests many seasons. “The only
thing is that we are very dry up here.”

“We’re all prohibitionists, so we won’t mind that,” laughed Tom.

“You mistake me,” said Mr. Thorndyke, with a smile. “I mean we have had
no rain for a long time. It is that dryness I mean.”

“Is the hotel water supply running low?” Tom asked. He knew what a
shortage like that meant in the height of the season.

“Not that,” the manager said. “We have our own artesian well that never
goes dry. But all about us the forests are like tinder. It is feared
that if there are forest fires they may get beyond control. The fire
wardens are worried and are constantly on the alert.”

“Let us hope that doesn’t happen,” Tom said, lightly enough. “And it may
rain.”

“It may. I hope so,” said Mr. Thorndyke but he had a worried air.

However, Tom, Mary and the others had come to Mt. Camon for a good time
and such a thing as a dry spell was not going to spoil their vacation.
So they got settled in their rooms, Mary saw that her mother and father
and Mr. Swift were comfortable, then she took Tom out to show him around
the place, for she had spent many summers there.

“I suppose,” said Tom, rather jokingly, “that you will take me to Bridal
Veil Falls, Lovers’ Leap, the Maiden’s Retreat, and all sorts of places
like that.”

“We have them all!” laughed Mary. “But I do hope the dry weather hasn’t
spoiled the flower gardens. They are, or were when I was last here,
quite a feature of this hotel. Let’s go out and look.”

They went through the main entrance, out on a broad piazza, and started
down the long walk that led up to the hotel from the road. On either
side were beds of flowers, plants, and shrubs, and Tom was beginning to
admire them.

“Oh, this isn’t what I want to show you yet,” said Mary. “Come over this
way.”

She led him through a path of shrubbery. Just ahead of them were two
men, one evidently a gardener. The figure of the other was familiar to
Tom Swift. Then he heard a well known voice say:

“Bless my watering can, but those are the finest roses I ever saw! I
must have one!”

He reached over to pick a blossom.

“Mr. Damon!” cried Tom in delight.

“Tom Swift!” ejaculated the other, turning about. “When did you get
here?”

“Just arrived,” Tom answered. “But I never expected to see you. When did
you come?”

“I just arrived, too. The bus brought me here from that little jerkwater
station shaped like a mushroom. But see these flowers! In spite of the
dry spell this fellow has made them bloom,” and he motioned to the
gardener standing beside him.

Mr. Damon reached over again to pick a rose. As he did so, the man
beside him, with a cry like that of a wild animal, shouted:

“No! You must not! I forbid you!”

“My man, you forget yourself!” said Mr. Damon severely. “I have been a
guest here before and I know it is allowed to pick a few flowers. Stand
aside!” for the man, with a face showing rage, seemed about to prevent
him.

“No! No! You must not pick that rose!” cried the man, and he raised his
hand as if to strike Mr. Damon. But that eccentric character was very
quick, and a moment later the gardener went flying backward into some
bushes, propelled by the vigorous fist of Wakefield Damon.




                               CHAPTER IX


                            A FLASHING KNIFE

“THERE!” exclaimed Mr. Damon with a grunt of satisfaction, as he
straightened up. “Bless my golf clubs, but I think I’ve taught that
insolent fellow a lesson!”

“What’s it all about?” asked Tom, greatly surprised by this scene.

“Oh, he’s a crank about flowers, that’s all,” Mr. Damon said. “But I
have never known him to go to such lengths before.”

“Did he hurt you?” asked Mary anxiously, for she was very fond of Mr.
Damon, as was Tom, in spite of his odd ways.

“Not at all, my dear,” answered the eccentric man. “I hit him first.”

“And, speaking of golf,” said Tom, “you seem to have made a hole in one,
Mr. Damon.”

“What do you mean, Tom?”

The young inventor smiled and pointed to the gardener who was getting up
out of a hole beneath the bushes into which Mr. Damon had knocked him.
There was a strange, strained look on the man’s face, but he said
nothing nor did he attempt to renew the quarrel. He dusted himself off,
looked at some scratches on his hands, glanced once at Mr. Damon, and
went away.

“You had better look out for him, Mr. Damon,” Tom warned. “He had an
ugly look.”

“I know him of old,” was the answer. “He is very jealous of his flowers,
but Mr. Thorndyke has said that we guests may pick a few when we please.
I shall speak to the manager about this fellow. But, Tom, I am delighted
to see you and Mary here. How did it happen?”

“The folks needed a rest and change, particularly dad,” Tom explained.
“So I brought them up in the House on Wheels.”

“And we came nearly not getting here,” added Mary.

“How was that, my dear?”

“We were caught in a landslide.”

“Bless my toothbrush!” cried Mr. Damon. “You don’t tell me!”

Then Tom related some of the events leading up to the visit to Mt.
Camon. In turn, Mr. Damon stated that his wife had gone to visit some of
her relatives, and he not fancying a trip to the little town where they
lived, had come by himself to the mountain resort.

“We will have a good time while you are here, Tom,” said the odd
character. “Bless my first base, but we must get up a ball game! They
have a very good diamond here. We married men will play the single men,
and you’ll have to be in the former class now, Tom.”

“That’s right, Mr. Damon, and I’m not sorry!” laughed Tom, with a fond
look at his wife.

“She can play tennis,” went on Mr. Damon. “They have some fine courts
here.”

“Indeed they have,” said Mary. “I’ve played here before. Is there a good
crowd up this season, Mr. Damon?”

“Well, really, my dear, I don’t know. I arrived only a little while ago,
like yourselves. But from what I have seen I should say it was going to
be a good season. Are you up for long, Tom?”

“No, I must go back in a few days. We have a big, new dirigible in
process of construction, and it’s taking a good bit of my time. But I
hope to have it finished in another month and then Mary and I will enjoy
our vacation together. How long are you going to stay?”

“As long as my wife will let me and while she is contented to stay with
her relatives,” chuckled the odd man, for it was no secret that Mrs.
Damon was rather censorious and she and her odd husband led a more or
less troubled life.

A little later Mr. Damon went up to speak to Mr. Swift and the Nestors,
leaving Tom and Mary to wander about the hotel grounds. Tom saw the
tennis courts and the well-laid-out ball field. The hotel and its
grounds occupied the level plateau of the highest of the mountain peaks
in that neighborhood. All about it on every side, only pierced by a few
roads, was a dense forest.

“It is dry,” Tom observed, when he and his wife had gone a little way
into the outlying woods. “If this ever got on fire it would be a hard
job to put it out.”

“Let us hope then,” said Mary, with a smile, “that it will never get on
fire.”

“Oh, sure!” exclaimed Tom.

On the way back to the hotel veranda, where Mary said she wanted to rest
awhile before dressing for dinner, they met the strange gardener who had
tried to stop Mr. Damon from picking a rose.

“You want to be careful!” said the man to Tom.

“What do you mean?” asked the young inventor with not a little
indignation in his voice.

“Keep away from that man who picks my roses,” went on the gardener. “He
is in danger. And don’t you pick any flowers, either.”

“Look here!” began Tom, but Mary pulled him by the arm and whispered:

“Don’t have a fuss with him, Tom dear. He is a bit queer. A sort of
crank about his flowers.”

“I must speak to the manager about him,” Tom decided, as he and his wife
walked on, leaving the evil-faced gardener pottering about some laurel
bushes.

Tom left Mary with her father and mother, Mr. Swift having gone to his
room to rest. Then, while walking about the beautiful grounds, the young
inventor came upon Mr. Damon talking with Mr. Thorndyke, the hotel
manager.

“Well, Mr. Swift, are you enjoying yourself?” Mr. Thorndyke wanted to
know.

“Very much,” was the reply. “But I have been a little annoyed by the
actions of one of the gardeners on the grounds.”

“I was just telling him about that man myself,” said Mr. Damon. “Really,
Mr. Thorndyke, your guests should not be annoyed by such a fellow when
they want to pick a rose or two.”

“Indeed they shouldn’t!” agreed the manager angrily. “I must speak to
Cosso Tobini.”

“Is that his name?” asked Tom. “Sounds Italian.”

“It is Italian, I believe.”

“Well, he got in Dutch with Mr. Damon!” chuckled Tom. “It was one fine
little knock-out.”

“Perhaps I shouldn’t have hit him,” said the odd man. “But, bless my
boxing gloves, I didn’t want him to hit me.”

“You did perfectly right, Mr. Damon,” the manager said. “Wait. Here
comes Tobini now. I shall speak to him. He is a very good workman and an
excellent gardener. He has achieved results here with flowers and plants
that no other man has ever been able to equal. But we are in the hotel
business to please our guests, not to raise roses for a cranky gardener
to keep on the bushes. Tobini is very hot-headed, but I must make him
listen to reason and mend his ways.”

The man with whom Mr. Damon had had such a lively little argument was
coming along a path with a barrow of dirt, evidently destined for some
flower bed. Mr. Thorndyke stopped him as Tom and Mr. Damon stood near.

“Look here, Tobini,” said the manager, “you must stop this nonsense of
trying to prevent our guests from picking roses or I will discharge
you.”

“They are my roses!” snapped the man, and one could see that he had a
passionate love of flowers. “No one must pick them! Why should they not
live out their lives on their own stems? To pick them is to kill them.
Let them live their alloted lives.”

“That’s all nonsense,” said Mr. Thorndyke. “Our guests may pick a few
flowers when they choose. If you interfere with any of them again,
Cosso—with Mr. Swift or Mr. Damon—you will get your walking papers.
Understand?”

“They can pick my roses?” the man growled out the question.

“Certainly! Keep your tongue and hands to yourself! Now go!”

The gardener wheeled the barrow of dirt a little distance and then
deliberately upset it in the middle of a gravel path. A moment later, as
Tom and Mr. Damon looked in surprise at this manifestation of anger, the
man took a shovel and slowly began refilling his barrow from the pile he
had made.

“Bless my thermometer!” cried Mr. Damon, “what’s the idea?”

“It’s just one of his fits of temper,” said the manager, with a shrug of
his shoulders. “He has done stranger things than that. But he is such a
good gardener that I hate to let him go, though I have threatened to
many times.”

“Well,” chuckled Tom, “as long as he makes work for himself and cleans
up after it, he’ll be kept busy.”

“It’s an outlet for his rage, I suppose,” the manager said. “I don’t
really believe he is dangerous, though he has all the hotness of the
Italian race and is unreasonable in the extreme.”

The incident was soon forgotten, as Tom and Mr. Damon strolled about,
talking over old times and the many adventures they had shared together.
If they had known it, a great adventure was just around the corner for
them.

Mr. Damon was given a seat at the table where Tom Swift and his party
ate, and they were making a pleasant meal, laughing and conversing, when
a sound on a veranda just outside the window near which the Swift table
was placed, attracted their attention.

Mr. Thorndyke, the manager, was walking along the veranda. Suddenly, out
of some side passage, sprang the gardener, Cosso Tobini. As Tom Swift
looked he saw something flashing in the man’s upraised hand. A moment
later the young inventor knew what it was—a knife glinting in the rays
of the sun.

“Look out, Mr. Thorndyke!” Tom cried.

As he spoke, the evil-faced man leaped forward, raising the knife high
to strike. Mr. Thorndyke, warned by Tom Swift’s cry, looked over his
shoulder just in time, and, seeing the danger, began to run. There were
excited shouts from those at Tom’s table and from other guests.

“I will kill you!” screamed Tobini, as he raced after the fleeing
manager. “You let people kill my roses! I will kill you!”




                               CHAPTER X


                              UGLY THREATS

FOR a moment no one seemed to know what to do, and after the first
excited cries the only sounds audible were the pattering of the feet of
the pursued and the pursuer on the flagged pavement of the hotel
veranda.

“Bless my courthouse,” gasped Mr. Damon, “there’ll be murder done by
that mad scoundrel!”

“Unless somebody stops him!” ejaculated Mr. Nestor.

Tom pushed back his chair and scrambled through the low window near his
table and out on the broad porch. A moment later he was chasing after
Tobini, who was rapidly drawing nearer to Mr. Thorndyke. The manager was
a portly person, and evidently not accustomed to running. But fear lent
him some speed.

“Drop that knife, you scoundrel!” cried Tom, hastening after what was,
if not a madman, a man mad with rage.

“I kill him! I kill him!” screamed Tobini. “No one shall kill my roses
and live!”

He was almost upon the panting manager now, but when Mr. Thorndyke
looked back again and saw that murderous, gleaming knife, he took a
desperate chance and leaped over the low balustrade of the veranda into
some shrubbery at a place where it was not far to the ground.

“Good!” cried Tom Swift.

With a cry of rage Tobini reached the same place and started to leap
down, but the young inventor was close behind him and, reaching forth a
hand, tore the upraised knife from the gardener. At the same time Tom
stuck out his foot and tripped Tobini so that he fell heavily. Tom was
upon him in an instant, seeking to hold his hands to prevent the drawing
of any other weapon. Tom had cast the knife back of him.

There was a fierce struggle for a few moments, Tobini seeking to tear
himself loose; but Tom Swift was strong and would not let go. He got the
fellow on his face and sat upon his back, twisting his arms up and
around behind him.

By this time Mr. Damon, Mr. Nestor, and several other guests had hurried
to Tom’s aid, and the raging, fuming gardener was subdued, but not
without a further struggle. Like all such persons, he seemed to possess
the strength of several men.

“Did he kill poor Thorndyke?” asked Mrs. Nestor, after the hands and
feet of Tobini had been tied with large table napkins in lieu of ropes.

“I think not,” Tom said. “I believe he jumped over the railing in time.”

This proved to be true, for a few moments later the manager, rather pale
and disheveled from his leap into the shrubbery, came back up on the
veranda and surveyed the now subdued and temporarily quiet Italian.

“I’ve put up with enough of your tricks!” said the incensed manager.
“You are a good workman, Tobini; but we have had too many complaints
from our guests about you. This is the end!”

“What are you going to do with me?” growled the fellow.

“Send you to jail where you belong. Telephone for the state troopers,”
he said to one of the waiters, that constabulary being the nearest
authority to the isolated hotel.

“To jail!” growled Tobini.

“Yes. That is my last word to you!”

“But it is not my last word to you!” screamed the man, trying to break
from his napkin bonds and from his captors. “You shall hear from me
again! I shall have my revenge!”

His face was distorted with rage and his body writhed like that of a
captive snake. But Tom Swift and the others had tied the napkins well
and they held. The man was led from the veranda to a secure closet on
the basement floor until the state troopers should arrive. Then the
interrupted meal went on.

“He must be insane,” stated Mary.

“A bad number, whatever he is,” agreed Tom.

“I wish you didn’t have to go, Tom,” said Mary wistfully.

“So do I. But business is business.”

“I know, my dear. But I—I——”

“What is it?” asked Tom, as she hesitated.

“I have such a strange feeling, as if something were going to happen,”
she said, looking over her shoulder apprehensively. “I feel as if we
were surrounded by great danger.”

“Nonsense!” laughed Tom. “Mr. Thorndyke was the only one in any danger,
and the cause has been removed, or soon will be. I think the troopers
are coming now,” he went on, as the sound of an auto was heard in the
lower road. “I’ll go and see.”

“No, Tom, stay with me, please!” begged Mary. They were out on the
veranda after dinner.

“What’s the danger?” he asked. “That fellow is well trussed.”

“He might break loose,” said Mary. “And he made such a dreadful
threat—about revenge and killing people. I’d rather you wouldn’t go.
Let the state troopers take him away.”

“All right,” assented Tom, with a smile and a shrug of his shoulders.

A little later the madman, for such he was, temporarily at least, was
taken away by the police and, so the hotel manager said, locked securely
in the jail of a small town several miles away.

The excitement caused by Tobini passed away with the evening, though it
was a fruitful source of conversation the next day among the guests, one
and all of whom praised Tom Swift highly for so quickly disarming the
fellow.

The season was now in full swing, and the hotel was well filled with
guests who enjoyed the various forms of amusement and the activities
provided by the manager and his helpers.

Tom and Mary went off much by themselves, as newly married couples have
done since the beginning of the world and probably always will do. Mary
showed Tom the various points of interest about the big estate. They
went on excursions in the surrounding forests and once or twice met fire
wardens who spoke of the danger of fires on account of the continued
dryness.

“But we’re on the watch,” one deputy warden said, talking to Tom and
Mary at the foot of his observation tower, from which he had descended
for a little walk.

“I’ll feel more at ease when I’ve gone back to know that the firemen are
on the alert,” Tom said to his wife as they returned to the hotel.

“If anything happens, will you come and get me, Tom?” Mary asked.

“Of course!” he exclaimed and, there being none to see, he put his arms
around her and kissed her.

Tom had intended to stay four days at Mt. Camon with Mary, but the
second night a long distance telephone call came for him.

“It’s from Mr. Jackson,” he said, when he had finished the talk. “He
wants me back as soon as possible. I’ll go in the morning.”

“Anything wrong?” asked Mr. Swift.

“Oh, Jardine is making a fuss about a lot of things regarding his
dirigible,” Tom said, in annoyed tones. “I’ve got to go and help Jackson
and Ned straighten matters out.”

“I hope that dwarf won’t make any trouble,” said Mary.




                               CHAPTER XI


                          SHADOWS OF THE NIGHT

TOM SWIFT believed among other things that when persons are on a
vacation to enjoy themselves they should be bothered, annoyed and
worried as little as possible. So, though he was not altogether easy in
his mind regarding the message from his shop and though he was a bit
apprehensive concerning that sinister dwarf, he affected to be quite at
his ease.

“Don’t worry, Mary,” he said. “Everything will be all right.”

“But why does Mr. Jackson want you to come back before your time is up?”

“Oh, a lot of little details that they think I must settle,” Tom said.
“I dare say they really amount to nothing. There are many things to
decide in building such a big dirigible, and naturally Jackson and Ned
don’t want to take the responsibility.”

So, though he had intended to spend another day at Mt. Camon, Tom Swift
made arrangements for leaving early in the morning. When the time came,
the House on Wheels was brought around from the hotel garage.

“Be careful of that place where the landslide was, won’t you, Tom?” Mary
called to him when he was ready to leave.

“I’m not going back that way,” he answered.

“When will you come up again?” she asked.

“I’ll come for my long vacation as soon as the dirigible is finished,”
Tom said. “But I may run up for a few days before then if things are all
right.”

Tom was a little downcast at leaving his wife, and Mary frankly cried a
little at the parting, brief though it would be. But when Tom Swift was
at length on the way back, speeding along in the House on Wheels, he was
thinking of so many things that even his new wife was, for the moment,
crowded out of his mind.

“I hope that bird Jardine isn’t going to butt in and spoil my plans,”
Tom said. “The dirigible may be in part his idea, but I’ve got to build
it and do it my own way. We may come to a bust yet, if he’s too fussy.”

Tom stayed over night at a small country town where his strange House on
Wheels attracted much attention. He received several offers to purchase
it, one from the proprietor of a moving picture theater who said it
would be a good advertisement. But when he learned the cost he whistled
and said:

“I guess that’s a bit too steep for me!”

Tom drove the machine to the limit next day, and arrived at his shop
just before closing time.

“Well, I certainly am glad to see you back!” exclaimed Ned. “Oh, boy,
what a relief!”

“Why, what’s the matter?” asked Tom.

“That baby Jardine,” was Ned’s reply. “He’s had the life almost bothered
out of me. He just left, and when I said you might be here by dark he
said he’d be back.”

“What’s the idea? What does he want?” Tom asked.

“Oh, he’s got some new notions about the dirigible. Wants to make
changes in her construction. It’s all Greek to me. I put him off as best
I could.”

“You didn’t let him order any changes, did you?” Tom asked.

“Certainly not! Jackson held him with a firm hand. But you’re going to
have trouble with that bird!”

“No, I’m not,” Tom said. “If there’s any trouble I’ll throw over the
contract. It has a revoking clause, if any changes unauthorized by me
are incorporated, and I won’t make them.”

“Stick to your guns!” chuckled Ned. “Only you’re going to have your
hands full, believe me.”

“What about that dwarf?” asked Tom.

“Oh, that wasn’t really anything. It was just a fuss between Chock and
the giant. Koku certainly gave the little man the raspberry, and I don’t
blame him for not standing it.”

“Then Chock didn’t make any trouble?”

“Not what you would call trouble, I guess. But he sure had one sweet row
with your giant. Offered to lick him with one hand tied behind his back
and all that, with Rad egging Chock on. For, naturally, Rad and Koku
don’t get on any too well.”

“I know that. So the dwarf left?”

“Vamoosed in a hurry and as mad as a wet hen. Jardine, too, raised a row
when he found Chock was gone, and threatened to bring him back. But I
haven’t noticed him doing it. Outside of that, everything is all right.”

“How’s the dirigible coming on?”

“Fine. The work can be rushed if Jardine doesn’t make a lot of changes.”

“He won’t—don’t worry!”

“It sure is lucky he could supply all the oralum plates ready made, and
getting a lot of the machinery made up of stock parts saved a lot of
time. I shouldn’t wonder, Tom, but that in a few weeks you could fly the
_Silver Cloud_.”

“I hope so. Well, I’ll take a look at things in the shop and then be
ready for Jardine if he comes back.”

“He will. Don’t worry. How are Mary and the bunch?”

“Fine as silk. Everything went beautifully except that we were pretty
nearly killed in a landslide going up and then a crazy gardener at the
hotel tried to stab the manager.”

“Outside of that there ain’t no news, I suppose!” chuckled Ned.

“Right, me lad! And now to business!”

Tom found that his men had made good progress during his short absence
and he was hopeful of an early test of the great machine, which dwarfed
everything else in the big hangar where it was being constructed.

Tom and Ned had supper together and were back in the private office,
going over many matters, when there was a step in the corridor outside
and a well-known voice exclaimed:

“Well, you’re back! I’m glad of it! There are a number of important
matters I want to take up with you, Tom Swift. Here, have a cigar, and
we’ll consider some changes.”

“Changes in what, Mr. Jardine?” Tom asked, as he laid aside the cigar
offered.

“Changes in the _Silver Cloud_.”

“What is the nature of the changes?” asked Tom patiently.

“Well, here’s one. Now what is that sort of little dog kennel on top of
the oralum envelope?” and he pointed to the detailed blue prints on
Tom’s desk.

“That is the weather observatory,” Tom said. “An observer there will
predict storms so that we may stay out of their course.”

“It isn’t necessary!” said Mr. Jardine, taking his cigar out of his
mouth, tossing it in the air and catching it between his lips as it
descended. “A little trick I just learned,” he said, with an odd smile.
“I could go on the stage, maybe.”

“Maybe!” murmured Ned.

“Why do you consider the weather observatory unnecessary, Mr. Jardine?”
asked Tom, and his voice was still patient.

“Because,” was the answer, “my dirigible is to be so strong she will
fear no storms, so what’s the use of knowing when they are coming or
from where?”

“The _Silver Cloud_ will outride any ordinary storm,” Tom said. “But it
is well to be advised even of them. I consider the observatory vital and
necessary.”

“I want it enlarged and made into a private cabin for me and my
friends,” said Mr. Jardine. “We don’t need an observatory.”

“What’s that?” cried Tom Swift.

“Enlarge that useless weather observatory and make it a private cabin
for me and my friends,” insisted the fussy little man. “And here are
some other matters. There is too much space given to the crew. Cut it
down by half!”

“Forty men can’t get along in any less space,” Tom said.

“Forty men? I’m not going to carry half that crew!” cried Mr. Jardine.
“We want more room for passengers so we can make some money out of this.
You’ve got to cut off half the crew space.”

“I’ll not do it!” said Tom determinedly.

“And I want one extra big motor put on, just behind the private cabin
you are to build for me,” said Mr. Jardine. “In case the other motors
fail, I can run the ship myself with the extra big one.”

“It is out of the question,” Tom said, and his voice was losing some of
its patience. “I have calculated the power required to move the _Silver
Cloud_, and we have ample, and to spare, in the motors already planned.
Another would not only be unnecessary but a positive danger, placed
where you want it.”

“Well, I’m going to insist on it,” Mr. Jardine said. “I won’t go into
any more details now, but I’ll take this up with you in the morning,
when you are fresher. I understand you just came in from Mt. Camon.”

“Yes,” Tom said, “I did. But morning isn’t going to change my mind about
doing what you request. It is impossible!”

“We’ll talk it over in the morning,” said Mr. Jardine lightly. “Have
another cigar! Oh, I forgot—you don’t smoke. I’ll see you later. About
that dwarf. I want him taken back on and your giant must let him alone.
But we’ll take that up to-morrow.”

He hurried away, lightly humming a song as if there was nothing on his
mind and as if the alterations he proposed were as easily made as
changing the color to go on a new house.

“What did I tell you?” asked Ned, as he and Tom were alone again.

“He is the limit!” exclaimed Tom, in disgust. “Why, he’s crazy to think
those things can be done!”

“He’s a nut, if you ask me!” declared Ned. “Well, you don’t have to do
as he says.”

“You bet I don’t!” exclaimed Tom fervently.

Then he and Ned considered other matters, but Tom Swift could not get
out of his mind certain worrisome thoughts concerning the big dirigible
and the man who had ordered it built and was paying for it. For Ned
reported that the money was still coming in from the Jardine company,
according to contract.

“You’ll just have to stall him along, Tom,” were Ned’s parting words as
he left his chum in the laboratory, for Tom had some experiments to
finish in connection with the _Silver Cloud_.

It was late when the young inventor came out of his shop to go home in a
small car that was in waiting. As he was about to step from his private
office to go to the garage he thought he saw something like the shadow
of a man flit across a lighted, open space in front of the laboratory.

“That dwarf!” exclaimed Tom in a whisper as he stopped and listened.

But he heard no sound and was about to proceed when another shadow of
the night flitted in front of the doorway. This shadow was taller.

“Jardine!” whispered Tom. “What are he and that dwarf doing around here
at this time of night?”




                              CHAPTER XII


                                BAD NEWS

MARTIN JARDINE, for he it was, and in company with the dwarf, either had
no intention of concealing his movements, or, now that he was caught,
relinquished such an intention, for when Tom Swift stepped from the
doorway he met the man and Jim Chock coming in.

“Oh, excuse me, Mr. Swift,” Jardine began lightly, as though asking for
a light for his cigar, “but I met Chock after I left you and he begged
so hard that I intercede for him that I agreed to do so. I saw a light
in your office and guessed you were still here, so I turned in. So now
let’s talk things over.”

“Excuse me,” Tom said. “I have nothing against you personally, Chock,”
he said. “But you and Koku would be sure to quarrel, and that would mean
disruption in the shop. I can’t have that.”

“I wouldn’t quarrel with your giant, Mr. Swift. Though he sure did get
me r’iled,” said the dwarf.

“I understand. Perhaps it wasn’t altogether your fault. But Koku has
been with me many years. I know his ways and his failings, and I am not
going to part with him.”

“But, Mr. Swift,” broke in Jardine. “Think how useful a man as small as
Chock will be on the dirigible.”

“I have considered, and I can’t have him. After you take the ship over
you can do as you please. Until I complete it and turn it over to you, I
have the final say as regards the working force. The contracts call for
that.”

“Yes, I know, Mr. Swift——”

“Now, there is no use prolonging the discussion,” Tom interrupted. “I am
tired and need rest. This is a closed matter!”

“All right,” Jardine seemed to assent graciously enough. “I guess you’ll
have to stay away, Jim,” he said to the little man. “But I’ll put you
aboard when the _Silver Cloud_ is my own.”

“You may do as you please then,” Tom said. “And I will now bid you
good-night.”

“Well, I’ll see you in the morning about those changes,” Jardine said,
and Tom did not think it worth while to say it would be useless.

The young inventor remained in his office doorway until he had seen
Jardine and the dwarf leave the premises, and then, going to the main
gate, Tom said to the watchman:

“Don’t let that dwarf in here again, even if he comes with Mr. Jardine.”

“I didn’t let him in this time,” said the man.

“You didn’t! Then how did he get in?”

“Blessed if I know, Mr. Swift. I had orders to let in Mr. Jardine, and I
did, twice to-night. But the dwarf wasn’t with him either time.”

“Then Chock must have been hidden in here all the while,” said Tom.
“That looks bad! I don’t like this a bit. He must have been in here and
met Jardine the second time that man came back.”

“Maybe the dwarf climbed under the fence, same as he tried to do
before,” suggested the watchman. “The charged wire isn’t yet in place.”

“I must see to that at once—first thing in the morning,” Tom said. “I
can’t have things like this going on.”

He gave orders that the plant was to be closely watched that night and
put extra men on duty in the hangar where the dirigible was. But he
could think of no reason why Jardine would want to damage his own
property or smuggle the dwarf in.

“It’s a queer game,” mused Tom, as he went to bed. “As Ned said, he must
be a nut. I’ll be glad when I’ve finished with him.”

However, troubles often vanish with darkness, and the next day, somewhat
to Tom Swift’s surprise, Jardine neither made any reference to his
midnight visit with the dwarf nor did he speak of the unusual changes he
wanted made in the _Silver Cloud_. When he and Tom made the usual
inspection of work on the big machine Jardine said:

“Everything is coming along well, Mr. Swift. I am more than pleased! Now
don’t work too hard over this yourself. Take a few days off. While I’d
like to get the dirigible as soon as possible, I don’t want you to kill
yourself. Everything is fine! Go along as you are.”

“Well, I’ll be darned!” said Tom to Ned, when they were alone. “He must
talk in his sleep or something, to go on this way after what he said
last night.”

“Just a nut!” murmured Ned, with a chuckle, as he made a circular motion
with one finger near his head. “Wheels—going around,” he added. “But
you needn’t worry as long as he pays you.”

“I suppose not,” assented Tom, laughing a little.

For the next week nothing happened, except a lot of hard work. Tom Swift
pushed the labor on the dirigible and, to his delight, Mr. Jardine did
not come near the works. Nor did he send any word about nonsensical
changes or the hiring of the dwarf. That odd creature was not seen
again, and Tom gave orders that he was not to be admitted. The charged
wire at the bottom of the fence was again adjusted and the place was
well guarded.

“Well, Ned,” said Tom one afternoon, when unusually good progress had
been made on the dirigible, “I think I’ll take a few days off and run up
to see Mary.”

“Good idea!” agreed the financial manager. “Give her my love and
remember me to your dad and the Nestors.”

“I will. Don’t you want to come along?”

“I’d like to, but I don’t believe it would be best for us both to be
away at the same time, Tom. I’ll take an outing when you come back.”

“Be sure you do.”

Tom Swift made the second trip to Mt. Camon in a smaller but more speedy
car, and it need not be said that Mary was delighted to see him. The
unexpectedness of his visit made it the more delightful.

“Oh, I’m so glad you came!” she murmured. “I feel safer now.”

“Why, nothing has happened, has there?” Tom asked.

“Oh, no. But I can’t get over thinking there may.”

“That crazy gardener hasn’t been around again, has he?”

“No, the poor fellow is in jail yet, I guess.”

“Then don’t worry,” Tom advised.

“Well, bless my porous plaster!” cried Mr. Damon when he saw Tom a
little later. “You’re a sight for sore eyes! Up for good?”

“No, only for a few days this time. But I expect my next visit will be a
longer one. I hope to finish the season here.”

The hotel was well filled, many new guests having arrived, and when Tom
went down to the dining room he saw a stylishly dressed woman at the
table next to the one where he had a place with his father, Mary, and
her parents. The lady wore many diamonds, yet without an air of display.
With her were two children in their teens, the boy Harry and the girl
Laura.

As Tom left his seat after dinner, Mary having preceded him, he paused a
moment to let the be-diamonded lady pass out first, but she stopped and
spoke to him.

“Excuse me,” she said in pleasant tones, “but aren’t you Tom Swift, the
eminent inventor?”

“I don’t want to say how eminent I am,” said Tom modestly. “But that is
my name.”

“I am glad to meet you,” she went on. “I was told you were here; but
your people, whom I have come to know slightly, said you were not
expected for some time.”

“I ran up unannounced between jobs, so to speak,” said Tom. “I am at
work on a big dirigible.”

“That is what I want to speak to you about,” went on the lady in a low
voice. “Could I have a few minutes’ talk with you alone?”

“What’s this?” thought Tom. “Is this a prospective customer for another
airship to rival the _Silver Cloud_, or does she want to engage passage
on the first trip?”

“Run along, my dears,” said the lady to her children. “Will you come out
on the veranda with me, Mr. Swift?” she went on. “I am sure your wife
will excuse you a moment, won’t you, Mrs. Swift?” This to Mary.

“Of course, Mrs. Jardine! I didn’t know you knew my husband.”

“I took the liberty of introducing myself,” the lady smilingly replied,
while many thoughts surged through Tom’s head as he heard Mary call his
companion “Mrs. Jardine.”

“Are you the wife of the man for whom I am building the big dirigible?”
Tom Swift asked when he and Mrs. Jardine were in a secluded place on the
big hotel veranda. “Excuse me for not recognizing you.”

“How could you, never having seen me before? I am Mrs. Jardine, but not
the one you suppose,” and her voice had in it a quality Tom could not
fathom.

“I am Mrs. Lawrence Jardine,” she went on.

“Lawrence Jardine?” Tom murmured, more and more puzzled.

“The sister-in-law of Martin Jardine for whom, I believe, you are making
a big airship.”

“Yes, certainly,” Tom said. “Martin Jardine is the name.”

“He is my husband’s brother,” went on the lady, and her air grew more
serious. “I have been anxious to get word to you, but I did not just
know how to go about it,” she added. “But when my husband sent me and
the children to this hotel and I found that your family were guests here
and that you were coming, I decided to wait and see you. I have
important news for you—bad news I am afraid.”

“Bad news!” murmured Tom. The puzzle was more complicated.

“Yes. While it is true that Martin Jardine is in partnership with his
brother, my husband, I do not believe that Martin had any authority to
go ahead and order that big airship built. In fact, I am quite sure he
had not. He did it on his own responsibility, and I feel sure my husband
and the other members of the firm will disapprove of it. I should advise
you to stop work at once.”

“This is bad news, indeed!” exclaimed Tom. “But can’t I get in touch
with your husband and settle this matter?” All the suspicions regarding
Martin Jardine rushed to the fore again.

“My husband is in Mexico prospecting for new mines and oil wells,” said
Mrs. Jardine. “I have not heard from him for some time, but I have sent
him word about his brother’s mad project. I think you had better have
nothing more to do with the _Silver Cloud_.”

“This is most surprising!” Tom exclaimed.

“I feared it would be. I am sorry.”

“So am I,” Tom said. “This will make a big difference to me.”

“Yes, I suppose so. Martin was always odd. You must have noticed it, Mr.
Swift.”

“I have. But he seemed to have good business sense, and he has met his
payments promptly.”

“I think he will not meet any more after my husband hears of his latest
freakish project. You are well out of it if you have lost nothing.”

“Oh, we can’t get out of it so easily,” Tom said. “We have invested
large sums ourselves, and hoped to be paid back. This certainly is bad
news,” and with a troubled face Tom paced the veranda.




                              CHAPTER XIII


                           A CHANGE OF PLANS

MARY came to the door of the hotel and looked out where Tom Swift was
pacing up and down, while Mrs. Jardine watched him anxiously.

“Oh, Tom!” Mary called.

“Yes,” he answered, starting out of his troubled reverie. “What is it?”

“Will you make up a hand at bridge? We are one short, and mother is so
fond of her game. Mr. Damon, too.”

“Oh, all right,” Tom answered, with a glance at Mrs. Jardine. “Will you
excuse me?” he said to her.

“Certainly,” she murmured.

No one, probably, ever felt less like playing bridge than did Tom Swift
that evening after having heard the disquieting news. He could not get
it out of his mind, and yet he must. So he forced himself to exchange
light hotel gossip with his wife and the others and, in addition, had to
remember what was trumps, whether the lead was in the hand of the dummy
or elsewhere, and keep track of the cards played. It was hard work, but
he and Mary managed to take the odd trick more than once and won the
rubber against Mr. Damon and Mrs. Nestor.

But all the while he was wondering how he could get another talk with
Mrs. Jardine and find out more particulars without letting Mary and his
father know the disastrous news. For it was disastrous in several ways.
It was a blow to the prestige of the Swift plant and a big money loss if
they were to have the big dirigible left on their hands.

“I ought to get word back to Ned and Mr. Jackson to stop everything if
what Mrs. Jardine tells me is true,” mused Tom, as he walked out on the
veranda after the game to get a breath of outer air before going to bed.
Then he saw Mrs. Jardine again and as Mary had remained inside, Tom had
a clear coast for extracting information.

But a further talk only confirmed what Mrs. Jardine had first told
him—that her brother-in-law, Martin Jardine, was an irresponsible
schemer and had, several times before, involved the firm in enterprises
which had to be abandoned.

“He has wonderful ideas sometimes,” Mrs. Jardine said of Martin. “But he
is a dreamer and is also very eccentric. I have no authority for telling
you to stop work; but that would be my advice. I have tried to get in
touch with my husband in Mexico. I have sent messages to several places
where he may call, and I have told him to communicate with you at your
shop at once.”

“Thank you. I shall take your advice and cease work on the dirigible,
pending some word from your husband. And I think I had better get back
to headquarters to receive any messages that may come from him. He would
not know I am here, and if he called up my shop, no one there would feel
authorized to do what he told them; but I’ll take precautionary
measures.”

This Tom Swift did at once by sending a night letter to Mr. Jackson,
telling him to stop work on the dirigible until the young inventor could
get back.

“This is the second time my temporary vacation has been cut short,” Tom
mused, as he went up to his room, planning to leave early the next
morning. “Confound that crazy Martin Jardine, anyhow!”

Mary was disappointed, of course, when Tom told her he had to go away
again; but when he explained that it had to do with the dirigible she
made no objections, for she knew what the completion of the _Silver
Cloud_ would mean to Tom Swift’s reputation. Nor did he tell her how
near the project was to being wrecked. Neither did he say anything to
his father, for Mr. Swift needed quiet and repose. Time enough for that
when he himself knew more of the situation.

Tom appeared at the works two days later, to find Ned, Mr. Jackson, and
the foremen of the various shops in a quandary over his message to cease
operations.

“What’s the idea?” Ned asked, for Tom’s telegram had not gone into
details. He did not want word of the fiasco to get out. “Stopping work
on the biggest thing we’ve ever turned out, Tom!”

“It had to be done,” Tom said, regretfully enough. “It may be only
temporary, but I fear for the worst. I’m expecting a message any time
now.”

“It will be a shame to have to scrap all this,” said Garret Jackson,
looking up at the huge mass towering over their heads in the hangar.
“Why, a couple of weeks more, and she’ll be ready for the air!”

“It is too bad,” Tom said. “It will mean a big money loss to us.”

“Yes,” assented Ned. “It has cost a lot more than we originally
calculated on, and though Jardine has met his payments according to
contract, they have not been enough. We should have stipulated for more
money.”

“I don’t believe we’ll get any more,” said Tom grimly, and he related
all Mrs. Lawrence Jardine had told him about her erratic brother-in-law.

Tom and his intimate associates were in consultation over the matter
when the telephone in the private office rang and when the girl
announced “long distance,” Tom had a feeling, he said later, that it had
something to do with the Jardine matter.

This proved true, for Tom soon heard the voice of Lawrence Jardine
talking to him from Mexico City and saying:

“Stop all work on that dirigible ordered by my brother. He had no
authority to go ahead.”

“Isn’t your firm responsible?” Tom inquired.

“Not in this case. Martin acted beyond his rights. We shall not make any
further payments.”

“I think you are bound to,” Tom said quietly.

“Nothing doing, Mr. Swift. I am on my way home and I’ll stop to see you.
But don’t finish that airship!”

“I won’t—that is, not for your firm,” Tom replied. “But it seems a pity
to scrap it. All right, Mr. Jardine. I’ll wait until I see you up here.”

It was tedious waiting in Shopton until the older brother and real head
of the Jardine firm should arrive from Mexico; but there was nothing
else to do. So all work on the dirigible was halted. Meanwhile Tom Swift
tried to get in touch with the eccentric Martin, but without effect.

At length, one day while Tom was in his office, Koku came in, very
quietly for so big a man, and announced:

“Mans to see you, Master.”

“Show him in,” Tom directed, as Koku handed him the card of Lawrence
Jardine.

The young inventor was soon face to face with the older brother and real
head of the Jardine company. Lawrence Jardine was a hard-headed business
man, quite different from the eternal cigar-smoking Martin. Though he
had good business sense, he could not be moved from his position that as
the dirigible was ordered by Martin, the latter was without authority
and the firm would repudiate the matter. Tom and Ned talked it over and
realized that Lawrence Jardine was within his legal rights.

“But there is a moral side to it,” Tom said. “I took this order from
your brother in good faith, and he seemed cloaked with full authority to
enter into negotiations.”

“Martin is a fool!” burst out his brother. “It isn’t the first time he
has dangerously involved our concern and spent money foolishly. No, I’m
through, and I won’t have the dirigible at any price!”

“Won’t you take a look at it first?” suggested Ned. “It will be a big
advertisement for your oralum metal plates.”

“It’s entirely too big an advertisement!” snapped Lawrence. “I tell you,
I don’t want it!”

Tom tried to influence him, telling him of the various advantages of the
new dirigible, how far it could cruise, and what a load it could carry
above the clouds, but the head of the Jardine company was obdurate.

“I’m through!” he said, and his voice cracked like a whip.

“Well,” remarked Ned, “there are certain uncompleted payments your
brother promised to make, amounting to several thousand dollars. We are
entitled to them.”

“Try to get the money!” retorted Lawrence.

“That’s plain crooked!” exploded Tom.

“Don’t you call me crooked!” fired back the other.

“Well, your brother is.”

“Not so much crooked as a fool. You can sue if you like, but I’ll not
accept the dirigible and you’ll get no more money!”

There followed a hot and heavy discussion, bordering on a quarrel, but
Lawrence Jardine could not be moved and in the end he stamped out of the
office, leaving Tom and Ned defeated.

“Well, what’s next to be done, Tom?” Ned asked, looking at the plans,
specifications, and contracts having to do with the _Silver Cloud_. His
desk was littered with them.

“Hanged if I know,” Tom said moodily.

“Do you think you could sell the dirigible as she is, perhaps to the
United States or Germany?” asked Ned. “It would beat even the _Graf
Zeppelin_.”

“I might make a sale,” assented Tom listlessly. “But it would take
negotiations of nearly a year to bring it about. Meanwhile everything
would be tied up.”

“You think the airship will be a success, don’t you Tom?”

“Sure, she’ll be a success!” cried the young inventor. “I’m positive of
that. Even if the oralum did come from those crazy Jardines, it’s a
wonderful metal. It wouldn’t take much to put the _Silver Cloud_ in
running order.”

“It would be a big feather in the cap of the Swift company if you could
get it going, Tom,” said Ned.

Then, suddenly, a great change came over Tom Swift. He fairly jumped
from his chair, his eyes shining, and exclaimed:

“I’ll do it! Bless my propellers, as Mr. Damon would say, but I’ll do
it!”

“Do what?” asked Ned.

“I’ll finish the dirigible for myself! It will be mine from top to
bottom and end to end! I’ll keep the name, but nothing else. I’ll own
the _Silver Cloud_!”

“Good for you!” shouted Ned as enthusiastically as his chum. “But can
you manage it?” he added more soberly.

“Yes. We’ll make new plans. Oh, I don’t mean to change the plan of the
airship,” he went on, as Ned looked at the mass of papers. “She is too
nearly completed for that. But we’ll think up some plan to raise the
rest of the money needed, and I’ll finish and own this ship myself!”

“Then you and I’ll go sailing in it!” cried Ned.

“Surest thing you know!” exclaimed Tom. “Send Mr. Jackson here and I’ll
issue orders to rush the work to completion!”




                              CHAPTER XIV


                          BUCKING A HURRICANE

WHAT at first seemed almost an impossible undertaking gradually became
less and less so as the days passed. So about a week after Tom Swift had
changed his plans and made what seemed a momentous decision, work was
resumed on the _Silver Cloud_ at almost doubled speed.

How the necessary money was raised, partly by straining credit to the
uttermost and partly by selling some valuable patents, and how
permission was finally squeezed out of Lawrence Jardine to sell at cost
price the necessary oralum plates needed to finish the craft—all this,
as Tom and Ned said afterward, seemed like part of a nightmare. They had
never worked harder in their lives.

But they were successful, and though Lawrence Jardine refused to lend
his name, money, or influence to the further completion of the big
dirigible, it was continued without his help—save his somewhat grudging
acquiescence to sell the oralum plates.

All this time not another word was heard from Martin Jardine nor the
grotesque dwarf who seemed like some uncanny familiar spirit of his.
They appeared to have dropped out of sight and hearing, and Tom did not
try to locate them.

“We’re well through with such folks,” he said to his chum.

“That’s right,” agreed Ned. “I’m glad your father and Mary are away from
here enjoying themselves. They’d be upset if they knew all we have gone
through.”

“I guess that’s right,” Tom assented wearily.

“How are they up at Mt. Camon?” asked Ned.

“All right. It’s pretty dry there. No rain at all.”

“The whole country is suffering from that,” observed Ned. “There have
been a number of small forest fires and there may be more.”

“I hope not!” exclaimed Tom. “If the woods around that hotel where Mary
and the folks are ever got to burning, nothing could put the blaze out.
I don’t like to think of it!”

“Then don’t,” advised Ned. “The fire wardens are on the watch and they
have plenty of help. Now about the notes we have to sign to get that
bank loan.”

“Oh, yes,” Tom replied. “Gosh! I hope I can finish that dirigible and
sell her, or get some money out of her. If I can’t, I’ll be bankrupt.
But this is about the last money we’ll need. I’ll have the craft
finished this day week.”

“Let’s hope so,” responded Ned. “We haven’t much credit left and the
cash is going fast. Maybe when you’ve made a successful trip, Uncle Sam
or one of the commercial companies will buy the _Silver Cloud_.”

“Maybe, is a slight foundation of hope on which to spend so much money.
Anyhow, we’ll soon give her a trial.”

It was decided not to finish the craft completely, that is, the cabin
accommodations for passengers would be omitted temporarily.

“What we’ll do,” said Tom, talking the matter over with Ned, “will be to
make it mechanically perfect. You and I and the crew can rough it on the
trial trip; I mean as to sleeping and eating. Later, if she behaves as I
hope she will, we may interest some capitalists and finish the
passengers’ cabins in _de luxe_ style for transoceanic travel.”

“Like the Zeppelins,” suggested Ned.

“That’s it. But now we’ll save all the money we can.”

In general, however, the original plans were carried out. The big all
metal envelope to hold the lifting gas was finished. The various motor
compartments were constructed within it and the powerful propellers,
thrust out here and there to get a grip on the air, alone showed the
motive power. By putting the motor gondolas inside the envelope much air
resistance was done away with. This was one of Tom’s original ideas.

The quarters for the crew were simply finished and those for the
navigating officers contained no luxuries. The young inventor said he
was willing to sleep on the floor of his cabin and eat off his lap to
save money for essentials.

Tom received a letter each day from his wife, telling of events at the
Mt. Camon hotel. More than once she asked when he was coming up for his
vacation. She said that Mrs. Lawrence Jardine and her children were
still at the place, and from the fact that Mary was friendly with her
Tom guessed that the wife of the head of the Jardine concern had been
discreet in not telling of the fiasco.

Tom wrote back that he would be up soon, but he did not tell Mary of a
daring plan he had in mind. This was to sail the _Silver Cloud_ over the
wooded mountain on top of which the hotel was perched.

“That is if I can get her to go,” Tom said to his chum.

“I never saw anything yet, from a motor cycle to a submarine, you
couldn’t get going if you tried hard enough,” returned Ned.

“Well, you can bet I’m going to try!” declared Tom Swift emphatically.

From then on there were days and nights of hard work on the big
dirigible. In a way, Tom Swift was glad of the Jardine episode since it
left him his own master and he could build the airship as he pleased
without the eccentric suggestions of Martin Jardine and the menace of
having the grotesque dwarf around.

“Huh!” exclaimed Koku when told that Chock would not return. “If him do
I bust him open same as Radicate bust watermelons!”

“That’s going some!” chuckled Tom.

So the work went on, hammer and tongs, tongs and hammer, until at last
the oralum envelope was completed and proved gas tight. The motors had
been tested and worked very well, but they would do better after a trial
spin, Tom said. The quarters for the crew, for Tom, Ned and the
executives of his plant, were roughly finished so they could be used,
and at last all was in readiness for a trial flight.

Great tanks of the new lifting gas had been charged in readiness, and
there was an apparatus aboard the _Silver Cloud_ for making more gas in
case of emergency.

“But one filling ought to last for ten thousand miles,” Tom declared to
Ned.

“How about food?” asked the young financial man the night before the day
set for the test when they were examining the ship and talking matters
over.

“We shan’t be in the air long enough for that,” Tom replied.

“Can’t tell. Might get stuck up there,” suggested Ned. “I’m going to ask
Mrs. Baggert to make some sandwiches.”

“All right. Now I’ve got to see that those gas pressure gages register
properly. Then we’ll be all set.”

The day for the test flight broke calm and clear. Tom was glad of this.
There was activity in the plant long before sunrise, and by the time Old
Sol’s rosy beams were warming the earth all was in readiness.

Tom Swift was in the navigating cabin, which was in the nose of the
ship. Above him was a weather expert, Mr. Kirby Larson, who had been in
the United States Government service. Mr. Larson had to himself the
little cabin which Martin Jardine had wanted to make into a personal
stateroom.

“All ready!” cried Tom to the ground crew of men who were to walk the
big dirigible out of the hangar.

“All ready!” came from the captain of this crew.

“Go!” ordered Tom.

Slowly the _Silver Cloud_ left her birthplace, and for the first time
emerged into the open. The full lifting power of the gas was not exerted
until she was clear of the hangar, and then Tom, having received word
that all was clear, cried:

“Let go!”

The ground crew loosed the mooring ropes, the power of the lifting gas
began to make itself felt, and the great dirigible slowly rose like some
immense but graceful creature of the air.

“Half speed ahead!” Tom signalled to the various motor compartments, and
the great machines began to whirl the propellers in unison. The _Silver
Cloud_, looking very like her namesake, went upward and ahead.

A cheer rose from the crowd below, workmen of the Swift plant. But as
the ship passed over the high fence and came into view generally,
another crowd of townspeople and other curious folk who had heard about
the latest Swift achievement set up loud shouts of surprise and
approbation.

“She’s the biggest airship in the world!” cried one man.

This was true. For the _Silver Cloud_ was nearly a thousand feet long.

“Well, Ned, she’s going up!” Tom said to his chum, as, together, they
stood in the control cabin.

“Of course she is!” exclaimed Ned. “I wish your father were here to see
it.”

“I wish those Jardines were here, or at least the head of the company!”
snapped Tom.

“Why?”

“Because if he sees she’s a success he might buy her and we’d get our
money back.”

“Of course there’s no great market yet for a giant airship, but if this
one is a success we’ll hope you won’t have any trouble in selling her at
a profit,” remarked Ned slowly. “But is this as fast as she can go?”

“I should say not!” chuckled Tom. “But I’ve got to start the new motors
easily at first.”

In a little while the craft was gathering speed and when she had arisen
several thousand feet into the air she was humming along at nearly a
hundred miles an hour. She was capable of more than this.

As Tom Swift and Ned Newton were rejoicing over what seemed like a
wonderful success a signal from Mr. Larson in the upper weather
observatory came to them.

“You had better turn about,” he said.

“Why?” asked Tom.

“We are heading for a low pressure area and I think there is a storm
center there. The instruments indicate a powerful wind blowing—one of
hurricane strength. Turn back.”

To the surprise of Ned Newton, the young inventor, instead of giving the
signal to turn the airship, kept her headed in a straight course.

“What’s the idea?” asked Ned. “You’re running into trouble—into a
hurricane!”

“That’s just what I want to do,” replied Tom. “If this craft is any good
at all, she can’t be sailed in fair weather only. She’ll have to stand
storm and stress; and if she won’t, now is the time to discover it. I’m
going to buck the hurricane!”

“Whew!” whistled the young financial man. “Then I’m glad I brought along
some sandwiches.”

“Why?”

“We may get shipwrecked and need them.”

“We shan’t get shipwrecked,” said Tom Swift confidently. “But I’d like
to see how she acts in a big wind.”

A little later the _Silver Cloud_ began to pitch and toss.

“I think you’re going to get your wish,” cried Ned, clinging to a safety
hand rail in the cabin.

There was a call from the weather observer in his high cabin.

“Hurricane just ahead!” he reported. “Turn back!”

“Full speed ahead!” Tom ordered to the motor rooms.

Then the _Silver Cloud_ was battling with a powerful, furious wind.

“Feel that drop!” cried Ned, as the craft was whirled toward the earth.
“Will she stand it, Tom?”

“She’s got to stand it!” was the fierce reply of the young inventor.

For a few moments, in spite of the brave words of Tom Swift, it was
almost touch and go in the fight between the big dirigible and the
powerful wind.




                               CHAPTER XV


                           CAUGHT IN THE FOG

TOM SWIFT, the young inventor, did not give up making the _Silver Cloud_
fight her way into the very teeth of the hurricane, and, though the ship
seemed to turn and twist as though to escape the ordeal, he held her to
her task. The motors hummed, the big propellers whirled their way,
tossing aside the roaring winds, and the _Silver Cloud_ moved ahead.

“Only an all metal ship would stand this!” murmured Tom, as, with Ned
beside him, he stood in the control cabin and watched the various gages
which indicated the height and speed of the craft.

“Yes, a fabric envelope like those of the Zeppelins, even on a metal
frame, would be torn off,” Ned agreed.

He knew something about reading the gages and he noted, with Tom, that
now the great craft would be forced down slightly, and again, when
getting into some “pocket” where the hurricane was not of such powerful
strength, she would ascend.

Her forward speed was cut at times from around a hundred miles an hour,
which it had been in the calm atmosphere, to less than thirty. But Tom
Swift had not yet used all the power in his motors.

“Here goes for a big test, though!” he presently decided. “The engines
have been run on the blocks long enough to wear the pistons smooth, so I
think I can chance giving her about all she’ll take. Let’s see if we
can’t run through this hurricane.”

Tom signaled for more speed to the motor compartments. The _Silver
Cloud_ trembled, but, after a moment of uncertainty, the occupants of
the control cabin saw the needle of the speed dial begin to move slowly
toward the higher figures.

“Sixty!” called Ned.

“Good!” murmured Tom, who was steering the ship.

“Seventy!” cried Ned.

“She can do better than that!” Tom said.

“Up to a hundred now!” reported Ned a moment later.

“That’s good, considering the wind is dead against her,” Tom agreed.
“But if she’s to make a trip around the world, as I hope, she may meet
with even worse winds than this, and to beat them she’ll have to do at
least a hundred and fifty now.”

“She can’t!” Ned declared. “Never!”

“Well, if I can get to one twenty-five I’ll be satisfied,” Tom said.

The ship throbbed, trembled, and vibrated from end to end. In the motor
compartments, which Ned visited in turn, to make sure all was well, the
men tense, eager, and anxious, bent over their machines and gages. The
one great fear was lest some bearing should overheat or an oil feed or
fuel pipe break, thus cutting down the power.

Nothing like this happened, and when Ned Newton got back to the control
cabin he glanced at the speed gage and cried:

“One hundred and thirty!”

“Good!” shouted his chum. “That beats the hurricane!”

A moment later there came a signal from Mr. Larson:

“We have run through the storm.”

This was immediately noticed, for the speed of the ship went to one
hundred and sixty miles an hour, there being no head wind now to hold
her back. But as such speed was needlessly racing the motors, Tom cut it
down to a normal rate of eighty miles.

“Well, you did it,” Ned remarked when, having swept through the
hurricane area, they turned about and headed for Shopton on a course
that would not again take them into a danger zone.

“The airship did it!” replied Tom. “Give her the credit.”

“Are you satisfied?” asked Ned.

“Not altogether,” Tom admitted. “I can see where I can make some
improvements. But they will come later. On the whole, I think she did
very well, and in a severe test, too.”

“I’ll say it was severe!” murmured Ned, rubbing some bruised spots where
he had been tossed against the cabin walls.

That evening the _Silver Cloud_ was housed in her hangar, safe and sound
save for a few minor mishaps. There was great rejoicing in the Swift
plant, for it was felt that the work was a big success.

“But I’ll make her better yet,” declared Tom.

“Then the Jardines will be sorry they called the game off,” predicted
Ned.

“Maybe,” said Tom, with a grim smile. “We’ll see.”

“Gosh!” Ned suddenly exclaimed.

“What’s the matter?”

“I forgot, in the hurricane, all about eating those sandwiches!” laughed
Ned.

There were still more busy days of work in the Swift plant when once
again the big dirigible was in her hangar. Several changes were carried
out, one motor that had shown a weakness was replaced and different
propellers were put on.

A number of new instruments were adjusted and several pieces of
apparatus designed for comfort and safety, which had not been installed
on the trial trip, were added. Also, the passengers’ main cabin and some
of the staterooms were partly finished.

“We could pretty nearly make a trip around the world now,” Ned observed,
as he went over the ship one night with his chum.

“Yes,” was the answer. “But I want another test first.”

“We got a good write-up in the papers about the one we had,” Ned stated,
showing Tom a bundle of press clippings. “They called it another Swift
triumph.”

“Yes,” Tom chuckled. “But they ain’t seen nothin’ yet, as the joke has
it. Let ’em wait!”

“It’s queer we haven’t heard a word from the Jardines,” went on Ned.
“You’d think they might at least wish us well.”

“I don’t want to hear from that crazy Martin,” Tom said. “But Lawrence
seemed businesslike. He might at least make us a rebate for the
advertising we’re giving his oralum metal.”

“Sure,” agreed Ned. “But he’s hard-boiled!”

A week later the _Silver Cloud_ was ready for another test. She took the
air more easily, for the lifting power of the gas had been increased
somewhat, and she moved along more smoothly under the power of her
motors.

“Going to buck another hurricane?” asked Ned, with a laugh, as he stood
in the control cabin with Tom.

“Not unless we have to. But we can do it.”

They moved speedily through the air, the members of the crew getting
more familiar with their duties. There seemed to be no hitch in the
smooth performance of the great airship.

“I’ll head south,” Tom decided after a while.

“You’ll have to go higher than this if you do,” Ned told him. “You know
the Moochie range of mountains lie south and there are some pretty tall
peaks.”

“We can clear them,” Tom declared. “But I will go higher.”

The _Silver Cloud_ rose above those masses of vapor for which she was
named and sailed through the brilliant sunlight. Then she passed over a
large lake, heading for the high mountains. In a little while a warning
came from the weather observer:

“Fog ahead!”

“Confound the luck!” exclaimed Tom, for fog is one element no airship,
however powerful, has ever been able to conquer.

“Go up!” advised Ned.

But when Tom called for a more detailed report, Mr. Larson said the fog
was more dense above than below, so the ship descended.

They were now cruising, though at reduced speed, through what was a
dense, white vapor, and even Tom Swift was rather apprehensive.

Suddenly a signal of alarm came from Mr. Larson.

“Stop! Back up!” he called through the telephone.

Tom’s hand was on the lever to signal the motor rooms when there came a
sudden jar, a dull thud, and the ship stood still, held fast in what
seemed to be a bank of dense fog.




                              CHAPTER XVI


                           A GIANT’S STRENGTH

“WHAT happened?” cried Ned Newton.

“We seem to have struck something,” Tom answered. In spite of the
emergency and, probably, danger, the young inventor remained cool and
collected.

“Struck something!” ejaculated Ned. “How could that be so, high in the
air? Air travel isn’t yet as popular as autoing. If we were on the
ground I could believe it.”

“We aren’t very high,” Tom said, glancing at the gage. “I have a strong
suspicion that we have rammed the side of a mountain.”

“Whew!” whistled Ned. “That’s bad!”

“Luckily we were going slowly. Also somebody must have cut off the
motors even before I signaled for it,” observed Tom. “At worse, I think
we’ve crushed the false nose.” The _Silver Cloud_ was provided with a
fender, like those on autos, on the front of the cigar-shaped gas
envelope of oralum. It was one of the last improvements designed by the
young inventor.

“Well,” remarked Ned, not feeling so alarmed now, “if we’ve only got a
bent fender, so to speak, what’s the matter with backing up out of the
way of the mountain, if that’s what we hit, begging its pardon, and
going on?”

“We’ll try,” Tom answered, laughing at Ned’s conceit, as he went to the
door of his control cabin. He had heard the rush of feet and knew his
officers and crew were hastening to report for orders.

“Maybe we hit another airship,” suggested Ned.

“No, I hardly think that,” Tom answered, trying to peer out of one of
the cabin windows. “It’s hard to see.”

“It’s as thick as bean soup,” murmured Ned. “I can’t make out anything
except a lot of fog and something dimly black beyond it.”

“That’s the mountain we hit, I think,” Tom said. “But I’ll have the
search lights turned on and they may help a little.”

Another of his recent improvements was a battery of powerful lights,
located on the outside of the oralum envelope and just below the control
cabin. They had a new style of lens and the beams of light sent out were
designed to penetrate fog and smoke. Of course no light will penetrate
far under these conditions, but those of Tom Swift’s big dirigible were
far ahead of any others yet invented.

Suddenly the white, murky mist all about the _Silver Cloud_ was brightly
illuminated and the observers in Tom’s control cabin, peering out and
ahead, saw dimly just in front of them the dark, forest-grown, sloping
side of a mountain. The big ship, sailing low in the fog, had rammed her
nose into it.

“Well, it isn’t as bad as it might be,” Ned remarked, as he took an
observation, aided by the gleaming fog-lights. “Can’t you back up and go
on, Tom? Rise above the fog, maybe. The gas envelope isn’t cracked, is
it?”

“No,” Tom answered, glancing at a gage. “Otherwise the lowered pressure,
caused by escaping gas, would show here. The pressure is normal for this
height.”

“Then pull out and let’s get out of this!” suggested Ned.

“Good advice if we can follow it,” Tom said. “I’ll try.”

“He gave the signal half speed astern, but though the motors tried to
back the big dirigible, making her tremble with their power, they did
not budge her.

“She’s held fast!” said Tom. “I was afraid of this.”

“What do you think has happened?” Ned wanted to know.

“Nothing serious; that is, to the airship herself,” Tom said. “But we
have rammed her nose into a mountain side, and broken trees, rocks, and
a tangle of bushes are holding us there.”

“You bucked the tornado!” cried Ned. “Why can’t you rip off the false
nose, or fender, if you have to, as long as it won’t damage the gas
envelope? Surely you have power enough to pull out of some broken
trees!”

“You might think so,” Tom replied. “But did you ever see a big ocean
liner made fast to her dock with big hawsers?”

“Of course,” Ned replied.

“Well,” went on the young inventor, “if those hawsers were taut and the
liner started her engines, she could never get away from that dock in a
thousand years. There must be play enough for her to get some momentum.
That’s what we need, momentum. If the liner had a few feet play, or free
movement, and could start ahead with her engines at full speed, she’d
break those hawsers like thread. But if they hold her tight to the dock,
her propellers would only churn the water.

“Now our propellers are only fanning air, so to speak. We can’t get
enough movement to make our weight and speed count. What we’ll have to
do is to cut loose from the holding tangle of trees.”

“How can we do that?” asked Ned.

“That remains to be seen,” Tom answered. “If this fog would only clear,
I could see just what the trouble is.” At this moment Koku, who had been
taken along on this trip at his earnest solicitation, came into the
cabin, being a sort of privileged character.

“What um wrong, Master?” he asked.

“We ran into trees on the side of the mountain,” Tom answered. “We can’t
pull loose. We’re like a football caught in the branches, Koku. We need
somebody to give us a push off.”

“Me push!” grunted the giant, flexing his powerful hands and arms.

“By golly, do you know I think he’s got it!” cried Ned.

“Got what?” asked Tom.

“The right idea,” went on the manager. “There’s an exit out of the front
end of your gas envelope, isn’t there, Tom? I mean in between the
individual gas tank holders?”

“Yes, there’s a passage out through the nose to the mooring ring.”

“Big enough for Koku?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Then,” went on Ned, “why not have him go out that way and cut us loose
from the tangled, broken trees and bushes that are holding us fast?
Koku’s giant strength may get us loose.”

Tom considered this for a moment, seeing the dangers, difficulties, and
possibilities. Then he said:

“It’s a chance! Koku, come with me!”

“Sure, Master! Me push—me pull—bust anything!” chuckled the giant.

Passing along amidships through a central tube running the length of the
dirigible, Tom, Koku, Ned, and some of the crew emerged on to a small
platform in the very nose of the ship. There the cause of the stoppage
was plain to be seen, for the fog was now lifting.

The _Silver Cloud_ had rammed her front fender deep into the crotch of a
big tree growing on the mountain side. The crotch was partly split down,
and the fender was bent and broken. But the actual structure of the
airship had sustained no damage. The fender was caught about fifty feet
above the ground.

“There, Koku,” said Tom, pointing. “If you can climb out there and pull
or chop those two parts of the tree crotch apart, you may free us and we
can back out. Are you strong enough?”

“Sure!” grunted the giant. “Me show.”

Armed with a keen axe, Koku crawled out to the very edge of the
platform, and went out of the ship through an emergency door. He climbed
into the branches, braced his feet against one side of the Y in the tree
and his back against the other part, being above the damaged nose fender
which was caught fast.

“Now me push!” cried Koku. Supporting himself by his hands, he took a
long breath, and those aboard the craft could hear the fibers of the
already cracked tree beginning to rend and tear. But still the nose of
the ship was held as in a vise. Then he used the axe for several
minutes.

“You bust, now!” commanded Koku, and it seemed as if he would break
himself so terrific was the strain. “Bust, tree!” he shouted.

The great tree split down farther. The Y shaped opening became wider,
and Tom, seeing this, called to a man he had left in the control cabin
to signal for full speed astern.

The great propellers whirled, and with a tearing loose of the damaged
fender, part of which remained in the tree, the _Silver Cloud_ was at
last free.

“What about Koku?” cried Ned, for the giant was left in the tangle of
branches.

“I’ll pick him up with a rope ladder,” Tom said. Then he signaled to the
giant to climb down and wait on a level place at the foot of the
mountain.

It did not take long to ascertain that the dirigible was damaged no more
than the tearing away of her nose fender, which in no way interfered
with her maneuvering. So a little later, the _Silver Cloud_ hovering low
over the level place, Koku was picked up, the fog having been driven
away by a rising wind.

“That’s pretty nifty!” Ned remarked, as Tom had the rope ladder lowered
from a windlass and drum which wound up the ladder again when Koku was
on the lower end. “It saves a lot of climbing.”

“Yes,” Tom said, “I thought he’d be tired after breaking that big tree.”

Koku seemed to think nothing of his remarkable feat, but if it had not
been for him it is probable that the craft might have been held there a
long time until men with axes could have chopped down the forest giant.

“Well, that’s another adventure to our credit,” Tom said, as they
reached the hangar that night. “And it gives me a new idea.”

“What?” asked Ned.

“A nose fender that can be detached and dropped off by pulling a lever
from within the ship,” was the answer. “Then if we ram something again
we shan’t be held up until Koku can free us.”

So this improvement was added to many others.

During the next week several other trial trips were made, though not to
any great distance, and various improvements incorporated in the big
craft of the air. Though there were many accounts in the paper of Tom
Swift’s dirigible, no word came from the Jardine company.

One day Ned saw Tom carrying a large bouquet of flowers into the
officers’ cabin.

“What’s the idea?” asked the manager. “Going to have a christening,
Tom?”

“No. These are for Mary.”

“Mary?”

“Yes. I’ve a desire to take a longer trip for this test flight, and sail
over Mt. Camon. Then, if all goes well, I’ll drop this bouquet and a
note to the folks down by means of a little parachute. I thought it
would surprise them.”

“I’ll say it will!” chuckled Ned. “Good for you! When are you going to
start?”

“Pretty soon. Coming along?”

“Of course. You’d have to tie me to keep me back.”

At the time agreed upon the _Silver Cloud_ took off in good shape, rose
steadily and easily, and was soon soaring on her way to the great forest
reserve in the midst of which stood the hotel on Mt. Camon.

“It certainly is dry,” observed Ned, as they flew low over a farming
community and saw the arid fields, crops drying up, and, in many
instances, farmers hauling water for their horses and cattle.

“I don’t see where the rain is keeping itself,” Tom said. “It’s as dry
as a powder horn!”

The aviators made good time, and early that afternoon came in sight of
the mountain summit on which the hotel stood.

“There it is!” cried Ned, who first sighted the resort. “Get the bouquet
ready, Tom! Say, maybe you could make a landing on the ball field. Why
don’t you try?”

Tom turned the helm over to his chum for a moment and began making an
observation through his binoculars.




                              CHAPTER XVII


                           MIDNIGHT VISITORS

“CAN you make a landing on that ball field?” Ned Newton asked, as the
young inventor put aside the glasses and took over the steering wheel.

“I doubt it,” was the answer. “It would be too much of a risk to try.
That ball field is too small. Though I could make a safe landing in a
big enough place without a landing crew by manipulating the gas
pressure, I don’t want to try it unless it’s necessary. Might damage the
airship, and then I’d be out a lot more money.”

“That’s right. Don’t take any chances,” agreed Ned, who, as befitted a
financial manager, was rightfully cautious. “But they see us!” he
exclaimed, as he and Tom saw crowds pouring from the hotel, some one
having spread word of the sight of the big dirigible.

“Yes, I suppose Mary, dad, and Mr. and Mrs. Nestor are in that bunch,”
went on Tom. “I’ll go a bit lower and maybe we can pick ’em out.”

“Wonder if they take us for the _Graf Zeppelin_?” chuckled Ned.

“Oh, dad would know this boat,” Tom answered. “I fancy Mrs. Jardine
would, too, for the last time I talked to her she had a small sketch of
it she said her brother-in-law had given her.”

“Is Mrs. Jardine still at this hotel?”

“Oh, yes; she and her children. Mary has become quite friendly with
them, she wrote me.”

The big dirigible was now just drifting along, the motors having been
stopped, and was slowly settling toward the hotel. On the green lawn in
front of the hotel the guests had assembled in great excitement. It was
so still and quiet, with the machinery cut off, that the cheers of the
hotel people could be heard.

“There’s Mary!” Tom exclaimed, pointing out a group of persons detached
from the others.

“Yes, I see Mr. Damon, too!” ejaculated Ned. “Look! He’s swinging his
hat!”

“He’ll be standing on his head next, he’s so easily excited,” laughed
Tom. “I see dad, too! Hand me that bouquet, Ned!”

The bunch of flowers, to which Tom had fastened a little note for his
wife, was attached to a small parachute and at the proper time was
dropped through a trapdoor opening in the bottom of the main cabin, back
of the control room. There was very little wind, and as the _Silver
Cloud_ hovered over the hotel Tom, Ned, and the others could see the
flowers gently floating down. They fell within a short distance of Mary.
Mr. Damon was seen to run and pick them up, and then, observing the note
with Mary’s name, he handed them to her.

The air was so clear and the big, floating airship was so close to earth
that in the silence which followed the dropping of the flowers, Tom
could hear his wife call up to him:

“Thank you!”

Then there was a burst of applause over the clever and romantic feat,
and Tom waved his hand to his wife, blowing her a kiss from his fingers,
though she may not have seen that action.

To give the guests a good view of the wonderful ship, Tom slowly circled
over the hotel several times. Then, to show what his craft could do, he
speeded up the motors and raced along at roaring speed. He was higher in
the air now, however, and could not make out individuals on the ground.

“Too bad we couldn’t land,” remarked Ned, as, with three dips of her
“nose,” Tom made the _Silver Cloud_ wave a final farewell salute to his
wife and the others.

“Yes,” the young inventor agreed. “But I think this airship is about
finished now, and I’m going to lock her in the hanger and take my
vacation.”

“So you think you’ll have to keep her yourself, do you?” asked Ned. “I
mean, have you given up the idea of trying to sell the dirigible?”

“I’d be glad to have the government, the Jardines, or any one else buy
the _Silver Cloud_ if we could get out of it with a decent profit,” Tom
said. “As it is, she’s a white elephant on my hands. But we’ve certainly
had no offers for her or even inquiries about her. So I’ll just park her
after I make a few more changes and give her a last hard test.”

The trip back to Shopton was without incident, save that one of the
motors cut out on account of ignition trouble. But those remaining were
more than sufficient to drive the craft along, and she was soon safely
housed.

Tom Swift went to his office to make some notes on the trip,
incorporating in them suggestions to Mr. Jackson for certain changes,
while Ned went over some accounts and tried to think of some way of
making the _Silver Cloud_ a profitable venture for the Swift firm.

It was past midnight and all was quiet in the office. The plant was shut
down and only the watchmen were making their various rounds to be sure
all was well.

Tom was writing a letter to Mary, intending to post it on his way home
with Ned, when the latter, giving up with a sigh of regret an attempt to
figure some way out of the financial puzzle, suddenly murmured:

“Hark!”

“What to?” Tom asked.

“I thought I heard some one coming along the hall.”

“The watchman, probably.”

“The watchman wouldn’t walk on his tiptoes like a thief,” whispered Ned.
“I believe we are going to have unexpected visitors.”

Tom Swift quietly left his seat at the desk and moved softly across the
room to the door. He opened it suddenly and as he did so there was a
scurrying rush of feet. As Ned leaped to join his chum and Tom switched
on a light in the corridor, they saw two dark forms vanishing around a
turn.

“Come on!” cried Tom. “We’ve got to catch them!”




                             CHAPTER XVIII


                               THE ESCAPE

FOLLOWING Tom Swift out into the corridor, Ned Newton paused long enough
to throw an emergency switch that flooded the different yards of the
plant with brilliant electric light. At the same time alarm bells were
set ringing in the various places where the different watchmen had their
stations for the night.

“Stop! Hold on! Who are you?” shouted Tom, as he raced after the
midnight visitors who had approached so stealthily but who had left in
such a hurry when discovered.

There was no answer, naturally, and when Tom and Ned reached the turn in
the hall, around which the two had disappeared, the fugitives were not
in sight.

“We’ve got to get them!” cried Tom. “I’ve got to know what this means!”

“Looks as if some of the gangs that bothered us in the past were up to
their old tricks,” commented Ned. “But wasn’t one of those fellows the
dwarf, Tom?”

“I thought so; but I couldn’t be sure, coming out of the lighted office
as I did.”

“The other fellow walked like Jardine,” went on Ned. “But what would he
be doing here, coming in like a thief?”

“I can’t imagine,” Tom said, “unless he hoped to appeal to me to let him
have a share in the dirigible in spite of what his brother has said.”

“He’s just about crazy enough for that,” agreed Ned. “But how did he and
the dwarf get in without some of the watchmen seeing them?”

“That’s what we’ve got to find out,” decided Tom.

The mystery was solved a little later when at a gate on the north side
of the plant, one seldom used, the watchman was found unconscious.
Though when revived he was not found to be in the least injured. He told
a strange tale.

Shortly before midnight, he said, when he was returning from punching
one of his clocks, two men, one a dwarf, approached the gate and asked
to be directed to a certain small town about ten miles away. They were
in a car the engine of which was left running at the side of the road.

Suspecting nothing, the watchman, who had received the first inquiry
from behind his wicket gate, opened it and came out. In an instant he
was caught by the dwarf, a handkerchief saturated with some powerful
chemical was pressed over his face, and he knew nothing more until
revived by Tom and Ned.

“Jardine and the dwarf sneaked in here for some trick,” decided Tom.
“Maybe they didn’t expect to find you and me in the office so late,
Ned.”

“But what was their game, Tom?”

“Hanged if I know.”

“Maybe they wanted to steal the dirigible!”

“Jardine would be crazier than I think he is to try anything like that.
But he may have hoped to damage the ship in revenge for what has
happened. It’s a mystery.”

A careful search of the plant revealed nothing wrong, and the watchman
at the dirigible hangar said he had seen nothing of the midnight
callers. They had made their escape, probably through the gate where the
watchman lay unconscious.

“I wish the _Silver Cloud_ was off my hands,” complained Tom, as he and
Ned left the plant after additional watchmen had been summoned from
their homes near by and stationed about the place. “It’s a big success
mechanically, but I can’t make any real use of it.”

“It’s certainly eaten into your money and I’m afraid is shaking our
credit a bit. We’ll have to retrench as much as possible for a while if
you can’t sell it,” declared Ned.

The next day a careful check-up all over the plant revealed nothing
wrong, and a further test of the dirigible showed it to be almost
perfect.

“I want to get a little speed out of her, and then I’ll be satisfied,”
Tom said when the airship had been returned to the hangar after a short
voyage around Shopton.

“Can you do it?” asked Ned.

“I think so,” was the answer. “And, Ned, I wish you’d write another
letter to Lawrence Jardine, offering him a little better terms if he
will buy the _Silver Cloud_. I’m willing to take a small loss on her if
I can get it out of the way. I need the hangar for another type of craft
I have in mind.”

“All right, I’ll try to get in touch with Jardine,” promised Ned. “But
he’s a queer bird—not as queer as his brother, but as hard as nails.”

It was the day after this, when Tom was giving orders to have the
_Silver Cloud_ groomed for a final and most severe test of all, which
was to take place with a full load of passengers and crew, that Ned
Newton, reading the paper, gave a whistle of surprise.

“What’s the matter?” asked Tom. “Has Jardine sent word that he will buy
the ship?”

“No. But read that!”

He indicated a small item which Tom took in at a glance. It stated that
a man named Cosso Tobini had escaped from the jail in a small town near
the Mt. Camon hotel.

“Tobini!” cried Tom. “Why, that’s the crazy gardener who wanted to knock
down Mr. Damon.”

“Sure!” assented Ned. “And the one you told me chased the hotel manager
with a knife.”

“That’s the fellow,” went on Tom. “A bad bird!”

“Well,” Ned remarked, “I suppose he’ll be after that manager’s scalp
now.”

“Shouldn’t wonder,” Tom assented, and then a worried look came over his
face.

“What’s the matter?” Ned asked.

“I was just thinking,” said Tom slowly. “I suppose this crazy Tobini may
want to take another crack at Mr. Thorndyke or at Mr. Damon. And if he’s
insane, as I really believe, he may fly into a rage against
anybody—Mary or her parents or dad. I wish he was back in jail!” and
Tom Swift began to pace nervously up and down.




                              CHAPTER XIX


                           THE FOREST OF FIRE

AFTER reading of the escape of Cosso Tobini from jail, Tom Swift
somewhat relieved the anxiety of his mind by getting in touch with the
Mt. Camon hotel on the long distance telephone and talking to Mary.
Without unduly alarming her, he told her of the escape of the madman, of
which, however, she was already aware, and begged her to be careful.

“Oh, Tom dear,” said his wife, with a little laugh that echoed musically
over the wire, “don’t worry! I’m all right. I have your own dear father
to look after me, as well as mother and dad.”

“Yes, but be careful just the same,” advised Tom. “And tell Mr. Damon to
watch out!”

“I will. But, bless my powder puff, as Mr. Damon might say, I’m sure
there is no danger. Mr. Thorndyke, the manager, told us not to worry,
that if Tobini came on the hotel grounds he would be immediately
arrested.”

“It didn’t seem to do much good to arrest that bird before,” said Tom.
“Better put him in a stronger jail next time.”

“I’ll have that attended to,” promised Mary, with a laugh. “Now tell me
about yourself and the big dirigible.”

“We’re both all right, and so is Ned,” Tom answered, not speaking of his
worries over the financing of the great airship.

“When are you coming up again, Tom?”

“Oh, pretty soon,” was the answer. “Then I’ll take a long vacation with
you and the folks.”

“That will be lovely,” his wife murmured.

Neither of them realized how soon Tom Swift would appear on the scene
nor under what tragic circumstances.

“Well, good-bye,” called Tom into the instrument. “Do you?”

“Of course I do!” said Mary earnestly. “Do you?”

“With all my heart!”

“Talking in cryptograms?” chuckled Ned.

“None of your business!” snapped Tom, and he blushed even under his coat
of tan.

The day came when the _Silver Cloud_ was to be given the most severe
test since her construction. Up to now only a skeleton crew had been
carried on the different trips, and there had not been a full load of
gas and oil. No passengers at all had been taken up, the accommodations
for the fifty that could be transported remaining vacant.

Now Tom Swift planned to go aloft with a full crew, enough gas, oil, and
other supplies as if for a ten thousand mile trip, and he would have as
his guests fifty persons from in and around Shopton. Some of the plant
executives were to be allowed to bring such members of their families as
they chose and the mayor and officials of the town were to get
invitations.

“It will be some party!” predicted Ned. “Going to serve lunch?”

“Oh, sure! I want you to ask the newspapers to send some reporters
along, if they wish, and newspaper men always like to eat.”

“Sure!” chuckled Ned. “And smoke, too. How about that? Will you permit
smoking?”

“In certain rooms, yes. But they will be insulated from the danger of
setting fire to the lifting gas. Not that it would explode like
hydrogen, but I must take no chances.”

“You’d better not if I’m going along!” warned Ned, with a laugh.

There was great excitement in Shopton when a number of the townspeople,
including the mayor and other officials, received word to assemble at
the Swift plant on a certain morning, there to go aboard the _Silver
Cloud_ for a trip through the air.

There were many who would have given a large sum to be of the selected
ones, but there were limits even to the big dirigible, though Tom
promised his many friends, who had known him since boyhood, that at a
later date he would give them all a ride.

With his various officers, Mr. Jackson, and the head workmen from the
Swift manufacturing plant, Tom Swift went carefully over every part of
the big craft. The weather reports had been collected by Mr. Larson and
there were no adverse conditions for several hundred miles around, so
Tom felt that his dirigible would give a good account of herself.

“Though I almost wish we would run into a storm,” he told Ned. “It would
give the newspaper men something to write about.”

“Some of ’em might be too sick to write,” chuckled Ned, for though the
_Silver Cloud_ was very steady at most times, it could not be denied
that she rolled and pitched in a powerful wind, and the feeling of new
passengers was somewhat akin to seasickness.

“All ready?” called Tom from the navigating cabin when all the guests
and the crew had assembled on board.

“All clear!” answered the captain of the ground crew.

“Walk her out!” Tom ordered.

The sun began to gleam on the silver-colored oralum plates of the big
dirigible.

At last she was free from the hangar, and as the young inventor began to
increase the power of the lifting gas, she tugged at her mooring and
ground ropes like some great creature eager to be free that she might
float in the blue space above.

“Let go!” cried Tom.

The ropes were cast off, the ship hesitated for a moment, seemed to
quiver like a race horse, and then went up amid the cheers of the crowd
that had gathered to see the final test.

The great propellers roared and throbbed, the nose of the _Silver Cloud_
was pointed to the north, and away she went, gathering speed every
moment until at last she was high above the throngs and like a silver
thread in the vast blue space all around her.

“Perfect!” exclaimed Ned, who, in the control cabin with Tom, had
observed the take-off.

“As nearly so as it’s possible to make her,” agreed the young inventor.
“Now, if nothing goes wrong, I’ll show this crowd and those newspaper
boys something!”

From then on the young inventor put his craft through her paces to the
limit. She shot up to a great height. She went down until it seemed as
if she must hit the earth and some of the faces went a little white. But
at the right time Tom pulled the elevating rudders and the ship went up
again, high above the clouds. Then he circled, went straight away at a
pace of over a hundred and fifty miles an hour, and, as a final stunt,
skimmed over a great lake, two hundred miles from Shopton.

There, hovering in the air like some queer balloon and with the blue
water sparkling beneath, lunch was served on board and Tom presided as
host. He was cheered to the echo.

“This is the best thing you’ve ever done, Mr. Swift,” said a New York
newspaper reporter who had seen some of Tom’s other strange machines.

“I’m glad you think so,” was the modest answer.

Tom had but one regret—that Mary and his father were not along to
witness his triumph. But he planned to have them on board later.

The trip was a success in every way. Not a mishap marred the supreme
test, and when the ship went back to her hangar that night, papers
containing reports of what had happened on board were already being sold
in Shopton. The _Silver Cloud_ carried a wireless telephone outfit that
could be tuned in to the proper instruments on the ground.

The next day’s morning papers printed pages of the wonderful success of
the _Silver Cloud_, and as Tom and Ned sat reading them in Tom’s private
office, Ned remarked casually:

“Maybe Lawrence Jardine will change his mind now, pay for this ship,
Tom, and buy her.”

“I think he’s too stubborn,” Tom remarked. “At the same time, I wish I
could sell her at a profit. I really don’t know what to do with her. But
I think it’s useless to appeal to Lawrence Jardine again. I wonder
what’s become of him, anyhow?”

Hardly had he spoken when there was the sound of an auto coming along
the road at a reckless pace. Tom and Ned saw a big machine, containing a
chauffeur and a man at the sight of whom Ned exclaimed:

“Talk of the old Nick—here’s Lawrence Jardine now! And he’s coming
here! Looks as if something was up!”

Jardine leaped from the machine as it came to such a sudden stop that
the tires shrilly protested. He rushed into Tom’s office, his face
showing some terrible emotion.

“What’s the matter?” Tom asked.

“Help!” gasped Lawrence Jardine. “The hotel at Mt. Camon is surrounded
by a forest of fire! They’ll all perish! Can’t you do something? An
airplane? My wife and children!”

He fell in a faint at Tom Swift’s feet.

“What did he say?” cried Ned, who had lingered behind Tom.

“Something about a forest on fire—at Mt. Camon!”

“The woods—dry as tinder!” exclaimed Ned. “A forest fire! But we
haven’t heard of such a thing!”

“Quick!” gasped Tom. “Get me some water. I must revive him and find out
what he means! The hotel surrounded by a forest of fire! And Mary’s
there! And dad! Mr. Jardine, wake up! Tell me more! What do you mean?”

Tom Swift fell to shaking the unconscious figure as Ned dashed back into
the office for water.




                               CHAPTER XX


                        SPEEDING THROUGH THE AIR

“LOOKS as if he were coming around,” said Ned Newton in a low voice, as
he bent over Lawrence Jardine.

“Yes,” assented the young inventor, raising the man’s head and pouring a
little more water between his lips. “He went out cold.”

“I’ll get some aromatic spirits of ammonia from the doctor’s office,”
went on Ned. In the plant of the Swift Construction Company there was
always more or less danger of accidents, and there were a resident
physician and nurse in constant attendance, as is the case in most large
establishments employing much help.

Ned came back with the spirits of ammonia and this, administered to the
unconscious man, completed the restoration that nature had already
undertaken when he fell.

“Are they safe?” Jardine gasped, looking around as Tom supported his
head on his knee. “Did you save them?”

“Who?” asked Tom, almost before he thought.

“My wife and children in the Mt. Camon hotel! They are surrounded by a
ring of fire! Oh, no—they can’t be saved! I just heard the news! Then I
rushed here. If any one can save them—save all the doomed ones—it must
be you, Tom Swift!”

“Tell me about it!” demanded the young inventor. “Talk fast! If there’s
a big fire, there’s no time to lose!”

“It is a big fire,” gasped Mr. Jardine, gradually recovering himself and
slumping into a chair Ned brought forward. “The whole forest surrounding
the hotel is blazing!”

“How do you know?”

“I had a long distance call from my wife. She was in terror. Even as she
talked, I could hear men and women and children in the rooms about her
shouting and crying and screaming in fright. It’s awful!”

Tom Swift’s thoughts went to Mary and the others in the hotel. He wanted
to rush forth and save them, but first he must know exactly what to do.
Eagerly he and Ned questioned Mr. Jardine for particulars.

“I have been stopping in Mansburg on some business,” went on the head of
the Jardine firm. “It was there, not a half hour ago, that I received
the telephone message from my wife. She said there was a trail of fire
in the forest, completely surrounding the hotel. As you know, it’s in
the midst of a dense forest with no open tracts for miles to check the
progress of the flames.”

“How did the fire start?” Tom cried.

“My wife didn’t say. But she said the woods were as dry as tinder and
that the fire was sweeping up from the bottom of the mountain at a
terrible rate! Oh, you must do something!”

“Did your wife tell you anything else?” Tom wanted to know.

“She begged me to hurry up there and save them; but it’s a two days’
trip in a fast auto, and in the end an auto couldn’t reach them.”

“Why don’t they appeal for help to places near them?” asked Ned.

“They have, my wife said. The fire wardens are all out and have sworn in
all the deputies they can muster. But the fire is terrible! There never
was such a big one! Oh, we must do something!”

Tom dashed away, leaving Ned to minister to the visitor who, however,
seemed to have fully recovered from his faint. But he was very weak and
excited.

“Where’s he going?” asked the metal manufacturer, observing Tom.

“To a telephone, I guess,” was Ned’s answer. A moment later from Tom’s
private office came the words:

“Long distance—in a hurry—it’s a case of life or death!”

He got long distance and gave his number. Then, after a short pause, Ned
and Mr. Jardine heard him jiggle the hook and appeal to central to hurry
and put through the call. There was again a period of tense silence, and
then Tom repeated in a dull voice:

“Oh—they don’t answer. All—all right!”

The receiver clicked back on the hook and Tom rejoined Ned and Mr.
Jardine.

“The wires are down,” Tom reported. “Burned, I suppose.”

“Then we must do something at once!” cried Ned.

“Yes,” agreed Tom. “We must get there as quickly as we can.”

He looked at his watch and glanced about the lower office as if seeking
something.

“Take me with you!” pleaded Jardine. “That’s why I raced to get here in
my car. I want to go with you, Tom Swift!”

“Just a moment,” said Tom, raising a restraining hand for silence. “I
must think what is best to do. This is terrible!”

“Can’t you go to Mt. Camon in the big dirigible?” asked Mr. Jardine.
“That will take you there as quickly as anything else. In that perhaps
you can save my family—and yours,” he added after a moment of
hesitation. “Oh, Tom Swift, you must do something!”

“I will, Mr. Jardine. But I must make some plans. Though the gas in the
dirigible is not as explosive as that generally made use of, I don’t
know that I dare risk sailing over a forest of fire in the machine. Let
me think a moment!”

He paced the floor with nervous energy. Then he called to Ned:

“Go out and tell Blake to get the _Wasp_ ready.” This was a small
monoplane, very speedy, carrying two.

“Will you take me?” cried Mr. Jardine.

“Impossible—in the _Wasp_,” Tom said. “I must first see what the
situation is before I can decide what to do. The forest fire will burn
fast, but my _Wasp_ will fly faster, and once I get a view of the
burning forests I can decide how to act to save the hotel people.”

“My wife is there—my children, too!”

“My wife is there,” said Tom softly, “and my father. Also some dear
friends. I will save them if possible. But first Ned Newton and I will
go up in the little plane. It will not take more than an hour.”

“An hour, man! They may burn to death in that time.”

“I hope not—I think not,” Tom answered. “Anyhow, it is the only way. I
must see if it is possible to use the dirigible. Hurry, Ned!”

But Ned Newton was already on his way to have the _Wasp_ run from the
hangar, and a few minutes later he and Tom climbed into the cockpit.

“Wait here until I return!” Tom ordered. “You could never get there in
your car, Mr. Jardine.”

“Oh, but Mr. Swift! Take me! I’ll hang on outside!”

“Impossible!”

“Then get me another plane!”

“I have no other ready that could make the round trip in time. We may
need you later, so wait here and I will do all I can.”

“Yes! Yes! You must, Tom Swift!”

As the _Wasp_ roared lightly and at great speed through the air, under
the guiding hand of the young inventor, Tom Swift’s heart was like lead,
for he wondered what was the fate of his wife, his father, and the
others.




                              CHAPTER XXI


                             IN DIRE PERIL

GAYETY and merriment were twin spirits in possession at the big hotel on
top of Mt. Camon. The establishment was crowded to capacity with guests,
young and old, and all were enjoying themselves to the utmost. It had
been a glorious day—a day filled with the pleasure of strolls in the
wooded recesses of the forest, with games of tennis and baseball on the
spacious grounds, and now, in the evening, after a bountiful dinner, the
men, women, and children were gathered in the big ballroom to witness
another clever marionette performance.

Pietro Notine and his charming wife with her radiant smile had been
asked to play a return engagement of their puppets at the Mt. Camon
resort and had been only too glad to do so.

“It is with so much pleasure that I greet you again,” said the Italian
puppet master to Mary Swift, as he got ready to go on with the little
marionette play.

“And your so helpful husband, he is not here?” asked Mrs. Notine, with
her warm smile.

“No, he’s hard at work on that big dirigible of his,” Mary answered.

“He was so good to us,” murmured the marionette master’s wife as she
went behind the scenes of the miniature stage to manipulate the strings
of the puppets with her husband. “Had it not been for him, our summer
tour would have failed. Please make my remembrances to him.”

“I will,” promised Mary.

Then the little play went on, to the great delight of the children and
the no small pleasure of the adults. There was music by the hotel
orchestra and the evening came to a close with a small, informal dance
following the entertainment.

Mary was standing out on the veranda of the hotel, to get a little fresh
air before going to bed. She was talking to her mother.

“Is Tom coming up soon?” Mrs. Nestor asked.

“Yes,” Mary replied. “And I shall be so glad!”

From the other side of the veranda, she heard her father say:

“You haven’t seen anything more of that crazy gardener who wanted to
stop you from picking roses, have you, Mr. Damon?”

“No. And, bless my insurance policy, I don’t want to, either! I guess he
left these parts after he broke jail. It wouldn’t be healthy for him to
stay around here after——”

Mr. Damon’s voice trailed off, and he arose, went to the edge of the big
veranda, and looked down the wooded slope. There was something so odd
and startling in his manner that Mary and her mother left their seats
and walked toward him as Mr. Nestor asked:

“What’s the matter? What do you see?”

“A fire,” Mr. Damon replied. “Some one has started a bonfire down there
in the woods, and it’s a bad thing to do with the dry weather we’ve had.
The trees and bushes are like tinder. That’s a very foolish thing to do!
I think I had better notify the manager. That fire is too close to this
hotel. Look!”

He pointed out some flickering flames which showed plainly in the
blackness of the dense forest.

“Some campers, probably,” suggested Mary. “But it’s a good way off.”

“Still, fire can travel fast!” observed Mr. Damon, and there was an
anxious tone to his voice. “I don’t like it!”

As they watched, the flames spread with alarming rapidity, creeping out
in two long lines as if from a central point. At the same time a cry
arose from the other side of the hotel, where there was also a veranda.

“Fire! Fire! There’s a big fire down the side of the mountain!”

“Bless my——” began Mr. Damon, but he did not take time to finish. With
Mr. Nestor, he ran around to the other veranda. Mary and her mother
followed, having seen the first little blaze they had noticed spread out
into an alarming trail of flames.

On the other side of the hotel it was the same. It seemed as if the
woods on the east and west of the place had simultaneously broken out
into a dangerous conflagration, and in a short time the two lines of
flames crept north and south, until it seemed they would soon meet and
form an encircling ring of fire about the hotel, though several miles
down the mountain.

“This is terrible!” cried Mr. Damon. “Awful!”

“It is a bad forest fire,” agreed Mr. Nestor. “I never saw a fire spread
so rapidly! Hark!”

Blasts from an air siren echoed in the quiet of the night. It was the
danger signal from a fire warden’s station. A little wind began to blow,
and it wafted to the nostrils of the hotel guests the odor of gasoline.

“Some car must have had an accident and caught fire,” said Mr. Nestor.
“It has scattered the burning gas along the road that runs through the
woods below and all around the hotel.”

“An automobile!” ejaculated Mary. Her thoughts went in a flash to Tom
and his House on Wheels. Could he have been coming up in that?

The excitement spread rapidly throughout the hotel, and guests who had
gone early to bed hurriedly dressed and came down. All were greatly
alarmed and there was some talk of getting things together and
departing, even though it was now midnight.

“There is no danger,” Mr. Thorndyke told his people. “Do not be alarmed.
It is true that the woods are on fire, as they have been before. But the
wardens and their men will soon have the fire out. Do not be alarmed.”

But for all his words there was great alarm, and some of the guests
became a bit hysterical.

Mrs. Notine was standing near Mary and her people.

“It looks like a bad fire,” said the puppet master’s wife. “I am so
afraid of fires—ever since that wicked dwarf tried to burn our little
traveling theater. I hope he had nothing to do with this.”

“You mean that dwarf my husband hired—Chock?” asked Mary.

“Jim Chock? Yes. He seems to have a mania for fires.”

“What would he be doing up here?” Mary asked wonderingly.

“I do not know. I only hope he had no hand in this. I must go to help my
husband pack the puppets. We shall leave in our van if this fire gets
worse.”

“You can’t leave, I’m afraid,” Mr. Damon said. “At least not now.”

“Why not?”

“Because the fire is completely about the hotel, as you can see. It is
some distance away and probably will not come here. But until the circle
of flames is broken you cannot get through.”

“Oh, but we must get away!” cried Mrs. Notine. “I shall go tell my
husband!”

As she hurried off, there was some excitement around one of the lower
entrances to the hotel—at a basement door directly under Mary Swift and
her people, who stood on the veranda watching the ever increasing flames
below them.

Mary saw a man stagger through the light which streamed out of the
basement toward a group of hotel employees. He was a man who had
evidently just come off a tank automobile containing oil or gasoline,
for his clothes bore unmistakable evidences of that occupation. There
was some excited talk, and, evidently, Mr. Thorndyke had been sent for,
for a moment later Mary, leaning over the edge of the veranda, saw the
manager talking to the oil man.

“What is it?” asked the manager.

“Danger! That’s what it is!” cried the man. “A little while ago, as I
was driving up here with a tank of oil and gas for your place, I was
stopped by a man with a red light who leaped out into the road from the
bushes and waved it at me. I thought there was some obstruction ahead,
and I got down to ask him about it. Then he jumped at me and knocked me
out.”

“Knocked you out?”

“Yes, unconscious. Slammed a rock on my head. When I came to I saw him
driving away with my tank auto and the cocks were open. Oil and gas was
running out all over the road.”

“Gasoline!” cried the hotel manager.

“Yes, and oil,” went on the driver, whose head was bleeding. “I yelled
to the fellow, but he kept on driving with the cocks open, and a little
later I saw a spurt of flame and I knew the oil and gas had caught
fire—or had been set.”

“This is awful!” gasped Mr. Thorndyke, and murmured cries of alarm came
from the hotel workers. “We are surrounded by fire!”

It was only too true. The flames were rapidly spreading, started by the
oil and gasoline and now fed by the tinder of trees, dried leaves, and
bushes of the forest.

“It was the work of some madman!” cried Mr. Damon, when he and the other
guests heard what had happened. “The state police should be informed!”

“An alarm has been given,” said Mr. Thorndyke, going about and trying to
calm his guests. “The fire wardens are summoning help from all over.”

This was evidenced by the weird screaming of the air sirens located here
and there on the mountain. But the fire was spreading fast and the
forest for miles around the big hotel was in flames. Something very like
panic spread among the guests in spite of the efforts of the manager and
some of the cooler guests to keep it in check.

“What can we do?” Mr. Nestor asked of Mr. Damon, as their party stood on
a corner of the veranda, looking at the spreading flames, as yet far
below them but inexorably creeping nearer.

“We ought to get away from here!” said Mr. Damon. “There are cars in the
garage, and if we can’t take all our things we can take some.”

“How can we get through that ring of fire?” asked Mr. Nestor, pointing
to it. “Out of the question! We can only wait until the fire fighters
beat out the flames on a path by which we can get through. We are safer
here than we would be down there.”

“It is coming nearer,” said his wife.

“Yes,” he admitted in a grave voice, “it is coming nearer!”

Mrs. Jardine swept up to the group.

“I am going to telephone my husband by long distance,” she announced.

“What good will that do?” Mr. Nestor asked.

“I don’t know. But I must tell him that we are in danger—we, his wife
and children and all of us are in grave danger.”

She hurried toward the office. The air was now beginning to be acrid
with smoke and odors from the burning trees.

“For that matter I might telephone Tom,” said Mary in a low voice. “But
what good would it do?”

“Nothing can do any good until the wardens and their men put out the
fire all about us,” her father said.

Helpless and alarmed, the guests paced the verandas or walked nervously
about the grounds adjacent to the hotel. Mrs. Jardine came hurrying back
to Mary and her people. It was now beginning to get daylight.

“I got my husband on the wire!” exclaimed the woman. “I told him we were
surrounded by flames and asked him if there was no way to get help to us
to rescue us.”

“What did he say?” asked Mary.

“I couldn’t hear him very well in the first place, and then the wire was
suddenly broken or cut.”

“Or burned through,” said Mr. Damon.

They looked at one another helplessly in the smoke and flame-reddened
light of the early morning. Just then there was a piercing cry of alarm
from an outer wing of the hotel. As all ran in that direction they saw a
big mass of flame and cinder come sailing through the air from the
forest of fire down below. This flaming mass fell into a great pine
tree, not far from the hotel, and in a moment the pine was a glowing
torch of fire.

“I’m afraid this is the beginning of the end,” said Mr. Nestor solemnly,
as he stood close to his wife and daughter.

“Quick! Run out the hose!” commanded Mr. Thorndyke to his emergency
fire-fighting squad. “The hotel will catch from that burning pine if we
don’t put it out! Hurry!”




                              CHAPTER XXII


                           A MESSAGE OF HOPE

“THERE’S the fire all right!” shouted Tom Swift to Ned Newton, who was
riding in the cockpit of the _Wasp_ behind him as they circled over the
mountain.

“Burning fast!” remarked Ned. “It’s a big blaze.”

“It hasn’t reached the hotel yet,” went on Tom. “If the wind holds this
way it may not.”

Ned looked down with appraising eyes. He wanted to keep Tom’s spirits
up, for he knew much would depend on the young inventor if he was to
save his wife, his father, and others imperiled at the hotel surrounded
by fire, and yet Tom must know the full extent of the danger.

“The wind holding one way won’t do much good when the fire is all around
the hotel—as it is,” Ned remarked.

“That’s so,” agreed Tom. “This is awful!”

They had made a quick trip from Shopton in the speedy little airplane,
leaving Lawrence Jardine, frantic and half crazed with anxiety, to await
their return.

It was now close to noon, and in the broad light of day great clouds of
smoke billowing over the mountain on which the hotel was situated could
be seen. With the smoke were long flashes of fire.

“Better head up a bit, Tom!” called Ned to Tom, as they started down
when almost over the hotel. “Here comes a lot of smoke.”

The wind was blowing a great cloud of hot, white, acrid vapor toward the
_Wasp_, and Tom shifted the controls which speedily sent the fast craft
up above into a clearer atmosphere. There a broader view could be had of
the great forest fire. Its proportions amazed Tom and his chum.

“The whole place will go!” cried Ned.

“Looks so,” agreed Tom. “But we’ve got to do something to save
them—save my family and the others!”

“There’s the hotel!” cried Ned, as another shift of the wind dispersed
the hovering clouds of smoke and revealed the big hostelry plainly.

With a sudden movement of the stick, Tom Swift sent his airplane down
until he and Ned could make out men, women, and children circling about
the buildings. It was as though they sought a way through the ever
narrowing ring of fire.

“Take control, Ned!” Tom suddenly called, for the _Wasp_ was fitted for
dual management.

“What are you going to do?” Ned asked.

“Write a note and drop it down there for Mary!” Tom replied. “Some one
will pick it up and give it to her.”

“A note?” Ned questioned, as he grasped the levers.

“Yes. I must warn her and the others not to try to get down the
mountain. They’ll only run into the fire which is all around them.”

“But they’ve got to get away!” cried Ned. “The fire is sweeping up
toward the hotel!”

“Yes, I know. But they can’t be saved that way.”

“How can they be saved?”

“Only by the big dirigible, Ned. We’ll go back and get it and fly it
here. I can be up here with it in a few hours. I want to keep Mary and
the others in or around the hotel until then. It is their only chance.
If they try to go down the mountain, it means death!”

“And a horrible death!” murmured Ned.

Tom quickly wrote the note. He weighted it with a spare bolt and
fastened it to his handkerchief by the four corners so that, in effect,
he had a small parachute. Then, watching his chance, while Ned directed
the _Wasp_ over the ball field and while the crowd of fear-stricken
guests below watched, Tom Swift dropped his message of hope.

    “We will save you if it can be done,” Tom had written to his
    wife. “Do not try to get through the forest. The fire is
    everywhere.”

He saw the note with its handkerchief parachute land on the ball field
and several run to pick it up. Tom could not distinguish his wife, his
father, or the Nestors, but he had no doubt that they were there, as
Mary and Mr. Swift must have recognized the _Wasp_. It was painted in
distinctive colors and bore the Swift trademark on the underside of its
wings.

“That’s all we can do now,” Tom remarked, as he again took charge.

“What’s next?” Ned wanted to know.

“Back to Shopton to get the big dirigible!” said Tom. “It’s the only way
to save them.”

“If you try to land her down there, in that circle of fire, she’ll
explode her gas!” exclaimed Ned.

“I’m not going to land,” Tom said.

“How else can you make any rescues?”

“I have a plan,” was all Tom said, and he pointed the nose of the _Wasp_
toward Shopton. Never before had the machine been sent through the air
so fast.

As Tom Swift and Ned Newton flew away from the mountain of fire, they
could see, down below them, hundreds of forest rangers and their crews
and neighborhood men fighting desperately to stem the tide of the flames
or to block them from eating their way up to the summit where the hotel
was perched.

Trenches were being dug in the earth, and the soil was being spread over
the carpet of leaves and pine needles in which the fire ate its way
along the ground to break out in a dozen new spots.

Hundreds of men, with flails made from burlap bags dipped into water
brought from a distance, were beating out spots of flame here and there.
Above all hovered that choking pall of smoke.

“Wonder how that fire started?” murmured Tom.

“Some careless camper, probably,” was Ned’s opinion.

“There must have been a hundred campers to make the fire spread so
rapidly and in so big a circle,” said Tom. “No, it was some other cause
than a camper.” As yet he and Ned had not heard the story of the oil
tank driver.

They made a quick landing in the yard near the shop where Tom had his
office and not far from the hangar of the big dirigible.

“Well, have you seen them? Are they safe?” cried Lawrence Jardine, as he
rushed frantically out of Tom’s office where he had been impatiently
awaiting the return of the _Wasp_.

“I have seen them,” gasped Tom Swift. “But they are far from safe! They
are in great danger!” He rapidly told what he and Ned had observed.

“They must be saved!” cried Mr. Jardine. “Use the big dirigible, Mr.
Swift. Save my wife and children and I will do anything in the world for
you—anything!” He held out his hands appealingly.

“I will do my best,” said Tom. “I want to save my own family as well as
yours. I also want to save the other people.”

“How can you do it?”

“By using the big dirigible. It is the only way. It may cost us the
airship and our lives, even to make the attempt above that awful forest
of fire, but it is the only way.”

“I’m with you! Tell me what to do!” cried Mr. Jardine.

“We must work fast,” Tom said. “Luckily, the ship is ready to take the
air, but I must rig up a device for getting the people on board. I shall
not be able to descend to the ground. I’ll need a crew. I must call for
volunteers among my men. Those who go in the _Silver Cloud_ to the
forest of fire may never come back. Each man risks his life. I will ask
no man to go—they must volunteer!”

The alarm signal was sounded, bringing the men from the distant shops,
and when they were assembled in the big yard Tom rapidly told them the
circumstances and spoke of the great danger.

“Will some of you go with me to the rescue?” he asked.

There was a moment of hesitation. Then, from the outer edge of the crowd
of workmen, a voice cried:

“Count me in.”

A little man—a dwarf—wriggled through the press and stood before Tom
Swift.

“Chock!” cried the young inventor.

“At your service!” said the dwarf, with his grotesque smile. “Oh, I know
I acted like a fool, Mr. Swift,” he hastened to say as he saw objection
on Tom’s face. “But I did nothing wrong to you or yours, and I can prove
it. Let me make amends by being the first to volunteer. I’m not afraid!”

Tom hesitated, but in that instant out stepped Koku from where he
towered above the other men.

“Little man um go—big man um go!” cried the giant. “I be volteer too!
Giant and dwarf both go!” He stood beside Chock, the contrast being
grotesque and almost laughable in spite of the tragic situation. Then
there broke out a cheer from the workmen and voices here and there
cried:

“I’ll go!”

“Count on me!”

“Don’t leave me out!”

“We’re all with you, Mr. Swift!”

In a few minutes a volunteer crew had been selected and Tom began to
issue his orders.

“Are you really going to take that dwarf?” asked Ned.

“Of course,” Tom answered. “Perhaps I have done him an injustice, or it
may have all been Martin Jardine’s fault. But I’ll take Chock. He saved
the day by volunteering first. He started the others. Now I’ve got to
get the cage ready.”

“Cage? What cage?”

“A big metal cage that can be lowered from the dirigible by a chain and
windlass to save those at the hotel. It is the only way!”




                             CHAPTER XXIII


                             THE METAL CAGE

THERE was so much to do and in such a rush, that for two hours Ned
Newton had no chance to talk further with Tom Swift about the
desirability of taking along the dwarf Chock. When at last, after the
metal cage was being hurried to completion, Ned made the inquiry, Tom
said:

“That dwarf with his small frame and immense strength may be of great
service to us. In a way, he may be as good as Koku.”

“But can you trust him?” asked Ned.

“That I’ll find out right away,” said Tom. “I’ve got a few seconds now
to catch my breath, and we’ll settle the question. Whether or not he
tried to play tricks on me, in conjunction with Martin Jardine, I have a
kindly feeling toward the dwarf, for he appeared in the nick of time and
started the volunteers.”

“Yes,” agreed Ned. “I wonder why he appeared as he did—in the nick of
time? Can Martin Jardine be hanging around?”

“We’ll find out if we can,” Tom said, and sent Eradicate to tell Mr.
Jackson to have Chock appear in the private office.

The dwarf came, sweaty and dirty, for he seemed to have been laboring
like a Trojan.

“Chock,” began Tom abruptly, “while I’m glad to admit you did me a
service by volunteering, I needn’t tell you that your conduct up to now
has been very suspicious, and more than once I think you have been
trying to gain access to the works here.”

“You’re right, Mr. Swift, I have been doing some crooked work. Rather, I
tried to do it for Martin Jardine. But I’m through with him for good and
all now. I’m working for you, and I’ll work faithfully to save your wife
and father and others in the burning hotel.”

“Let us hope it isn’t burning yet,” said Tom.

“What about that forest fire?” cried Ned. “Did you have anything to do
with it, Chock?”

“Of course I didn’t! What do you think I am—a fiend or a madman? What
makes you ask such a question as that?”

“Because of something Pietro Notine told me,” said Tom.

“Pietro Notine?”

“Yes. Did you once work for that marionette showman?”

“I did, yes; and I’m sorry to say I made a fool of myself. I got drunk
when I was playing engagements in theaters and afterward working in his
show. But that’s the worst I did—getting drunk—and I’m off that now
forever. I’ve taken a solemn pledge.”

“What about setting fire to his marionettes?” asked Tom sternly.

“I never did it intentionally. I was drunk and went to sleep with a
cigarette in my mouth—very wicked and foolish. It started a fire; but I
woke up when I felt myself scorched, and helped put the fire out. Then I
ran away. I wouldn’t for the world have done it intentionally. But those
marionettes got on my nerves.”

“What do you mean?” asked Ned.

“Well, there was one dwarf marionette and I always thought he was meant
to poke fun at me. I know now he wasn’t, but I was drinking and I
imagined all sorts of foolish things. That marionette dwarf made me
drink harder, and then came the fire and I skipped out. After that I
went to work for Mr. Jardine, though I didn’t stop drinking right away.
But I’m through now.”

“What was the game you and Martin Jardine tried to play? Was it to
damage my dirigible?” asked Tom.

“No,” the dwarf answered. “But Martin Jardine is queer, and when he
found out his brother had called a halt on the big airship, he wanted me
to slip in and take away certain parts without which he thought it could
not run. He thought he could force his brother to a compromise by
hampering you. But it didn’t work.”

“No,” said Tom. “Such a trick would never work with me. Then you and
this Martin Jardine visited the plant one night?”

“Yes, and we had trouble in getting away,” Chock said. “It was after
that I decided to go straight, and I quit Jardine. But I never set any
forest fire and I never would have done anything to damage your
dirigible more than temporarily. But I’ll be true to you now! I’ll risk
my life to help save your folks and in that way I’ll make up for what
I’ve done. I hope you’ll tell Mr. Notine I didn’t mean to start that
fire in his show.”

“I’ll tell him,” promised Tom.

He and Ned were both impressed with the sincerity of the dwarf, and
after a consultation with Lawrence Jardine, who bore out some of what
Chock had said regarding the irresponsibility of Martin, it was decided
to let the little man accompany them.

“But you must have no further quarrels with Koku!” warned Tom.

“I won’t,” the dwarf promised. “He can make all the fun of me he wants
to and I’ll never say a word.”

But Koku was too busy even to notice the little man, for there was much
need of the giant’s strength. Great beams of steel that would have
needed a small derrick to put in place in building the cage were lifted
around more quickly by Koku, and in this way the work was hastened.
Chock, too, was able to use his powerful muscles in narrow quarters
where other men found it impossible to gain access. So the two extremes
of human life, the dwarf and the giant, labored together on the steel
cage that Tom hoped to use in saving those at the fire-encircled hotel.

Between the hours of rushing work Tom was in communication with the
forest rangers’ headquarters by telephone. Everything possible was being
done to check the fire, but the forests were so dry from lack of rain
that the conflagration was steadily sweeping upward.

“It looks as if the hotel is doomed,” was the message Tom had over the
long distance wire. He tried again and again to get in touch with the
hotel itself over the wire, but as Mrs. Jardine had said, the copper
circuit was cut or burned.

“Did you think Chock set that fire?” asked Ned of his chum, when Tom,
directing a gang of men who were getting the dirigible ready, stopped
for a moment.

“Oh, at first the thought entered my mind; but he couldn’t have got here
so soon after setting it except by airplane, and I don’t believe he came
that way.”

“I wonder if the fire was set, and who did it?” mused Ned.

“That we may never find out,” answered Tom.

“Do you think it could have been Martin Jardine?”

“No. He wouldn’t be crazy enough for that—to put in danger his
brother’s wife and children. It’s queer, though, why he hasn’t shown up
here lately.”

At last, later in the afternoon, the metal cage was finished. A chain
from the top went around a drum driven by an electric motor aboard the
_Silver Cloud_. By this means, through a trapdoor in the bottom of the
dirigible, the cage could be lowered to the ground and pulled up again
into the interior of the big airship.

“It’s a small cage to save a whole hotel full of people,” said Tom. “But
it’s as large as we dared make it.”

“How much chain have you?” Ned asked.

“About two hundred feet. I daren’t go any closer than that to the ground
if there is fire near,” Tom said. “Well, I think we are ready to leave,”
he added, as he hurried about the dirigible, making sure that everything
was in shape.

At last, with the metal cage in place, the _Silver Cloud,_ manned by the
brave volunteers, including Lawrence Jardine, the giant, and the dwarf,
left the ground and was headed for the burning mountain. It was one of
the hardest things Tom Swift ever did to refuse Eradicate permission to
go. But with the desperate work ahead, it was no place for the aged
Negro.

“Yo’ cain’t save yo’ pa wifout me, Massa Tom, an’ yo’ knows it!” wailed
Eradicate, as the ship sailed without him. But it had to be.

With her motors running at top speed, the big dirigible was pointed
toward Mt. Camon and in about two hours a rolling cloud of murky haze
told the young navigator and his volunteer crew that they were again
near the burning forest.

“Now to save them if we can!” cried Tom, as he flew through the smoke
over the forest of flames.

“You’re flying too high,” said Ned. “Your chain is only two hundred
feet.”

“I know!” Tom exclaimed. “We’ve got to go lower. It’s flirting with
death, but it must be done!”




                              CHAPTER XXIV


                           OUT OF THE FLAMES

WITH the bursting into flames of the great pine tree so near the hotel
wing, a new danger threatened those imprisoned by the circle of forest
fire. Yet it was not so much a new danger as an extension of that
already menacing them.

“Quick with that hose!” cried Mr. Thorndyke, as his crew of amateur
firemen responded to the summons. “Hurry, men!”

“Can any of us help?” asked Mr. Damon.

“We’ll do our share,” added Mr. Nestor.

“You may have to—later,” said the manager, as he directed his men.
“This is an isolated blaze at present. It will easily be put out. But
the fire from below is drawing nearer. Unless the wardens and their men
can check it, I don’t see what is to become of us!”

By this time the water was spurting through the hose that had been run
out through a lower door. The hotel was provided with great tanks on the
roof, thus affording a gravity supply to different rooms. But the long,
dry season had depleted the springs from which water was pumped to the
roof tanks, so they were not more than half full.

Suddenly, just as the first sprays of water were directed at the blazing
pine tree, the forest giant exploded with a loud report. The heated
pitch and other sap within had reached a temperature where they must
expand, and they did so, rending the bark and trunk.

This explosion, which felled the tree, sent more masses of blazing
material in every direction, and for a moment it looked as if that whole
wing of the hotel would catch fire, even though the actual burning
forest was some distance down the mountain side.

“Run out another hose!” ordered Mr. Thorndyke; and when this had been
done, the blaze, after hard work, was sufficiently wet down to afford
temporary relief.

However, all this time the circle of fire about the seemingly doomed
hotel was slowly growing closer. The conflagration was eating its way up
the mountain, as well as down, but more slowly in the latter direction,
as the wind was sweeping toward the summit.

“They should make a back-fire!” declared Mr. Damon, who, with the other
guests, including Mr. Swift, Mary, and her parents, was watching the
progress of the fire from a veranda. “It’s the only way.”

“I think they are doing that,” said Mr. Nestor.

Mr. Swift said nothing, but every now and then he would look up toward
the smoke-obscured sky, trying to pierce the murky haze.

“What are you looking for?” asked Mary, coming to his side.

“For my son Tom,” answered the aged inventor. “He said in his note that
he would save us.”

“And he will, too! I am sure of it!” declared Mary earnestly.

“Then he must make haste,” said the old man in a low voice. “It is
getting hard to breathe up here. Don’t you feel the heated air, Mary? It
is getting closer—the fire!”

“Oh, I hardly think the air is any hotter than it was two hours ago,”
Mary answered, more because she wanted to reassure the old man than
because she really believed it. She felt a sense of oppression and she
did have difficulty in breathing, just as Mr. Swift had.

“He can’t be long now,” went on Tom’s father, his weary eyes scanning
the sky. “Do you see anything of an airplane, Mary?”

“Not yet, Father. But it would have to be a very big airplane to save
all at this hotel, even if he could land and take a few in at a time.
How do you think Tom will manage?”

“I don’t know. But he’ll find a way,” said the old man. “I’ll leave it
to my son Tom. He’ll know what to do.”

“Yes,” said Mary softly.

“If he had the big aerial warship that we sold to the government, that
might do,” went on Mr. Swift. “I wonder if Tom thinks of that? But the
warship is far away. However, he might get another big craft from the
government and come for us in that.”

“If he comes at all, I think it will be in the new dirigible,” said
Mary.

“Oh, Tom will come!” his father declared. “But he would not dare hover
the dirigible above the forest of fire.”

“Why not?”

“The gas in it would explode. It would mean death for all on board. But
Tom will save us somehow.”

With weary eyes, the anxious ones in the hotel looked first to the
efforts of the men below them, fighting the flames, and again toward the
sky, for the message Tom had dropped from the _Wasp_ had been picked up,
carried to Mary, and had been eagerly read aloud, so that all in the
hotel knew its contents and looked for the young inventor to save them.
How, they did not know, nor did even Tom’s friends. So they could only
wait and hope while the fire hemmed them in closer and closer.

The crackling of the flames could now be plainly heard by those on the
hotel grounds and verandas. Every one was outside, for it could not be
told at what moment some burning masses might be wafted by the wind and
fall on the roof, to set it ablaze.

No one thought of eating, though some of the cooks had prepared a
breakfast. A few took coffee, but it was no time to spend over food.
When the blazing pine tree had been well doused with water, Mr.
Thorndyke sent a crew of men with a hose up to the roof to watch for an
outbreak of flames there.

Meanwhile, Tom Swift and Ned Newton, in charge of the big dirigible, had
guided the craft until by afternoon it was directly over the hotel, with
the circle of fire ever drawing tighter. For a time the smoke was so
thick that it obscured the woods and the buildings, and more than once,
as Tom gave the signal to descend, such a blast of heated air, tipped
with red flames, arose that he had to increase his gas pressure and go
up.

“Looks as if we couldn’t make it, Tom,” gasped Ned, for some smoke had
gotten into the control cabin.

“We’ve got to make it!” was the fierce answer.

“My fortune is yours if you save my wife and children!” cried Mr.
Jardine.

“That looks like an opening,” Ned cried, pointing down through a rift
which appeared in the pall of smoke. “If the wind only holds that way
for a time, we can go down and let them know we have come to save them.”

“Yes!” exclaimed Tom Swift, and he gave the signal for going down.

Fortunately the wind held, and, for a time at least, the summit of the
mountain was comparatively free of the hot, white vapor.

The airship went down rapidly, almost as straight as a descending
elevator. It was now within a few hundred feet of the hotel, and
suddenly, above a temporary lull in the crackling of the flames, voices
from below cried:

“There it is!”

“The big airship!”

“Tom Swift has come to save us!”

Mary, her parents, Mr. Swift, and Mr. Damon heard the cries of joy and
hastened toward the rear of the hotel whence came the shouts and on
toward the ball field, the largest space around the hotel where there
were no trees or shrubbery to catch fire.

“Yes, that’s Tom!” cried Mary, recognizing the big dirigible. She waved
her hands and kissed them to Tom, but it is doubtful if he saw her.

Slowly the giant of the clouds descended lower and lower.

Then came a cry of despair from a crowd at the rear of the hotel. A
great mass of blazing material, matted together, came floating up, borne
by a strong wind and, landing in a pile of broken boxes and other débris
piled near the main building of the hotel, set it on fire.

“The hose! The hose!” came the appeal.

But before the men with the hose could run the nozzle of it around to
the new point of danger the dry wooden structure of the hotel, parched
by many days of hot sunshine, had burst into flames almost with the
rapidity of an explosion.

“The place is doomed now!” cried Mr. Damon.

“Only Tom Swift and his big dirigible can save us!” exclaimed Mr.
Nestor.

Leaving the end of the hotel to burn, and knowing the fire would soon
communicate to the entire structure, the guests and help gathered at the
ball field, looking up to observe the _Silver Cloud_.

The crowd had no sooner reached the place than flames broke out in the
trees and bushes around the ball field. So with one end of the hotel
afire and the underbrush at the edges of the recreation ground burning,
the guests were fairly hemmed in.

“Get shovels and dig up the field!” cried Mr. Thorndyke. “If we can make
a wide enough patch of bare earth the flames may not cross it. Dig,
everybody!”

Shovels were hastily procured and the men and even some of the women,
Mary and Mrs. Nestor among them, worked desperately to keep the fire
from their little patch of safety. It was an island in a sea of flames.

Tom’s airship was now directly above the flames and was coming still
lower.

“He’ll explode if he comes down any further!” cried Mr. Swift. “That gas
can stand so much heat and no more! Go back, Tom! Go back!”

But the _Silver Cloud_ came lower and lower, closer to the raging fire
that was now consuming the north end of the hotel. Below and all around
was a seething caldron of leaping flames.

The dirigible was soon within two hundred feet of the ground. Tom Swift
dared not go lower. But it was enough. He gave the word:

“Lower the metal cage!”




                              CHAPTER XXV


                               A JOY RIDE

THE metal cage slowly descended on its chain of iron from the interior
of the dirigible. The great airship hovered almost motionless over the
perilous scene below, with the forests blazing all about and the hotel
wrapped in flames that were rapidly devouring it. Only on the ball field
was there a temporary place of safety.

“Look! Look!” cried the hotel guests and the servants, when they saw the
descending cage. “What is it?”

“Will it put out the fire?” some wanted to know.

“That is Tom’s plan to save us!” cried Mr. Swift. “Don’t rush now!” he
advised, as a nervous movement was observed in the crowd. “I see a board
with some instructions painted on it. We must follow his directions if
we are to be saved!”

Lower and lower came the cage like an elevator out of its well. The
airship swayed slightly, but Tom Swift had set the motors to hold it
almost stationary in the wind.

“Steady on the windlass!” ordered Tom from the control cabin of the
_Silver Cloud_ as, looking down, he observed the progress of the metal
cage toward earth.

“Steady she is!” answered Ned.

The crew was on the alert, every man at his station and Koku and the
dwarf working together as if they had never quarreled.

With a little jar, the cage touched the earth. There was a rush of
frightened men, women, and children toward it, but Mr. Damon, for once
rising to the occasion, took charge and ordered them all back.

“Let me read what this says!” he cried, pointing to the sign Tom had
fastened to the cage, for there was no time to drop a portable telephone
and it was impossible to hear voices between the airship and earth
because of the crackle of flames and the screams and cries of the
imperiled people.

Mr. Damon read the instructions on the board.

    _Eight passengers at a time in the metal cage. No more! We will
    save you all in turn!_

“Eight only! Eight!” cried Mr. Damon.

“Then of that eight must be Tom Swift’s wife and his father!” shouted
Mr. Thorndyke.

“Yes! Yes!” cried many in the crowd. “That’s only fair!”

So Mary, Mr. Swift, and then Mary’s father and mother were directed into
the cage. There was room for four more, and Mr. Damon was about to pick
out four from the most hysterical of the women and children, to get them
away from alarming the others, when Mary asked that Mrs. Jardine and her
son and daughter be taken up in the first ascent. A little girl was then
put in and a signal was given from below to those on the _Silver Cloud_
to indicate that the cage was filled.

“Up with it!” cried Tom. “Quick!”

The chain wound up on the electric windlass. Slowly the cage with its
living freight arose above the ever narrowing ring of fire.

Slowly, but surely and carefully, the cage went up and up until it
disappeared within the dirigible through the door in the bottom. Tom was
in the windlass room as the cage was caught and held fast. In a moment
the safety door was opened.

“Mary!” cried Tom, clasping his wife in his arms.

“Tom!” she sobbed. “I knew you would save us! But there are more down
there and the fire is gaining fast!”

“I know!” cried Tom, as he clasped his father’s hands. “I will save them
all!”

“Tom Swift, my boy!” cried Mr. Nestor, with a choking voice. “This is
the biggest thing you have ever done!”

“It isn’t done yet,” said the young inventor grimly. “We have a long
haul ahead of us!”

Then, as he saw the last of the passengers come out of the cage, he
ordered the machinery again set in motion.

Mr. Jardine clasped his wife in his arms and held his children close to
him as he said:

“You owe your lives to Tom Swift! Never forget that!”

Mrs. Jardine and her son and daughter turned to Tom to overwhelm him
with their thanks, but he modestly disclaimed them.

“Where’s Mr. Damon?” Tom asked suddenly.

“He said he wouldn’t come up until the last,” reported Mary. “He and Mr.
Thorndyke.”

“A hotel manager true to the tradition of a captain and his ship,”
murmured Ned, who led the rescued ones to a cabin where they could rest
and recover their nerves.

“Are you all right, Mary?” Tom asked, as he went back to see that the
windlass machinery was working well.

“All right, Tom dear,” she answered. “You came just in time.”

“I hope so,” he murmured.

Again the metal cage descended, was quickly filled and hauled up. In
this way the work went on until six loads had been taken aboard the
_Silver Cloud_. Then came a new problem.

“We’re loaded almost to capacity, Tom,” stated Ned, as the dirigible
began to settle. “What are we going to do?”

“We’ll have to fly to a place of safety—where the fire isn’t
threatening or where it has burned out,” Tom answered. “There we’ll
unload these folks and come back to take on another load until we’ve
saved them all.”

“Got to work fast!” commented Ned, as he saw the raging fire below.

“And we will!” echoed Tom.

There was almost a groan of despair from those still in the safety area
of the ball field when they saw the blazing hotel and witnessed the
departure of the dirigible. But Tom wrote and dropped a message which
said:

    “Cheer up! We will soon be back!”

The young inventor was as good as his word. Circling over the blazing
forest, Tom, in the control cabin of the airship, saw a large tract on
the mountain side, a cleared plateau near a small lake in which a little
water yet remained.

“We’ll land our passengers there, Ned!” Tom cried, and they were quickly
transferred by the cage to a place where fire might rim them around at a
safe distance but where, because of almost bare earth, there would be no
danger of creeping flames.

Then the big dirigible was hurried back to the rescue work. Those in the
_Silver Cloud_ worked furiously, lowering and hauling up the loaded cage
with eight at a time, while the airship hovered over the burning forest
and the fire-swept hotel, now doomed to destruction. In the second cage
load were the puppet master and his wife, with some of the marionettes
clasped in their arms.

Another trip to the safety plateau near the little lake, another voyage
back to the almost despairing ones on the ball field, until at last
every soul, women, children, and men, with Mr. Damon and Mr. Thorndyke
in the last cageful, had been saved.

Then such a ringing cheer as went up for Tom Swift and his big
dirigible! It echoed even above the crackle and roar of the flames.

But the plight of the rescued ones would yet have been hard had it not
been for the brave fire wardens and their men.

These intrepid workers, fighting desperately, at last turned the tide of
mounting flames until there was a safe path down the mountain, and
there, at the edge of the burned district, autos met the refugees and
took them to safety.

“What about that hotel?” asked the chief warden, as he greeted Tom
Swift, who, having temporarily anchored his airship, climbed down a
Jacob’s ladder to see how Mary, his father, and the other rescued ones
were.

“Looks to me like a complete loss,” Tom said. “But we got everybody out.
Say, what made this fire gain such headway?” he asked.

“Gasoline and oil,” was the answer.

“Do you mean a filling station exploded?”

“No. A crazy man held me up, socked me on the bean, saturated the woods
with gas and oil from my delivery auto, and set fire to it,” said the
wounded driver who was among those rescued.

“Who?” cried Tom, with righteous wrath. “That fellow ought to be
hanged!”

“It was that mad gardener, Cosso Tobini,” reported the warden. “But
he’ll never hang.”

“Why?”

“He was burned to death in the fire he set. We found his charred body in
a puddle of water where he threw himself after he found himself ablaze,
I suppose. Near him was a tin box containing a letter in which he said
he set the fire to revenge himself on the hotel manager.”

“What a terrible revenge,” Tom murmured.

“It would have been more terrible but for you, Mr. Swift,” said the fire
warden. “You deserve a congressional medal of honor.”

“Oh, cut that out!” answered Tom lightly. “I’m satisfied—with this!”
and he put his arm around his wife.

“I suppose all my pretty things are burned in that hotel,” sighed Mary
later, when she and her family and some other passengers who had decided
to travel that way, were voyaging in the _Silver Cloud_.

It was headed for Shopton. The remaining refugees were being cared for
at resorts lower down the mountain, well away from the blazing forest,
the fire now, however, almost extinguished.

“Well,” Tom said, “I’m afraid there can’t be much left.”

Later, however, it was found that the main part of the hotel did not
burn, for the reason that two great water tanks on the wing which first
caught fire fell and put out the blaze. The fire wardens and their men
did the rest. But the hotel was not fit to be used. Mary and many
others, however, were glad to get back most of their possessions.

As was to be expected, the papers the next day were filled with stories
of the great fire and Tom Swift’s exploit with his big dirigible. The
Swift Construction Company and the Jardine concern were spoken of as
having added much to the science of air navigation by the construction
of such a ship, while a great deal was said of Tom’s ingenuity in
rigging the metal cage. Tom was delighted with the prowess of his craft.
Only in that way could the many lives have been saved.

“Well, Mr. Swift, did I come through clean?” asked the dwarf several
days later when the exciting experience was something of a memory.

“Yes, you did, Chock,” was the answer. “I am glad I trusted you. But I
hope this doesn’t mean that you and Koku are going to resume hostilities
now the danger is over.”

“Oh, no. We’re good friends,” chuckled the dwarf.

“Little man sometimes good as um big man,” was Koku’s contribution to
burying the war hatchet. And from then on the two extremes of life were
good friends.

“I said, Tom Swift,” remarked Lawrence Jardine, when they were talking
over the matter several days later, “that I would do anything in the
world for you if you would save my wife and children. You did. As a
memento of this, I want you to accept my check for all you spent over
and above what my brother advanced on the construction of the big
dirigible. Then the ship is yours absolutely.”

“I can’t accept an offer like that,” Tom said. “Why can’t the original
contract be carried out? Where is your brother Martin? He and you and I
ought to get together on this.”

“I don’t know where Martin is!” said Lawrence, rather bitterly. “He
acted the fool and almost plunged me into bankruptcy. If I ever see him
again——”

“Will you forgive him?” asked a voice suddenly from the hall outside
Tom’s private office, and Martin Jardine, no longer the gay, careless
character he had been, walked in. He was so serious he was not even
smoking.

For a moment Lawrence Jardine stood looking at his brother. But when
Martin held out his hand pathetically and again murmured something about
forgiveness, Lawrence was not proof against this.

“All right,” he agreed. “We’ll let bygones be bygones. But why did you
try to involve that dwarf with you, Martin?”

“I don’t know. Because I was a fool, I guess. We both were, but I
couldn’t let him come through clean and not do so myself. I’ll make it
all up to you, Larry!”

“All right, Marty!”

The two brothers were reconciled, and Tom Swift left them alone for a
little while. But he was soon called back to the office, for the now
reunited Jardine firm members wanted to reestablish the contract
Lawrence had repudiated, and this was soon done.

“Then you will take over the _Silver Cloud_ as you originally agreed
to?” Tom asked.

“When she is finished,” said Martin, and his brother nodded assent.

“She’s finished now, except for a few repairs and fitting up some of the
passenger cabins,” Tom said. “You can have her next week.”

“Then here’s a check in full settlement,” said Lawrence. “But I’ll only
sign it on one condition.”

“What’s that?” asked Tom.

“That you and yours, I and mine, and brother Martin will have a joy ride
in the big dirigible,” was the stipulation. “I’d like to take a long
voyage away from fire and smoke. I had enough of that up on Mt. Camon,”
for Lawrence had been among the volunteers and had done valiant work in
saving many.

“That suits me,” Tom said. “Provided my wife will go.”

Mary accepted gladly, so the summer ended in a glorious outing in which
they sailed over half the United States in the _Silver Cloud_ to the no
small wonder of many cities over which they soared. Mr. Swift’s health
improved so much that he was able to go along, and among the guests were
Ned Newton and Helen Morton—as an engaged couple.

                                THE END




                =_This Isn’t All!_=

                Would you like to know what
                became of the good friends you
                have made in this book?

                Would you like to read other
                stories continuing their adventures
                and experiences, or other books
                quite as entertaining by the same
                author?

                On the _reverse side_ of the wrapper
                which comes with this book,
                you will find a wonderful list of
                stories which you can buy at the
                same store where you got this book.

                    _=Don’t throw away the Wrapper=_

                _Use it as a handy catalog of the books_
                _you want some day to have. But in_
                _case you do mislay it, write to the_
                _Publishers for a complete catalog._




                         THE TOM SWIFT SERIES
                         By  VICTOR  APPLETON
        Uniform Style of Binding.  Individual Colored Wrappers.
                   Every Volume Complete in Itself.
       Every boy possesses some form of inventive genius. Tom Swift
   is a bright, ingenious boy and his inventions and adventures make
   the most interesting kind of reading.

                     TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR CYCLE
                     TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR BOAT
                       TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRSHIP
                   TOM SWIFT AND HIS SUBMARINE BOAT
                  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIRELESS MESSAGE
                  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RUNABOUT
                  TOM SWIFT AMONG THE DIAMOND MAKERS
                     TOM SWIFT IN THE CAVES OF ICE
                      TOM SWIFT AND HIS SKY RACER
                   TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RIFLE
                     TOM SWIFT IN THE CITY OF GOLD
                     TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR GLIDER
                        TOM SWIFT IN CAPTIVITY
                    TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIZARD CAMERA
                  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GREAT SEARCHLIGHT
                    TOM SWIFT AND HIS GIANT CANNON
                   TOM SWIFT AND HIS PHOTO TELEPHONE
                   TOM SWIFT AND HIS AERIAL WARSHIP
                     TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG TUNNEL
                   TOM SWIFT IN THE LAND OF WONDERS
                      TOM SWIFT AND HIS WAR TANK
                      TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR SCOUT
                   TOM SWIFT AND HIS UNDERSEA SEARCH
                   TOM SWIFT AMONG THE FIRE FIGHTERS
                 TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE
                     TOM SWIFT AND HIS FLYING BOAT
                  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GREAT OIL GUSHER
                  TOM SWIFT AND HIS CHEST OF SECRETS
                   TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRLINE EXPRESS
                     TOM SWIFT CIRCLING THE GLOBE
                  TOM SWIFT AND HIS TALKING PICTURES
                   TOM SWIFT AND HIS HOUSE ON WHEELS
                    TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG DIRIGIBLE
             GROSSET  &  DUNLAP,  _Publishers_,  NEW  YORK




                         THE DON STURDY SERIES
                          By  VICTOR  APPLETON
                    Author of “The Tom Swift Series”


         Every red-blooded boy will enjoy the thrilling adventures
     of Don Sturdy. In company with his uncles, one a big
     game hunter, the other a noted scientist, he travels far and
     wide—into the jungles of South America, across the Sahara,
     deep into the African jungle, up where the Alaskan volcanoes
     spout, down among the head hunters of Borneo and
     many other places where there is danger and excitement.
     Every boy who has known Tom Swift will at once become
     the boon companion of daring Don Sturdy.

                 DON STURDY ON THE DESERT OF MYSTERY
                 DON STURDY WITH THE BIG SNAKE HUNTERS
                 DON STURDY IN THE TOMBS OF GOLD
                 DON STURDY ACROSS THE NORTH POLE
                 DON STURDY IN THE LAND OF VOLCANOES
                 DON STURDY IN THE PORT OF LOST SHIPS
                 DON STURDY AMONG THE GORILLAS
                 DON STURDY CAPTURED BY HEAD HUNTERS
                 DON STURDY IN LION LAND
                 DON STURDY IN THE LAND OF GIANTS


             GROSSET  &  DUNLAP,  _Publishers_,  NEW  YORK






                         THE RADIO BOYS SERIES
                         (Trademark Registered)
                            By ALLEN CHAPMAN
                 Author of the “Railroad Series,” Etc.

             Illustrated.  Every Volume Complete in Itself.


         Here is a series that gives full details of radio work
     both in sending and receiving—how large and small sets
     can be made and operated, and with this real information
     there are the stories of the radio boys and their adventures.
     Each story is a record of thrilling adventures—rescues, narrow
     escapes from death, daring exploits in which the radio
     plays a main part. Each volume is so thoroughly fascinating,
     so strictly up-to-date, and accurate that all modern
     boys will peruse them with delight.
         Each volume has a foreword by Jack Binns, the well
     known radio expert.

                 THE RADIO BOYS FIRST WIRELESS
                 THE RADIO BOYS AT OCEAN POINT
                 THE RADIO BOYS AT THE SENDING STATION
                 THE RADIO BOYS AT MOUNTAIN PASS
                 THE RADIO BOYS TRAILING A VOICE
                 THE RADIO BOYS WITH THE FOREST RANGERS
                 THE RADIO BOYS WITH THE ICEBERG PATROL
                 THE RADIO BOYS WITH THE FLOOD FIGHTERS
                 THE RADIO BOYS ON SIGNAL ISLAND
                 THE RADIO BOYS IN GOLD VALLEY
                 THE RADIO BOYS AIDING THE SNOWBOUND
                 THE RADIO BOYS ON THE PACIFIC
                 THE RADIO BOYS TO THE RESCUE


              GROSSET  &  DUNLAP,  _Publishers_,  NEW YORK






                        WESTERN STORIES FOR BOYS
                        By  JAMES  CODY  FERRIS

            Individual Colored Wrappers and Illustrations by
                            WALTER S. ROGERS
                    Each Volume Complete in Itself.


           Thrilling tales of the great west, told primarily for
       boys but which will be read by all who love mystery,
       rapid action, and adventures in the great open spaces.
           The Manly Boys, Roy and Teddy, are the sons of
       an old ranchman, the owner of many thousands of
       heads of cattle. The lads know how to ride, how to
       shoot, and how to take care of themselves under any
       and all circumstances.
           The cowboys of the X Bar X Ranch are real cowboys,
       on the job when required but full of fun and
       daring—a bunch any reader will be delighted to know.

                  THE X BAR X BOYS ON THE RANCH
                  THE X BAR X BOYS IN THUNDER CANYON
                  THE X BAR X BOYS ON WHIRLPOOL RIVER
                  THE X BAR X BOYS ON BIG BISON TRAIL
                  THE X BAR X BOYS AT THE ROUND-UP
                  THE X BAR X BOYS AT NUGGET CAMP
                  THE X BAR X BOYS AT RUSTLER’S GAP
                  THE X BAR X BOYS AT GRIZZLY PASS
                  THE X BAR X BOYS LOST IN THE ROCKIES


               GROSSET  &  DUNLAP,  PUBLISHERS,  NEW YORK






                         THE HARDY BOYS’ SERIES
                        By  FRANKLIN  W.  DIXON

             Illustrated.  Every Volume Complete in Itself.


    The Hardy Boys are sons of a celebrated American detective,
    and during vacations and their off time from school they help
    their father by hunting down clues themselves.

    THE TOWER TREASURE

        A dying criminal confessed that his loot had been secreted
    “in the tower.” It remained for the Hardy Boys to make an
    astonishing discovery that cleared up the mystery.

    THE HOUSE ON THE CLIFF

        The house had been vacant and was supposed to be haunted.
    Mr. Hardy started to investigate—and disappeared! An odd tale,
    with plenty of excitement.

    THE SECRET OF THE OLD MILL

        Counterfeit money was in circulation, and the limit was
    reached when Mrs. Hardy took some from a stranger. A tale full
    of thrills.

    THE MISSING CHUMS

        Two of the Hardy Boys’ chums take a motor trip down the
    coast. They disappear and are almost rescued by their friends
    when all are captured. A thrilling story of adventure.

    HUNTING FOR HIDDEN GOLD

        Mr. Hardy is injured in tracing some stolen gold. A hunt by
    the boys leads to an abandoned mine, and there things start to
    happen. A western story all boys will enjoy.

    THE SHORE ROAD MYSTERY

        Automobiles were disappearing most mysteriously from the
    Shore Road. It remained for the Hardy Boys to solve the mystery.

    THE SECRET OF THE CAVES

        When the boys reached the caves they came unexpectedly upon
    a queer old hermit.

    THE MYSTERY OF CABIN ISLAND

        A story of queer adventures on a rockbound island.

    THE GREAT AIRPORT MYSTERY

        The Hardy Boys solve the mystery of the disappearance of
    some valuable mail.


              GROSSET  &  DUNLAP,  Publishers,  NEW  YORK





                           TRANSCRIBER NOTES


Misspelled words and printer errors have been corrected.

Inconsistencies in punctuation have been maintained.

A cover was created for this eBook.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG DIRIGIBLE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


