*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 61253 ***

[Transcriber's note: The use of [a:] denotes the letter a/A with a
diaeresis below. I was unable to locate a utf8 equivalent. Original
spelling has been retained, my limited knowledge of ENTOESE left me
with little choice.]




 JOURNEYS TO

 THE PLANET MARS

 OR

 OUR MISSION TO ENTO

 BY

 SARA WEISS

 Author of "Story of Decimon Huydas: A Romance of
 the Planet Mars"

 THE BRADFORD PRESS
 45 BROADWAY      NEW YORK




 Copyright, 1903,

 BY

 SARA WEISS




CONTENTS.


 CHAPTER                                                           PAGE

 I. Interview with the Evon-Thia                                     1

 II. Special Features of Mars                                       14

 III. Ento, and Entoans                                             35

 IV. Descriptive Features                                           53

 V. Giordano Bruno                                                  74

 VI. Inidora and Genessano                                         103

 VII. First Approach to Ento Sensitives                            132

 VIII. Spiritualized Man                                           166

 IX. Meeting with Camarissa                                        177

 X. Dr. Blank's Lesson                                             215

 XI. In the Galarésa                                               249

 XII. Europe and the Far North                                     284

 XIII. Ento's Precious Stones                                      317

 XIV. Dano and Vallo[a:]                                           370

 XV. Re-embodiment                                                 382

 XVI. Concerning the Eskimos                                       434

 XVII. Culmination of the Mission                                  473




EXPLANATORY NOTE.


In the Ento language, the accented A has the sound of [a:]h. The
horizontal line over E, gives it the long sound of a. The circumflex
over ŷ and û, closes them, and in certain words I takes the sound of
E. Thus, Info st[a:] tiv[a:] Zēnoss[a:]a oovistû is pronounced Info
st[a:]h tev[a:]h Zēnoss[a:][a:] oovistû. In English this signifies,
To the care of the gods until we meet again, and Info oovistû bears
the same meaning as the French expression, au revoir. Largely the Ento
language is a language of inferences, it expresses far more than words
indicate. Various movements of the hands convey subtle meanings, adding
to, or detracting from apparently simple statements, questions or
replies. Tylû is Ento for city; y and û being closed it is pronounced
Tilloo. The interjection, Loh[a:]û is Ento for the English word,
hail; a form of greeting, as Loh[a:]û, ēmano (Hail, friend!) and is
pronounced Lohowoo amano. These are simple examples of a language not
at all complex, but replete with charming expressiveness.




PREFACE.


To all who may be concerned in an endeavor to acquire information
relating to affairs beyond the range of physical vision we offer for
consideration what may be regarded as an incredible narrative of
journeys to, and explorations of the Planet known as Mars, and we
entreat that you shall not pass unfriendly judgment upon that which
may impress you as a merely imaginative composition, but which, in all
sincerity, is a statement of facts.

Desiring to, as far as practicable, simplify the relation of this
absolutely truthful narrative, of a not unexampled undertaking, I,
and others of the Evon-thia, have thought it well to present it in
colloquial form, as being more realistic than any other mode of
expression, and also we have thought it well, that only a limited
number of our numerous Band shall present themselves as actors, in what
may appear a fanciful drama.

We are aware that we might offer certain special pleadings, which, in
many minds, would induce favorable consideration of the unvarnished
relation of our varied experiences, but we prefer to leave to the
more or less enlightened seekers after truth, such verdict as their
inner perceptions may accord, not only for the facts and philosophy
involved in the narrative, but also for the services of our intrepid
conscientious and faithful instrument, who, during nearly two years,
devoted her time, her energy and such ability, as she alone of Earth's
sensitives, at this period possesses, for the accomplishment of an
object which long has concerned the denizens of our and other spirit
worlds, an object for which wittingly she became re-embodied.

With occasional brief interruptions, our journeys to the Planet,
astronomically known as Mars, but to its inhabitants as Ento, which
in the Ento language signifies "chosen, or set apart," extended from
October 6, 1892, to September 16, 1894. During this period, through a
rather rare phase of mediumship, which we term semi-automatism, the
objective, or soul consciousness of our instrument was controlled
to write certain observations and experiences, but through various
unavoidable conditions, the record was somewhat imperfect, fragmentary
and altogether too voluminous for the purpose in view. Hence, when
after quite two years, during which she gradually recovered from the
devitalized condition, to which her devotion to a most worthy object
had reduced her, she expressed her readiness to permit herself to
pass under my control for the purpose of revising the manuscript, the
contents of which she was almost wholly ignorant, I found myself a
little dismayed over the magnitude of our mutual undertaking, which
I well knew would tax our endurance to the utmost, and certainly,
only patient, persistent endeavor on the part of our instrument, and
myself, has resulted in what, at the best, we all consider a not very
satisfactory rendition of experiences as unique as ever have occurred
to one yet embodied in physical form. So unique, indeed, that she
shrinks from the probable, nay, the certain unpleasant criticism which
the presentation of not new, but unrecognized facts, may elicit, and
it is only through the persistent entreaties of friends on both sides
of life that finally she has decided to offer for publication the
rather sketchy narrative of our journeys to Ento. Possessing neither
a natural, nor a cultivated ability, for a pictured presentation
of form, our spirit artist, Aaron Poole, has found it difficult to,
through her automatism, represent even some of the simpler examples
of the Flora of your neighboring Planet, but I may assure you that,
though from an artistic standpoint, they are somewhat crude, they
convey a fairly correct idea of the form and color, of the species
of plant life they represent. Also, I may state that our mission to
Ento was undertaken for a specific purpose, the record of its various
features being a secondary affair, but of sufficient importance to
induce us to undertake the task, which to all concerned, has been
purely a labor of love. Largely, it has been written for the purpose of
affording our Earthians information which only through the mediation
of discarnated spirits can be obtained. To scientific inquiry, in
whatsoever direction, there is a limit beyond which the physically
embodied man cannot penetrate, but to freed, most exalted spirits from
whom we receive instruction, the depths of unthinkably boundless space
are accessible. To spirits less exalted as we are, the planets of our
solar system afford free fields of observation, and in some far distant
time you and we, dear reader, through loving service for Humanity, may
find ourselves so purified, through earnest investigation and lofty
aspiration, so learned, so exalted, that together we may journey beyond
suns and worlds of which your photographers catch imprints, as faint
as smiles on the white faces of your dear dead. And may we hope that
in reading of our mission to Ento, you may find some expression of
thought, some lesson which may aid you in ascending the heights, ever
leading toward exalted states of being, thus nearer to a realizing
sense of the all pervading, infinite spirit of an infinite universe. We
pray that it may be so.

To all who love their fellow man, to all who love truth, for truth's
sake, and who earnestly, prayerfully seek for it wheresoever it may be
found, we dedicate this narrative of loving endeavor.

 Carl De L'Ester,

 Counsellor and Guide of one of the Spirit Bands, in
 Planetary language known as Evon-thia (for love's sake).




JOURNEYS TO THE PLANET MARS.




CHAPTER I.

INTERVIEW WITH THE EVON-THIA.


De L'Ester--Madame, we greet you, and rejoice to perceive that our last
prolonged visit to Luna has not proven detrimental to your health, but
hereafter we must endeavor to be more prudent. Now, I pray you, to
attentively listen to what I may say to you.

During the years of your present re-embodiment, for a definite purpose,
and toward a definite period, certain Spirits have occupied themselves
in shaping the unfoldment of your Mediumship, the anticipated period
has arrived, and with blended emotions, we, your Spirit friends,
question the momentous future, which we trust contains the glorious
fulfillment of a stupendous undertaking. Soon after your son Bernard
passed to our side of life, we informed you that you no longer would be
used for automatic writing, but that later on your Mediumship would be
manifested through an altogether different expression. We did not then,
and we do not now deem it advisable, to more than refer to this change
of phase, considering it best that, through your own experiences, you
shall grow into an understanding of what otherwise no one can make
plain to your comprehension. Our paper on Earth's Satellite nears a
conclusion; indeed, for the present, in that direction, to-day will
end our investigations. May we hope that your recent experiences have
proven sufficiently interesting to have awakened in you a desire for a
larger knowledge and a more comprehensive view of the wonders of Starry
Space?

We are aware that in the minds of Earth's thinkers there is a lively
interest relating to a world of our Solar System, astronomically
known as the Planet Mars. We, too, are greatly interested in the same
direction, and it is our ardent desire that we may use you as a means
through whom Earth's peoples may obtain a closer acquaintance with the
Planet, and through whom we may accomplish an aim very dear to our
hearts. We also are aware that your desire to acquire knowledge, at
even a sacrifice of personal ease, and other allurements, will induce
you to regard our proposal with favor, so I shall not urge you into
hasty compliance with our wishes. You carefully will consider the
matter, and we with some anxiety will await your decision.

Now close your eyes, tranquillize your thoughts, and quickly we again
will visit Luna.


 _October 4th, 1892._

De L'Ester--Yes, again we are with you, and are delighted to find you
fully recovered from your exhaustive experience of yesterday. Are we
to felicitate ourselves upon your having favorably considered our
proposal? You hesitate; yet in the past you have trusted yourself to
our care and guidance. Surely you safely may trust us for the future.

Medium--If I seem to hesitate, it is not that I fear trusting myself
to your care, but you are aware that this phase of Mediumship is very
devitalizing, so you will understand that I a little shrink from
incurring possible injury to my health. Then, too, if you may consider
it advisable, I should like to be informed concerning the proposed
undertaking. Since my early youth I have greatly desired to study
astronomy, but always circumstances have prevented my gaining more than
a very slight knowledge of this, to me, most wonderful of sciences, so,
as in the undertaking some astronomical features are involved, without
further hesitation I accept your proposal to attempt to make use of my
organism for what I feel assured is a wise and beneficent purpose.

De L'Ester--Madame, in our undertaking much is involved that will
be unfolded as we progress toward its fulfillment. Aside from the
principal object in view, we desire, and hope to give through you,
descriptive sketches of the geographical divisions, geological
formations, fauna, flora, race characteristics, social conditions,
religious beliefs and rites, government, educational methods, arts,
sciences, architecture, mechanics and other features of the planet
Mars. Certainly we fully understand the devitalizing effect of your
peculiar Phase of Mediumship, and I will not conceal from you that your
acceptance of our proposition may bring about possible undesirable
consequences which we cannot foresee, so again I say, we will not urge
you, but should you comply with our wishes to have you accompany us in
a series of journeys from Earth, to Mars, our gratification will be
boundless, and your experiences will be so unique that in any event
you will find no cause for regret. Friends who are known to you, and
others with whom you will become acquainted, will share with us the
responsibilities and pleasures of the undertaking. For the most part
these persons are interested in such sciences and pursuits as engaged
their attention while in physical form, thus they are specially fitted
for such purposes as they have been chosen to serve.

No, madame, we do not anticipate even a remote possibility of a fatal
disaster to your physical existence; but, through exhaustion, your
health might receive injury, so you will weigh the matter well before
positively deciding to devote yourself to what I may assure you is a
beneficent purpose. Should your decision meet our wishes, after the
first step shall have been taken we will expect you to be steadfast to
the end.

We, as well as yourself, have duties and occupations, and in the event
of your positive acceptance of our proposition, it will be necessary
that we shall make certain arrangements for the successful inception
and after-progress of our journeys and investigations.

You are not yet fully developed in your peculiar Phase of Mediumship,
and unfortunately you are extremely skeptical and over-cautious, which
renders you very positive, and doubtless there will be occasions when
it will be difficult to harmonize conditions; still, as you possess in
an unusual degree the graces of patience, perseverance and earnestness,
may we not expect that you will prove equal to such occasions as may
occur? Indeed, we feel assured that you will.

Medium--You know the conditions under which I consent to place myself
at your service, and in as far as my ability may serve, I shall
endeavor to meet your wishes.

De L'Ester--Your conditions are perfectly reasonable, and we promise
you that we faithfully will observe them. Shall we then consider your
decision as final?

Medium--Yes; and as I also shall have to arrange my affairs so as to
place myself at your service, I shall require a delay of two days. On
the 6th I shall be ready to accompany you.

De L'Ester--At what hour?

Medium--At 9 A.M.

De L'Ester--Let it be so, and remember that during the hours you may be
with us you positively must secure yourself against intrusion. This is
imperative. Do you understand the necessity for this requirement?

Medium--I do, and shall arrange for it.

De L'Ester--Then on the 6th day of October, 1892, our initial journey
will occur. Until then, adieu.


 _October 6th, 1892._

De L'Ester--Good morning, madame, I am pleased to find you quite
prepared for our journey Starward. Accompanying me are George Brooks,
an Englishman, whom ere now you should have known; Agassiz, one of
earth's noted naturalists, and his close associate, Alexander Von
Humboldt, whose fame is not confined to Europe. Allow me to make known
to you these friends who are Members of the Band whom I have the honor
of directing.

Medium--Gentlemen, I indeed am pleased to make your acquaintance.

Agassiz--Madame, our acquaintance _is not of to-day_, and our mutual
friendship dates further into the past than at present you are aware
of. Through the immutable Law of Attraction, humans are as links of an
unbreakable chain, and real friendships are as enduring as eternity.

Von Humboldt--As no words of mine would add force to this statement, I
shall only say that I am, and ever will be, your friend Alexander Von
Humboldt.

George Brooks--And may I add that as all humans are akin I not only
am your devoted friend, but, after a fashion, am your brother George
Brooks.

De L'Ester--And it has been arranged that George shall assist you in
your flights through space, and that I shall take upon myself the
responsibility of conducting our observations and investigations. To
each member of our Band has been allotted some special duty, thus no
confusion can occur, and from time to time Spirits of our Spheres, and
of other Planetary Spheres, for certain purposes, will join us. When
desirable, further explanations will be offered you.

Ere we begin our journeys to another world, we will turn our thoughts
toward the Infinite One, in whom we indeed live, move and have our
being.

Earnestly, humbly, prayerfully, we turn toward Thee, Thou Eternal,
Infinite Intelligence, who art the All Pervading, All Knowing Energy,
controlling every atom of the Universe. Ever Thy children are seeking
after truth. Ever they who blindly grope their ways through mortal
existence, unconsciously, are striving to draw nearer to a realization
that Thou art. Oh, Thou Dual, yet indivisible One who art the All and
in All, as now we are entering upon a mission of loving endeavor, with
loftiest aspirations, and with perfect trust we offer ourselves for
loving service, well knowing that in Thee are the issues of all things,
and that Thou wilt give Thy angels charge concerning us. Amen and amen.

Madame, you now will close your eyes and endeavor to render yourself
passive. That is well. Now, with utmost assurance, rest upon George's
outstretched arms. Have no fear. Remember our promise. Gently, gently,
George. Upward, upward now, and outward on this wondrous magnetic
current we glide. Swiftly as thought traverses space, so swiftly we
journey toward Mars, which, like a great ruddy jewel, enmeshed in gold,
gleams yonder in space.

Now that we are nearing the Planet, we slowly will descend to such an
altitude as will enable you to observe how varied is the scenery, and
how very similar it is to portions of our Earth World.

A little lower, George. Madame, do you now see clearly? And are you not
at all alarmed?

Medium--I see quite distinctly, and am not at all alarmed.

De L'Ester--Truly you are a courageous woman.

Through personal observation you will learn that the geological
formations, natural divisions, atmospheric conditions and other
features of Mars are very similar to corresponding features of our own
Planet.

The same may be said of its fauna and flora, which will surprise you
by their familiar appearance. We will remain at this altitude, and as
we pass slowly onward we desire that you shall closely observe such
views as may be presented. We do not at present wish to discuss them,
but should they suggest to you questions which may be relevant to our
purpose I shall be pleased to attempt replies.

Medium--Then may I ask which of the two Planets, Earth and Mars, first
came into existence? And also I should like to know how Planets are
formed.

De L'Ester--So much is involved in your questions that I cannot now
afford you a comprehensive reply. So I may only say that we have
been made to understand that Suns are, so to say, magnetic stations
or centres of magnetic energy, and in so far as exalted spirits of
highest spirit spheres can determine, in their relative positions and
functions, they are eternal and unchangeable, also, they affirm that
the elements, not only of Suns, but of all bodies of infinite space,
are homogeneous. That periods arrive when through magnetic attraction
of elemental substances Suns become surcharged and their pregnant
energies exhibit inconceivable activity, casting into space the
extremely attenuated elemental substances of which worlds are made.

We, as well as those Wise Ones, are aware that during incalculable
lapses of time, Infinite, Intelligent Law brings order out of chaos
and formless aggregations of atoms become observable bodies of
incandescent matter. That cycles upon cycles elapse, during which
cooling and condensation proceed, and these gaseous bodies contract
to the measurable dimensions of globes. In this manner Mars, and much
later Earth came into the family of our Solar System, and in the course
of time about either Planet a crust was formed, encompassing their
super-heated masses. Numberless cycles added unrecognized years to
the ages of the infant Planets. Continuously their confined energies
burst forth with tremendous force, rending the gradually thickening
crust and casting into space masses of incandescent matter, some of
which formed satellites of the Planets. Others, not projected with
sufficient force, were drawn back within the mass of such Planet as
had cast them forth. No, I do not mean to say that all satellites
of Planets have their origin in this manner, and at another time I
shall speak to you of this matter. Backward, as the ages flew, the
surfaces of Mars and Earth were upheaved into mountain chains, anon
these were engulfed within fiery abysses whose measureless energies
tumultuously threatened to burst asunder the entire surfaces of the
young Worlds. But time flies on tireless wings, and at last atmospheres
for them become possible; not beneficent atmospheres, but such as
heralded the possibilities of a later time, when dew and rain would,
like blessings, fall upon the hot bosoms of the new Worlds. The lapse
of time from the beginning of the formation of a Planet to a period
when the crust has cooled and thickened sufficiently to have become
somewhat stable, when natural forces have made it possible for, so to
say, the _generation_ of an atmosphere, is inconceivable, and quite
as inconceivable is the time that must elapse ere the cooling of the
atmosphere and consequent condensation and deposition of moisture shall
have made life conditions possible; truly, my friend, only the Infinite
Mind is equal to such a conception. Understand, please, that I am not
indulging in mere speculation. In a simplified and perspicuous manner
I am trying to convey to you such facts as may furnish brief replies
to your questions. I wish you to learn that World building is not only
a process of bygone ages, but that far off in the depths of space
innumerable Worlds are now being formed, just as this Planet and Earth
have been formed. As the primitive history of one corresponds with
the primitive history of the other, I shall say that in the earlier
ages strange conditions prevailed. Geographically the surfaces of the
two Planets changed, as change the forms in the kaleidoscope. Oceans
and Seas were being deposited, and from their depths Continents were
upheaved, only to disappear beneath unquiet billows, leaving isolated
Islands or Archipelagoes to mark their subsidence, and from the heated
waters dense vapors arose enveloping the new Worlds as in winding
sheets.

As it is not possible to compute the ages, much less the years,
during which Mars and Earth passed through the various stages of
evolvement, up to the period when either Planet became sufficiently
cool and stable, the waters of a suitable temperature and atmospheric
conditions favorable to a degree that life in its earliest expression
became possible, necessarily I must remain silent in relation to that
matter. But in this connection I may say that the formative history
of one Planet is the formative history of all Planets of all systems
of Worlds. First, a nebulous condition of substance, which, through
natural activities or laws, gradually contracts into measurable
dimensions. Secondly, a somewhat spherical, gaseous body extending
in all directions into space. Thirdly, a positive, individualized,
observable body in a highly incandescent state, followed by such
gradual evolvement as your geologists well understand. In a fragmentary
and simplified fashion I have as concisely as possible replied to your
_second_ question. As to the first, such authorities on our side of
life as are known to be unquestionable, declare that the Planet Mars is
incalculably older than Earth. That during the ages when our globe was
almost wholly incandescent, Mars' crust was measurably solid and cooled
and its earliest life expressions were teeming in its tepid waters. The
interval elapsing between the earliest appearance of life on Mars and
the period when it became possible for the earliest life expressions
to appear on our Planet is not to be computed through years or through
centuries of years, the duration of such an interval is inconceivable.

We desire that you shall understand that _we do not propose_ that this
shall be an astronomical, geological or other scientific work, but in
so far as we may be able to use your organism we shall touch upon such
recognized sciences as may subserve our purposes of comparing degrees
of knowledge attained to, in the same direction by the peoples of two
Planets, Mars and Earth.

Medium--I should like to know how the lowest life forms of a new Planet
originate, where do they come from, and what are they?

De L'Ester--Truly a large question, to which I must make a very
brief reply. Your scientists declare that protozoa are the first,
consequently the lowest, forms or expressions of life. The statement
to a degree is correct, but as the life, the active principle of the
cell, relatively is as great as the active principle of a universe,
one cannot accurately designate it as either high or low. Life, the
imponderable potentiality of the universe, is a unit, expressing
itself in every atom, in the formation of every cell, floating in
the tepid waters of new Worlds. It is as truly _substance_ as is
the cell _brought into form_ through its intelligent activity. It
is the Infinite, Intelligent Energy, permeating all that is. It is
the Infinite Spirit whose countless manifestations we recognize, but
whose nature is beyond the conception of angels or of archangels.
_It is that which we term GOD._ On all Planets sufficiently evolved
life expressions first appear in cell formations. In these cells, for
which scientists have various names, are _all the potentialities_
necessary for the evolvement of all forms of animal and vegetable life.
Through the ceaseless activity of Infinite, Intelligent, Immutable
Law, these germ cells, step by step, are evolved from lower to higher
planes of expression, _and this is a truth, the cells containing the
potentialities of the human animal are unlike those containing the
potentialities of the mere animal_. Infinite Intelligence makes no
mistakes, and in the primordial cells are _all_ the possibilities of
_all_ specific orders of animal and vegetable life. In every direction
life expressions strive to advance on straight lines, and however
thwarted and baffled, go forward with invincible, intelligent energy
toward definite ends. But the subject is inexhaustible, and we must for
the present defer its further consideration.

We are now resting in space, about one English mile above Mars'
surface. Freed spirits see where mortal vision perceives naught. As you
now are, to a degree, liberated from physical limitation, you perceive
that all your senses are enlarged and intensified, and you will not
find it difficult to carefully observe the view presenting itself, and
to describe what you may perceive.

Medium--I cannot realize that I am gazing on the planet Mars, for it
is so strangely similar to our own far distant Earth, I see cities
and towns, some near by, others in the dim distance. There are Lakes
and streams of shining water and there are wide spreading plains over
which I see some animals moving, but I do not see them very distinctly.
Directly beneath us are fields of waving grain and meadows green with
verdure, with here and there clusters of many bright hued flowers.
Away off yonder I see what appears to be moving trains of railway
cars, but the motive power must be different from that in use on our
railways, for I do not see either steam or smoke, and the locomotive
is quite unlike any I have seen. What direction is that? South? Well,
far Southward I see a considerable body of water, and on it, moving in
all directions, are large and small vessels, some with sails, others
without any visible motive power. But, dear me, what is that moving so
swiftly through the air? An air transport? How very wonderful, but I
see neither sails, balloons or any propelling power. I wonder how they
rise, and what keeps them from falling? George, it is very impolite in
you to laugh at me. Of course I am excited; so would you be were you
in my place. Oh, that one over yonder town is slowly, slowly dropping
down, and now it has landed on a great platform and passengers are
alighting and others are entering, as one might enter a railway car.
Now it is ascending with a sort of undulatory movement, dipping and
rising like a bird in flight, and now it has risen to quite a height,
and is going toward the South. Cannot we go nearer to one of the
strange conveyances? I am very curious to learn more about them. How
they are constructed, and what their motive power is, and what sustains
them in the air, and what--George, if you do not stop laughing at me
you will let me fall. De L'Ester, do tell me something about them.

De L'Ester--Patience, patience, madame. Your curiosity is quite natural
and commendable, and in good time shall be gratified, but as this is
an experimental trip we do not think it prudent to hold you longer. As
you grow accustomed to unusual conditions gradually we will prolong
our journeys, but now we must return you to your Earth home, and if we
may find you sufficiently vitalized, to-morrow, at the hour of 9.30,
we again will come for you, and we promise you that your experience of
to-day is but the beginning of a series of the same, which will greatly
add not only to your pleasure, but to the profit of many, for whose
benefit our journeys have been planned.

Now, Earthward, George. Yes, the sensation of moving with such
tremendous velocity is peculiar. To move so swiftly as to experience a
sensation of immobility is quite beyond the conception of mortals, who
cannot conceive the fact of an ever-present now in a spaceless universe.

Here you are in your quiet room, and none the worse for your starward
journey. Now you are in your normal state and I have something to say
to you.

For a reason that later on you will appreciate, _you are not to read
what your conscious self has been made, and will yet be made to write_.
Do you understand? Then at the conclusion of each journey put away
whatever may have been written, and in some coming time together we
will read it, and then you will comprehend why I make this request.

May divine and loving influences guide and guard you. Au revoir.




CHAPTER II.

SPECIAL FEATURES OF MARS.


De L'Ester--Again we have the pleasure of greeting you and of observing
your attempt to secure yourself from intrusion, and we urge upon you
the imperative necessity of continuing this precaution. Now, assume a
comfortable position. How close your eyes and endeavor to compose your
too active mind by joining us in harmonizing prayer.

Eternal Infinite Intelligence! Eternal Infinite Energy, we, Thy
children, desire to come into conscious relation with Thee. Unto Thee
we offer our loving, reverent adoration, and Thou wilt guide us in all
our ways. Amen, amen.

George, for a little while, we will move slowly, so that madame may
more clearly observe the scene below us. To physical vision the Earth's
surface would appear somewhat depressed, but to our spirit vision this
illusion is not apparent. To mortals, at this altitude, the atmosphere
would be too rarefied and too cold to be endurable, but, as you
perceive, Spirits sufficiently evolved, are not subject to physical
conditions. How deep is Earth's atmosphere? He who estimates the depth
of the _oxygenated_ portion of Earth's atmospheric envelope at ten
English miles may safely add another half-mile, and the entire depth
of Earth's atmosphere is so greatly in excess of what your scientists
conceive it to be that on your account I a little hesitate to say that
it runs into hundreds of miles, and through the activities of natural
forces ever it is deepening. Yes, necessarily, all inhabited Planets
possess oxygenated atmospheric envelopes, but you are not to confound
atmosphere with ether, which fills all interstellar space, _and is
substance_, but so refined as to be imperceptible to physical sense.

Upon all the planets of our solar system, our glowing, radiant Sun
sheds its life-preserving beams. Its magnetic waves, pouring across
space, quicken into activity latent energies, thus making progress
in all directions not only possible, but inevitable. Mars, being
many millions of miles further away from the Sun than is our Planet
necessarily it receives less direct solar heat. On the other hand,
Mars' atmosphere is such as to both receive and retain an amount of
solar heat sufficient to render its climatic conditions very favorable
for its various life expressions, and being much older, and hence, in
proportion to its bulk, _far more magnetic than Earth_, its density,
as compared with that of Earth, much less, its atmosphere rarer and
lighter, it follows that to a limited degree its climatic conditions
vary from those of Earth. Still, as you will have opportunity to
observe, the temperature of its different zones is not greatly unlike
that of the various corresponding zones of our own Planet.

Yes, the panorama now below us is a reminder of many similar views on
various portions of our far distant World, which, to our vision, now
appears as a rather diminutive, luminous sphere in immensity of space.

Certainly, madame, ask such questions as may occur to you, to which, as
we slowly move onward, I shall to the utmost of my ability reply.

No, the depth and quality of a Planet's atmosphere does not altogether
depend upon the age of the Planet. With both its quantity and its
qualities other factors are concerned. Were not this true, Mars'
atmosphere, relatively, would be deeper than that of Earth.

As a fact, the depth of Mars' _oxygenated_ atmosphere is rather under
half the depth of that of Earth. As to its qualities you already are
informed. Yes, equability of temperature characterizes the various
regions of Mars, only at the equator, and on either side for about
seven hundred English miles, can the temperature be considered high,
and even at the equator the heat is less torrid than in a corresponding
latitude on our Planet. Disintegration and attrition have so worn away
Mars' mountain ranges and other elevations that they offer slight
diversions for its air currents. Through ethereal disturbances cyclonic
storms occur, but at rare intervals. A noticeable peculiarity of
Mars' atmosphere, which later will attract your observation, is its
extreme humidity, which ancient Mars spirits have told me increases
as the Planet ages. Even the polar regions are under the influence of
this exceptionally humid condition, and there, during the year, snow
falls nearly continuously. As spring approaches, at the north pole
vast accumulations of ice and snow begin to melt, and as the season
advances, immense volumes of water threaten to inundate portions of the
Planet. Against such a calamity wise provision has been made, but of
this presently you will become better informed.

We near our destination, and now, gently descending, we stand upon
solid ground. Madame, we salute you, and welcome you to a land visited
for the first time by a spirit yet embodied in the physical form. The
energetic and adventurous American is a born pioneer, so it seems quite
in keeping with your national tendency that you are here.

Medium--It may be quite in keeping with my nationality to be
adventurous, but I confess that at this moment I do not feel very
courageous.

De L'Ester--Fear not. Many times you shall come hither, returning to
Earth safely. You wish to know on what portion of Mars we now are? I
can only reply in this manner: Relatively we are in about the same
latitude and longitude as is St. Louis. For purposes of comparison,
and for the instruction not only of yourself, but of some who possibly
may read these pages, we have decided that it will be well to afford
you a glimpse of Mars' interior, so you will stand beside me while I
shall endeavor to direct your spirit perception, and that you may more
readily comprehend what I shall say I shall make use of such terms
as our Earth scientists have established. In succession, the Azoic,
the Silurian, the Devonian, the Carboniferous, the Reptilian, the
Mammalian, and the crowning Age of Man have carried Mars and Earth
to their present states of evolution. As we perceive, the merging of
one age into another was through such imperceptible degrees that it
is not possible to note lines of demarcation, yet we easily can trace
the wondrous vestiges of the passing ages up to the appearance of the
evolved human animal man, of whom, at another time, I shall further
inform you.

Yes, gold, silver, copper, iron, tin, in short, all the minerals with
which Earth abounds, are equally abundant as constituents of Mars, and
like our planet, Mars contains vast stores of mineral salts, which in
solution form nature's remedial springs.

Naturally, as cooling of the Planet has proceeded, the primitive
stratum has deepened, and as we perceive within its compass is a vast
volume of highly heated matter, which, to a degree, corresponds with
the interior of the World upon which you so serenely dwell.

Very true, to one unaccustomed to such a view, it appears amazing and
awe-inspiring.

Following the Devonian age the dank atmosphere was laden with noxious
gases, and the fauna and flora of this Planet attained to gigantic
proportions. This was the Carboniferous age, during which largely the
coal fields were formed, and I may say that during a corresponding age
of Earth like causes produced like effects. All over this planet, in
various localities, deposits of coal abound, and through unnumbered
centuries, it served for the Marsians the purposes of fuel and
illumination.

Now, madame, turn away your gaze from yonder fiery abysses and allow it
to rest upon pleasanter views.

From the slight elevation on which we stand we gaze upon a very
attractive scene. Stretching away into the distance are level plains,
sustaining luxuriant verdure and a wealth of grains and other
vegetation. The plains are dotted with towns and villages and animals
of several kinds are grazing in the nearby inclosed fields.

A silvery haze veils the distant landscape, partly revealing, partly
obscuring its exquisite beauty, and in all directions the land is
abloom with many-hued flowers, each exhaling a fragrance all its own.
Nature adorned as a queen demands her rightful measure of homage, and
thus we salute thee, thou beauteous expression of the Infinite Good.

The ceaseless activities of nature accomplish manifold wonders, and in
the peculiar looking animals under the shade of yonder great trees we
observe one that may surprise you. Madame, we will draw nearer them.
At times I forget that your vision is not as far reaching as our own.
You will allow me to assist you. Do you now see them clearly? Yes?
Then for a little we will pause here. Your amazement does not at all
surprise us, for indeed those creatures are strangely formed, colored
and clothed. We desire that you shall attempt a description of that one
standing apart from the others.

Medium--But where shall I begin? With its head? Certainly that is its
strongest, strangest feature, and it is formed very like the head of a
giraffe, but its enormous horns, curved spirally, extend upward, and
its ears are small and drooping. No one on Earth ever will believe me
when I say that its large, gentle eyes are placed, one in the front,
the other in the back of its head, yet truly they are there. Its neck
is very like that of a horse, but rather longer, and its shoulders are
much higher than its haunches. It is covered with short, reddish brown
hair, perhaps I should say wool, for it is rough and crinkled, and on
the end of its tail, which nearly touches the ground, is a great tuft
of long, crinkled hair. Its mane is short, thick and upright, and both
mane and tail are of a lighter tint of brown than is its body. At its
shoulders it is the height of an ordinary horse, but its long neck and
its great horns extending upward adds to its apparent height. I cannot
imagine a more grotesque looking animal. I wonder what purpose it may
serve?

George Brooks--I should say, to illustrate that when nature sets about
it she can turn out enigmas difficult of solution. Another reason for
the existence of such queer-looking animals may be that nature intends
them as a background on which to exhibit the good looking ones, for
grazing near yonder clump of shrubbery is an exceptionally handsome
animal.

De L'Ester--George, you may not be either a philosopher or scientist,
but certainly you are original.

Madame, will you also attempt a description of this animal?

Medium--I shall do my best, and where I fail you will prompt me. This
animal reminds me of a horse, but it is larger than any horse I ever
have seen. Its head is well proportioned to the size of its body and
is as delicately formed as the head of a deer. Its ears are erect,
pointed, rather small and set closely to its head. Its eyes are large,
gentle and beautiful. Its neck is rather short, but symmetrical, and
fringed with a long, silken mane. Its legs are well proportioned and
its hoofs are daintily formed and semi-transparent. Its tail, almost
sweeping the ground, is covered with long hair the color of its mane,
which is a very dark brown, and its body is clothed with hair of a
lighter shade of brown, rather, I should say, with shades of brown and
white arranged in spots, like those of a leopard. I think it a very
handsome animal. Is my description at all accurate?

De L'Ester--Quite so; and this animal is a Lûm[a:], and the other is
a Vetson. As I already have intimated on this Planet there are in its
animal kingdom forms bearing striking resemblances to some existing
on Earth, but owing to Planetary conditions they are of a larger type
than their kindred of our Planet. You are to remember _that all life
germs are homogeneous_, their varying expressions being the result
of varying conditions. Thus throughout the myriad life expressions
of different Planets there are endless strong resemblances. Why not?
The conditions of the several Planets of our Solar System are not so
utterly dissimilar as some of your learned persons declare them to be.
And mark what I shall say: On Earth's physical plane there are at this
time re-embodied ones whose inherent qualities will within the next
half-century enable them to give to Earth's peoples undreamed of facts
concerning other Worlds. Facts which will necessitate a _readjustment
of accepted scientific conclusions_. Yes, necessarily, resemblances
between the fauna and flora of Mars and Earth are closer than between
those of any other two Planets of our Solar System. I say necessarily,
for the reason that like produces like, and the conditions of Mars and
Earth, being more nearly similar than are the corresponding conditions
of any of their Planetary kindred, it follows that their productions
must keep pace with conditions.

Another question? Certainly, but I must make a brief reply. Throughout
the animal and vegetable kingdoms of all inhabited Planets structural
divergences ever have marked the lines of evolution, _the human animal
alone excepted_. True, the human animal evolves through all the
gradations of animal existence, but unlike other animals, he diverges
neither to the right nor to the left. _His specific, inherent energy
impelling him ever onward, ever upward and straight ahead._ Man is the
culmination not only of forces but of qualities which set him apart
from all other physical existences. _He is the apex of intelligent
direction, the final, expression of God in form, not only on Mars and
Earth, but in the human everywhere._

We will now proceed, observing as we move onward whatever may be
instructive or interesting. Embowered in yonder grove of magnificent
trees is a stately dwelling. We will approach it more nearly, we even
may enter it, for I doubt not, madame, we might find in it much that
to you would be new and of interest. From its dimensions and imposing
style we may conclude that it is the home of persons of wealth and
distinction. For a little we will pause under the shade of these great
trees, which impart a sense of restfulness.

Medium--You speak of a "sense of restfulness." May I ask do spirits,
like mortals, experience a sense of fatigue?

De L'Ester--What I mean by a sense of restfulness is a state of
tranquillity, through which a Spirit comes into harmonious relations
with its surroundings. _Spirits do not become wearied as expressed
by the word fatigue_, but upon entering the physical plane, Spirits,
to a certain extent, take on the conditions with which they come in
contact, and they experience what may be termed _a sense of unrest or
inharmony_, and in exact proportion to the progress attained by Spirits
is this sense of unrest accentuated. _Hence, Spirits of the higher
spirit realms seldom enter the physical plane._ Have I made the matter
clear to your comprehension?

Medium--Perfectly so.

De L'Ester--We now will look at this massive and really fine structure.
As it is a good example of the many imposing residences to be found
throughout this North temperate region, it shall serve as an object
lesson for you, madame, and I shall take upon myself a description of
its exterior.

A large structure of gray stone, extending on either side of a central
entrance for at least forty feet. The entrance, which is wide and
lofty, is approached by a fine flight of stone steps, leading easily
up to it. Artistic and elaborate sculpture frames in the doorway,
and on either side of the entrance are sculptured life-size forms
in bas-relief. Their upturned eyes and upreaching hands lead one to
conclude that they represent a guardian God and Goddess.

The entire front is pierced by many large windows surrounded by wide
bands of intricate sculptured designs. Story above story to the height
of four, the central portion of the building rises, and on either side
of it are wings, two stories in height. Its entire front is beautified
by traceries of delicate sculpture, among which are groups of life
forms of various kinds. No doubt these forms hold certain meanings, and
we regret that our Mars friends have not yet joined us, as they might
enlighten us in this direction.

We now will move around to the right. Ah, here is a sort of annex and
evidently devoted to pious purposes. Being a Frenchman I would term it
une Temple, and you, madame, would name it a Chapel. It appears to be
an extension of the dwelling, but really is quite a separate structure,
which later on we will examine. As we perceive, these spacious and
comfortable apartments at the rear of the dwelling are occupied by the
domestics. As you, madame, are aware, to most Earth dwellers, Spirits
are invisible; to the Marsians they are even less so, so we safely may
enter the dwelling to have a view of the interior, but, George, you are
to play no pranks to startle the occupants.

We will enter at the front. What a beautiful interior. This grand
staircase, rising from this central hall, is fine enough for a royal
palace. Evidently an able architect designed this dwelling, and
intelligent and cultivated persons occupy it.

How very quiet it is. What is it, George? Not a soul in the house?
Better so, for really this seems a sort of intrusion, all the more so
were the occupants at home. Now, madame, which part of the dwelling
shall we first investigate? Ah, we might have guessed that, as you are
such a devoted housewife. To the kitchen then, but I shall expect you
to describe this apartment, as really it is more than I am equal to.

Medium--I fear that I also am unequal to a description of it. It
appears to be better fitted for chemical experiments than for a
kitchen. What a large, sunny, airy room it is and what a variety
of utensils. I cannot even guess at the uses of many of them. Am I
mistaken in supposing that these bowls and platters and some of these
pretty vessels are of gold and silver? No? Then those metals must be
very plentiful, or the owner of this residence very rich. As sure as I
live here is a weighing apparatus, and in design not very unlike one I
use in my own kitchen. What are you saying, George? That one touch of
nature makes worlds akin. Well, while this is not a touch of nature, it
has a wonderfully homelike appearance. And here is a cooking range, but
it is not designed for the use of coal, wood or gas. I wonder what kind
of fuel these people use? De L'Ester, can you enlighten me?

De L'Ester--Since a very remote time the people of this Planet have
for heating, lighting and as a motive power used electricity. In this
instance it is the heating agent.

Medium--And Earth's peoples, who regard themselves as highly evolved
humans, are only beginning to learn of the many uses to which it may
be applied. One cannot question the fact that the same metals used on
Earth are used on Mars, for here are vessels and utensils of gold,
silver, iron, copper, tin, and what looks like brass, and of alloys new
to me. Then here are vessels which I shall call porcelain, and there
are various other wares similar to some with which I am familiar. I
cannot find words to express my amazement at all this, it seems so
utterly incredible, and yet I cannot question the evidence of my own
senses. A woman with a genius for cooking would be enchanted with this
kitchen. Is the dining-room as well worth seeing?

De L'Ester--It may be, but the family being absent, to an extent it is
dismantled, so we prefer that you should not see it. Then, too, we have
in mind a certain dining-hall which we purpose showing to you.

Now we will look through the rooms at the front of the dwelling. We
will enter this one on the right. What a superb apartment, so spacious,
so sumptuously furnished. Art and luxurious appointments combined
have produced charming effects. Here, and elsewhere, we anticipate
the pleasure of showing you many evidences of the wealth and culture
of the Marsians. Before proceeding further we desire to inform you
of something which, for a reason, until now, we have withheld. This
Planet, known to Earth's peoples as Mars, is, by its inhabitants, known
as Ento, which, in their language, signifies CHOSEN, or SET APART.
They believe that as an expression of His love, Andûmana, the Supreme
One, created Ento, and that when their home was prepared for their
occupation He created His children, who with other living things should
manifest the power and greatness of His Divinity. In future we will
speak of the Planet as Ento, and of its peoples as Entoans, and during
our journeyings and investigations you will learn that on Ento there is
a state of civilization and consequent culture quite in advance of that
of our own immature Planet.

Observe now those paintings. What marvellous creations they are. And
those sculptured forms, so beautiful, so true to nature. Only the mind
of a genius and the hand of a master could have conceived and executed
either of them.

Here is a masterpiece. I know not what title the artist may have given
it. I shall name it "Love's Awakening." It represents the sculptured
form of a young girl just budding into womanhood. How charming is the
angelic expression of her upturned eyes and smiling lips. The face,
no longer that of a child, yet scarcely that of a woman, is rarely
beautiful. She seems to be listening to Love's first whisperings, and
almost one can fancy her lovely mouth tremulous.

So eloquent is the silence of her slightly parted lips, that in
expectant attention, one listens for the faint murmurings of a soul
awakened to the infinite possibilities of the passion, which welds into
a unit all things animate and inanimate. Observe that the drapery,
half concealing, half revealing the exquisite form, is as transparent
as a mist wreath. Truly it is a marvellous expression of art. These
friends and I are not unused to the finest representations of art
of many planets, yet seldom have we seen a piece of sculpture equal
this; still less seldom have we seen one surpassing it in design, or
excellence of execution.

No, madame, the extent of this collection is not unusual, for the
Entoans are liberal patrons of the arts. But we will look further.

Here, on a grassy knoll, is a group of three quite young boys, their
forms lightly clothed in loose garments, which but partly conceal their
rounded, shapely limbs. The middle, and larger boy, holds on his knees
a book, from which apparently he reads a stirring story, to which the
other boys listen with rapt attention, their beautiful faces expressing
liveliest emotion. Notwithstanding that this group does not strongly
appeal to the imagination, there is that which obliges one to feel that
in it the sculptor has embodied much love and a reverence for art.

Now we will learn what this draped recess may contain. Ah, a
descriptive composition, and in _tinted_ marble. Not an agreeable
representation, but an instructive reminder of a religious rite of
happily bygone centuries.

Before us is an altar, on which lies the draped form of a young girl,
her eyes closed as though in sleep. The loose robe drawn aside from her
bosom reveals the contours of a maiden in the first blush of womanhood.
At her side, holding in his upraised hand a long, keen bladed knife,
which he is about to thrust into the heart of the unconscious
victim, stands an aged, majestic looking Priest, his crimson robe in
strong contrast to the white robed, golden-haired girl, who is to be
sacrificed by knife and flames to an imaginary god or gods.

While one must admire the consummate art which so faithfully has
represented this scene, one shudderingly turns from it, as being a
horrible reminder of the many crimes and cruelties, which in the name
of Religion, have been, and still are perpetrated.

Madame, it is a lamentable truth, that incorrect conceptions of the
attributes of the Supreme One, ever are allied to cruelty. This
statement applies not only to Ento, and Earth, but to all Planets
inhabited by humans. It is only when man has become highly evolved,
that spirit, the ego, dominates the animal soul, and God is apprehended
as love, not hate.

Ancient Ento spirits, and others of comparatively modern times, have
informed us concerning their religious rites and customs, which during
the passing centuries have, with the exception of the sacrificial
rite, remained almost unchanged. They relate that the victims of that
horrible rite generally were drugged into unconsciousness, yet at
times, willing victims, hoping thereby to appease the offended Gods,
and thus avert some calamity, went consciously, courageously, to their
death. Though deploring the ignorant fanaticism of such an act, one
feels impelled to admire the heroic and generous nature of one willing
to yield his or her life as a sacrifice for the real or fancied good of
others.

In this adjoining recess is another composition, scarcely less
pathetic, but devoid of the element of cruelty. On a large malachite
base is a stone altar, on which lies the nearly nude body of a dead
boy, and over and about him is a mass of inflammable material, bursting
into flames. Thus in very ancient times the Entoans disposed of their
dead. It is a very realistic representation of a custom of remote
times, and certainly is not the production of an artist of recent days.
Yes, incineration of their dead, is with the Entoans, a universal
custom but during many centuries it has been accomplished in a more
scientific, and less repellent manner.

You still express surprise, that the Entoans, physically, are formed as
are we, and the peoples of our Planet. My dear madame, believe me, when
I reiterate, that _humans_, no matter of what Planet, are essentially
the same. Disabuse your mind, now, and for all time, of the idea,
that necessarily, different Planets must produce entirely different
expressions of life. One Intelligent Energy directs the universe, and
one universal Law prevails. Should you visit Venus, Jupiter, or indeed
any Planet inhabited by _humans_, you would find _man_, only as you
know him. Evolved, it is true, on some Planets, to a higher spiritual,
consequently to a more perfected physical plane, and a more advanced
state of civilization. Spiritualized humans are the expressions
of spirit entities. These spirit entities must act within their
limitations, and _never, never_, by any possibility, does a _spirit_
entity take possession of any other than the evolved _human_ organism.
_Spirit knows no such negation as retrogression._ When _man_ on any
Planet has evolved to a certain condition, or degree, he becomes a
partially self-conscious _soul_, and then he walks erect. Ages pass and
he becomes a Spiritualized Being, Spiritualized through the incarnation
in him of a Spirit entity, which enables him to fully _recognize
himself_. Not until then, is he evolved into the Spiritualized
IMMORTAL--THE GOD MAN, as are all Spiritualized MEN everywhere.

Nay, you owe me no apology. I quite understand your mental state, and
desire that you shall ask such questions as naturally must occur to you.

Observe now the very beautiful hangings of this apartment. They are of
thick, lustrous silk, and their rich shades of crimson and gold form
an excellent background for these superb paintings and marbles. It is
to be regretted that limited time and space will not admit of a more
detailed description of the many works of art in this collection. As
it is, we must content ourselves with glances here and there. We think
it advisable to notice this large painting, which vividly illustrates
another feature of the sacrificial observance. It represents the
interior of a richly ornate temple, and on a raised space stands a
number of Priests and Priestesses, clothed in long, flowing, crimson
and yellow garments. With the exception of three Priests, who are brown
haired, blue eyed, and fair skinned, all are very dark hued. The hair
of the younger, dark complexioned Priests is very black, and worn quite
to their shoulders, and that of the aged ones is as white as wool, and
worn in the same fashion. Around the heads of all are narrow fillets
of gold, binding back their flowing locks. On these fillets, directly
over the forehead, are golden suns, the points of the rays tipped with
yellow jewels--topazes, I should say--and the centre of each sun is
what appears to be a fine ruby, encircled by topazes.

The Priestesses are young, dark skinned, and dark eyed, and their
long black hair falls loosely toward their feet, which are concealed
by their crimson and yellow robes. Around their heads are fillets,
corresponding with those worn by the Priests. In the foreground are
a number of youths and maidens, and back of them a throng of men and
women, all with anxious, terror stricken faces. Well may the eyes and
faces of the assemblage be full of fear, for some one's child will be
selected as a sacrifice to their Gods, whose dwelling place is beyond
the clouds which veil the portals of Astranol[a:], lest impious,
inquiring eyes gazing upward, may behold what mortals may not see, and
live.

This painting depicts a scene once of frequent occurrence, but during
four centuries past the horrible cruelty has not been practiced.

We now will pass into the adjoining apartment. This appears to be a
sort of lounging room, in which form and color combined have produced
some fine effects. Over the lofty corniced windows and doorways,
velvet-like, crimson drapery falls in graceful folds. Luxurious divans
line the cream tinted walls, over which sprays of lovely, dainty
blossoms are scattered. The floor is a mosaic of exquisite effects.
The field, a rich cream color, the designs, graceful, lifelike flower
pieces, united by trailing vines. A deep border of aquatic plants,
grasses and vining lily blooms, forms a fitting frame to the lovely
floor picture, over which very beautiful rugs are disposed.

This large and massive table, so exquisitely carved, and inlaid with
rare colored woods, in a design partly arabesque, partly floral, is
indeed a thing of beauty, but more beautiful still is this superb vase,
occupying its raised centre.

These portfolios of pictured illustrations we can only glance at. Yes,
in conception, coloring, and execution, they are highly meritorious.
The same may be said of these handsomely bound volumes. You had
not thought to find books on Ento? Why not, madame? Do not you yet
comprehend that the inherent attributes of the genus homo, not only
_impels_, but inevitably _compels_ him in one common direction? This
is a universal law, and there is no escape from it. As I already have
declared, its expression, wherever demonstrated, is essentially the
same. We doubt not that many things we shall show you on Ento will
surprise you, more by their likeness than by their unlikeness, to what
may be found on our Planet.

The entire ornamentation and appointments of this apartment are rather
quiet in tone, but _le tout ensemble_, is very refined and beautiful.

George is so urgent to hasten our movements that I suspect he is up
to some mischief. Yes, yes, we are coming. George, George, you are
incorrigible; it is not surprising that madame is startled, for this
figure is wonderfully lifelike, and what an odd conceit, to use one of
its long arms to hold back this heavy drapery.

Medium--Really, for a moment, I thought it a living creature. Does it
represent a human being? It looks very like one.

De L'Ester--Truly it does appear very human, but it represents a
species of Ento anthropoid, so intelligent, that frequently it is
trained for simple requirements, mostly of a domestic nature. As later
on, you will see living specimens of the same creature, I shall not
now describe it. Enough cannot be said of the fidelity with which the
artificer has reproduced the form, coloring, and expression of the
living animal. Of what metal is it made? Of a composition of copper and
tin, and if you choose, you may call it bronze, for that is what it is.
Yes, the enamelling is very fine, the tinting is true to nature.

Here is a collection of miniature paintings, and be assured that these
illustrations of Ento female loveliness are not at all exaggerated.
Some are types of the blonde, blue eyed Northern races, others of the
dark skinned, lovely women of the Orient, with eyes as dark and liquid
as quiet pools in shady nooks. As you perceive, all are arrayed in
graceful flowing garments, unlike the hideous robes worn by even the
most highly civilized women of our Planet.

Ah, what a gem! We cannot pass this by unnoticed. Madame, you will
carefully observe this painting, as some time you may have occasion to
recall a memory of it. In the foreground is a youth in the early flush
of manhood, whose shapely head is crowned with black hair waving down
to his shoulders, and bound away from his fine forehead by a jewelled
silver fillet. His smiling, parted lips, form a perfect Cupid's bow,
and above them is a nose as straight and finely formed as ever graced
the face of a Grecian statue. A robe of azure blue, bordered with
silver embroidery, clothes his very tall, graceful form, and falls
in artistic lines to his sandalled feet. Looped high on his left
shoulder is a loose sleeve drapery, caught into folds by a jewelled
ornament, indicating that this youth is of exalted rank. Bending
slightly forward, he smilingly listens to the words of a young girl,
reclining on a low couch, who is costumed in a soft, clinging, white
robe, which scarcely conceals the outlines of a fragile but perfect
form. Her golden hair, which is caught back from her low, wide, white
forehead, by a silver fillet, adorned with sapphires no bluer than her
lovely eyes, seems to have caught sunlight in its tresses, as it falls
in rippling masses over her shoulders and onto the floor, where it
lies in golden confusion, on a rug of rich, dark hued fur. She is as
fair as the youth is dark, and in her beautiful face is the innocence
and mirthfulness of the child, with the promise, too, of a gracious
womanhood. Remember these faces, for one day you may see the originals.

How true it is that art expressions are the mute speech of genius, and
genius is but another name for inspiration. It has been said "back of
the artist is art, and back of art is that which men name God." That is
a fine expression of the unity of things.

George, Agassiz, Humboldt, hasten here. Ah! you too, recognize, this
scene, Is not it an agreeable surprise? Madame, I will explain. This
is a most exact representation of a locality these friends and I have
visited. Rather recently we with some scientific and other persons
were, for a certain purpose, making a tour of Ento, and while slowly
journeying toward a distant portion of the planet we found ourselves
passing over the spot illustrated by this painting. It attracted our
attention, and descending, we found it such a quiet, tranquil spot that
unanimously we named it the Valley of Repose. With wonderful fidelity
and consummate art the painter has reproduced the lovely scene. Stand
here, madame, and I will attempt to describe it.

A spacious valley surrounded on three sides by gently rising uplands,
which in long gone ages were portions of a mountain range. From a rocky
formation in the upper end of the valley debouches a considerable
volume of water, forming this sparkling stream, which empties itself
into yonder pretty lake, dotted with tiny islands. Those rather
fragile looking bridges thrown from island to island form continuous
passageways to either side of the valley. The villages dotting the
rim of the lake, and those white structures on the larger islands, to
one's imagination suggest flocks of white plumaged water fowl nestling
amid the luxuriant greenery. Boats laden with the products of labor.
Crews intent upon landing their crafts. Other boats carrying pleasure
seekers, who call to passing friends, fill up the animated picture.
Gazing with admiring eyes upon the lovely scene, we tarried awhile
under these great trees laden with sweet scented blooms.

You may like to know that this valley is in the North Temperate Zone,
in latitude and longitude corresponding nearly to that of the northern
central portion of your State of Tennessee. Being sheltered by the
uplands, the climate is very genial, and the loamy soil produces
grains, vegetables and fruits in great abundance.

Continually artists frequent this valley to sketch its beauties, and
the painter of this picture, who signs himself as Lafon Thēdoss[a:],
has literally transferred the lake and its surroundings to his canvas.
It seems as though we have met face to face a well known friend.

My dear madame, do not vex yourself that we cannot use your organism
for all purposes. Were we engaged in a purely scientific work it would
be altogether necessary that we should have a Sensitive through whom we
might express technicalities pertaining to matters under investigation
or discussion. All along we have fully understood your limitations,
as well as your extremely skeptical and cautious nature, and we
well know that should we attempt to express through you statistics,
technicalities, latitude, longitude, and other matters your nearly
morbid dread of making mistakes would render you so positive that we
could not use you at all. At present we are quite satisfied with what
we can accomplish through you, and we anticipate a time when you shall
have so developed that we shall be able to use you for ends you little
dream of. So we pray you to fret no more that you are not equal to our
wishes, for you quite satisfy our requirements.

We must not hold you longer to-day. Gradually you are adjusting
yourself to present conditions and ere long we may lengthen our visits
to this Planet, but now at once you must be returned to your Earth
home. There are indications that the occupants of this residence are
about to return to it, so endeavor to hold yourself in readiness, for
we may come for you at an unusual hour. Now, George, Earthward. Not
another question, madame. We must not allow you to become exhausted.

Safely arrived, and some one is knocking at your door. May loving
angels have you in their keeping. Au revoir.




CHAPTER III.

ENTO, AND ENTOANS.


De L'Ester--To our faithful comrade we tender our greetings, and an
apology for our early appearance. You will arrange quickly for our
departure, for the family have returned, and we desire to visit them
ere day dawn on Ento. Madame, you have not locked the rear door of the
room, and some one might disturb you, which would not be well for you.
Now you are comfortably seated, and will endeavor to tranquillize your
disturbed equilibrium. We feared that our somewhat abrupt _entrée_
might startle you. George, I think that madame may find herself
sufficiently sustained, through simply resting on your extended arm.
You are rapidly growing stronger, madame, and accustomed, too, to
the peculiar conditions of your unusual phase of Mediumship, and we
anticipate that soon you will overcome the timidity you at times
experience.

Now you are quieted, and we at once may begin our journey. Upward now,
and outward. You are at ease, madame? That is well.

Yonder is the Planet Venus, regal, beautiful Queen of the Earth-night.
And in the northwest is the grand constellation known to you as The
Great Dipper--whose family of worlds, like Ento, and Earth, pursue
their law compelling ways. Four of them are peopled with humans, far
in advance of those of either Earth or Ento. In every direction are
myriads of Worlds, inhabited by human beings in various stages of
evolvement. Throughout limitless space are Suns and Systems of worlds,
varying in bulk, and of diverse conditions, yet through intelligently
directed energy, each shining wonder traverses pathless space, in
conformity with unvarying law. In striving to conceive an idea of the
universe, one is overwhelmed by its boundless immensity. Only Infinite
Intelligence can compass a thought so far beyond the limit of the
finite mind.

We near the residence, and now will descend. Yes, near the fountain,
George. Madame, you perceive that there are lights in portions of the
house. With the Entoans it is a universal custom to keep lights burning
during the night. Later on, you will learn their reason for doing this.
There are no developed clairvoyants in this family; of that we have
assured ourselves. In what manner? Well, previous to coming for you
we investigated their condition. We now will enter the home, so that
you, madame, may obtain a general view of the apartments and their
occupants, on the second floor.

The front room to the left, George, and you, madame, will please
describe whatever may attract your attention.

Medium--This is a large, almost square room, elegantly, yet rather
scantily furnished; that is, it is not overfurnished. The ceiling is
lofty, of the tint of old ivory, and decorated in a delicate design of
wreaths and sprays of foliage and flowers. The walls also are ivory
tinted, but of a deeper shade than the ceiling, and are decorated in
designs harmonizing with those of the ceiling. On the highly polished
floor, which is of some light, rose colored wood, are fine Oriental
looking rugs, and there is a very handsome divan, and some richly
upholstered chairs, and a large, beautifully carved wood table, and a
massive dressing bureau, which is built into the wall, and on it
are many pretty toilet articles, some of which have a very familiar
appearance. Near the one lofty, wide, front window, in an ornamental
tub, is a large growing plant, which looks like some species of palm,
but is unlike any palm I know of. It bears an enormous truss of lovely
scarlet flowers, which give out a fragrance resembling that of the
hyacinth. I am pleased that it is to be included in the illustrations
of Ento's flora.

[Illustration: RUVACC[A:] PLIMOS]

De L'Ester--It is not related to the palm family. Observe carefully the
forms of both calyx and flower, and you will consider its Ento name,
Ruvacc[a:] plimos, quite appropriate. You may name it trumpet flower.
Now, madame, you will proceed.

Medium--How shall I describe the sleeping occupant of this beautiful
couch? I am at a loss for words that might do justice to this
revelation of Ento female loveliness. Allow me to be silent, De
L'Ester, while you, who are more competent than am I, shall attempt the
impossible.

De L'Ester--As you will, madame, though I confess to an unwillingness,
to attempt through words to convey an idea of the appearance of
this extremely beautiful woman. The invasion of the privacy of her
apartment, to you, seems an impertinence. But that you may learn many
things pertaining to the Entoans, we must use means at our command, so
I think we may be pardoned for this intrusion.

The woman sleeping upon this shell shaped couch is young, and indeed
"tall, and divinely fair." Below a wide, shapely forehead, shaded by
flossy curls, long, silken lashes fringe white eyelids concealing
large, luminous blue eyes. A profusion of golden brown hair lies in
curling, waving masses, over snowy pillow, and bare, blue veined,
white throat. Her complexion is as fair and rosy as pink rose petals,
for this is not one of Ento's dark skinned beauties, but one of a
Northland race. In her sleep she dreams and smiles, her slightly parted
lips revealing a hint of two rows of pearls, in keeping with this shell
shaped couch, so closely inlaid with pearl that one can imagine it the
former abode of some great ocean creature and the white fleecy covering
of its present occupant the foam of storm tossed waters.

Fair dreamer, may you long experience joyous awakenings to happy days
and happier years!

We now will pass to the apartment across the hallway.

The dimensions of this chamber are the same as those of the one we have
but now left, and the decorations and furnishing is much the same, the
noticeable exception being this low, broad couch, of some fine wood,
artistically inlaid with a variety of colored woods in a floral design.
Its corners are held by heavy, ornamental silver clasps, which add much
to its sumptuous beauty. Lying on it in a profound sleep, is a man of
apparently middle age, and though quite dark skinned, he is extremely
handsome. He is very tall, and finely formed, as are all of his race,
and in his quiet face one reads dignity of character, and gentleness.
Through his black, silken, curling beard one perceives that he has
finely curved lips, and that his black, abundant curling hair graces an
admirably statuesque head, neck and shoulders. Yes, all Entoans have
abundant hair. Their head covering, which seldom is worn, is not of a
kind to destroy the growth of their hair.

This man is a fine specimen of a race known as the Hovan[a:], and
doubtless were he awake, and clear-seeing, he would find himself
greatly surprised, if not alarmed, on perceiving a group of strange
appearing persons gazing upon him so intently. Adieu, monsieur, and
should we again meet, may it be under more favorable conditions for a
mutual acquaintance.

A bath and dressing room adjoins this apartment, which now we will
examine.

Quite a large, and well appointed room, with floor of very beautiful
marble, its whiteness relieved by veinings of gray and pale rose color.
From the floor to half the height of the room the walls are of silver
richly wrought in festoons of vines and flowers of various kinds, all
suggesting aquatic growths. Thence, to the slightly curved ceiling, the
walls are of highly polished wood, of a deep rose color. The ceiling,
too, is of wood, of a paler shade of rose, and is carved in exquisite
floral designs. The bath is of snowy marble, lined with burnished
silver, which curves over, forming a broad rim. The outer surface of
the bath is chiselled into a composition of aquatic plants and grasses,
which are very artistic and effective.

Here is a large onyx dressing table, on which are various toilet
accessories of admirable designs and workmanship. Truly, "Necessity is
the mother of invention," and the necessities of humans, everywhere,
lead to very similar results, hence these familiar looking objects.

I recall that during my Earth life I imagined that if any of the
Planets might be the abodes of intelligent life forms owing to varying
conditions, necessarily such forms, and their requirements, must
altogether differ from those of Earth, and I assure you that one of the
greatest, and most pleasing surprises awaiting my renewed acquaintance
with the spirit side of life was the realization, that not only was the
genus homo of other worlds essentially like myself in appearance, but
that their characteristics, pursuits and requirements were very like
my own, and that the Spirits of all Planetary spirit worlds recognized
their common origin, and universal relationship.

Your mental state is similar to what mine was, hence you find it
difficult to realize the universal homogeneity of substance, which
under like, or similar conditions, _must_ manifest itself, in harmony
with intelligent, universal laws. I am aware, that as factors, or
potentialities, forces and qualities, known as gravity, attraction,
repulsion, density, volume, distance from Solar influences, position
of Planets, etc., are to scientific minds the pivotal points upon
which certain results must of necessity turn, and largely they are
correct. But while drawing conclusions from real or apparent facts
scientific minds seldom consider the one all-powerful factor, The
Infinite, Intelligent energy, the adjuster of causes and effects into
a harmonious whole. But really at present we have not time for either
scientific or philosophic dissertations, and I must conclude this
digression into which your remark has beguiled me by saying that on
Ento you will find the same humans, with the same requirements, as may
be found on numberless Planets.

Everywhere the man creature evolves along fixed lines, and sooner or
later this hairy-headed person requires combs, brushes, mirrors and
other appliances with which to enhance his charms or to contribute
to his comfort, his well-being or his vanity, consequently here are
veritable combs, brushes and mirrors, and here, too, is a familiar
looking cleansing preparation. You may doubt it, madame, but I swear
it is soap, and a very excellent soap it is. It is delicately scented,
too, which may indicate that my lord and his lady are somewhat dainty
in their requirements.

You may know that on our Planet, in various localities, there are
deposits of a saponaceous character. Such deposits exist not only on
Earth, but on Ento and other Planets, which affords another bit of
evidence that worlds are akin.

These bath appliances are quite admirable. Overhead are faucets with
spraying attachments for both hot and cold water, and here, at the foot
of the bath, are silver faucets for the same, and from these yawning
mouths of silver nondescript heads both cold and hot water pours
into this great silver bowl. But we cannot devote more time to this
room. Certainly, for a country house, one scarcely would expect such
luxurious appointments.

This door opens into the sleeping apartments of the wife of the
slumbering gentleman. Shall we enter it, madame? You are silent. I have
observed that curiosity is not your ruling trait. Ah, I see. You think
that we gentlemen should not intrude upon the privacy of the lady.
Then, that you may acquire certain information, I suggest that you
shall go alone, and in the hallway we will await your return.

Medium--Well, here I am, and will relate what I have seen and heard.
Asleep on a couch very like that on which the gentleman lies is a
large and very beautiful woman with a most charming expression of
countenance. Her complexion is rather dark, but much fairer than that
of her husband, and her hair is very black and luxuriant, flowing
loosely over the pillow and down on to the floor. Never have I seen
hair so abundant or so beautiful, and she has such lovely arms and
hands. On tables and on the side shelves of a magnificent dresser are
beautiful toilet articles and the loveliest jewel caskets. Of what are
the caskets made? Dear me, I cannot say, but I should think of gold
and silver. One looks like gold filagree set with different colored
stones forming flower sprays, and one appears to be of silver closely
incrusted with diamonds and rubies in a peculiar pattern. Another is
a rather large shell clasped with some kind of metal hinges, the edge
of the upper half set closely with large, lovely pink pearls, which I
should think might be worth a fortune. There are several other caskets,
but I did not observe them closely.

Clothing of beautiful texture and exquisite coloring hangs in closets
and other receptacles. There are robes of what I should call Grecian
style. Some are of a plain weave, others are brocaded in admirable
designs. Some are of silken texture, others are of wool or silk and
wool. Some are undecorated, but almost all of them are trimmed around
the neck, sleeves and hems with borders of very beautiful embroidery
of gold, silver or in colored silks, imitating foliage and flowers or
in arabesque designs, some of them set thickly with small jewels of
several kinds. They are the most beautiful garments I ever have seen.

Close by the lady's couch is a smaller one, on which lies the dearest,
loveliest child. She appears to be about four years old and is very
large for that age. I felt inclined to kiss the darling, but feared
that I might awaken her, so stood intently looking at her, when
suddenly she stirred and opened her eyes in a startled manner, crying
"Omm[a:], Omm[a:]." Instantly I retreated behind the window drapery
and peered through. The mother arose in haste and knelt beside the
child, murmuring as she caressed her, "Omm[a:] estro, Omm[a:] estro,
gentolēn[a:]. Emenol[a:] grandû, emenissema grandû." That is all I can
remember of what she said, but soon the child fell asleep, the mother
stole softly to her couch and I came away. I hope, monsieur, that I
have satisfied your curiosity.

De L'Ester--Madame, your complaisance overwhelms me. My curiosity.
Truly I do not find myself equal to an expression of my appreciation
of your effort on my behalf, and can only bow my acknowledgment. May
I ask if you looked into the apartment adjoining the one you visited?
George informs us that in it is a younger and handsomer woman than the
one you have described.

Medium--I only glanced at a very youthful and handsome girl who was
asleep on a couch. Although I realize that these persons are unaware of
our presence, I cannot avoid an unpleasant consciousness that we are
taking advantage of their unconscious state. Of course I know that idle
curiosity has nothing to do with it, and that you all are doing your
utmost to assist in my Ento education, for which you have my thanks.

George, how do you know that there is a young and handsome woman in
that room? I shall have to report you to Inez.

George--While looking through the house I came to her room, merely
glancing in as you did. Inez has too much confidence in her other self
to listen to an ill report of him; then, too, madame but jests.

While looking through this spacious dwelling and into its history, I
have learned that it is modelled in a style antedating what we will
term Ento's modern architecture. This style was in high favor four
centuries ago, Ento time and for suburban and country residences is yet
much favored. It was designed for the requirements of a large family
and has served its purpose during several generations and still is so
substantial that its massive walls may shelter generations yet to come.
At present, only the first and second floors are occupied or furnished.

From the conversation of the domestics I also have learned that the
proprietor is a distinguished Government Official, who, with his
family, resides in the Capitol and that occasionally he and they come
here for recreation and to look after his estate.

It may surprise you, my sister, to learn that all the lands of Ento are
held in trust by the government, only the improvements of an estate are
owned by the proprietors. Later on we will have occasion to further
inform you concerning this regulation.

In the Istoira is a sort of genealogical record of this family and De
L'Ester suggests that, as our time is limited, it will be well to at
once go there.

De L'Ester--We will enter by way of this inner doorway, and for a
moment we will pause here. As you may not correctly estimate the
dimensions of this Istoira, I will inform you, madame, that its
depth, including the sanctuary, is about one hundred and twenty feet;
its width about sixty feet. These private Istoiras are attached to
the residences of all large country estates and are used, not only
for religious purposes, but for placing of memorial records, and as
depositories of the ashes of the dead. As you perceive, the seats are
placed only along the sides, and facing us is a beautiful altar, back
of which falls heavy drapery concealing from view the sanctuary. In
this subdued light the white, very ornately sculptured marble altar
gleams like masses of snow flowers. In contrast to its whiteness
here are some red and yellow blooms so recently laid on it that the
atmosphere is laden with their sweet fragrance.

All over the planet at high noon and at the moment of the disappearance
of Andûman[a:]'s shining abode in the numerous Temples and Istoiras
religious observances occur. At high noon, on occasions, animals are
sacrificed and offerings of value are laid on altars. At the evening
service only grains, fruits and flowers, the sacred red and yellow
tsoina and valseta blooms are offered. Soon, we believe, sacrifices
involving animal life will be known no more on Ento.

[Illustration: ISOINA]

Medium--De L'Ester, pardon me for interrupting you. You have informed
me that the Entoans, as a whole, are more highly civilized than are
the peoples of our planet. Why, then, do they still practice these
superstitious observances?

De L'Ester--Superstition, madame, is a feature of all religions. The
Entoans who offer to Andûman[a:], or the Deific Ones, an animal as
an atonement for wrong doing, or to perhaps appease an angry God or
Goddess, are no more superstitious than the Christian who believes
in the vicarious atonement of Jesus of Nazareth, whom he regards as
an embodiment of God. In the early ages of man's evolvement (I speak
of man of any Planet) he gropes his way with uncomprehending senses
until a period arrives when he becomes a spiritualized being. Then he
looks about him. Effects present themselves to his wondering, fearful
gaze, and more or less clearly he perceives them, but as yet he is
too immature to associate effects with causes of which he has no
conception. Gradually he becomes conscious that back of effects there
appears to be an intelligent cause or causes, and in accordance with
the degree of his spiritual unfoldment he invests this cause or causes
with beneficent or maleficent qualities, frequently with both. In time
his unfolding ideas become more distinctive, and from them he evolves
two personalities, one good, the other evil. The former he reverently
adores, the latter he regards with fear and disfavor, yet with a
certain respectful consideration. The human ages and ever _intuitively_
he seeks after truth. In his uncertainty he looks this way and that,
gathering as he goes fancies which, by and by, he formulates into
facts, and these fanciful facts keep pace with his growth, and a
period arrives when he establishes a religion which is a concretion
of inherited tendencies conjoined to such legendary and other myths
as may have come his way. Further along his larger unfoldment obliges
him to discard beliefs which do not fit into his wider views which are
the logical consequences of his wider experiences, and in his unrest
he grows desperate or indifferent as to what may or may not be true.
You are aware that at this time among Earth's peoples many are in
this unhappy state of mind, and that, what is little less deplorable,
multitudes are held in the bonds of ecclesiastical legends and dogmas
which ever obscure the truth, and superstition ever is where truth is
not.

 _But the God-Man is coming; he will break his bonds asunder,
   And go marching through the ages, his gaze turned toward the blue;
 Where the Angel hosts, in tones as of reverberating thunder,
   Sing hosannahs to The Highest, who alone is true._

To the Entoans Andûman[a:], the Supreme One, is absolutely perfect,
yet his perfection admits of righteous anger against his willfully
offending children whom He, for their own good, chastises until,
realizing their culpability, they make atonement for their sinfulness.
In bygone times the atonement for sin against their Creator demanded
human sacrifice, or, perhaps an offering of their most valued
possessions, against which no one dared offer a protest.

Gods and Goddesses who are Andûman[a:]'s Ministers and Messengers, He
created less perfect than Himself, and to appease their anger or to
secure their favor sacrifices and offerings without number have been,
and are, laid upon the altars of Temples and Istoiras.

[Illustration: VALSĒT[A:]]

Certainly such beliefs are very childish, very superstitious, but
childhood conceives of childish fancies, and man on Ento and on
Earth, spiritually, is yet in swaddling clothes.

Beyond the limits of his present unfoldment his infinite possibilities
are as little understood as are abstruse utterances by a lisping child,
but intuitively, within his being, he perceives godlike attributes, and
ever he is impelled toward higher spiritual unfoldment, which is but
another expression for what is termed civilization.

On Ento, as on Earth, the Priesthood stem the tide of human progress.
Always the Priesthood are conservative, holding tenaciously to old
traditions, rites and ceremonies, and, as a rule, they are sincere
in their professions, for it is a fact that through their constant
affirmations of the tenets of their various faiths they become so
self-psychologized as to be unable to perceive beyond their established
views. Never are the Priesthood in advance of the people. It is only
when the multitudes demand larger views of truth that they yield to the
necessity of moving forward, and always under protest.

Yes, certainly, to be religious is a natural impulse; natural, because
man is a spiritualized being, the expression of Infinite Intelligence
and Infinite Energy in form.

You will allow me to repeat that notwithstanding certain features,
the Entoans as a whole are more highly evolved spiritually, hence
more highly civilized, than are the peoples of Earth. In the arts,
their attainments are productive of most excellent results. As much
may be said of the sciences, in which, with two notable exceptions,
of which presently we shall speak, they are far more learned than are
Earth's scientists. But they are dominated and restricted by their Holy
Writings, which declare that Audûman[a:], the Supreme One, ever has
been, and ever will be. That in a remote time he said, "I no longer
will dwell alone and in silence." So, out of himself he created
Astranol[a:], a beautiful realm beyond the clouds. A realm ever abloom
with loveliest flowers and watered by flowing streams as sweet as
nectar. A realm where deep darkness never comes and its dim twilight is
irradiated by the innumerable lamps of the Deific Ones, which Ento's
children may behold gleaming in the quiet night sky. A realm where
storms, sickness and death are unknown and where the air is filled with
sweetest perfumes and the land is bathed by dews which fall like clouds
of silvery mist. A realm where birds of wonderfully beautiful plumage
fill the air with melodious songs, and where no noisome thing exists.

When the creation of Astranol[a:] was completed Andûman[a:]
contemplated the expression of His will and was satisfied. Then he
spoke into existence Gods and Goddesses, who should dwell in this realm
and who should be his Ministers and Messengers, and then he created
Ento, which, in the beginning, was as beautiful as the children of His
love whom He also spoke into existence and for whom he declared Ento
should be a home for evermore. Through his Messengers he gave to them a
revelation of His will, which instructed them as to their duties toward
their Creator, toward his Messengers, toward each other, and toward all
living creatures whom He had created for their uses and pleasure. And
it was specially enjoined upon them _that no eye should ever attempt
to penetrate the cloud veil falling between them and the abode of
the dwellers in Astranol[a:]. Should any one presume to disobey this
commandment, swift vengeance would be visited upon the offender._ To
a people entertaining no conception of a continuity of existence and
to whom death is an ever present terror, curiosity is not a powerful
enough incentive to induce the Entoans to risk their chiefest treasure,
life, or to bring upon them and theirs the wrath of the offended
deities of Astranol[a:]. Thus, as a science, astronomy is unknown to
the Entoans.

The Holy Writings do not forbid an investigation into, or even allude
to, Ento's physical constitution, but for cogent reasons the learned
Priesthood ever have opposed themselves to whatever might remotely
imperil their cherished dogmas. Thus it occurs that, while many
scholars possess a minute knowledge of the science of mineralogy,
geology as a science finds small favor. No, nowhere in the Holy
Writings is there even a suggestion of human or other living sacrifice.
It was not until after a fanatical and powerful Priesthood became
the sole interpreters of the mysteries of religion that Andûman[a:],
through a revelation of His will, demanded human sacrifice as a test of
obedience or as an atonement for sin.

At another time I may inform you further in relation to the Ento
Scriptures, which embody not only the revelation of Andûman[a:]'s will
and the fanciful story of Ento's creation, but also much of the history
of ancient times. How far back do the Ento Scriptures date? We have
been informed that unquestionably this supposed revelation occurred
nearly fifty centuries ago. Yes, Ento time. The age of the Planet no
Entoan either in or out of the physical body assumes to know. Soon we
shall have with us some learned Ento Spirits, who, we doubt not, will
gladly afford us exact information upon this and other subjects of
interest. No further questions at present, madame, for time flies and
soon we must return you to Earth.

The Sun held aloft in the hand of the statue surmounting the altar
is emblematic of Andûman[a:]'s supposed abode, and this really fine
mosaic, representing sun rays radiating from the circular altar, also
is an emblem of the same.

Observe, now, this central marble shaft, which rises nearly to the
domed roof. Both base and capital are sculptured masses of grains,
fruits and flowers. The surface of the shaft is divided into sections
on which are engraved names and brief records of departed Entoans.
Above each legend is a head in bas-relief, and so well executed are
these images of the dead that one can easily determine as to age and
characteristics of the originals. Through such knowledge of their
written language as I possess I shall attempt to gain some information
relating to these people of a bygone day.

Muyolos Kalaf and Feniston Inisella were ancestor and ancestress to
Inisellēna. Their sculptured faces indicate that they were handsome and
intellectual persons and that all lived to a good old age.

Here it is stated that the original of this admirable bust was one
Hûyten Dēmos, who was sire to Endoifan Inivos, who became the mother of
Rosilla, who in time gave birth to Stivon Izamma, which also was the
name of his sire, who was greatgrandsire to Silvano Izam, the present
proprietor of the residence we have been viewing. Engraved on this
shaft is quite a family history, but we shall find matters of greater
interest to enlist our attention.

This edifice in itself is both Istoir[a:] and F[a:]v[a:] a croidas,
where the ashes of the departed are deposited, and in those sealed,
ornamental receptacles are the incinerated remains of past generations.
Observe the many sculptured forms on this and on the opposite wall.
Here is a face, hoary with age, but with a fine, majestic expression,
and here are others of the midday of life, representing splendid types
of the human.

Here are faces of youths and maidens as entrancing as dreams of love.
Of children, too, angelic in their beauty and innocence of expression.
Ah, me! Were mortal life the end of all, better to not have been born
into it. Think of all that these sculptured faces stand for. Smiling
infants, youths and maidens and mature men and women, who loved with
intensest devotion and who passed to their spirit world without either
hope or expectation of reunion.

All, all lived and loved, joyed and sorrowed and when death came
hopeless despair came also. How could it have been otherwise? To live,
to love, to die, and then--nothing. This was their belief and is yet
the belief of the entire peoples of Ento, whom it holds in a state of
hopeless despair, of measureless anguish.

Medium--Have the Entoans never believed in a continuity of existence?

De L'Ester--We have learned that previous to the establishment of the
national religion, which largely was based upon their legendary Holy
Writings, there were those who entertained vague theories relating to
it, so vague indeed that they do not appear to have influenced those
who formulated the Ento religion.

You have been informed that planetary influences are controlling
factors, accelerating or retarding the spiritual unfoldment of humans
of whatever Planet. The influences dominating the Entoans ever have
tended toward a positive mental materialism, but their spirituality has
conserved and exalted them, thus enabling them to submissively yield to
the will of their Creator.

Then, too, there is that in the human which impels him to submit to the
inevitable. In agony unspeakable he may for a time rebel, but in the
end he submits. Thus it has been with the peoples of this Planet. They
have hopelessly, despairingly submitted to what they have considered
inevitable. But for them a brighter day is dawning, and is near at
hand; the darkness of a hopeless belief ere long will pass away, for
bright rays from their spirit realms are irradiating their inner
consciousness and death, the dread messenger who ever stands between
them and happiness, soon will be known as the angel who will open for
them the gateway into a continuous, glorious existence. To their soul
consciousness there is yet no visible sign of the coming religious
revolution, yet events are so shaping themselves that you shall see
this prediction verified; not only see it, but you will aid in bringing
it to pass. Ere long you will better understand my meaning; at present
it would not be well to say more in this direction.

We might with pleasure and advantage remain here for another hour, but
you are somewhat exhausted, and we must act prudently, else we may find
occasion for regret.

George alone will attend you on your Earthward journey. Special duties
elsewhere demand our immediate attention. To-morrow at the appointed
time we will come for you. No, madame, we will not again return to this
locality. Adieu.




CHAPTER IV.

DESCRIPTIVE FEATURES.


De L'Ester--With pleasure we salute you, and we are gratified to find
you awaiting us. But before starting on our journey I must again insist
that you shall protect yourself against interruption. Yes, I see how
you are situated, but the fact remains that it is harmful to you to be
disturbed. Yesterday, while you were with us, some one attempted to
enter your apartments. The locked doors prevented the intrusion but you
were so disturbed that it was all we could do to keep control of you.
It is not well that you shall be suddenly called back to your physical
body. It injures you, and is a great disappointment to your comrades.
Cannot you take further precaution against intrusion?

Medium--I do not see that I can. I fully realize that it harms me to be
disturbed, but at times I cannot prevent it.

De L'Ester--Well, what cannot be cured must be endured, but we shall
hope that you may be left in peace to-day. Your sister Inez accompanies
us, and desires to speak to you.

Inez--Dear sister Sara, I bear greetings to you from many loved and
loving ones, who, with delight and boundless interest, watch the
progress of our mission of loving endeavor to which you and many other
devoted ones are for its accomplishment applying such talents and
energy as are at your and their command. But our Counsellor and guide
grows restive, and we must not delay our journey.

De L'Ester--Now, madame, we are ready for our flight to Ento. Compose
your too active soul forces and trust yourself unreservedly to our
care. George, we are a little late, so will make a hasty passage.
Upward now and outward. More swiftly than the lightning's flash cleaves
the sky we are borne on this wondrous magnetic ocean which knows no
shore but is as boundless as the universe and changeless as God.

In grandest, sweetest cadences ever its magical undulations are
murmuring, "Glory to the Highest! Glory to the Highest!" and angel
choirs innumerable join the glad pæan, "Glory to the Highest! Glory
to the Highest!" Ah, madame, little do or can mortals know of the
wonderful existence on our side of life, and in some not very far away
time you again will enter the marvellous spirit realms, which language
is too poor to describe, and we, with our dear ones who watch and wait
for you will meet and greet you on the threshold of two worlds, the
spiritual and the physical.

Yes, madame, we are nearing Ento. Lower, lower, George. That is well.
We will move slowly, so that we may closely observe such scenes as may
come into view. We now are about 1,400 miles north of the equator, and
below us is a mountain range of no great altitude. The height of its
loftiest peak is not over 3,000 feet. Those rugged heights are but the
vestiges of snow-capped, cloud-piercing giants of bygone ages. Yes, in
that shaded cleft is some snow, and to mortal sense the air here would
appear quite cool. Lower still, George. Madame, look downward now, for
beneath us is the deepest canyon on Ento, but in either area or depth
it is not to be compared with many such formations on our Planet.

George, we will alight near the margin of the stream.

Medium--What a quiet, solitary spot.

De L'Ester--It is indeed a quiet, solitary spot. Here is a scant growth
of grass amid which are some tufts of flowering plants and on yonder
rocky elevation are some low-growing shrubs and stunted trees. From
its base upward the mountain's side is worn into deep fissures, partly
screened from view by shrubs and several species of conifera. There
is no sight or sound of bird or bee or of any living thing. From the
rocky ledges tiny rivulets of sparkling water trickle downward, finding
their ways to the level and into this limpid stream. From yonder cleft
in the mountain side a volume of water gushes with such energy that as
it strikes the ledge lower down it is dashed into silvery spray whose
myriad drops fall into the deep, dark pool whose over-flow is tributary
to this stream, which flows southward, then eastward, finding entrance
into an underground channel at the base of the mountain, where it too
curves outward, thence debouching on the further side, where it is
joined by other streams, all flowing into a small but pretty lake,
which later on you shall see.

Madame, you are silent. Does the quiet of this solitary spot oppress
you?

Medium--Friends, I feel absolutely dazed. I had thought to find
everything on Ento altogether unlike anything on Earth, yet here is
water and there are tufts of star-shaped white and pink flowers very
like some I have seen on Earth. Then see those pretty purple flowers,
so closely resembling violets, and on that elevation and up the
mountain's side are shrubs, trees and vegetation so very similar to
growth on our own Planet that you will pardon me for saying that not
only am I surprised, but in a sense am disappointed. No, George, I did
not imagine that I should find either people or trees growing upside
down, but I did imagine that surely there must exist more striking
dissimilarities between the life expressions of this Planet and our
own. Such speculations relating to it as I have become aware of have
led me to expect something very different from what thus far I have
observed on Ento.

Von Humboldt--Madame, with your and our Counsellor and guide's
permission, I shall say that since I have been not of Earth, I have
journeyed far and have looked closely into nature as expressed on
many habitable Planets, and I have learned that everywhere Infinite,
Intelligent Energy is manifested in strikingly similar ways. You
have been told that the homogeneity of matter is universal. That the
qualities of metals of all Planets are exactly the same and that the
constituents of water never anywhere vary, neither do the crystallized
forms of either ever vary. So it should not surprise you to find here
water quite as palatable as the sparkling beverage of our Earth-world.

Of course their relative positions to, and their distances from central
Suns, occasion differences in the bodies of Planets, particularly as to
their density; then, too, in accordance with conditions, atmospheres
vary as to being rarefied or dense, humid or dry and so on, but life
germs of fauna and flora ever are the same, and given like or similar
Planetary conditions their expressions will present more or less close
resemblances. Yes, environments occasion differences, but environments
are the results of Planetary conditions. But that is too comprehensive
a question for present consideration. At another time we may recur to
it.

The physical and atmospheric conditions of Ento and Earth being so much
alike, naturally their Fauna and Flora must present mutual likenesses.
As for chemical affinities and their unvarying expressions, they are
universal.

As has been said to you the universe is indeed a unit. Everywhere
Infinite, Intelligent Energy seeks to express itself not only in
harmony and beauty, but along the same lines, and ever toward a state
of _perfection_, beyond the highest conception of Spirit or mortal,
for who can conceive an idea of that which is known by many names, but
whom you name God? From my own observation and through association with
spirits of advanced spheres whose mission, like my own, is Planetary
research, I can say with assurance that among the life expressions
of all sufficiently evolved Planets there is what may be termed a
universal homogeneity, for while there are dissimilarities there are
equally close resemblances which may be expressed as unity in variety.

As to man on Ento, Earth and other Planets, we find our brethren so
like ourselves that, logically, we all must claim the same origin. Yes,
madame, I do assure you that in limitless space there are myriads of
worlds, varying as to bulk, density, and atmospheric conditions, but
in other respects so like Ento and Earth as to present fauna and flora
very similar to those of either Planet. They are peopled by humans like
ourselves, in various stages of evolvement, and all, like the peoples
of Ento and Earth, are engaged in the endeavor to solve the problem of
eternal progress. Between those on the lowest and those on the loftiest
heights of progress on different Planets, the intermediate stages
represent man in all degrees of evolvement. On some Planets I have
visited, man,--the human animal, slowly, through ages,--has pursued
his _certain_ way, toward the period in which he is destined to become
a Spiritualized being, and now the hairy, unshapely limbed creature
who scarcely walks erect, with face full enough of the mystery of
existence to startle one, approaches nearly the line of demarcation
between the human animal and the Spirit man.

On other Planets, compared with man on either Ento, or Earth, the
spiritualized human is as a god.

If what I have said may suffice as replies to your questions and
remarks, or may in some measure reconcile you to the close resemblances
between features of Ento and Earth, I shall account myself more than
fortunate.

De L'Ester--Thanks, Von Humboldt, for your timely remarks, which we
hope may lessen madame's regret at finding Ento so like our own beloved
Planet, and its human denizens so like ourselves,--with but one head,
two arms, and as many legs. Madame, I but jest that I may bring a smile
to your perplexed face. Since I have accomplished that I feel that I
may hope for pardon.

Aside from affording you a general idea of the varied formations and
scenery of Ento, we have a special purpose in bringing you to this
spot. We desire that you now shall closely observe these rose-colored,
lily-shaped blooms, whose long slender stems springing from tufts of
dark green, glossy foliage are crowned with a profusion of the pretty,
dainty flowers. As they will be used for one of our illustrations, I
will give their Ento name--which is Lois[a:] yanû, in your language
water gems or jewel. These compact masses of prettily leafed plants
with their numerous white, star-like blooms are named Oin[a:] mist[a:].
Oin[a:] signifying lamp and mist[a:], snow. You will remember that to
the Entoans the shining points in space are the lamps of Astranol[a:],
hence Oin[a:] mist[a:], or snow lamp.

Yes, these purplish blue flowers, almost hidden by abundant foliage, in
form, color and fragrance are very like Earth's wild violets. Entoans
know it as Lois[a:] infûen, but you may name it, Water drinker, for
that is as near the significance of its Ento name as I can arrive
at. Lois[a:] yanû, oin[a:] mist[a:], and lois[a:] infûen, always are
found growing in marshy places, or by the margin of flowing streams.

[Illustration: LOISA INFUEN]

Now we will learn what yonder elevation may offer. No, it is not an
isolated mass. Do not you perceive that on the further side it connects
with the mountain of which, doubtless, it is a small spur? I have said
that in bringing you here we have had a special purpose in view. In
this pretty, flowering plant our purpose stands revealed. Yes, this is
The Hinifro enor[a:]. The yellow wonder which requires so little soil
or moisture as to be practically independent of either. When, nearly
two years ago, through your automatism, Poole created a copy of it,
promising to sometime on another Planet show it to you growing and
in bloom, you smiled rather incredulously. As we have fulfilled that
promise, so shall all else that we have promised you come to pass.

These densely foliaged trees are known as Oon[a:]mos[a:] tûl[a:].
In your language this would signify burr-berry. They seldom grow to
a greater height than thirty feet. Yes, they do resemble chestnut
trees, but the burrs contain berries, not nuts, and they now are fully
ripened. Certainly it could not harm you to taste the fruit, but
through its extreme acidity and astringency it is very unpalatable.

We now will examine these pretty shrubs whose dark green, glossy
foliage renders them quite attractive. The fruit has a luscious
appearance but is unfit for human food. Its Ento name is Gûfon
litz[a:], which I shall translate into Bitter sweet. Once Inez was
curious enough to taste this fruit and very much to her discomfiture.
As you are aware, your sister was a still born child, consequently her
mortal education has been acquired under such difficulties as you, in
your present state, little comprehend. Being of an inquiring turn of
mind she investigates for herself, at times gaining information at some
cost, which makes it all the more valuable.

Inez--De L'Ester, I owe you thanks for regarding my overweening
curiosity so leniently. I confess that I am of a very inquiring turn of
mind, but since largely through this means I acquire necessary mortal
experiences which, through my premature return to the spirit side, were
denied me, I feel assured that your forbearance will condone what may
amount to a fault.

De L'Ester--Inez, dear friend, I did not mean that my brusquerie should
occasion you even a passing thought. Pardon me if I may have caused you
a suggestion of pain.

Inez--Pardon is not a word that should pass between two such close
friends as are we. There, I offer you my hand with my heart in it and
thus the fancied wound is healed.

Medium--De L'Ester, George, what a strange looking animal is emerging
from that cleft in the mountain. What an ungainly, ugly creature and
what vicious looking eyes it has.

De L'Ester--Really, the creature is as much a surprise to us as to you.
As none of us have seen its like on Ento, we must conclude that it
belongs to a nearly extinct species. That it is of the marsupial family
is apparent. Its structural formation, hair and other characteristics
are those of your American opossum, but its size is much greater than
that of those creatures. I should say that it is quite two feet in
height, four in length, and its weight not under one hundred pounds.

As it comes this way sniffing, grunting and rooting under the leaves
for the fallen fruit of the Oonamosa tûl[a:], it impresses one with the
idea that it is an ill-tempered, pugnacious animal. When our Ento
spirit friends join us we may learn its name, habits and so on.

[Illustration: HINIFRO ENOR[A:]]

Although we twice have visited this canyon we have not, until now, seen
in it an animal or bird of any kind, but we have been informed that
during the mid-summer season of this latitude a species of water-fowl
comes here for breeding purposes, but that as soon as their young are
able to fly they migrate to other regions. We know that very recently
they were here in considerable numbers, now not one remains. Earlier
in the summer the canyon produces a harvest of wild grains, and those
low growing shrubs bear an abundance of fruit which affords them
subsistence.

Madame, you perceive that the mountain curves toward the east; now
look quite to our left and you will observe a rift in it extending
southward. Once when George with these and other friends were examining
this region they discovered an opening in the rift, leading into a
cavernous formation which they consider worthy of observation. As
neither Inez nor I have yet seen it, we will share with you whatever of
interest it may offer. George, you and Inez will lead the way, and I
shall have the pleasure of assisting madame.

Yes, the entrance is somewhat forbidding. We will remain here while
George lights up the interior. How? Through the ignition of elemental
substances. Sooner or later all Spirits learn the laws of chemical
affinities. It is a simple matter, the production of molecular
combustion. We now will proceed.

This rather low and narrow passage widens as we descend, and now
terminates in this vast chamber, which truly is wondrously beautiful.
Stalactites depending from the lofty ceiling meet upspringing
stalagmites, forming seemingly endless rows of columns, united by
snowy arches so singularly perfect in their outlines as to present
a spectacle strangely, weirdly, marvellously lovely. In this soft
radiance columns, arches, and walls appear as though incrusted with
countless, many colored jewels, whose splendor might bedim the rarest,
costliest gems worn by Ento's or Earth's rulers.

We now will approach more nearly yonder grotesque formations, which
certainly are very remarkable. Sufficiently so to suggest a sermon
on what some learned persons might term unintelligent energy in
unintelligent matter. Be not alarmed, friends, though in these peculiar
formations there are many sermons of a nature to arouse earnest
inquiry; at present I am not in a mood for sermonizing but I must say
that they positively are startlingly strange. One readily can imagine
them animal forms of some far away age whom suddenly death stilled into
immobility, leaving to pitiful nature the kindly office of enveloping
them in snowy winding sheets.

In this spacious niche is another group, apparently composed of
the forms of a man, two females and the torso of a child, all so
admirable in outline, pose and drapery as to suggest the skill of an
able sculptor. It, indeed, would require uncommon artistic ability to
surpass, or even equal the grace of this snowy group.

Here is another formation still more wonderful than those we have
been observing. George, you have done well to hold in reserve this
masterpiece of nature. It really is marvellous. It is as though some
weary mortal of a past age laid down to rest, Death coming this way
blew upon him his icy breath and froze him into perpetual silence, then
gently enshrouding him in purest whiteness passed on, leaving him to
the peacefulness of endless sleep.

How many years have elapsed since nature began these strangely
beautiful formations? Who can say? Not I, madame. Such a lapse of time
is inconceivable. But we know that here, during an unrealizable length
of time, from dripping water charged with lime, atom has been added
to atom and thus the stupendous wonder has grown, grown in darkness,
and silence, and never have any but Spirit eyes gazed with admiring
awe upon the splendor and loveliness of this scene which naught but
Infinite, Intelligent activity could create.

On no other Planet have we found formations of this nature excelling
these, seldom have we seen them equaled. Those arched openings invite
us into other divisions of this underground fairyland. We will
enter this chamber on our right. These formations differ somewhat
from those we have seen, but are quite as beautiful. See how those
great stalagmites, singly and in groups, unite themselves with the
white loveliness of descending stalactites, all apparently forming
a gateway to a veritable garden of snow trees and vegetation, the
drooping branches laden with blossoms and fruit, forbidden fruit, we
may conclude, as between it and ourselves there is a swiftly flowing
stream. What do I think of the Biblical legend concerning Adam and Eve?
Madame, my opinion is, that had the mythical garden been as beautiful
as this the commendably inquisitive Eve would have been content with
the prescribed diet and the amiable Adam would, to this day, be
promenading under the Edenic trees. One is tempted to linger in this
strangely beautiful spot, but we must pass on.

We pointed out to you that the stream traversing the canyon entered an
opening, at the northern base of the mountain; it is the same stream
now rushing by us toward an exit at the southern side of the mountain,
thence into the lake of which we have spoken. We now will cross it to
glance through other portions of the cavern, some of which, George
says, are not greatly unlike those we already have explored.

Medium--Although I have not seen them, I know that on our Planet there
are formations similar to these; may I ask are such formations features
of all Planets you have visited?

De L'Ester--Yes, of all Planets sufficiently aged. Do not you remember
that on our moon we once showed you a cavern similar to, but not
nearly so extensive as this that contained stalactites and stalagmites
too, but of rather diminutive proportions? You also may remember
that we demonstrated to your satisfaction that there was a time when
Luna was capable of and did sustain many life expressions of both
fauna and flora, but that now the internal heat of the little Planet
is so nearly exhausted that but a limited number of peculiar life
expressions survive the rigor of its extremely low temperature? The
history of a planet may be likened to that of a human. In the case
of the Planet, birth, growth, maturity, with a gradual but unceasing
withdrawal of vitalizing heat and energy, which finally must culminate
in the extinction of all its life forms, aye, of even the cohesive
energy which has so long held it in form, followed by inevitable
disintegration of its atoms which are the building material of new
worlds.

The parallel history of the human includes birth, growth, maturity,
then gradual withdrawal of vital energy, during which the heart beats
respond less vigorously to the crimson current which flows more
and more sluggishly and the history draws near its conclusion. The
extremities grow colder, colder, animation dies out of the expressive
features, the eyes grow dim and sightless, pulseless, breathless, lies
the mortal body, but it is not dead. No, no, there is no death. Life is
in every atom of the universe and the disintegrated particles of the
physical body afford material for new life expressions, while the freed
Ego, the ever conscious, cohesive, vitalizing spirit force which held
the mortal body in form assumes other and higher relations and thus
revolves the wheel of evolution whose circumference is the universe,
whose centre is God.

Madame, you are so given to asking questions and I to loquacity that
we too much delay our progress. Your pardon, friends, for having kept
you waiting. Now we will move on. Yes, it would be rather difficult for
even a diminutive mortal to penetrate this passage which now widens
and grows loftier, and now we have reached the last of the series of
caverns. Gradually we have been descending and now are far below the
level of the entrance and on the brink of a deep and narrow chasm. No
occasion for alarm, madame, but to reassure you we will join hands.
Inez, you will take your sister's right hand, giving your right hand
to Humboldt. I will hold your left hand, madame, and Agassiz, with
George, will precede us. George, you will be good enough to light us
down the abyss. Yes, it is a tremendous chasm, but here we stand, safe
and sound, and you perceive that there was no danger. It is too much to
expect that, while you yet are on the physical plane you will wholly
free yourself from apprehension. Indeed, we have experienced some
misgiving as to the amount of courage you might exhibit on occasions to
which, during your mortal existence, you must be unaccustomed.

George, as you are acquainted with this uncanny locality, I desire
that I now may stand aside while you shall act as guide and I suggest
that you shall say to madame something relating to our mission. Your
discretion will limit your statements.

George--You, madame, have been informed that certain Spirits being
aware that you possessed such qualities as gave promise of a peculiar
phase of mediumship, _suited to a special purpose_, have since your
birth, been endeavoring to prepare you for it. With measureless
patience and loving care they have guarded and guided you, sometimes
by straight, ofttimes through devious ways, but ever toward a definite
end. Finally it became possible to control you for our purpose and
I, with Von Humboldt, Darwin, Agassiz, Bulwer Lytton, Giordano Bruno
and others of our band traversed Ento, with the purpose of arranging
a programme against the time when we should have you with us. As
unfavoring events may oblige us to accommodate our movements to such
circumstances as may occur, we do not anticipate that our programme
will, in its entirety, be carried to its conclusion, but to that end we
all will do our utmost, and we feel assured that Divine influences will
aid us in our mission which, as yet, you but slightly comprehend, but
which in time will unfold itself.

One purpose we have in view is to show you much that will be of
interest to you, through whom we hope to bring to the peoples of our
Planet the positive knowledge that the neighboring world, about which
they are so curious, has much in common with Earth.

Yes, it is matter for regret, that much concerning our journeys and
mission must be left unsaid and that necessarily the written account
of our experiences must be somewhat sketchy, otherwise it would be too
voluminous for the average reader's patient perusal.

Through some Ento spirits we learned of the existence of these great
caverns and of a very unique spectacle which, presently, we will
observe. This one is much larger than any of those we have examined
and, as you perceive, it contains no formation to break its immensity.
We are about eleven miles distant from the outer entrance and quite
one thousand feet below its level. A half mile further on will reveal
the cause of this continuous vibration and the tumultuous detonations
which resemble the discharge of artillery. Thanks to our spirit
condition, we are invulnerable to the condition existing here, else we
would not dare to approach the fiery horror we are nearing.

The roaring of ocean's storm-tossed waves is as nothing to the sounds
breaking upon the stillness of these cavernous depths; but fear not,
madame, for with safety you may, with us, approach a scene so grand, so
appalling that you are not likely to ever forget it.

We now are in another great cavern whose floor slopes abruptly to this
precipitous elevation and, standing on its edge, we look down upon a
very hell of tumultuous flames. Yes, lacking a stirring feature or two,
it easily might hold its own against Dante's "Inferno."

Look, now, away toward the left where is bursting forth a huge column
of flame. Up, up, toward the vaulted roof it climbs, twisting, curving,
writhing like a gigantic serpent; now it slowly sinks downward and is
engulfed. Now in the distance a storm is raging. See how the fiery
billows are rising; higher, higher, leaping and curving their angry
crests they madly rush toward us as though they would overwhelm us and
as they burst against this precipice, involuntarily one shrinks back
from their hot, mephitic breath.

Observe that pyramidal fountain near the centre. Is not it grandly,
wonderfully beautiful? See how it forms itself into a rose shape, while
from its heart numerous jets shoot upward. A moment and it is gone
and all over the surface of the fiery lake myriad fantastic shapes of
many hued flames are glowing, scintillating and projecting themselves
toward the lofty roof, forming a magnificent pyrotechnic display.

The noise is indeed deafening and the ever changing spectacle so awe
inspiring that words cannot adequately describe its terrible, but
wondrous beauty. Truly, silence is at times golden.

Medium--Still, I should like some one to break the silence by an
explanation of this, to me, strange phenomenon. Is it volcanic?

Von Humboldt--One does not desire to long remain in proximity to this
underground conflagration, for, madame, that is what it is. Not for one
moment could a mortal live in this mephitic atmosphere. As you perceive
even Spirits are, to a degree, sensitive to it. As we return toward
the upper world I shall briefly explain to you the origin of the truly
wonderful spectacle. We have reached the cavern at the bottom of the
chasm and if it may please you, friends, we will pause here while I
shall attempt to satisfy Madame's laudable curiosity.

All over Ento in certain localities, are deposits of the various
coals of sulphur, of naphtha, of natural gas, and of such mineral
formations as are found on other Planets, and since remote times coal,
naphtha, natural and manufactured gases as fuel and for lighting were
universally used. Then came a knowledge of applied electricity, and
with this knowledge a disinclination for the old, cumbrous methods
of heating and lighting, and ere long, save in rural localities,
electricity became almost the sole illuminant and heating energy, and
coal as fuel fell into disuse; but for certain uses, to a limited
extent, it yet is mined.

The region in which, for a period equaling nearly twenty years of
your time this conflagration has been raging, contained vast stores
of bituminous coal, sulphur and naphtha. Through some mischance a
colliery became ignited, and ere the danger became apparent, the fire
was inextinguishable. A large area has been burned out, extending to
the southern base of the mountain where the fire burst into the immense
cavern which holds, as in a basin, the terrific, raging, incandescent
volume of heterogeneous matter. As the coal deposit extends no further
than the base of the mountain and other inflammable materials involved
finally must become exhausted, we may conclude that at no very distant
time the conflagration will die out. Soon an opportunity will be
afforded you for observing the devastation it has wrought elsewhere.

Madame, you owe me no thanks. It is both my duty and my pleasure to
contribute what I may to the interest of our undertaking.

Medium--May I ask if you still are interested in such researches as
engaged your attention while in earth life?

Von Humboldt--Madame, the bent of mind which, during earth life, has
impelled mortals in certain directions or toward special pursuits,
is an inherent part of each individual. Entering upon an advanced
plane of existence I found myself possessed of the same inclinations
and traits as formerly characterized me. The same may be said of our
friends, Agassiz, Darwin, Bulwer Lytton, Bruno and others of this
Band. The chemist, the mathematician, the geologist, the naturalist,
the astronomer, the mystic each is true to his inherent traits or
tendencies. When freed from the ills and cares incident to mortal
existence, with quickened senses and desires, with enlarged abilities
and the universe an open book in which all who strive for attainment
may learn to read the wondrous story written by Infinite Intelligent
Energy, strange, indeed, would it be did not these and all aspiring
Spirits in time acquire a larger knowledge of such arts, sciences or
pursuits as dominated their lives on the physical plane.

In contradistinction one must use such terms as Spirit, mortal,
spiritual, physical and others. Yet, substantially, they all are
states of being. Spirit, _per se_, as we understand it, is the
vitalizing, unchanging principle which expresses the infinite,
intelligent, indestructible, unvarying, all pervading energy and in
every atom of the universe this indivisible spirit is manifested.
As without substantiality there can be no existence or state of
being, conclusively, spirit is substantial and all entities or
individualized expressions of substance hold within them the
spiritualized potentiality of evolution or growth. And, as in each
individualized expression of substance there is a quality which may be
termed plasticity, it follows that through inheritance and environment
entities evolve in various directions, thus manifesting the scientific,
the artistic and other tendencies.

Yes, the spirit body is as substantial as is the physical body, _but of
a finer expression of substance_. You now are apart from your physical
body, yet you are conscious that your spirit body is substantial, and
where there is consciousness there is being, which is but another name
for spirit. I may add that there is not an atom of the universe that
is not, in a certain sense, _conscious_, hence, in a certain sense,
_individualized and intelligent_.

I am aware, madame, that I have answered your questions in a
superficial manner; at present I cannot do otherwise.

Our chemist is ready to light our way to the outer world and you will
allow me to assist you. As we proceed, I shall, with your permission,
relate a past personal experience.

Age and infirmity came to me as it comes to many, and the hour of
my departure from earth life drew near. For a time I had lain
apparently unconscious, though really I was fully alive to all that was
transpiring about me, and gradually, yet with a certain suddenness,
I experienced a most peculiar sensation. I felt as though I were
ascending what seemed to be a rift between walls of adamant. Darkness
so profound I never before had experienced and, in some perplexity,
I reached out my hands and groped blindly, hoping to touch something
that might indicate my whereabouts; but in vain. The sensation of
being between two walls continued and I felt myself ascending, ever
ascending. I do not recall that I experienced a sense of alarm, but in
an indolent fashion I queried as to what the peculiar sensation might
mean. Certainly, I did not associate it with the change called death.
Suddenly, as we now come into the sunlight, I emerged into a soft
radiance, indescribably, gloriously beautiful, and in great surprise I
looked about me, seeing nothing but the soft radiance which wrapped me
about as with a garment. Great as was my surprise, I at once began to
wonder where I was and as to what had occurred to me. Was I dreaming?
Was I delirious? No, I was fully awake and in possession of all my
senses. Yet something unusual had occurred. Surely I had not died. No,
that could not be, for here, I said, is my body, and I am as alive as a
man can be. Perceiving that I could move about through the bewildering,
unaccountable radiance, I began to investigate my surroundings which,
imperceptibly, had assumed an air of strangeness. Imagine, if you can,
my amazement when, after a little, I found myself standing near my old,
worn body over which friends were tenderly bending, closing its wide
open, dim eyes, smoothing its scant locks, and otherwise preparing it
for its last resting place.

As spellbound I gazed upon the pitiful scene, I felt, rather than saw,
some one near me. Turning, I, in great surprise beheld a company of
radiant beings, who called to me in joyous tones: Alexander! Alexander!
We have come to meet and greet you; come with us, come away from this
Sorrowful Star[1] to our glorious spirit realms.

In a moment I recognized dear, long-lost friends of my youth. In
a moment I was in the embraces of my parents, no longer aged, but
glowing with life, with love, with the beauty of immortals. There were
my nearest and dearest ones, each vieing with the others in joyous
congratulations upon my having been freed from Earth life. All, all
with loving embraces and tenderest speech, drew me away from my mortal
home to the realms of immortals, the realms which know neither death or
hopeless partings.

Has this reminiscence wearied you? No? Then I shall not regret having
related it. You, and all mortals, must pass through the change called
death. When this change shall come to you the memory of this recital
may aid you in your ascent from the physical to the spiritual plane of
being.

De L'Ester--Dear friend, you are silent. Nay, you need not tell me why.
I read your thoughts, as you might read an open book. True, the change
called death must come to you, as it must come to all mortals, yet
dread it not, for so frail is the tie between your real self and your
physical body that almost ere your physical eyes shall be closed as in
sleep, your spirit eyes will open to undreamed of glories.

Now make your adieux, for we must not hold you with us longer. George,
I shall accompany you and this somewhat wearied comrade to her home,
where approaching night is already enfolding her physical body with
darkening shadows.

Across space with the speed of thought we have journeyed. And now
commending you to the care of angelic guardians, whose watchful love
ever protects you. Au revoir.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: Spirit name for Earth, "The Sorrowful Star."]




CHAPTER V.

GIORDANO BRUNO.


De L'Ester--Good morning, madame. It gladdens us to find you quite
recovered from the exhaustion of yesterday and in such a cheerful mood,
and ready for our journey to Ento, which only for a few moments will we
delay.

Yes, we propose returning to the locality of our visit of yesterday,
from whence we shall prosecute our quest for further experiences. How
long shall we hold you with us to-day? For at least three, possibly
four hours. All will depend upon your endurance, and may loving angels
strengthen and sustain you, for only through your instrumentality can
we hope to attain the fulfillment of the emprise so ardently desired by
countless hosts of many spirit worlds.

Now, away for Ento. Our swift movement no longer disturbs you? No? We
knew that soon you would adjust yourself to it. George, we will descend
to the rift in the mountain. You recognize the spot, madame? Yes, that
is the entrance to the cavern, and our way lies through this rugged,
fern-clad rift to the further side of the mountain. The convulsion
which rent it asunder must have been a terrific one. How long ago did
it occur? It is our opinion, madame, that it may have occurred at about
the period during which our planet was assuming recognizable form,
which was so long ago as to be not a matter of years, but of ages.

[Illustration: OINA MISTA]

As we proceed, the rift narrows into this gloomy defile, overhung by
insecure-looking crags, from which, we emerge into the sunlight. What
a beautiful spot is this niche in the southern slope of the mountain!
It is a veritable flower garden. Indeed, madame, I wish you might
bear to your Earth home some of these lovely, fragrant, white star
flowers. Yes, they are a variety of Oin[a:] mist[a:]. The tiny stream
trickling from the mountain's side provides necessary moisture, and the
sun so warms the sheltered nook that the growth of the plants is very
luxuriant.

These star-like blooms are fitting emblems of the spirit group of
which you and Inez are members. What do I mean? Why, have not you
been told that in our spirit realms, as in the spirit realms of all
worlds, the law of affinity, holds Spirits in different groups, which
are designated by different names? Both you and Inez belong to the
group known as Star Angels. Onerous as is your present mission, on
your return to the spirit side it will be no less so, for the Star
Angels are the teachers of the Spirits who wander in darkness in the
Earth spirit sphere, multitudes of whom scarcely, if at all, realize
that they have left the physical body, _and ever are hovering about
the places where formerly they existed_. Not alone to those whose
mortal lives were passed amid vice and squalor and wretchedness; not
alone to those who were the very undertow of the murky tide of human
degradation and misery; not alone to these do the Star Angels minister.
There are myriads of men and women who have passed, and continually are
passing, to the spirit side of life, who have dwelt in luxurious homes,
surrounded by all the splendors and delights their selfish, perverted
natures craved; having, during their Earthly existence, chosen
spiritual darkness rather than light, they reap as they have sowed, and
in sorrow and bitter anguish gather up their sheaves of tares. To such
unhappy ones the Star Angels also minister.

In the Earth spirit sphere licentiousness, selfishness,
uncharitableness, envy, cruelty and all the baser animal passions
are the chains which hold the Spirit in bondage. Separation from
the physical body makes no change in the status of the physically
disembodied Spirit. _It goes to its own place, and cannot go elsewhere,
until it has earned advancement to a higher plane_.

Madame, I should like to make my replies as endless as your questions,
but this mutual pleasure must be deferred.

We will now move toward what has aptly been named Moûentos ho[a:]
falados, for, truly, it is a desolate valley, made so through the
conflagration to which Humboldt has alluded. We will pause on this
elevation, underneath which is the remarkable spectacle we recently
observed. The roaring, rumbling, hissing sounds and constant vibration
of this spot are rather disquieting, but as they can work us no injury
we need not hasten our departure. In this region during the winter
season there is a heavy snowfall as spring advances, the snow rapidly
melts, rains add to the volume of water which pour down the mountain
side and into those fissures from which gases and smoke are issuing.
The water coming in contact with the fire raging deep down beneath the
surface, tremendous explosions occur, casting out such quantities of
ashes that, as you perceive, the entire valley is covered as with a
parti-colored mantle. Vegetation there is none, and living creatures
shun the pestilent locality. Previous to the conflagration the valley
afforded sustenance for a large number of agriculturists and others
engaged in various occupations. At the further end of the valley we
yet perceive vestiges of the wrecked homes and industries of a busy
community.

On our right the mountain spur separates this valley from another
of about the same conformation and area. We will now pass on to
it. George, you will allow me to assist your sister. As you see,
madame, the summit of this mountain spur is nearly level. Its eastern
side, which forms the western boundary of the Valley of Desolation,
is somewhat abrupt, while on the west it gently slopes toward the
picturesque and lovely valley at its foot. As this spot affords a fine
view of what we desire that you shall observe we will for a little
remain here.

Nearly two centuries of Earth time have elapsed since this valley
became a solitude. The climate is temperate and salubrious, the soil
prolific, and water abundant, yet no Entoan could be induced to attempt
to dwell in this ill-fated locality. From Ento spirits we have learned
the story of the horror which led to its abandonment. As briefly as
possible I shall relate it.

While in the canyon you were told that its converging streams, through
an underground channel, flowed into a lake, which later on you should
see. Behold the sparkling waters of the canyon, the swiftly flowing
stream of the cavern gushing forth nearly at our feet. Observe that
several mountain rivulets add to its volume, which empties itself
into yonder tranquil, oval sheet of water, which, like a great mirror
framed in emeralds reflects in its depths the sapphire sky, and white,
ever-changing forms of fleecy clouds.

Previous to its abandonment the valley, which is about seventeen
English miles in length, and half as many in width, was for the
most part devoted to the cultivation of grains and fruits. For the
convenience of those dwelling on either side it became necessary to
bridge the little river. Those substantial piers of stone and iron,
attest to the dimension and stability of the structure of nearly two
centuries ago. Where the river empties into the lake was another
and more imposing bridge, and there we perceive a number of great
white piers, like ghostly sentinels, keeping watch over the ruins
of a once populous city, extending from the bridge to far along the
eastern and western shores of the lake. The name of the city was
Pētûs[a:][a:] Tylû. In your language Pētûs[a:][a:] signifies pearl.
Hence, Pētûs[a:][a:] Tylû signifies City of Pearls, so named because
of certain pearl-bearing mollusks inhabiting the lake and river.
In Pētûs[a:][a:] Tylû were magnificent temples and institutions of
learning, and its private residences, were surpassingly beautiful. Its
various industries flourished and prosperity smiled upon a cultivated
and opulent community. Suddenly an ominous oppressiveness weighted
the atmosphere, and, nature aghast, was as silent as death. Then from
toward the south came a seismic wave, the ground trembled, heaved
and burst asunder into yawning fissures, towering temples crashed to
the ground in fragments, and public buildings and private dwellings
were shaken from their foundations in ruinous masses. Fire added
to the horror of the catastrophe and no one attempted to stay the
conflagration. Terror-stricken, all who survived the sudden disaster
strove to escape from the deadly peril to a place of safety. At
intervals, during two days and nights, the appalling shocks continued,
and it was estimated that fully one-third of the population of
Pētûs[a:][a:] Tylû, and the valley perished outright, or died from
injuries, terror and exposure.

After the subsidence of the seismic disturbances the survivors returned
to look after their dead, and, peradventure, to find some remnants of
their belongings; but so effectually had fire and destructive elements
done their work, that but few of their dead were recovered, and only
the ruins of their beautiful city remained. Ever since that dread
visitation, at intervals in this locality slight seismic shocks have
occurred, and no one has been found adventurous enough to attempt to
dwell in it.

Previous to this destructive event, this valley was one of the most
desirable spots on this portion of the planet. Sheltered as it is by
the mountain, its mean temperature is considerably higher than that of
other regions of the same latitude, and being thoroughly cultivated it
produced certain grains, fruits and vegetables in unusual abundance.
Nature, left to her own devices, has perpetuated some grains, fruits
and vegetables, but the harvests are gathered by wild creatures, who,
being undisturbed, have increased prodigiously. The air is vocal with
the notes of many birds, some of gay, others of modest plumage, and
trees and undergrowth are alive with small animals, whose chatterings
are to you unfamiliar.

Underlying the valley and the outlying region are coal fields,
reservoirs of naphtha, and deposits of various kinds, exactly
corresponding with those of our Planet, and in this mountain range are
immense stores of gold, silver and other minerals. Elsewhere these
minerals are mined or otherwise procured, but this locality will remain
undisturbed for as long as occasional slight seismic disturbances occur
or those ruins serve as reminders of the terrible catastrophe which
destroyed Pētûs[a:][a:] Tylû.

To the Entoans life is the chiefest consideration, and no inducement is
strong enough to tempt them to risk losing it. Could our daring Earth
men voyage between our Planet and Ento, how quickly would this solitude
be overrun with a gold mad multitude. Come here, they some time may,
but, heigh-ho, they will then care not at all for all the gold in the
universe.

Medium--Do the peoples of Ento and of other Planets consider gold and
silver more precious than other metals?

De L'Ester--We have visited many Planets peopled by humans, and
wherever we have found them sufficiently evolved to be able to
distinguish the qualities of things, we also have found gold and
silver taking precedence of all other metals. The Ento name of gold
is Vybo, which in your language might mean either glittering, shining
or brilliant. On this Planet gold is almost the only currency, and
you will have an opportunity for observing that it is coined in flat,
oblong pieces of varying weights. On the largest coin is what may be
termed the national emblem, a hand holding a full blown Rodel. On other
pieces are characters or symbols denoting their values. The Ento name
for silver is Rytz[a:], and as currency, it relatively holds about the
same value as copper holds in the estimation of your nation. Indeed,
with the Entoans, copper is little less valuable than silver, but for
ornamentation and the finer uses they prefer gold and silver to any
other metals.

Repeatedly you have been told that the components of all Planets are
the same. From unquestionable sources the truth has come to us that
the formulas of the Divine Chemist never vary. Thus Ento, Earth and
other planets, in proportion with their bulk and density, contain a due
amount of each universal component. On this Planet during past ages,
attrition and disintegration have been releasing the precious metals so
that they are easily procurable, and this has led to their application
to common uses.

You say that you find it difficult to adjust yourself to a belief in
or, rather, to a realization of the homogeneity of matter. That is not
to be wondered at. Old beliefs which, as a rule, are old superstitions,
cling to one with great tenacity. Nevertheless, it is a fact, and a
comprehension of it will enable you to adjust yourself to other facts,
one of which is that the Infinite Intelligent Energy compels each and
every atom to assume its orderly relation to all other atoms. Further,
that indeed, atoms are embryotic universes, each atom containing within
itself all the properties which anywhere exist, and any one atom may
form the nucleus about which other atoms may congregate, until a world
is in process of formation. But such was not the formative process
which brought this Planet and our distant World into recognition as
members of our Solar System.

To reply intelligibly to your questions is one thing, to do so
satisfactorily is another affair. At least I may hope that I have not
shocked you. No! Then on some other occasion I may feel emboldened to
recur to this subject. Now, one more look at the tranquil lake still
mirroring in its limpid water fleecy clouds and sapphire sky. One
more look at this lovely valley so luxuriantly clothed with grasses,
flowering plants, shrubs, trees and blossoming vines, and we will flit
to yonder distant mountain peak. Allow me the pleasure of aiding you.
Ah, what a pleasing view! Madame, you will kindly attempt a description
of it.

Medium--To the best of my poor descriptive ability I shall try to meet
your wishes. Extending westward are plains reaching further than my
sense of vision. From the base of the mountain, southward, the surface
of the land is broken into shallow, valley-like depressions, covered
with luxuriant vegetation. To the left is a forest of gigantic trees,
and in the distance and toward the south I see houses and cultivated
lands and some animals grazing. Thanks, George, I do not care to
approach them more nearly, I see them quite distinctly, and they
closely resemble one of the animals already described. I mean the one
so like a horse, but they are smaller, and they are altogether white,
excepting their black, short, erect manes and long black tails.

De L'Ester--They are a smaller variety of the same animal, and they
and their larger relatives, are at times used for such purposes as the
peoples of our planet use the horse. They are designated as Lûm[a:]
Zēon, and their services as draught animals are but seldom required,
the Entoans regarding them more as a luxury than as a necessity.

The animal near yonder clump of shrubbery is a cross between the
Lûm[a:] Zēon and another animal known as the Algoû. Yes, it is a
graceful and handsome creature, its marked peculiarities are its coat
of long, silken brown hair and its very erect appearance, the result
of its shoulders being a trifle higher than its haunches. Otherwise it
closely resembles the Lûm[a:] Zēon. George will now assist you downward
to the level.

George--Ever at your service, my sister.

 _Gently gliding toward the plain,
   In my arms I safely hold you;
 Downward, downward, once again,
   Here we are on terra firma._

I take it for granted that you all admire my poetry.

De L'Ester--Your doggerel, rather.

George--Unadulterated envy prompted that ungracious remark. Alas! how
often genius excites jealousy or goes unrecognized save by superior
minds. But I am magnanimous and I forgive you. A poet can afford to be
generous to one less gifted than himself. It really appears as though
you all are more interested in this browsing Algoû than in my inspired
utterances. I shall console myself with the reflection that as time is
endless I can afford to wait for appreciation. In the meantime, shall
we follow the course of this sparkling rivulet, which further on loses
itself in a marshy tract? De L'Ester, as you are more familiar with the
flora of Ento than am I, I shall now be silent. A poet should not be
expected to know everything.

[Illustration: LOIS[A:] MICAN[A:]]

De L'Ester--Your modesty, George, is only a little less admirable than
your poetry. What more can I say? You perceive, madame, that Spirits,
as well as mortals, at times indulge in a bit of nonsense. Ah! you
recognize these tufts of pretty flowers. Yes, it is the vining water
lily, which our artist friend, Poole, drew for you two years ago. See
how bees are extracting sweets from its pink chalices, which are quite
as fragrant as the flower you name tuberose.

You have been informed that the Ento word Lois[a:] stands for our words
water, lake, pond, reservoir, stream and so on, and that the Rodel
is the representative of the Ento lily family. Lois[a:] mīcan[a:]
is a diminutive relative of the true Rodel, and, with the Entoans,
who are flower lovers, it is a universal favorite. In your language,
mīcan[a:] would mean angular, crooked, curved and twisted, and you
will pronounce it Mēcan[a:]h.

This variety of the Rodel always is found by the margins of streams or
in marshy localities. Its long, slender, crooked leaf and flower stalks
convey the impression of a vining tendency, hence its name. See how the
rivulet is bordered with this and other blooming plants whose white,
red, blue and yellow tints present an endless array of floral beauties.
Yes, several of them have been drawn for you by Poole and Jared James.
I believe you and Jared had a slight unpleasantness over one of his
drawings. He is a very right minded person, but does not take kindly to
interference with his plans.

As we move along you may observe that the rivulet is widening and
losing itself in yonder great marshy tract, and if you will look toward
our left you will see something that may surprise you. Certainly, we
may go nearer. Yes, this is the same gorgeous, carmine hued, many
petaled, golden centred Water Queen, so faithfully reproduced for
you by Aaron Poole. You may recall that at the time it was drawn we
promised to some time show you the growing plant. Poised on their long,
slender flower stalks and stirred by the breeze, the stately beauties
bow this way and that, as though in gracious acknowledgment of the
homage of the myriad blooms growing luxuriantly all over the marsh and
filling the air with their sweet perfume.

The queen, though holding her head so loftily, has only her beauty to
commend her. Such odor as she exhales is very objectionable, and her
train of many slender stemmed leaves falling about her feet and onto
the limpid pool which serves her majesty for a looking glass, are
covered with a viscid exudation, and woe to such insects as may alight
on their treacherous surface. Her royal highness is known as Lois[a:]
Gentolissima. In these nearby, showy masses of bloom you will recognize
the Water Princess. Considering the difficulties in the way, Poole
certainly very fairly reproduced those two plants. You may observe
that the Princess differs from the Queen in having shorter, thicker
flower stalks, smaller leaves, fewer petals of a paler carmine, and her
pistils and stamens are of a brownish tint. This near relative of the
queen is Lois[a:] Gentolan[a:].

Your English words, lady, friend, gentle, loving, kind, beloved and the
like, in the Ento language is represented by the word Gentol[a:]. The
affixes an[a:], an[a:][a:], issima, issim[a:][a:], en[a:], ēn[a:][a:]
and others add to the word gender, number, dignity, distinction,
tenderness and so on. Frequently one or more of these or other affixes
are used as diminutives. You will remember this, as the word is a
common one and used in varying senses.

Medium--You speak of this or that as being known to the Entoans by such
or such a name. Am I to understand that all Entoans speak the same
language?

[Illustration: LOIS[A:] GENTOLISSIM[A:]]

De L'Ester--Strictly speaking, the Entoans have but one language,
which is spoken by all educated persons, but among what you might
term the common people of different Provinces there are dialects
and provincialisms, but not of a very marked character. Yes, all
the peoples of Ento are, to a greater or lesser degree, educated.
Nowhere on the planet does a condition approaching barbarism exist.
In every community there are industrial and other schools, which the
youthful Entoans are obliged to attend; thus all become fitted for such
occupations as they may choose.

Ere long two friends from Ento's spirit spheres, who at times serve
with our Band, will join us. They are more competent to afford you
special information relating to Ento educational matters than are we.

Medium--Allow me to remark that, having all my life heard of but one
Heaven, it seems strange to hear you speak of other heavens or spheres,
as belonging to other Planets.

De L'Ester--Doubtless it may appear strange to you. For myself, upon
entering our spirit world, one of my great surprises was to meet
Spirits from other Planetary spirit spheres who had come into our
realms on voyages of discovery or to make acquaintance with us and
our ways. No, only very advanced spirits can journey _unaided_ beyond
their own spirit spheres. Those less advanced, by which I mean less
spiritualized, may, when assisted, visit other planets and their spirit
spheres.

Yes, all Planets inhabited by the spiritualized human are surrounded by
their own spirit spheres.

Your beloved and loving son implores us to allow him to accompany
his dear mother on these journeys, and, through earnest endeavor
he progresses so rapidly that we purpose attempting soon to bring
him with us. Nearly five of earth's fleeting years have greatly
added to Bernard's spiritual growth and strength. Earth life with
its temptations, its defeats and victories, now appear to him as a
troubled, vanishing dream, dreamer and dream alike sorrowful.

Heredity, overlapping tendencies of previous embodiments and
environments, largely, are the influences which act as character
builders. Bernard's really fine, generous nature on one hand served him
as armor against foes without and within, on the other hand it rendered
him vulnerable to assaults to which impetuous youth ever is subjected.

But he builded as well as he could. _So do all._ Every one rough hews
his own character and, through the Divinity who shapes all ends,
eventually all learn to build according to the perfect law of love.

Yes, we are aware that Bernard has made you acquainted with his
experiences and progress, and be assured that all that loving service
can offer is aiding him in his highest aspirations.

We have not yet informed you that a dear friend, a member of our Band,
is to meet us here, and at any moment he may arrive. No, you have not
yet met him, but--Ah, here he comes! Hail! hail! and a welcome from all.

Madame, this is Giordano Bruno, of whom I doubt not you have some
knowledge. We are delighted that you are to have the pleasure of a
mutual acquaintance.

Bruno--Madame, I kiss your hand and shall be honored if I may place you
among my closest friends.

Medium--I assure you that I appreciate the kindness which prompts you
to meet me in such a friendly fashion.

De L'Ester--According to prearrangements, our friend and comrade,
Bruno, has come to take an active part in our plans. He and George,
having made a study of certain features of our programme will, from
time to time, lead our movements. I now shall give way to one whom we
all delight to honor.

Bruno--I am charmed, madame, that henceforth I shall have a place in
the Band of which you are the valued instrument. Since my entrance into
our spirit world, I have experienced much pleasure in visiting this and
other Planets, but seldom have I desired to return to our own sorrowful
Star. Memories of the terrible, woeful torture that freed me from my
physical body have disinclined me to look upon the land of my birth.
Ah, how often recollections of that sorrowful time force themselves
upon my consciousness. Never have I been able to forget the hour
when, rather than renounce what I knew to be a truth, I yielded up my
mortal existence. But Giordino Bruno lives. Aye, despite the ignorance
and cruelty of men who, in the name of the gentle, loving Nazarene
condemned him to an ignominious death; he lives and knows as many
of earth's learned ones now know, that worlds do revolve. Aye, that
systems of worlds as infinite in number, as the universe is infinite in
extension, pursue their appointed ways through space, proclaiming as
they fly: God is Infinite, God is Law, God is Truth, God is All.

Despite Papal excommunication and condemnation to eternal torment,
Giordino Bruno lives in a realm so surpassingly fair that even tongue
of archangel cannot declare the glory thereof.

Madame, will you bear from me a message to the peoples of your native
land? Yes? Then I thank you.

Children of earth's most favored land--children of America, I, Giordino
Bruno, once a citizen of sun-kissed Italy, greet you.

Rejoice unceasingly that freedom of thought and speech are yours.
_Guard jealously this priceless blessing_ which through centuries of
bloodshed, torturing flames and agony unspeakable has become your
heritage. Glorious indeed are your United States of America, blest
beyond expression in being as a "City of refuge" to the oppressed of
other nations. Not yet, Heaven born one, have you outgrown your years
of infancy and, though yet with uncertain steps you totter and waver,
ever your generous hands are extended toward the helpless, ever your
loving heart is pitiful for those who drink of the overflowing cup of
human misery. Ever your eyes are brimful of compassionate tears for the
unfortunates beyond ocean's watery wastes to whom your voice is as the
voice of an angel crying: "Come to us! come to us! and share with us
our bounteous store. Come to us and be free as we are free." I greet
you, child Republic. Thou, indeed, art the brightest jewel in earth's
diadem of nations. Freedom is thy most precious possession; lest
selfish greed and love of power may seek to wrest it from thee, wear
it next thy heart. Swear by all that to you is sacred, that neither
political nor religious intolerance shall find foothold upon your soil.
Let your unalterable declaration be: Liberty of conscience, liberty of
speech for all; license for no one.

Cherish in your heart of hearts a love of justice, of forbearance, of
toleration, of that charity which neither thinketh nor doeth evil,
but permit no faction or Religion to interfere with your liberty of
righteous action.

Insidiously, aristocratic ideas are striving to cross the threshold of
your Temple of Equality. Guard well its doorways. Sacrilegious hands
are seeking to smirch the records of your courts of justice; let your
vengeance fall swiftly upon the offenders.

On the fair face of your Goddess of Liberty there is a troubled frown;
beware lest she turn from you in anger. Spotless is her snowy robe,
children of earth's greatest Republic. See to it. See to it that in
the coming years you shall not stain it with your heart's best blood.

May the angels who watch over the destinies of nations be strong enough
to guide through the perilous future your "Ship of State," which,
through calm and storm steers toward an unknown shore. Amen! Amen!

Madame, our spirit realms are deeply interested, not only in the
progress of the United States of North America, but of the entire
continent. It is a matter for regret that your people do not more fully
realize _that they are an object lesson for all the other nations of
Earth_. The heart-beats of your Republic send a vitalizing current
through all the peoples of our planet. How all-important then, that
this life current shall flow unpolluted to the hearts and brains of all
nations.

Madame, through your kindly attention to my words you have made me your
debtor, but I feel assured that if these friends can bear with me, I
may ask as much of your courtesy.

Now, with your permission, we propose conferring on you a new name.
In madame there is no comradeship. Medium you do not fancy. Sara
is somewhat familiar. Gentol[a:], an Ento name, we consider very
appropriate. Will you allow us to know you by this name, whose
significance you understand? Yes? Then with Love and Truth as sponsors,
you shall be to us Gentol[a:].

George--Congratulations are in order. With tenderest, truest affection,
I offer mine.

De L'Ester--As all are children of The One, I offer a brother's love
and devotion.

Agassiz--De L'Ester's sentiment is also mine.

Humboldt--And mine, too, our friend, our sister.

Inez--And mine, for my sister by birth and "for love's sake."

Gentola--Friends, this is a strange christening, and for a time, I
fancy that my new name will to me seem equally strange. I promise you
that I shall strive to be all that it signifies.

Bruno--We chose the name because we know that it indicates your nature,
which is in tune with all that is best in the human.

Now, Gentol[a:], what I have to say is in line with the pursuits of our
friends, Agassiz and Von Humboldt, consequently, quite aside from the
science which engages me. But, having, with George, and other friends,
explored this portion of Ento it is thought that I am qualified to
offer you such information as may be pertinent to the present stage
of our mission. On Ento during a remote age, there existed certain
amphibious creatures so enormously large and unwieldy that only through
their prodigious strength could they have coped with other fierce,
active, gigantic forms of that early time. Scarcely can one realize
their size, their uncouth forms or their extreme ferocity, which
impelled them to a continuous warfare against not only their own kind,
but against other species equally huge and aggressive. As has been
said, Spirits, on our side of life, sufficiently progressed, can and do
visit Planets, not only of our Solar System, but of other systems of
worlds, and now, as at all times, there are Planets of our and other
systems evolved to a degree analogous to that of Ento, during the age
in which these and similar creatures existed. Through observation of
conditions obtaining on such Planets, we arrive at a conception of
the appalling conditions that must have existed on Ento during the
Reptilian Age, when the steaming waters teemed with countless life
forms and on unstable shores huge creatures fought to the death,
filling the hot, moisture-laden atmosphere with their savage cries,
roarings and hissings.

Cunning, sagacity, instinct, call it what we may, is an accumulated
unfoldment of innate ability expressed as the sum of inherited
experiences; hence, on Ento, in that age, the cunningest, the
strongest, the most active and tenacious of certain species survived
the many calamitous occurrences which swept out of existence myriad
reptilian creatures. Yes, modified through environments, even yet pigmy
representatives of ancient, huge ancestors inhabit the watery divisions
of Ento.

Previous to the spiritualized man epoch there was an enormous
production and destruction of life forms, and in time Ento became a
vast repository of fossilized remains. Time, climatic changes and
other causes so contributed to their destruction that only petrified
specimens of the larger and later reptiles are occasionally discovered.
How long ago did the earliest Ento humans appear? Gentol[a:], the
germinal man of Ento appeared when the first life cells swarmed in
the warm waters of the young Planet. But the evolved human, the
Spiritualized Man, became conscious of himself long after the great
creatures of the Reptilian Age had of necessity yielded place to no
less huge quadrupeds, who were more highly evolved expressions of life.

When one speaks of an event as having occurred some hundreds of
thousands of years gone, in the mind of an uninformed auditor it is
likely to occasion a sense of incredulity. But I safely may say that
the lapse of time which merged the Reptilian into the Mammalian Age,
during which came to the evolved human animal his crowning glory, _a
spiritualized, conscious existence_, if measured by years, might be
compared with the countless sands upon the seashore.

Now we must recur to the matter under consideration. As you perceive,
this division of the plain extends from the base of the mountain to
the verge of this extensive morass, which rests in a basin-shaped
formation of limestone. The plain itself is the result of ages of
attrition and disintegration of the foothills of the mountain chain,
and the morass is the result of many centuries of accumulated remains
of vegetable growths and débris washed from mountain and plain into
the basin of what once was one of a chain of fresh water lakes.
Its southern rim is a rather narrow ledge of limestone, once of
considerable elevation, but now a mere barrier between the morass and
a much lower level. Prior to the filling up of the lake it extended
westward quite thirty English miles, where it connected with a series
of smaller lakes leading into a great fresh water lake known to the
Entoans as Lois[a:] Bascam[a:], of which later on you will learn more.
For the double purpose of draining the morass, thus rendering it
tillable, and also that the mountain streams flowing into it may be
used for irrigation of the lands southward at the foot of the ledge, a
great basin is being excavated, into which they will be led. Already
the ledge has been pierced to afford them egress.

At a depth of about eighty feet the excavators unearthed some
petrifications of remote life forms. One of a prodigious size, has,
among the learned ones, occasioned excited interest. Savants from all
over the Planet are hastening to examine the fossils, especially the
larger one, and to no doubt talk learnedly of those relics of bygone
ages. When, very recently, George and I visited the spot we learned
that the large petrifaction is the well preserved skeleton of an
amphibian quite sixty feet in length. How came it there? One can only
conjecture as to that. Certainly there was a time when the temperature
of this latitude was much higher than at present, and the waters of
the entire chain of lakes teemed with forms of life now extinct. It
is quite as certain that the enormous spring floods so increased the
volume of the lakes that their waters then poured over the ledge,
which was loftier than it now is. It is not so certain as to how the
amphibian came to find lodgment at the base of the ledge. Perhaps,
in fleeing from a foe it rushed over the ledge, or having through
some mischance lost its life, its body may have been swept over it,
thus adding its skeleton to an already large accumulation of similar
structures. George and I observed a number of learned men and women
eagerly examining and discussing the probabilities and possibilities
relating to the great fossil, which is but slightly mutilated and is to
be removed to some museum.

As we looked and listened we were somewhat amused by the remarks of
some of the assemblage who evidently were quite sincere in their
statements.

One studious looking man mildly declared that the Holy writings clearly
intimated that in the beginning Andûman[a:] created from within Himself
all things. Another man warmly disputed this declaration on the basis
that Andûman[a:] being perfect, could not out of his own Personality
have created creatures so monstrous, so hideous as was this and many
others. No, clearly it was through a misunderstanding of the Holy
writings that such an illogical conclusion could be arrived at. Then
a person of great dignity of mien gave his opinion, which, evidently,
he considered final, that in the beginning, after Andûman[a:] created
Astranol[a:] and His messengers, He created Ento. Having prepared homes
suited to their needs He created all living creatures. Some He found
unsuited to His pleasure; such He destroyed, as is evidenced in these
fossilized structures, which, for the most part, find no correspondence
in creatures now existing. Having perfected His designs, He, _out
of Himself_, created His children who perpetually should dwell on
Ento. Then, with conviction, he exclaimed: Andûman[a:], through His
Messengers, who dwell in the best realms of Astranol[a:], revealed to
His children the origin of all things, all of which is contained in the
Holy writings, and I call His Messengers to witness that I, Kēlof[a:]
Irdomyn, am not so impious as to question His divine words.

No one seemed inclined to dispute with this expounder of mysteries and
with a self-satisfied air he resumed his critical examination of the
ancient fossil.

To be told that in nearly all directions the Entoans are further
advanced than are the peoples of Earth, and in a breath to bring you
face to face with their extremely circumscribed and absurd religious
ideas and beliefs, out of which have grown equally circumscribed and
absurd notions relating to certain scientific matters, naturally, may
occasion you to hesitate as to your acceptance of other statements we
have made and others yet to follow. Realizing this, we consider it
advisable to offer an explanation of a seeming paradox.

Through the process of unfoldment, spiritualized humans grow into
clearer, higher conceptions of personality. Through ages of ignorance
and savagery intuitively they grope their ways toward truth, which,
like a beacon light, beckons them onward and upward, and slowly, but
surely, their consciousness grows and unfolds as lotus blooms grow and
unfold from ooze and darkness into sunlight. _Thus, through ages the
Entoans evolved into a recognition of self as personality, but not
as spirit_, for Andûman[a:], being to them a Material Personality,
naturally, they could not conceive of aught more sublimated than their
Creator. Still their unrecognized spiritual forces inevitably urged
them forward, and in their history a period arrived when to a degree,
society became organized, and about certain centres congregated
those most learned in such sciences and arts as had resulted from
ages of evolution. As yet the masses were almost wholly uneducated,
consequently their ideas relating to social obligations and other
niceties of civilization were extremely crude. Wars between different
nations were continually waged, and of necessity, the weaker succumbed
to the stronger. Selfish, ambitious, cruel and successful leaders
grew arrogant, and the people were impoverished and enslaved and such
civilization as existed seemed threatened with extinction.

It is a fact that under adverse conditions, humanity degenerates more
rapidly than under favoring conditions it is capable of progression.
Were this truth generally recognized, it might act as a deterrent
against the reckless, criminally foolish conduct of nations who rush
into wars as though they were a pleasurable pastime, rather than
a damning process for the breeding of generations of preordained
murderers, suicides, thieves and prostitutes--the inevitable results of
inherited tendencies.

The Entoans, being no exception to a universal rule, were in a
deplorable condition, when a memorable epoch arrived which ushered
into mortal existence a man fitted for his arduous mission. A man wise
and humane beyond any one of his time. A man of high courage, firm
will, a fine sense of justice and a wonderful ability for controlling
other men. About him he gathered not only an immense army of soldiery,
but all who cared for their own safety and the welfare of the people,
hastened to join him in his efforts to bring about a better state of
affairs. In an incredibly brief time he subdued the vicious oppressors
of the people. Forced warring elements into peaceful subjection.
Established in the fullest sense, a centralized government, based
upon equitable principles. Autocratic, certainly it was, but with the
peculiar feature that rulers and people should he amenable to the same
laws. When through peace and prosperity the peoples of the Planet were
brought into harmonious relations with each other and with their newly
found freedom from oppression and dissension, Zoifan Ouidas, their
deliverer and Supreme Ruler announced that through a shining messenger,
Andûman[a:] had communicated to him certain instructions relating to
His now obedient children. A congress of Ento's learned and pious ones
having been convened, Zoifan Ouidas made known the revelation he had
received which constituted a basis for what was to be accepted as the
Holy writings. To this revelation was added such beliefs and legends as
appeared reasonable and desirable, and from these writings a creed was
formulated and a ritual established.

To this day the creed remains unchanged, but from time to time the
ritual has been added to or modified to suit the views or aims of an
all-powerful priesthood.

Since the establishment of their national religion, centuries have
been added to centuries. Steadily the generations of Entoans have been
evolving, and were it not that an unyielding ecclesiasticism has held
them in spiritual bondage, this closing of their fiftieth century of
peace and equal rights for all would find them not only with knowledge
of all the arts, but of all the sciences known to the people of our
planet, and their faces on which pathos, sorrow and despair are written
in every line would be beaming with the priceless consciousness of a
continuity of existence which ere now should have been a possession of
the plane of their unfoldment.

To a degree you now may comprehend the paradoxical situation,
and I trust that what I have related, may serve to explain other
incongruities which from time to time may attract your attention.

De L'Ester--George, with an excited air, is returning from the
excavation. What so perturbs you, mon ami?

George--Hasten, friends, hasten. A professor is about to hold an
autopsy over the remains of the ancient amphibian, and I fancy it will
be an edifying occasion.

De L'Ester--We immediately will accompany you. You with Inez and our
friends will lead the way. Gentol[a:], allow me to aid you. Direct your
gaze southward, and toward the right. Yes, quite a large assemblage
which will afford you an opportunity of seeing some of the eminent
personages of Ento, scientists, writers and others.

We need not approach nearer. Gentol[a:], attend closely to what the
very modest and intellectual appearing Professor may say. I shall
translate it word for word.

Professor--I have been requested to express an opinion as to what
order of life this fossilized structure may represent. Also as to the
probable date of its existence. Speaking with exactitude, this creature
was, like its diminutive descendants of the present, at home on the
land, or in the waters of Ento's lakes and rivers of temperate and
warmer climes. I need only allude to a fact that is well understood
that all this order of life, of which in ancient times there was a
greater variety than now exists, belongs to the Acrocustēno ingo-lavion
(amphibious flesh-eaters). Of the probable date of the creature's
existence I hesitate to speak. In these days many men and women
of learning and research find themselves in a state of unrest and
indecision. On one hand science demonstrates what appears to be facts.
On the other hand these apparent facts are opposed by the declarations
of our Holy writings. To state the matter briefly through ancient
records we learn that nearly two hundred centuries have elapsed since
the Creation of our beloved Ento. Our Holy writings declare the same,
and also make mention of and describe huge forms of life similar to,
if not exactly like this as having been of the first created creatures
who long previous to the establishment of our Holy religion had become
extinct.

How shall I proceed? Step by step scientific research has led us
backward, and now we face the indisputable fact that in this fossilized
structure, and the formations about it is positive evidence that the
creation of Ento dates incalculably further back than two hundred
centuries.

Friends, how shall we reconcile the positive statements of our Holy
writings, with this equally positive statement in stone? May the gods
be merciful, for, alas, I see no way out of the dilemma, and I refuse
to further incur the wrath of Andûman[a:]'s messengers.

Bruno--This person is in a fair way to get himself into trouble. As we
read the thoughts of the assemblage we learn that were some of them
as outspoken as this professor he would not find himself alone in his
skepticism. As it is a craven fear of their gods and the priesthood
seals their lips, and as the professor with a troubled face turns away,
they regard him with an air of disapproval.

In the reports these scribes are writing many learned terms will be
used, many learned opinions expressed, and doubtless many learned lies
will be told, all for the glory of Andûman[a:], to whom it is believed
His messengers will bear an account of these proceedings.

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], you will attempt a description of this scene.
You need not hesitate. Where you may fail we will prompt you.

Gentol[a:]--Extending eastward and westward I see a not very broad
ledge of limestone rock. On its southern side it is so perpendicular
and its surface is so smooth that it presents the effect of well
executed masonry. I cannot estimate the distance from where the
petrifactions lie on a broad shelf-like projection to the top of the
ledge, or from the projection to the bottom of the excavation.

De L'Ester--From the projection to the top of the ledge is quite one
hundred feet, but at the time of the creature's misadventure the
altitude of the ledge must have been considerably greater. From the
projection to the bottom of the excavation the distance is, I should
say, about eighty feet.

Gentola--On the south side of the ledge an immense excavation is being
made. On the north side the morass is on a level with the top of the
ledge, but on the south side the ground slopes rather abruptly to a
plain which appears to greatly need irrigation.

Aside from the large and very perfect petrifaction there are numerous
smaller ones which do not appear to interest the investigators. Indeed
they are in a very fragmentary state, and I suspect that my description
is of the same character.

I see a large number of men at work in the excavation. Some are engaged
in lining the sides with huge cut stones, which are mechanically lifted
and laid with much precision, some kind of cement being used to fill
the interstices. Other men attend the working of scoops, which take up
great quantities of soil, which is hoisted to the top of the excavation
and dumped into receptacles which run swiftly on a tramway to the plain
where it is thrown out, the empty receptacles returning on another
track. Nearly all of the labor is done by machinery, but I cannot say
what the motive power may be.

De L'Ester--Electricity furnishes the motive power, not only for those
machines, but as you will have occasion to observe for nearly all
mechanical purposes of the Entoans.

Gentola--One noticeable feature of this scene is the behavior of those
laborers who move about so quietly and speak in such a polite and
gentle fashion. The work proceeds very expeditiously, yet no one seems
in haste, or exhibits the least excitement or impatience.

How very tall those dark skinned men are, and they are so erect and
finely proportioned. Yes, notwithstanding their lustrous bronze
complexions they certainly are handsome men. Their long, black, wavy
hair, large dark eyes, regular features and very intelligent expression
is in strong contrast with the fair complexioned, brown or blond
haired, gray or blue eyed, and smaller men who are working on the
tramways.

All, both dark or fair, wear their hair to their shoulders, parted in
the middle or on one side, pushed well back from the forehead and held
in place by what appears to be fillets of silver. All wear shapely,
half loose garments, reaching to the knees, and the lower limbs are
clothed in loose fitting--well, as I do not know the Ento name, I shall
say trowsers.

De L'Ester--The Ento name for the upper garment is lenivo. For the
trowsers, as nearly as I can pronounce it, the Ento name is birrsch.
And for the foot covering, which you perceive is a very nicely formed
shoe, not of leather, but of a manufactured material, the name is--no,
not fettos, but pfettos.

We now will move to the tented space, and in a general way, but
briefly, you will further describe the appearance of those men and
women who are engaged in quiet discussion over fragments of the smaller
fossils.

Gentola--Both men and women of the dark skinned race are exceedingly
tall. The men are very handsome, very distinguished looking, with a
dignity of bearing quite devoid of ostentation.

The women are very beautiful, very graceful, very gentle, and quiet,
and with such fine, intelligent expression, that I cannot find words to
express my sense of their superiority to any women I ever have seen.

I do not quite so much admire the fair skinned men and women who are
more slightly built, but who are taller and stouter than any earth race
that I know of, and certainly they are in appearance very admirable.

Bruno, were you sufficiently tall, you might claim kindred with some
of those handsome, olive skinned men and women, who are but slightly
darker than yourself. They appear to represent one race, the bronze
complexioned ones another, the fair skinned men and women an entirely
different race.

It seems odd that the men, as well as the women, wear their hair long
and flowing. The hair of the men to their shoulders, that of the women
quite below their waists, and all wear fillets of various kinds. I must
say that I think the effect very pretty. As for the garments of both
sexes, they seem to me simply perfection, not at all voluminous, but
loose, graceful and of textures so admirable as to weave and coloring
that seldom have I seen fabrics so beautiful.

De L'Ester--You have mentioned the fillets worn by both sexes. The
metals, the width, form and settings of the fillets indicate the
official positions and occupations of the wearers. Not alone are they
worn for convenience or as ornaments, but also as badges of certain
distinctions, for which all are urged to strive. Class distinctions
in the sense of caste do not exist, and all are incited to a spirit
of emulation in the direction of meritorious achievements, which are
considered the only real distinctions. From the laborer yonder to the
Supreme Ruler, all men and women strive to attain to the utmost of
their capabilities. The cut, color, ornamentation and other features
of apparel also indicate the position and occupation of the wearer. As
our mission progresses you will have opportunities of further observing
such matters.

No, for decorative purposes the Entoans do not wear head coverings.
They too much prize their beautiful, abundant hair to risk such
abominations as hats and bonnets. Then, too, their taste is too finely
cultivated to admit of personal disfigurement.

Gentola--I commend both their judgment and taste, and I wish I might
understand what those learned persons are saying. The scene itself
I shall not soon forget. It is worth the experiences of an ordinary
lifetime.

De L'Ester--These friends and I possess a general knowledge of the
language, but of scientific technicalities we know next to nothing. If
we did both time and space are too limited to devote ourselves to their
consideration.

Not another word. We have held you long enough. One momentary,
comprehensive glance at the scene and then Earthward. George and Inez
will bear you swiftly to your quiet home. Au revoir.

George--Safe you are in your own room, and some one desires to enter.
It is your friend, Mrs. S----le, who always brings you flowers.

May divine and loving influences abide with you until we again come for
you. Adieu.




CHAPTER VI.

INIDORA AND GENESSANO.


De L'Ester--Like musical chords touched by unskilled fingers are your
thoughts, Gentol[a:]. For some minutes we have watched your hurried
preparations for our journey and it is evident that, though your
spiritual aspirations reach out toward highest ideals, material duties
equally claim your attention. Yours is a harmonious combination of
the Mary and Martha natures. Martha, now, will please close her eyes,
fold her active, capable hands and rest while Mary shall accompany us
starward.

We too, wish that it might be possible for you in your fully conscious
moments to recall the memory of events, scenes and other matters
pertaining to our journeys. As you cannot, that which your soul self
will be made to write must serve as a record of your experiences while
absent from your body. And when under my supervision you will, for
publication rewrite the record, you will vividly realize all that has
or will occur during our mission. You now are in a tranquil state and
we will be off. George, we are ready.

Ah, how grand, how exhilarating is the movement of this inconceivably
swift magnetic current, bearing us on its glowing, undulating bosom
toward our destination, which we are nearing. Lower, lower, George.
Look downward now, Gentol[a:], for we are over the morass.

We perceive that the learned visitors have departed and that the
great fossil is being carefully prepared for removal. The ledge is
being further pierced to afford a passage for the waters of the
morass, and the excavation is nearly completed. Some time we again
will pass this way to observe the result of the skill and labor
expended in accomplishing so considerable an undertaking. This being an
agricultural region, the irrigating reservoir will greatly add to its
fertility.

We now will move southward for about fifty miles, and you will observe
how thickly populated is the region over which we shall pass and that
the inhabitants enjoy a degree of the comforts and luxuries of life
found only among a highly civilized, consequently prosperous, people.
Observe too, the fine architectural effects, the well tilled fields
and roadways as smooth and level as floors. And let me tell you, fine
roadways always indicate an advanced civilization.

You are surprised at the paucity of animal life, but if you will
consider that but few Entoans are flesh eaters, that but a limited
number of milch animals, known as Vochas, are required; that
agricultural machinery and most vehicles are propelled by electrical
appliances, you will perceive the reasons why animals are not more in
evidence. However, on portions of the Planet there are herds of animals
known as Angossa, which are bred solely for their wool. By but one
race, who are flesh eaters, are they used as food.

Having reached the southern limit of this cultivated plain, we now
will turn eastward. Yes, owing to porosity of the soil throughout this
region irrigation is prevalent. Now that we are about to lose sight of
the mountain range, it occurs to me that I have neglected to acquaint
you with its name, which is Keneto alista. The exact significance of
Keneto I cannot find in your language, but the shades of meaning would
include giantlike, enormous, immense and the like. Alista is the Ento
word for mountain. From northeast to southwest its length is about two
hundred miles, and for the most part it lies almost parallel with the
equator. Its greatest elevation is but little more than 6,000 feet
above sea level, and among mountain ranges north of the equator it
takes first rank.

We now approach a region whose natural water supply is quite
exceptional and the inhabitants equally so. To say why would but mar
your interest in what may come under your observation. We now will
descend to yonder slight elevation, and you, Gentol[a:], will speak of
whatever to you may appear noteworthy.

Gentola--All about us is a level country, luxuriantly clothed with
grains, grasses, flowers, shrubs and groves of great forest trees.
Here and there are gray stone buildings, some quite large, others
smaller--apparently outbuildings. At a distance are a few animals like
some we have seen elsewhere. In front of us is a large meadow on which
the grass grows luxuriantly and at its further side, in a grove of
great trees, is a rather large gray stone building with smaller ones
nearby. From that direction a man and woman come toward us; both are
taller than any persons I have seen on Ento. Really, they are gigantic
in stature and well proportioned. They are dark skinned, black haired
and black eyed, and in their faces is an expression of gentleness and
simplicity which renders them quite attractive. Both are clothed in
loose garments of what appears to be a coarse, brown woolen cloth. The
upper garment of the man falls a little below his knees and he wears
what you term birrsch (trowsers) of the same cloth, and pfettaa (shoes)
of what seems to be leather, or a material very like it. His heavy
black locks are held back by a really pretty filagree, silver fillet,
which is wider in front than at the sides or back of the head. The
rather loose fitting upper garment of the woman falls nearly to her
feet, which are incased in shoes similar to those worn by the man. The
distinguishing feature of her very simple costume is the queer head
ornament she wears. It is very like a gilt bird cage without top or
bottom. The lower band fits closely about her head and her long, black
hair is drawn upward through the cage, falling over the upper band and
down onto her shoulders in a heavy fringe. Sheltered, as though under
a canopy, she walks behind the man, and both seem to be searching in
the grass for something. Carefully parting the grass with his hands,
the man eagerly hastens forward, snatching at some creature running
away from him. Now he springs forward and seizes--ugh, it is a large
serpent, and he with one stroke of a large knife severs it in pieces.
The woman laughs delightedly, and pats him on the back, but evidently
the hunt is not ended, for Giant resumes his search in the tall grass,
and Giantess follows timidly. Now he waves her back, and with a great
leap he has caught another serpent, which he also decapitates and casts
from him. You may laugh at me if you like, but I am not fond of snakes.
An inherited aversion? Perhaps so, and a very positive one.

From their exultant exclamations, it is apparent that Giant and
Giantess are greatly elated over the destruction of the serpents. De
L'Ester, do you understand what Giant is saying?

De L'Ester--He says "Hildian, Gandûlan[a:][a:] salēno ran[a:]vû
cominist[a:] testo. Ino dû lan[a:]. Ah, viamon dûl[a:] testo, landisto
osten vi, on[a:] pr[a:]-o Gentol[a:]." This is not pure Ento, but a
dialect of this race. I can only attempt a very free translation of
what he has said. Hildian is the woman's name, and he says, "The bad
serpents are killed, and I am glad. Ah, they are dead, and can no more
harm thee, dear." Listen, Giantess calls some one.

Giantess--Oua[a:]men istan! Oua[a:]men istan! Gandûlan[a:], fanistû
testo.

De L'Ester--In answer to her reassuring call, "That surely the serpents
are dead," two boys and a girl are bounding across the meadow, and as
they rush to their mother's arms, they fill the air with their excited
exclamations and inquiries. Now Giant swings the girl to his shoulder,
and like a conquering hero, leads the way toward the dwelling. The boys
cling to the mother's gown, and all follow the father who relates to
the delighted children the story of his prowess.

We will follow them to the dwelling, which is a fair example of the
homes of this giant race. All their dwellings are built of stone, and
though simply constructed, are well suited to their requirements. The
average height of this pastoral race is quite eight feet and they are
symmetrically proportioned. They are affectionate, gentle, industrious,
devoted to their families, and in their way, intensely religious. They
are the Kenēto Soûvanallo, which I shall translate as meaning giant
flesh eaters. They never intermarry with other races, and what they now
are as a race they have been for as far back as their history reaches.
They cultivate only such grains, fruits and vegetables as their needs
require, their chief sustenance and possession being animals, which
are herded in the surrounding luxuriant grass lands. These animals are
unlike any we have shown you, later we will afford you an opportunity
of seeing them. The region occupied by this race is about two hundred
miles long by one hundred and fifty in width, and its southern border
approaches equatorial lands. You now will describe the exterior of this
dwelling.

Gentola--It is built of a grayish stone, the surface rather rough, but
the stones are very accurately fitted and cemented. It is two stories
high and of ample width, and there are a number of windows filled in
with what looks like glass. Some stone steps lead up to the front door
and a flight of stone steps at the north side of the house leads up to
the roof, which slopes a little from front to rear. Around the roof is
a low balustrade, and spread all over it are several kinds of fruits
drying in the warm sunshine. I think that is all I can say of the
exterior. As I do not possess fine descriptive ability I fear that I
fail to convey adequate ideas of things.

De L'Ester--You are too modest. True, your style is not ornate, but you
possess the greater virtues of conscientiousness and conciseness. We
now will enter and learn what of interest the interior of the dwelling
may offer. This hallway, running the depth of the house, divides it
equally, and in the front room on our left, on a couch covered with
skins, lies Giant, talking excitedly with Giantess. I gather from their
conversation that in this region the presence of venomous serpents is
very uncommon, but that there are harmless varieties, which these flesh
eating giants consider delicacies. No, they are true serpents, and not
allied to the eel, which on Ento has some close kindred, known as Chifa.

We now will look into the room across the hallway. Ah, this is the
sanctum sanctorum, the invariable feature of all rural Ento dwellings,
not pretentious enough to afford an Istoira. On the draped altar are
fruits and flowers and the floor is covered by a really handsome rug.
These gentle, simple minded folk are faithful observers of the all
pervading religion, and their spiritual conceptions are on a level with
those of their teachers, the priesthood, who regard Andûman[a:] and
Gods and Goddesses as personalities who are to be adored, or appeased,
as occasions may require. With great sincerity they fulfill their
religious obligations and peacefully await whatever of good or ill may
come to them.

Ah, Giant, Giantess and the children have left the house and are
wending their way toward the forest. During their absence we will look
through the dwelling. In this and the adjoining sleeping room are
couches, tables, chairs, some garments and nothing more. We now will
ascend the stairway to learn what may be on the upper floor. As is the
custom of this race, the upper floor is used for storage purposes, and
here are grains, fruits and nuts in abundance. You will describe the
contents of some of these receptacles.

Gentola--Here are two varieties of berries, and were I on earth I
should say that they are raspberries and blackberries. Taste them?
Shall I? They are slightly acidulous and well flavored, but do not
taste like either raspberries or blackberries. These pretty scarlet
berries look like very large cranberries.

De L'Ester--Do not taste them; they are not berries, but what you may
term Ento Capsicum.

Gentola--Thanks for your warning. I have a sort of mania for tasting
things, so, if you do not object, I shall taste this grapelike fruit.
It is delicious, quite like fine raisins. I am especially fond of
grapes, so, if in the dim future I must again become re-embodied,
this fine fruit might induce in me a desire to be reborn on Ento. De
L'Ester, that reminds me of a question I have wished to ask. After the
change called death can spirits choose their homes? Yes, I mean the
locality and their manner of living.

De L'Ester--Time and opportunity permitting, I always am pleased to
reply to your questions. As both are limited I must reply briefly.
_Spirits, while yet in the physical body, in a sense earn their
homes_, or places, they must occupy on our side of life, and also in
a sense they have a _choice_ as to the place of their abode, but the
_choice_ must be made while on the physical plane. As you have learned,
spirits are entities, individualized personalities, requiring homes,
associations and pursuits. According as life on the physical plane has
been elevated, pure, loving, true, or the reverse, so are spirit homes
and pursuits beautiful and supremely enjoyable, or lamentably wretched.
All newly-freed spirits gravitate to the sphere and condition for which
their degree of evolvement has fitted them, there to remain until
they have progressed to a more exalted state of being. Do all spirits
progress? Most assuredly. Evolution is not confined to the physical
plane. Progress, everywhere, is continuous. Yes, spirits, who through
countless trials and experiences have _earned_ the exalted position of
teachers, lovingly, patiently labor to aid all unevolved freed spirits
to outgrow conditions which, like soiled garments, cling to those of
the lower or Earth spirit sphere. Seldom does a newly-freed spirit
gravitate to the higher realms. Only exalted spirits, _who, for some
special purpose, have become re-embodied_, do, when freed from the
physical body, return to their former place of abode, or, perhaps, to a
higher sphere.

The legend of Jacob's ladder, on which angels descended and ascended
into heaven, is a fitting symbol of the spirit's progress. Ever
descending angel teachers reach downward to those walking in darkness
on both the mortal and the spirit side of life, instructing, inspiring,
encouraging and strengthening them, until emerging _from the shadows_
of sense, their quickened vision perceives the descending angels of
love, and with eager, outreaching hands and trembling feet, they strive
to climb the ladder of eternal progress, _finding on each round the
home, the place, the plane suited to the degree of their advancement_.
Have I made myself understood?

Gentola--Yes, as far as I am fitted to comprehend such an abstruse
matter. Another question occurs to me. You have said that certain Ento
and other planetary spirits visit Earth's spirit spheres. Can they also
come to our planet, as you and other spirits come?

De L'Ester--Yes, after they have learned how to accommodate themselves
to Earth's conditions. Some Ento friends who are learning this strange
process soon will be able to visit you in your own home. Not another
question, I beg. We have already consumed too much time.

George--If you are ready to descend from celestial to terrestrial
affairs, come to the adjoining room, Gentol[a:], and tell us what you
think of its contents.

Gentola--What do I think of its contents? Well, I think that if these
ears are not corn they are surprisingly like it, and in this round
receptacle is a white grain very like, though considerably larger
than grains of rice. And here is a small, round, black grain of which
evidently this dark meal is a product. I wonder if Giantess makes bread
of it? What a noise! What is it, De L'Ester?

De L'Ester--As there is nothing more of note here, we will learn what
occasions the disturbance. Ah, it is the family returning, and what
a spectacle! Giant holding at arm's length a reptile which writhes
and coils about his arm, and now, playfully, he thrusts it toward the
children, who are in an ecstasy of excitement and delight.

Giantess does not appear to have an aversion for snakes, for see, she
takes from her spouse the harmless ophidian, allowing it to coil about
her arms and holding it so that the children may toy with it. Now she
brings it into the house, and very unceremoniously cuts off its head,
skins it, cuts it in pieces, which she tosses into a large cooking
vessel, adds some seasoning, covers the vessel and suspends it over
the fire, which Giant has kindled in the great stone fireplace. Now
she puts into a broad, deep pan, some of the dark colored meal we have
seen on the upper floor, adds milk until the pan is two-thirds full
of a thin batter, and, with the addition of some honey and a quantity
of yellow sliced fruit, we have before us a pudding which, if not to
the queen's taste, is quite to the taste of our Giant friends. Yes,
generally, the Entoans use cooking stoves of various kinds, but these
Souvanallos appear content with a more primitive method. The brazier
over which the pudding is boiling and bubbling is something of a
compromise between a fireplace and a stove.

As you have learned that the Entoans have both milch animals and bees,
you no longer are surprised that they have both milk and honey. They
also have sugar as excellent as you have on Earth.

Have you observed the animal lying under the projection near the
fireplace? What a short-legged, long-bodied creature it is, and as
spotted as a leopard, which, but for its short legs, it closely
resembles. Now it yawns, stretches itself, and follows Giantess
about, purring and rubbing itself against her garments, and as she
stoops and smooths its glossy fur in a caressing tone she murmurs:
"Fenēt[a:], Fenēt[a:], Inēvo Gandûlan[a:], casto seffil[a:] dissim[a:].
Gandûlan[a:] essin [a:] tuno, espen dûro."

What does she say? What I have learned of the Ento language I have
learned correctly, so find it difficult to translate this dialect.
The sense of what she says is about this: "Fenēt[a:], Fenēt[a:], you
shall have some of the serpent broth. The serpent will soon be cooked."
Fenēt[a:] appears to understand his mistress's hospitable intention
and he has taken a position where he can keep an eye on the odorous
mess.

Animals generally can perceive spirits. Approach Fenēt[a:], Gentol[a:].
He snarls and shrinks from you as though affrighted, and Giantess seems
greatly surprised at the behavior of her pet. Now touch her hands. She
regards one hand, now the other, evidently puzzled over the peculiar
sensation. Touch both her hands and face. She cries out in alarm,
looking about her fearfully. Again touch her face. She flies to Giant
and clings to him, crying, "Gandûlan[a:], oin[a:] dos [a:] corrend[a:],
espen v[a:]o [a:] tos[a:] testo."

She tells him that the serpent's life is not gone, that it or something
has touched her. Valiantly Giant lifts the cover from the cooking
vessel and critically inspects the contents. With evident satisfaction
he reassuringly says: "Gandûlan[a:], [a:] testo, espen eno nûy[a:]n
dûro." Giantess, as though doubting his assertion, that not only is the
serpent dead but well cooked, timidly approaches and takes a rather
furtive look at the bubbling mess. Apparently satisfied that no harm
can come from that quarter, she excitedly relates her experience, to
which Giant listens sympathizingly but evidently incredulously. Not so
Fenēt[a:], who has crawled under the projection and is regarding us
with strong disfavor, but is keeping a sharp outlook for the promised
savory stew. As Giantess, with nervous apprehensive glances, stirs some
meal into the mess the escaping odor fills the room and Giant says
approvingly: "Es fûy[a:]n mûs[a:]," and Fenēt[a:] quite agrees with
his master, that the odor is good, so tempting, indeed, that he seems
inclined to crawl out of his lair, but seeing such uncanny folk about,
he draws back. On the long table across the front of the room Giantess
places plates, spoons and drinking cups. Into a large deep platter
she ladles the stew and carries it steaming to the table. The pudding
follows and the luncheon is ready. Giant places some seats, while from
the rear doorway Giantess calls, "Ferr[a:]nd, Tēd[a:], Listano," and
the children rush into the house and to their seats at the table. The
mother serves the father and them bountifully and Fenēta, reassured by
the coaxing invitation of his mistress and the children, goes shyly to
the generous platter of stew placed for him near his mistress's feet.

This meal is an appetizer for a more substantial one later in the day,
and as two of our Ento friends are to join us here we may witness it,
not that it is likely to be of particular interest, but it is a part of
our plan to show you various features of Ento life. While awaiting the
arrival of our friends we will further observe this family.

Gentola--What an incongruity there is between the stature of these
children and their apparent ages. The boys are nearly as tall as any
of you gentlemen, and the girl is nearly the height of a medium-sized
woman. I wonder how old they may be?

De L'Ester--I should say that their respective ages are about eight,
ten and twelve years. The luncheon is ended and the family are
repairing to the sanctuary. The father with a boy on either side of
him, the mother with the girl by her side, stand before the altar
with bowed heads and outreaching hands. Reverently the father returns
thanks, the mother and children repeating after him: "Andûman[a:],
Andûman[a:], Omi felistû, Gandûlanos ino testo. Omi felistû ond[a:] ino
omi mûs[a:] fer-ûj[a:], Oir[a:]h, Oir[a:]h, Oir[a:]h."

The sense of this is: "Supreme One, Supreme One. We offer thanks that
the venomous serpents are dead, and again we offer thanks for the good
one we have eaten." Oir[a:]h means praise, thanks, it is so, and the
like.

The children return to their play. Giant reclines on the couch,
Giantess busies herself with household affairs, and Fenēta has
retreated to his lair, from whence he suspiciously but rather drowsily
watches our movements. We now will go out under the trees to await the
coming of our friends.

The Souvanallos occupy a position midway between Ento's most advanced
races and several isolated communities of people who are little more
than semi-civilized, yet who are far from a condition of barbarism.
They, like nearly all the Entoans, through a reverential regard
for life, abstain from eating the flesh of animals, yet, rather
illogically, all eat fishes of various kinds. The Souvanallos alone
raise herds of angossa for food and for their wool, which they exchange
for such commodities as they require, in this manner procuring textile
fabrics, household furniture and utensils, agricultural implements,
ornaments for personal adornment and so on. In no sense are they
artisans. Their dwellings and other structures are erected by men of
other lands, and such materials as are not procurable at home are
brought by air or other transportation from elsewhere. Their priests
are of their own race, they having been from early youth trained
and educated for the office. They instruct the people in religion,
in government, and in educational branches, officiate at marriages,
at funerals, and adjust any differences between neighbors. Being a
truthful, virtuous, generous and loving people, differences seldom
occur to mar the serenity of their lives.

Again the family go toward the forest, and yonder are our Ento spirit
friends, Inidor[a:] and Genessano, who are calling to us a greeting.

Genessano--Loh[a:]û, Loh[a:]û, ēmanos. Itsu fon ipsoien?

De L'Ester--We impatiently have awaited your coming and truly you are
welcome. But while we exchange greetings we must remember that one
whom you never have met is with us. Gentol[a:], as these Ento spirits
do not understand your language, or you theirs, it will be both my duty
and pleasure to interpret for you and them. Inidor[a:], Genessano, this
is our missionary, Gentol[a:], of whom you have heard and of whom we
all expect so much.

Genessano--My brother Inidor[a:] and I gratefully appreciate your
efforts on behalf of our people and we pray you accept our homage and
the earnest desire of our hearts that we may come to be numbered among
your friends. Strangely do we come together, Gentol[a:] ēman[a:], you
from a distant planet, we from our spirit realms. Appropriate indeed is
your new name, for well beloved are you by your dearest ones and your
many friends on the spirit side who also give to my brother and me a
place in their affection. Drawn by varied duties and inclinations, we
have visited other planets and their spirit realms, and, although we
have visited Earth's spirit realms, we as yet have not visited your
planet, and only twice, since passing hence, have we returned to our
beloved Ento. On this, our third return, we find ourselves amid scenes
once familiar but now so changed that we are as strangers in a strange
land. Through tender ties or weighty interests, often spirits are drawn
to their former abodes, but Inidor[a:] and I, being, save for some
distant kindred, the last of our race, have felt no attraction on Ento
strong enough to draw us away from dearer ties. You, perhaps, are aware
that we now return for a special purpose, and may the Supreme One aid
us all in our loving endeavor. This my brother Inidor[a:] will speak
for himself.

Inidora--I am happy in being a member of this group of earnest, loving
spirits. Gentol[a:] ēman[a:], you are devoting yourself to a grander,
a loftier mission than you have yet been made to understand. Myriad
spirits of many planetary spirit realms eagerly, anxiously, hopefully
watch its progress. From star to star a message has been heralded,
summoning angel hosts to unite with us in a mighty effort to tear
asunder the dense veil of materialism which so long has blinded the
eyes of Ento's despairing ones. To come in the might of their love
and wisdom, that they may strengthen our hands and make firm our
footsteps, while we strive to bring to the children of Ento a knowledge
of continuous existence. In answer to this message, angel hosts are
combining their forces to aid us in the momentous hour which swiftly
approaches. In that hour your spirit senses will be so unfolded that
then you will comprehend what now you but dimly perceive. And may
divinest influences aid us in this, as in all righteous undertakings.

Gentola--I well know that I do not understand the supreme aim of what
you and these friends are pleased to term our mission. It is my nature
to trust all, or not at all, so, implicitly, I trust you and them,
believing that whatever information may, for the time, be withheld
from me, will be for a kind and wise purpose. At present I am more
interested in what you may tell me of yourself and brother than in what
may be the special object of bringing me to Ento.

Inidora--Our friends approving, it will afford me pleasure to make
Genessano and myself better known to you. I regret that I do not
know your language or you mine but, through our kind interpreter,
De L'Ester, we may arrive at a mutual understanding. We are sons of
Genessano Allis Immo, a former governor of the province of Ondû, and
of Camariss[a:], his wife. My brother, Genessano, is but two years
younger than myself, and since his birth seldom have we been separated.
Since passing to our spirit world, at times certain duties have sent us
far apart, but ever our mutual affection hastens our return to each
other's presence. How long have we been on the spirit side? Nearly
four centuries of our time. I passed from my physical body first and
almost suddenly, and the memory of that hour saddens me even now.
As the nearness of approaching death grew into dread certainty, my
brother and I frantically clung to each other, our despair that we
were about to part to meet no more, finding expression in grievous
sobs and moans. Even while Genessano held me in his arms, our voices
blending in entreaties that Andûman[a:] might stay the coming of Phra
(death) the cruel messenger, my spirit departed from the physical body
and I was received by our dear parents and friends to be borne into
our spirit realms and to my own place. I find no words to express my
overwhelming surprise and joy when I at last realized that I still
lived, that my adored parents held me to their hearts in rapture
unspeakable; that dreaded death was but a birth into a higher life.
Aye, life, life, life forevermore. Then very soon we joyfully realized
that ere long our beloved one, our Genessano, would be with us. Yes,
surely he would be with us, who would watch and wait for him. Often the
memory of that wondrous time comes to me and so fills me with ecstatic
exultation, that had I at my command the combined voices of all the
angelic hosts I would strive to fill the universe with the amazing, the
priceless message, life is continuous, life is continuous, for spirit
is indestructible and unchanging, as is God, who is spirit, and all
that is is an expression of the One Divine Being. We waited and watched
for the release of this dear brother, our Genessano, for we were aware
that his despair that he was left alone and that never again would he
behold the forms and faces of his beloved ones was fast sapping his
vital force and that soon his breaking heart would be stilled and he
would be with us. I was not yet strong enough to go to him, but our
beloved parents ministered to him, and when he was freed they bore him
to his beautiful spirit home, where I awaited him. Oh, the rapture
of that moment, when again I gazed upon the dear, familiar face and
form of my brother, and the still greater rapture, when his slowly
unclosing eyes rested upon our adored parents, then, in indescribable
bewilderment upon me. Not yet could he realize the wonder that had
occurred. As though he were dreaming, he murmured: "I--ah--I thought
I--was dying, I thought--Inidor[a:], my brother Inidor[a:]--leaned
over me, and my--But I dream--I only--dream. I shall see him no
more--no more." I stooped and kissed his lips, and he smiled, again
murmuring, "I dream--I dream." Again I kissed him, crying to him our
old time greeting, "Lohaû, lohaû, Genessano." In extreme amazement
and perturbation, and with widely-opened, affrighted eyes, he gazed
into the faces of our parents, and then into mine, and as he gazed his
wonder grew, but not his comprehension of the marvellous change which
had come to him. Tremblingly, incoherently, he cried, "Father, mother,
Inidor[a:]--oh, pitiful Gods, deceive me not. Do I yet live? Have not I
died? Phra, Phra, come quickly and end this dream, which bewilders me
with its alluring unreality, which"---- Again, in joyous tones I cried,
"Lohaû, Genassano, lohaû," and into his dear eyes grew an expression
of recognition and of joy so unspeakable that, as he reached toward us
his trembling hands, no words fell from his lips, but on his radiant
face was the smile of one arisen from the depths of despair to the very
heights of supremest bliss. Then came to him the full realization that
we his dearest ones were embracing him, that our tears and laughter,
our endearing words, were a joyous, a blessed reality. Ah, Gentol[a:],
you who have ever known that life is continuous, can little comprehend
the depth of the unutterable despair of a people ardent in their
loving, constant in their affection, but without even a thought that
life may not end with death of the body. But the hour is coming,
quickly coming, when, through a knowledge of the glorious truth of a
conscious continuity of existence, the shadows ever brooding over the
lives of our people shall forever flee away.

If I have spoken at too great length I pray you pardon me. Could you
speak the planetary language, which, in your present but partly freed
state, you do not remember, we would not be obliged to tax the patience
of our comrades. As it is I find myself at a disadvantage and must beg
De L'Ester's forbearance.

De L'Ester--Make no apologies, I am at your and Gentol[a:]'s service.
As we shall await the return of the family, I suggest that you shall
relate to us whatever you may know concerning this gigantic race.

Inidora--With pleasure. Long previous to, and during the life of our
father, Genessano Allis Immo, this region was a portion of the Province
of Ondû, of which, as these friends are aware, my father was rûh[a:]
(governor). Later it became, and at this time is, the southernmost
region of the Province of Esvenēmo. While yet it was a portion of the
Province of Ondû, our father resolved to visit it, and in such ways
as might appear best, add to the well being of its inhabitants, of
whom little was known. Calling together a number of learned persons,
artisans and laborers, he prepared for the journey. With the eager
curiosity of a boy I begged for and received from my ever indulgent
parents permission to accompany the expedition, which, in an uneventful
manner, soon arrived at our destination. We found the country well
watered and fertile, and its inhabitants, the Kenēto Soûvanallo,
a gentle, hospitable and industrious race, owning great herds of
animals, and cultivating some land, but not to the extent or so well
as they do now. They occupied rather rudely constructed wooden houses,
which imperfectly protected them from inclement weather, and their
clothing was as rude as their dwellings. As it was for the purpose of
teaching Souvanallos better modes of living that our father had come
to them, he had brought cloths and stores of various materials which
he thought might become useful. Artisans and laborers soon throughout
the country erected stone dwellings and constructed furniture suited
to the simple needs of the people. The women were taught to design and
make garments of a better fashion than they wore, and to prepare food
according to more highly civilized ideas. More thorough communication
was established between the singularly isolated race and the different
provincial governments, and for the elevation of the people schools
were more perfectly organized, in which religious instruction, an
understanding of the laws, industrial arts and educational branches
should be taught. Without exception the people were found eager and
fairly apt in receiving instruction, and while witnessing the result
of his expenditure of time and means our dear father felt himself
highly gratified and more than repaid. When, after the lapse of more
than half a year he turned his face homeward, he experienced profound
satisfaction in the assurance that he had sowed good seed in a prolific
soil.

Once, previous to our passing into our spirit world, Genessano and I,
impelled by both interest and curiosity, visited this region. Great was
our surprise and pleasure to learn of the rapid progress made by this
race. Truly our father had sowed his seed in a prolific soil. Up to
the time of his coming among them they rarely had come in contact with
their highly civilized neighbors, only, indeed, when their necessities
obliged them to barter their wool and pelts for such commodities as
their simple tastes and wants required. After the lapse of but a few
years we found them occupying comfortable, and in many instances,
well appointed homes, their newly acquired liking for the luxuries of
their neighbors having accelerated their progress in many directions.
Previous to the visit of our father only rude vehicles drawn by animals
were used for draught and other purposes; now we found well made
roadways, modern carriages and well tilled fields, yielding grains,
vegetables and fruits in abundance. Clothing of a finer texture had
replaced the former coarse and badly fashioned garments, and the people
were earnestly striving for education, and the niceties of polite
conduct generally were observed.

Through various sources we have learned that still they are a wholly
pastoral people. Nowhere throughout their country is there a city, town
or village. There are depots where Air transports deliver and receive
freight and travellers, but about these depots there are only the
necessary officials and assistants. As an illustration of the average
condition of this race this family has been selected. There are others
of larger means and finer culture, others still of smaller means who
are refined and well informed. Of all it may be said that they are good
citizens, and the good citizen must be a man of many virtues.

De L'Ester--The family are returning, and in a very hilarious mood.
Across the meadow a party of three men and two women also come
this way. Giantess waves them a welcome and calls, "Sistû, ēmanos,
sistû," and they quicken their steps. Gentol[a:], have you ever seen
an antelope? Yes? Well, Giant carries in his arms a very similar
creature. Its large, beautiful eyes are full of alarm, and it bleats
and struggles to escape, but Giant is not a sensitive person, and
its bleatings and struggles do not appeal to him, for while Giantess
and the visitors exchange greetings, he coolly cuts its throat and
dexterously removes its skin.

The ladies have retired to the house, leaving the gentlemen to the
society of Giant, who proceeds to dress the slain rimoh, meanwhile
exchanging with them views upon the topics of the day, which indicates
that though they live somewhat apart from the world they are interested
and informed as to its movements. Poor rimoh is in readiness for the
attention of the cook, and Giant, escorted by his friends, bears him to
the waiting Hildian, who smilingly approves of the appearance of his
remains, which she quickly dismembers and places in a large cooking
vessel, adds a quantity of vegetables, seasoning and water, covers
the vessel closely and suspends it over the fire. Now, with quite an
air, she prepares a pudding. We will hope that the family and guests
may possess good digestive power, for what with sweets, spices, fruits
and other ingredients, it promises to be a rich and savory compound.
Giant fills the brazier with glowing coals, on which Giantess deposits
the capacious vessel containing the pudding, and having gotten this
important feature of the feast off her mind, she busily arranges the
table and supervises a beverage which Giant is brewing, the guests
looking on with evident interest and approval. There are juices of
fruits, honey and spices, over which he pours boiling water, closing
the lid of the great jug to prevent the escape of the spice-laden
steam. The combined odors of the stew, the pudding and the fragrant
beverage are so alluring that Fenēt[a:], who, on our entrance prudently
retired to his lair, cautiously crawls out but keeps close to his
mistress, regarding us with evident distrust and aversion.

Gentol[a:], you were wondering if these people use bread. In this
high heaped platter of small, nice-looking loaves is a reply to your
query. Giantess is preparing a batter of meal and milk, which she
pours into the stew, stirs it about and removes it from the fire. With
a large fork she lifts the meat on to a huge platter and ladles the
gravy over it. Into another platter she ladles the vegetables and bears
to the table the steaming viands. The pudding being done to a turn
is placed in the centre of the feast, flanked by bowls of honey and
confections of fruits, and now Giantess politely and very cordially
says: "Emēntos, rimoh ouman dû ran[a:] dos lito, passen tento ēvossû."
In your language, Gentol[a:], the sense of the invitation would be:
"Friends, rimoh and we wish you to partake of our hospitality." Giant
sits at one end, Giantess at the other end of the table. The guest of
honor is the white-haired, white-bearded giant at Giantess's left side,
the remaining guests occupying the side of the table on her right.
The children, who have quietly entered, sit on the opposite side. All
being seated, Giant fills the drinking cups and Giantess serves the
meal, which evidently meets with flattering appreciation. Fenēt[a:]
has not been neglected, and, as he carefully finishes the remains of a
bountiful supply of stew, he regards us apprehensively, and retreats
under the table.

Leaving these kindly disposed, gentle humans to the enjoyment of the
good things, they regard as having been specially provided for them by
Andûman[a:], the Creator of all things, we will bid them adieu.

Gentol[a:], George and Inez will bear you to your Earth home and we
will attend to a duty demanding our presence elsewhere. But our loving
thoughts will keep us in touch with you until we shall meet again.

George--Come, sister, rest your hands on our shoulders. You require
less assistance than formerly. As you are but slightly exhausted
we need not hasten. How do we move through space? That I cannot
demonstrate to your present understanding. No words can convey to you
that which is outside your sense of realization. Not until you shall
again become a wholly freed spirit will your consciousness compass this
and other marvels. So rest satisfied and await such knowledge as in
the nature of events must ere long come to you. No, I do not mean in
a month or a year, but after your work shall be ended. Inez, dear, we
will pause for a little.

Yonder, Gentol[a:], is our planet. See how its luminous envelope pulses
and palpitates as though imprisoning the throbbing heart of some living
thing. Imagine some of your learned astronomers, with one or more of
your great telescopes, out here in space; do you not think that through
their observations they might arrive at some surprising conclusions?
Were you less sensitive to possible scientific criticism, Bruno and
others might use your organism for a grand purpose, and we are hoping
that you may gain sufficient confidence in yourself and spirit friends
to allow them to give through you some facts now only guessed at.

Can you realize that beyond that luminous veil is your home? It is not
surprising that you cannot, for I, whose quickened senses are more
acute than your own, can scarcely realize that once on the swiftly
flying globe I, too, dwelt. Where? In England, on an estate near
the banks of the Thames. Heretofore no opportunity has favored my
acquainting you with the story of my Earth life. Now I will briefly
relate it.

For services rendered their sovereign some of my ancestors were
rewarded with wealth and distinction. Thus the members of our family
were regarded as eminently respectable Commoners. My father, who was in
the army, was engaged in the War of the Revolution. At its close he
returned from America to England and soon afterwards suddenly passed
to the spirit side, leaving my dear mother a young and handsome widow.
Some years later, when I was nearly sixteen years old, she became
the wife of a titled gentleman, and in less than one year she, too,
passed to the spirit world, leaving me to the care of my stepfather,
a kind and honorable man. A year later, with a party of youths I went
boating on the river Thames. Some of the lads, in a mischievous mood,
began rocking the boat from side to side, the remonstrances of the
more prudent ones only serving to render them more reckless. One more
heedless than the others, stood up and shouting, "Here we go," gave
such an impetus to the rocking boat that it was capsized and all were
thrown into the water. Some of the party could swim, and thus saved
themselves and assisted others to the shore. I had nearly reached it
when I discovered that the lad who had caused the catastrophe was
drowning, and I turned about to rescue him. Twice he had gone under,
and as he again came to the surface I seized him by his hair, hoping to
sustain him and myself until assistance should arrive. In his frantic
struggling he caught me about the neck, and I being too exhausted to
release myself, we both were drowned. My quickly freed spirit was by
its own gravity borne to a realm suited to my condition, and there
my dear parents immediately found me and with loving ministrations
assisted my recovery from the terror of my sudden change from Earth
life to the spirit world. Subsequently, they also assisted me in my
efforts to complete my mortal education, which as you are aware, is a
requisite of spiritual growth.

I shall pass over the time intervening between my entrance into the
world of spirits and the coming of your infant sister, Inez. Being my
soul mate, my dear mother brought her into our home, where she has ever
remained. When your and Inez's mother came to our side of life she of
course, claimed her daughter. Inez, with a joyful recognition of their
relationship, and with the natural love of a child for its mother,
was drawn hither and thither, but in the end the law of affinity was
recognized by both mother and child, as eventually it became recognized
by all spirits, and Inez remained with me. Now you know who I am, and
how it is that I am your brother, George Brooke.

Yes, that is Earth's satellite, the little planet Luna, and it occurs
to me that from our vantage ground we behold what no astronomer or
other mortal has ever seen or ever will see through the medium of
mortal vision. Desolate and well nigh inanimate it indeed is, and
in coming time, atom by atom, its disintegrated particles will be
attracted to other combinations of matter, and ages hence a period must
arrive when its shadowy valleys, its frozen waters, its toppling crags
and cavernous depths will no longer afford a spectacle for the learned
or the curious. It is the purpose of our Band to some time afford you
another series of visits to Luna, so you will pardon me for declining
to now approach it more nearly.

Gentola--It is I who should apologize for having made the request, but
I so dimly recall what was shown me, that I am curious to again observe
the peculiar features of Earth's satellite. May I ask if your Band
always journeys together?

George--Always, unless one or more may be detailed for some special
duty or mission. Yes, together, we repeatedly have visited Venus,
scintillating yonder like a great diamond on the bosom of space.
Willingly I would tell you of the grandly beautiful planet, but as I am
aware that our Band has under advisement certain plans relating to it,
in which it is desired that you shall participate, I do not consider
it advisable to further speak of it. My dear sister, your mortal
existence will yet be so prolonged that you will take many starward
journeys with us.

Has it occurred to you that this is January 4th, 1893? No? It would
be well that all mortals should cease setting up milestones along the
roadway of life. On our side of life there is only the ever present
now. Why? Because, to a degree, spirits realize what mortal mind cannot
grasp, the meaning of Eternity.

Gentola--Have spirits a knowledge of how long ago Venus or any of
yonder shining worlds came into existence as worlds?

George--Not the slightest. Why, my sister, the immensity of time that
has elapsed since Venus or any of the planets of our Solar System
came into our galaxy of worlds is inconceivable, yet, compared with
eternity, their birth was as of yesterday. When I said that spirits
(and I do not mean all spirits) to a degree realize the _meaning_
of eternity, I do not wish you to understand that any spirit has a
conception or realization of the duration of eternity. Yes, I know
how flippantly mortals, who have no conception of either, prate of
God, of time and of eternity, yet that is less remarkable than the
stupendous egotism inducing mortals to believe that the Infinite Spirit
of an Infinite Universe became incarnated in the body of a finite
human creature, that thus to the humans of one small planet (which is
but one of a countless number of inhabited planets) certain benefits
might be secured and yet once I regarded any other religious belief as
sacrilegious. What a puerile conception of Infinity, but one on a level
with the evolvement of those entertaining it, and spirits constantly
enter the world of realities who must outgrow this and other mistaken
conceptions and in numerous instances a long time elapses before they
yield to the evidences of their experiences. _But, on both the mortal
and spiritual planes of life_ evolution goes steadily, invincibly
forward, and inevitably all grow into a clearer comprehension of truth.

Gentola--As we need not hasten our, or, rather, my return to Earth, I
should like you to tell me how spirits define time, space and spirit.

George--That which never had a beginning, and can never have an
ending, may be denominated Eternity or infinite duration of time,
and what is termed time as a separation of periods for the purpose
of making definite statements, or for marking definite occurrences.
Understand, I now am considering your question from a mortal, not a
spirit standpoint, for, on the spirit side, we are not conscious, in
the sense that mortals are conscious, of the divisions of time. As
neither time or space are dimensional, they can have no real existence
or recognition, so we do not assume to define that which is not.
For purposes of convenience, conscious mortal mind takes cognizance
of phenomena, _but the subconscious self, the Ego, recognizes only
realities_, hence, unlike mortal mind (which is the intelligent human
animal soul), bears no relation to the phenomena of so termed time and
space. Thus, from a spirit view, neither time or space are definable.
Neither can angel or archangel define spirit, yet all spirits
progressed beyond the first, or Earth sphere, are conscious of their
spirit being. We are taught by those of higher spheres, and our own
experiences teach the same truth, that every progressive step affords
the high reward of a clearer consciousness that all spirit entities are
the expressions of the One Infinite Spirit, and are one and inseparable
from their origin. Hence, is not it reasonable to assume that if all
spirits in or apart from physical bodies are inseparable parts of the
Infinite Spirit, vicarious atonement for sin, which is a misnomer for
undevelopment, is an uncalled for proceeding.

Gentola--I rejoice to say that I have outgrown that belief, but I
endured years of agony of mind while passing through the process. But,
George, do the peoples of other planets entertain religious beliefs
similar to those of Christians, Hindus and others of Earth's peoples?

George--None of the peoples of planets we have visited entertain a
belief corresponding with the dogmas involving the incarnation and
crucifixion of God. Human sacrifices are a concomitant of religious
superstitions of the crude civilizations or dominant ecclesiasticisms
of many planets. Animal sacrifices of a less cruel, hence of a more
advanced state, offerings of grains, fruits, flowers and objects
of value, of a still higher spiritual unfoldment, while devotional
aspirations and a desire to benefit others, indicate a tendency toward
rational views of the possible attributes of the Infinite Good.

_All spiritualized humans are of necessity religious_, and all adore
such gods as the degrees of their evolvement fashion. Our Earth peoples
have fashioned gods suited to their various immature conceptions, and
for the selfish purpose of having their real or fancied wants supplied.
All the divinities of all religions are the exact indicators of the
spiritual status of their worshippers, and as the peoples unfold higher
spirituality they will oblige their gods to keep pace with them. So
will it continue to be and in some coming age Earth's peoples will have
so evolved as to recognize but one God--the Infinite, All Pervading
Spirit, in whom all things live, move and have their being.

Yes, truly, the Entoans in nearly all ways are more highly evolved
than are our Earth peoples, and when the bonds of ecclesiasticism and
superstitious beliefs, shall have been broken they will emerge from
spiritual darkness into light, casting from them forever the shackles
which have held them in slavery to a dreary, deadening materialism.

Gentola--If I should pass to the spirit side, would that interfere with
what you all term our mission?

George--It would prolong the night of Ento's spiritual darkness. Our
and other spirit Bands have been, and now are, endeavoring to prepare
sensitives for this and similar missions, but as yet we can only use
you for this special work. We find you fitted for it quite beyond our
hopes and expectations, and now feel assured of entire success. Success
that means life for death, joy for sorrow, to the present and coming
generations of Ento.

Not yet, my sister, will you come to our side of life, not until your
work shall be finished. We have journeyed so leisurely that night
shadows are falling over your city of St. Louis. Now we will descend,
and in good time, for your husband is rapping at your door. A hasty
good-bye until we again come for you.




CHAPTER VII.

FIRST APPROACH TO ENTO SENSITIVES


De L'Ester--Good-morning, Gentol[a:]. Our satisfaction over the
departure of your early visitor quite equals your own. You have
forgotten to lower the shades over the south window, and soon the sun
will be shining through the blinds. Sit in the armchair, it is more
restful than this armless one. Now, render yourself passive. That is
well. As we are late, we will swiftly and directly pass to the country
of the Soûvanallo.

Yes, that is Giant's dwelling and we now are moving directly southward.
From this low altitude we have a fine view of the country, and we
desire that you shall speak of whatever may to you appear noticeable.

Gentola--In all directions there are extensive plains, with here
and there forests heavily timbered with enormously large trees and
undergrowths of shrubbery. Toward the west are numbers of small lakes
or, perhaps, they may be reservoirs connecting with each other through
channels on which are small boats passing to and fro. Far eastward is
a river, flowing southward, and it is the only flowing water within
range of my vision. The entire region is dotted with residences and
other structures. Some are very like the one occupied by Giant and
his family, others are more pretentious and picturesque and all are
surrounded by orchards, gardens and cultivated fields, in which are
many men busily engaged. I see, too, immense herds of grazing animals
which are quite unlike any you yet have shown me.

De L'Ester--George, we will alight near the herds toward our left, and
you, Gentol[a:], will describe the creatures.

Gentola--What gentle looking, pretty animals they are. They are twice
as large as our domestic sheep, and from their heads to the tips of
their short tails they are covered with a close growth of long waved,
silken wool. Some herds are white, some brown, others of a light
reddish, brown, and their hornless heads, large pointed, erect ears,
and large wide open eyes, give them such a surprised expression that it
really is amusing. Even to their cloven hoofs, they resemble, but are
handsomer animals than sheep.

De L'Ester--Your description is accurate. Yes, the creatures,
naturally, are hornless; that is why they are known as the Angossa.
Having already informed you as to their uses, we will not devote
further time to them. Those bodies of water are, for the most part,
reservoirs for the retention of the spring over-flow of the river you
have seen in the distance. Indeed, all are reservoirs, though formerly
some of them were diminutive lakes which have been enlarged. Along
the entire length of the river at intervals its banks are pierced by
channels through which its surplusage is conveyed into reservoirs
to be used for irrigation and other purposes. Inidor[a:] informs us
that previous to his father's visit to these people their methods of
irrigation were very imperfect, but quickly they were taught a better
system.

Apart from general irrigation, which is a necessary process on this
leveled planet, you have been informed that there is what is termed
the Irrigating and Waterways System; as we journey toward the equator
we will cross the northern half of this System, which is about 1,400
miles wide, and at present nearly 5,000 in length. The central
waterways traverse the equatorial and temperate regions, and in time
the system will, through connections with natural water divisions,
encircle the entire Planet. During the time allotted to our mission
it will not be practicable to visit the entire planet, so only such
portions and features of it as may best subserve our purpose will be
shown you.

Throughout the north and south temperate regions the lands, wherever
practicable, are cultivated, and densely populated by highly civilized
and cultured people. Further northward and southward, even within
the frigid zones, and under most unpromising conditions, the lands
are well occupied by educated and refined races, who, possessing a
knowledge of natural forces, do not so much accommodate themselves to
their environments as that they, to a degree, oblige their environments
to yield to their requirements. They are not at all nomads, but the
vicissitudes and exigencies of many centuries of warfare with nature's
pitiless and at times unconquerable forces has developed in them a
migratory tendency, hence during the long winter season, through the
agency of air and other transportation, they in large numbers flit to
other climes, returning in the spring to their homes and occupations.
These races are most interesting and some time you shall visit them.

We now will move southward. The plateau over which we now are passing
is the southern boundary of Esvenemo, and a vestige of a once great
mountain chain extending in a southwesterly direction and forming the
northern boundary of Indolois[a:], which is one of Ento's largest salt
seas. Is not this a beautiful country? Certainly you have seen nothing
surpassing it.

Gentola--Truly, I have not, and I wish that I may be able to retain a
memory of the wonderfully beautiful land which seems a very paradise.
There are fields cultivated like gardens, and gardens amid which are
fountains and statuary, and there are groves and groups of gigantic
trees. The finest, I think, are those great Bûd[a:]s trees, whose
feathery foliage is ever in tremulous motion. There are reservoirs like
miniature lakes, and all are bordered by small, pretty structures, with
statuary, trees, shrubbery and blooming plants, and all are surrounded
by wide paved roadways, over which people in motor vehicles or on foot
are passing, and overhead air transports, like huge humming birds, are
rushing in all directions. What an amazing, bewildering scene! I cannot
conceive of even spirit realms being lovelier than this enchanting view.

De L'Ester--Of its kind it is very attractive; but you will be shown
other views much finer. You have mentioned the tremulous motion of
the foliage of Bûd[a:]s trees. They are so named because of the
tremulousness of their leaves.

We now will move slowly onward. As you perceive, the scenes vary, but
everywhere are indications of high intelligence, luxury and refined
tastes. George, again we will pause for a little. What do you now see?

Gentola--What do I see? I cannot say. The scene is so unlike anything I
ever have beheld that I cannot even attempt to describe it.

De L'Ester--We have reached the northern limit of the Irrigating and
Waterways System, and are 700 miles from the equator. Within the
limits of this system, the civilization of Ento manifests its highest
expression in sciences, arts, literature, mechanics and all that
constitutes a very advanced social condition. As we move onward we
perceive two parallel waterways running diagonally across the equator,
and they at greater or lesser intervals are intersected by smaller,
but navigable, waterways. Those lofty structures are the stations
containing the machinery through which the waterways and irrigating
system is controlled. To such perfection has hydraulic and civil
engineering been brought, and so adequate are the receiving reservoirs
that little if any difficulty is experienced in regulating the water
supply of Ento.

As we already have intimated, owing to Ento's excessively humid
atmosphere and rather high temperature, as spring approaches and
advances, the vast accumulations of ice and snow at the North Pole, and
throughout the Arctic, Antarctic, frigid and temperate regions, melt
with phenomenal rapidity, and water courses, lakes, rivers, canals,
and waterways are filled to overflowing. Were it not that the soil
to a great depth is as porous and absorbent as a sponge, even Ento's
advanced methods would inadequately cope with its annual floods. The
generally cloudless skies might lead you to suppose that necessarily
rains must be of rare occurrence; quite the contrary, throughout the
irrigated equatorial belt and temperate regions you will have occasion
to observe sudden, frequent, heavy showers, but the porous soil so
quickly absorbs them that they serve merely as additions to irrigation.

Previous to the introduction of the Irrigating and Waterways System,
the entire equatorial regions largely were arid and unproductive; but
as the great and beneficent work progressed, and the soil was supplied
with life giving streams, vegetation was quickened into immediate
growth, and gradually the then very infrequent rains came to be of
common occurrence, and the lands of the progressing System prolific to
a high degree.

Inidor[a:] now will speak of matters which I doubt not will be
interesting to all.

Inidora--Ere I attempt to continue the conversation I propose that we
shall pass directly to the height overlooking the City Camariss[a:].
With your approval, friends, I will lead the way.

Ah, here is a pretty vine covered arbor, in which we may rest while
I shall endeavor to entertain you. The imposing edifice so grandly
crowning this portion of the height marks the site of Genessano's and
my ancestral home, of which at another time I may further speak. As
an introduction to other themes I shall presume to speak of matters
relating to personal history. This eminence was in a remote age, a
lofty spur of the mountain range, a vestige of which we crossed on our
journey hither, and for centuries its levelled summit was beautified
by the residences of the governors of this Province of Ondû, and by
other structures quite as admirable. After the death of our parents, my
brother and I resolved to carry into execution a work contemplated by
them, and left to us as a sacred trust. In pursuance of this resolve
we decided that our home which had sheltered so many generations of
our kindred should be demolished, and the height lowered to afford a
suitable site for an institution which should be of lasting benefit to
many generations of Ento's sons and daughters, and a fitting monument
to perpetuate the memory of our beloved parents. We lived to see our
work only well begun; but in yonder stately edifice we find our plans
and desires embodied. It is an institution devoted to science, art,
and other educational purposes of a most comprehensive nature, and is
what our parents contemplated that it should be, the best equipped and
richly endowed Galares[a:] of Ento.

After the death of his father, our father became hereditary governor
of this Province of Ondû, and it was he who conceived and carried into
execution the plan of the Irrigating System. The Waterways were an
afterthought, the result indeed of obvious necessity. You will make
a distinction between the Irrigating and Waterways System, and the
imperfect methods of irrigation, which for many centuries previous to
its introduction prevailed over a large portion of the arable lands of
Ento, and which, owing to adverse conditions ever were unsatisfactory.
The new and improved method revolutionized the old practices, and
our father lived to witness the successful inception and assured
progress of an undertaking which promised perpetual prosperity to the
children of Ento, then with a mind at peace with himself and all men,
he followed our dear mother, the Lady Camariss[a:], into our world of
spirits.

The great and beautiful city covering the slope, and spreading far
eastward, northward and southward, is named Camariss[a:], in honor and
memory of our mother. It is at the head of what is termed the Great
Central Waterway, and as you perceive it is intersected by canals, on
which small boats carrying passengers, or laden with various wares,
pass to all parts of the city. Over intersections of the canals are
light, beautifully constructed bridges, affording passageways for
pedestrians and vehicles of various kinds.

Yonder huge vessel coming into view is one of many coming or going
on the Central Waterway. Electricity is the motive power urging it
swiftly forward. Our friends inform me that on your planet, electrical
appliances are only coming into general use. On Ento, during many
centuries of our time this force has been so well understood that aside
from vibratory and atmospheric forces it has, as a motive power, nearly
superseded all other applied energies. Now the vessel approaches the
callois[a:] (landing) and draws alongside. While the busy crew attend
to their duties the numerous passengers disembark and greetings and
embraces are exchanged with friends awaiting them.

Now a number of men, women and children also are disembarking and
under guidance of an official of the Galares[a:] they are coming this
way. It is apparent that they all are natives of a Southland town,
known as Kyfû. They will attend courses of special instruction in the
Galares[a:], and, when qualified, will return to their own people to
serve as teachers in industrial and other vocations. This is a custom
which has long existed on Ento. You perceive, Gentol[a:], that they are
fair skinned, blue or brown eyed, brown haired, of medium height and
of a more vivacious manner than are our darker complexioned peoples.
Yes, they will reside in the Galares[a:] until sufficiently educated
to assume the duties of instructors. What did I mean by medium height?
Why, that they are not so tall as are Genessano and myself, whose
altitude is above seven English feet.

Looking downward over this terraced slope, with its many statues,
fountains, and stately and beautifully picturesque dwellings, embowered
amid trees and flower laden vines, it is difficult to realize that once
near this spot was our home. All is changed, but, as the improvement
is as great as the change, my brother and I experience no regret. At
the time of our passing into our spirit world this beautiful city was
scarcely a promise of what it long has been, one of Ento's finest and
most populous cities.

The imposing structures crowning the height to the north and south
are devoted to educational and beneficent purposes, and all, in their
several ways, are very admirable, but through personal reasons my
brother and I are more interested in yonder Galarēs[a:] than in other
institutions, and we feel assured that within its walls we all shall
find much that will be pleasing and instructive. If it may please you,
friends, we will turn our steps in that direction.

Nowhere on Ento is there a more beautiful or imposing edifice than is
this great Galarēs[a:]. The grand flights of steps leading up to the
spacious porticos, with their golden domed roofs, supported by many
lofty, massive, flower crowned columns, present a most harmonious and
pleasing effect. The group surmounting the roof of the central portico
represents the forms of eminent Entoans. In the admirable statue at
the front of the portico is a faithful representation of our father
Genessano Allis Immo, as he appeared during the middle years of his
mortal existence. He was, and is a man of noble and gracious mien, with
features as harmoniously beautiful as a musical chord, and though of
unusually lofty stature, he is so finely molded as to leave nothing
further to be desired. As you may perceive my brother Genessano closely
resembles our father, and in spirit they are two entities, with one
thought. Nay, my brother, I do not overrate you, for like our father
you are an embodiment of all the virtues and graces.

This Galarēs[a:], having been built nearly four Ento centuries ago,
its architecture is unlike that of the more modern style of some of
the structures to the north and south, but to my taste it compares
more than favorably with either of them. The rotunda, which we now are
entering, De L'Ester will be good enough to describe.

De L'Ester--From foundation to apex its height is quite two hundred
feet, its diameter little less than half its height. Looking upward we
perceive that the upper portion, including the domed roof, is filled in
with glass of a soft opalescent tint, through which the sun's rays fall
with a pleasing radiance. As we cannot avail ourselves of the lifting
apparatus we will, like mortals, try the experience of ascending the
staircase, which winds and climbs upward around the walls to the
landings, opening into balconies, until this topmost one is reached,
and as it encircles the dome it affords a comprehensive view of the
landscape. Yes, the view is really fine. Far westward and southward
extends the waters of yonder inland sea, which is but little less than
the largest salt sea of Ento. So tranquil are its waters that scarcely
a ripple disturbs its sparkling surface. What a number of small boats
are gliding hither and thither. Some of the occupants appear to be on
pleasure bent, and the western breeze bears to us musical notes of
stringed instruments.

The great vessels coming, going or lying by the piers, extending
far outward from the eastern shore, are of the same class as those
traversing the waterways and large bodies of water with which they
connect. They are most scientifically and stanchly built, and as on
Ento's waters dangerous gales seldom occur, and their motive power is
electric, they rarely are exposed to the destructive forces of storms,
or of fire. Then, too, Ento's ethereal signal system is so perfect that
collisions never occur. Indeed, by the Entoans accidents are regarded
as little less than crimes. Life is considered so sacred, and death so
deplorable that all possible precautions are taken to preserve the one,
and ward off the other. Inidor[a:], you will kindly resume.

Inidora--Genessano and I remember seeing the same kind of vessels
plying between this and other ports. At that time Indolois[a:]'s
eastern shore was further away, and with surprise we note how its
waters have encroached upon the land. I am informed that in your
tongue Indolois[a:] would be quiet or tranquil water. Compared with
other large bodies of water it is tranquil, yet I have seen it very
tempestuous indeed. Yonder massive sea wall is being constructed for
the purpose of arresting its aggressive waters, which have bitten
deeply into its eastern and northern shores. De L'Ester says that some
of your astronomers have decided that the surface of Ento is about
equally divided between land and water. In a sense, this is true, but
its natural divisions of water fall far short of occupying one-half
of its surface. Considered as a whole, the made areas fully equal
one-third of the natural water areas of our planet. At other times we
may call your attention to this matter, so for the present we will pass
it by.

Indolois[a:] is a very salt body of water, but during the season of
floods its volume being enormously increased, it, of course, is less
so. Were it a fresh water sea long ago the plateau would have been
pierced to form a connection between it and the Central Waterway. As
it is, it is included in the System, interchange of transportation
being as you perceive, effected by means of both air transportation
and soitzēn[a:] (tramways). We now will descend, but before proceeding
further De L'Ester has something to say to you.

De L'Ester--I indeed have something to say to you, and am somewhat
at a loss how to word it. From time to time we have intimated to you
that our purpose in bringing you to Ento, is that we may use you as
an instrument through whom we hope to accomplish a certain mission,
trusting that its gradual unfoldment might induce in you a willing
acquiescence with our desires until now we have deferred acquainting
you with our entire purposes. Be assured, Gentol[a:], that your
personal safety and welfare is to us as sacred as is our mission, and
we pray you to trust yourself unreservedly to our care and guidance.

Gentola--I confess that you startle me, but as I already have said, it
is my nature to trust all, or not at all, and I hope that the success
of this mission may be as unbounded as is my faith in you all.

De L'Ester--Then understand that in the lecture hall we now are
entering an important step is to be taken, and now we will attempt it.
On yonder slightly raised platform are several scholarly, dignified,
fine looking professors, one of whom has just ceased addressing the
youths and maidens about the hall. With their spiritual and mental
states we have made ourselves acquainted, and we know that three
of those youths are highly sensitive. As a subject for our first
experiment we have chosen the handsome, grave looking youth, clothed
in dark blue. Remain where you are, we will approach and address him.
You perceive that he is not aware of our presence. Now you, who are not
so etherealized as ourselves, will stand by his side, repeating to him
what I shall say to you.

Gentola--Commist[a:] estandû, Ento lisson?

De L'Ester--He starts, looks about him in great surprise, and
involuntarily replies, "Rēvol antiss[a:], Ento ēman[a:]." Professors
and students stare at him inquiringly.

Gentola--Indolois[a:], esto [a:] fondû, comprano gardo, ēvon non ista
paro mano. G[a:]-fon vos tran ist[a:] Gandûlan[a:]. Gandûlanos inos
est[a:] companist[a:] rēmondû. Illo ēmano, Illo.

De L'Ester--Trembling and amazed he springs to his feet, crying,
"Who speaks to me? Who speaks to me?" This youth, Lēta Verronadas,
is both clairvoyant and clairaudient, but cannot yet perceive wholly
freed spirits. Neither does he quite clearly perceive you, but he
is developing rapidly, and soon will both see and hear in a manner
that will greatly surprise himself and others. You wish to know what
you said to him, and the sense of his replies? You asked, "How are
you, Ento lad?" He replied, "Very well, Ento friend." You remarked,
"Indolois[a:] oversteps its bounds. Like some huge serpent it
stealthily crawls onward. Serpents are treacherous. Remember, friend,
remember."

The commotion is disturbing conditions. Quickly approach the student
clothed in purple. He is Dano Andûlēsa, son of Prince Basto Andûlēsa,
and is destined to be one of the chief instruments for the spiritual
enlightenment of Ento's sorrowful peoples. He is so highly sensitive
that already he perceives your presence, and glances about in an
inquiring and perplexed manner. Touch his head with the tips of your
fingers. Now he sees you, and oblivious of his surroundings, he
tremblingly exclaims: "Emana ûts[a:] istan t[a:] ûfan val? Efon foistû
lan[a:] ēdos[a:]."

Gentola--Emano, Ento nouist[a:] mû[a:] vilo. Efon par[a:] nos oirandû
lûtza kiafû zētos antista.

De L'Ester--Confusion reigns. The professors imagine that Lēta and
Dano have been attacked by sudden illness, and with much solicitude
they question the youths, who are greatly agitated, and who are
gently advised to walk in the open air until they regain composure.
What did Dano say? He asked, "From whence come you, friend?" Then he
regarded you very earnestly, and remarked, "I do not recognize you."
You replied, "Friend, Ento is not my home, I am of another world than
this." Later on, Gentol[a:], you and these youths will know each other
better, for both Lēta and Dano are instruments chosen to assist in
the accomplishment of our mission, and the result of this experiment
gives us assurance of a degree of success we scarcely have dared to
anticipate. At present conditions are too disturbed to attempt further
experiments.

Observe this large assemblage of students, for they fairly represent
the various races of Ento. Sitting somewhat apart from the others,
and near yonder great vase of flowers, there is a golden-haired,
blue-eyed, fair-skinned son of a race dwelling in a Northland, known as
Quend. His name is Favēon Myssonda, and he also is both clairvoyant
and clairaudient. The average stature of the Quends is a trifle less
than that of the darker races of Ento. They are a very symmetrically
formed and handsome race, and they excel in intellectual and artistic
pursuits. Their women are exceedingly gracious and graceful, and are
known as Rudēvos Quend[a:][a:]. (Beautiful Quend women.)

As far back as their history can be traced, this race has guarded
its purity of lineage, permitting no intermarriage with other races.
Genessano has related to us a characteristic event which occurred
during his mortal existence. Adjoining Quend Province on the east is
the province named Zandû. The Zandûs are also a fair-skinned race,
who for many centuries have been noted as manufacturers of rich
textile fabrics. A Quend woman, and a Zandû gentleman, both persons of
distinction, loved and desired to wed. This the Quend custom utterly
forbade. In this strait the lovers appealed to the Supreme Ruler,
Tyvon Oiranz[a:], but it was not within his province to interfere in a
domestic affair. Being more ardent than prudent, the lovers resolved to
defy consequences, and the lady fled with, and wedded the man of her
choice. The Quends demanded her restoration to her own family. This the
Zandûs refused, and a bitter strife ensued, during which the husband
and some others were killed, or injured, and the lady was recovered and
consigned to perpetual seclusion. This affair put an end to exploits of
this nature, and up to this time the Quends remain an unmixed race.

Dano and Lēta are returning, but their nervous, disturbed manner
indicates that they have not quite regained composure. It is not
desirable that they shall still sense our presence, so we will draw
further away from them.

To all Entoans this is a memorable day, for it is the anniversary of
the birth of one of the most noted personages of comparatively modern
times, and as it will be observed by all connected with the Galarēs[a:]
you will be afforded the privilege of seeing male and female
representatives of the various races of Ento. The great hall is filling
to repletion with youths, maidens and their relatives and friends, and
professors and teachers are crowding the spacious rostrum. One of the
professors is about to address the quiet, attentive assemblage. You
also will be attentive, while to the best of my ability I shall attempt
to translate into your language, what he may say.

Professor--Children of the Supreme One, through whose will you and
all things have come into existence, it is my privilege and my
pleasure to address you this day upon a theme ever dear to the hearts
of the children of Ento. You are of various races, and your diverse
surroundings have to a degree engendered in your minds a diversity
of ideas, still, I doubt not that all present yield ready obedience
to the will of Andûman[a:], whose laws control all things. Although
our Holy Religion permits a certain freedom of thought and action,
it is of paramount importance that the unformed minds of our youths
and maidens shall be trained to think and act aright. To this end all
instruction should tend, and all examples of right living should serve
as incentives for righteous endeavor.

In the beginning it pleased Andûman[a:] that his children should be
unlearned, beyond what might be necessary for self preservation and
for their happiness, well knowing that knowledge acquired through
laborious and painful experiences would be to them as valued treasures
earned at great cost. Since remotest times these treasures have been
accumulating, until now, we, who are the inheritors of all the past,
are rich, not only in knowledge, but in memories of noble deeds of
great and admirable men and women. On this commemorative occasion I
shall attempt to repeat the story of one whose name ever will be set
above and apart from all other names. It is the story of one whose
deeds ever will call forth the loving homage due to an illustrious
benefactor of Ento's children. It is the story of one of the greatest
men of any time. To him not only do we owe the prosperity of our
beautiful lands, but to Genessano Allis Immo and his most admirable
wife, the Lady Camariss[a:], we also owe our love and gratitude for
the creation of this, the greatest of Ento's institutions. True, ere
even its foundations were laid, they were in the voiceless silence,
but it was through their wise and generous munificence that means were
provided wherewith their two sons, Inidor[a:] and Genessano, might
carry into effect their wishes, thus perpetuating the memory of their
beloved parents and conferring upon the children of Ento an inestimable
benefit.

Genessano Allis Immo's greatest achievement, which, as I have
said, will set him above and apart from the renowned ones of the
past, present and future, was his conception and execution of the
Irrigating and Waterways System. It is a subject of history that many
Ryzo-entev[a:][a:] (centuries) preceding the period in which Genessano
Allis Immo's father, Apsidon Genessano Allis Immo, was governor of
this province, Ondû (which then, as now, extended from the western
shore of Indolois[a:] to the eastern shore of Gandûlan[a:] Lois[a:] and
northward and southward from Bascam[a:] Lois[a:] to T[a:]imon), not
only this province, but the provinces of the entire central regions
had, through the action of natural forces, grown more and more arid
and unproductive, and that gradually, in despair of a betterment of
their condition, multitudes had deserted homes and country for more
hospitable regions. Eventually it became lamentably apparent that
if the lands could not in some way be retrieved, at no very distant
time the central regions must become entirely depopulated. The peoples
who still tenaciously clung to homes and country, having, through no
fault of their own, grown impoverished and unable to longer passively
silently endure the hopeless situation, became not only discontented
but to an extent rebellious against the ruling powers, ascribing to
them lack of wisdom as well as lack of interest in the general welfare.
At this critical juncture Apsidon Genessano Allis Immo passed into the
silence, and his son Genessano Allis Immo became hereditary governor of
Ondû.

At the very outset of his official career, two grave matters confronted
him. Gradually, during the past centuries in Indolois[a:]'s basin had
been deposited the disintegrated substances of the lessening mountain
range and the wreckage of other parts carried into it by the annual
floods. As its bed raised, its waters encroached upon the lands to the
west and south and Genessano Allis Immo realized that this disastrous
and alarming condition must be remedied. The other and more momentous
matter was the ever increasing aridity of the lands of the central
regions. Genessano, the wise one, rose equal to these perplexing
conditions. Hastening to the capitol, he conferred with the supreme
ruler, Tyvon Oiranza, and his Council of State, who, being impressed
not only with the necessity for immediate and vigorous action, but by
his comprehensive grasp of the very serious situation, at once issued a
proclamation to the Rûh[a:]s (governors) of all the provinces, eminent
engineers and other learned ones to immediately repair to the capitol
in order that, if possible, their united wisdom and knowledge might
find a solution of existing calamities. The congress being convened,
Genessano Allis Immo addressed the assemblage. On this occasion it
is not fitting to give more than the substance of his oration. Amid
profound silence and strained attention he said: "Our gracious and
Supreme Ruler has called to this congress those upon whom he relies,
as being devoted to the interest of the peoples of our beloved Ento.
Upon your combined wisdom and knowledge he also relies, as being the
foundation upon which he hopes to build for the future prosperity
and happiness of our children and their descendants. To the Rûh[a:]s
of the several provinces of Ento I, your co-worker, offer a loving
greeting. To you, the learned ones of Ento, I proffer my profoundest
consideration. To you all it is known that Indolois[a:]'s waters
encroach upon the lands along its western and southern shores. From an
inconvenience this condition has grown into a menace. What shall be
done to avert it? We rely upon your united wisdom and skill to find a
remedy.

"It is, alas, a woful, an overwhelming fact that gradually natural
agencies have changed the surface of Ento, more especially the surface
of the central regions, until now the soil is so arid and unproductive
that poverty and consequent discontent of the peoples is leading
to their depopulation. Is it possible for science, aided by self
sacrifice, by unlimited means, by unremitting labor, to restore the
vanquished fertility of the lands of the vast, desolated area? It is my
thought by day, my dream of the night, as to how the glory, beauty and
prosperity of past times may be restored to them. We know that ere long
we must go into the silence, but Andûman[a:] will create, and others
of his children will reap that which we shall sow. Teach us, ye wise
and learned ones, that we may sow to be remembered as benefactors and
not as foolish and unkind ones who have gone into the silence leaving
a heritage of barren fields, of poverty and wretchedness." Genessano
Allis Immo then laid before the congress his plans for deepening and
confining the waters of Indolois[a:] and also for the reclamation of
the lands of the central regions. At first both plans were considered
impracticable, but, after much thought and careful calculation, the
Supreme Ruler and the entire Assemblage came to regard them favorably.
The very necessities of the situation created in their minds and in
the minds of the people a sort of enthusiasm and ere long the gigantic
undertaking was inaugurated. Thus far the results have been beneficent
beyond all expectation. Of that all are aware, but of the inevitable
difficulties and discouragements attached to the earlier years of
what, at the best, was considered a stupendous experiment, we can form
no estimate. True, the people, understanding that upon its success
depended their well being and that of their posterity, gave willing
co-operation, but so many difficulties and exigencies occurred that
many times Genessano's firm will and loving heart well nigh failed him.
Then it was that his spouse, the amiable and lovely Camariss[a:], stood
unswervingly by his side.

It is related that during this critical and trying period she gathered
about her many women of lofty station, of youth and loveliness, and
that she and they made it their duty to go among the laborers, bearing
to them cordials and palatable viands and so cheering and encouraging
them by their sympathy and gracious presence that the work progressed
with such astonishing rapidity that at the end of mēos elips[a:]a
(three years) the waters of the great storage reservoirs and of
Bascam[a:] Lois[a:], flowed southward, irrigating a considerable
area of arid land, which burst into verdure and bloom as though
newly touched by Andûman[a:]'s creative hands. This demonstration
so quickened the enthusiasm of all concerned that thereafter
discouragements and uncertainty had not to be combated.

In planning the irrigating system, Genessana Allis Immo did not include
possible waterways, much less our great system of waterways, but as
the work progressed the necessity for providing further storage for
the annual over-flow became apparent, and it was Genessano Allis
Immo's comprehensive mind that conceived the idea of turning to
advantage that which at first seemed a deplorable requirement. The
idea once conceived, its utility was quickly perceived and with great
determination and vigor the added enterprise was quickly under way.
That it has been and ever will be of incalculable service and profit to
Ento is obvious.

Toward the close of the seventh year (ofen elips[a:][a:]) the
Irrigating and Central Waterways System reached Gandûlana Lois[a:],
thence eastward through the province of Wy[a:]mo and onward the work
has continuously been prosecuted. Ere Genessano Allis Immo passed into
the silence, as the results of his grandly conceived and executed
plans he beheld fertile fields yielding rich abundance and growing
communities of industrious, contented people surrounding themselves
with the luxuries and refinements of prosperous conditions. He lived
to realize that even as a child nestles in the arms of its mother, so
would the thirsty lands of his beloved Ento nestle in the encircling
embrace of the life giving element. He lived to behold the infant
city Camariss[a:] smiling downward upon the sparkling waters of the
Central Waterway, with its many outreaching arms. He lived to see great
vessels traversing the waterway between Camariss[a:] and Gandûlan[a:]
Lois[a:]. He lived to see his adored wife, the Lady Camariss[a:], whose
virtues and beauty were themes for poets, painters and sculptors,
pass into the dread silence, while over her beloved form rained his
and their two sons' woful tears. He yet lived to see the basin of
Indolois[a:] greatly deepened and confined by strong embankments and
stronger walls. He lived until he arranged for the erection of this,
the greatest of Ento's Galarēs[a:]s, then with the quiet resignation
of one who has wisely and lovingly fulfilled the will of Andûman[a:],
he too was no more. Passing into the silence he left his two young
sons to perpetuate his and their mother's name and honors. As Rûh[a:]
(governor) of Ondû, Inidor[a:], the elder son, emulated the virtuous
example of his revered father, and Genessano, the younger son, who
in resemblance and characteristics was very like his father was his
brother's inseparable companion. It is related of them that the life
of one seemed inseparably involved in the existence of the other.
As two vigorous saplings growing side by side, their leafy boughs
so interlaced as to cast but one shadow, so were the lives of the
two youths interblended. The thought of one was the thought of both.
The desire of either one found fullest response in the heart of the
other. It was the will of Andûman[a:] that Inidor[a:] while yet in
early manhood should cease to exist. His brother Genessano, bereaved
and inconsolable, unable to endure the despair of knowing that no
more should he behold the dear face and form of the brother he loved
so well, that nevermore should he hear the voice that was to him as
sweetest music, also soon passed into the silence from whence, alas,
cometh no faintest whisper of our lost, our beloved dead.

Being the last representatives of their direct family line, and dying
unwedded, the title and office of governor reverted to the general
government, whose Supreme Ruler was Vestamon Oiranz[a:], whose father,
Tyvon Vestamon Oiranz[a:], had recently passed into the silence.

This great Galarēs[a:] was only well begun when the deaths of
Inidor[a:] and Genessano left to others the completion of their
parents' and their own plans. Those who took up the work which death
had obliged them to lay down, took it up lovingly, reverently,
not as a burdensome task, but as a great and precious trust, whose
faithfulest fulfillment should be reckoned no higher than a simple duty
to the memory of the generous dead. Ah me, were life continuous with
what gracious approval might they not regard this grand institution
which, like the radiant beams of Andûman[a:]'s glorious abode, blesses
all alike? To us the memory of Genessano Allis Immo, of the Lady
Camariss[a:] and their two sons has been handed down through song and
story. On yonder flower wreathed pedestals their sculptured images
form lovely groups. Seldom, if ever, has Andûman[a:] given to Ento
four such adorable children. Alas, that such admirable beings should
have forever perished. Alas, that there is no perpetuity of existence.
Were it possible for father, mother and sons to revisit their former
domain, and this institution dedicated to their memory, would not it
enhance their happiness to learn how far reaching is the blessing which
their beneficence has conferred upon the sons and daughters of Ento?
On this memorial day let us resolve to strive to profit by the example
of these illustrious ones, and though we may not hope to attain to the
greatness of their exalted characters, in some degree we may merit the
benediction of their wise and generous munificence.

It is written that the mighty gods are immortal, and may not
Andûman[a:] in some blest abode still continue the existence of those
whose lives were so nearly Deific? Only Andûman[a:] knoweth. Our sacred
writings contain no revelation relating to such momentous questions,
neither have our priesthood; whose lives are most virtuous and exalted,
any knowledge concerning a possible continuity of existence, and to our
despairing importunings the mighty gods make no reply. But this we do
know, that the good and evil deeds of men are as seed sown broadcast.
Has good seed been sowed? Then shall golden sheaves of a bounteous
harvest be gathered. Have noxious seeds been cast upon the bosom of the
wind to be wafted into the highways and byways? Then shall the unwise
sower gather his harvest in weariness and sorrow.

Dear youths and maidens, and you of maturer years, on this
commemorative occasion it will be well that we shall begin anew to sow
the seeds of righteous conduct, of loving thoughts, of generous deeds,
of helpful care for all who need our best service, for are not we all
the children of Andûman[a:], the Creator of all that is? Then when we,
too, shall pass into the silence, may we leave in the minds and hearts
of those who may succeed us, memories as sweet as the fragrance of
these rodel blooms, which now we will lay upon Andûman[a:]'s altar, in
recognition and remembrance of His love for having given to Ento those
who surely were His most admirable children.

De L'Ester--Were it not so touching, it might be amusing to watch the
faces of Inidor[a:] and Genessano, but so worshipful is their love
for their parents that they, like the assemblage, accord to them the
fullest measure of their admiring homage. How, as those dignified,
gentle mannered professors, followed by students and visitors from many
lands, reverently go toward the Istoir[a:] to lay their flower offering
upon the altar dedicated to Andûman[a:] and His Messengers, the Deific
ones, one is filled with wonder that despite the hopeless creed of
these people, their faces wear an expression of serene composure.

Gentola--Yes, their faces do wear a look of serenity, but to my mind
they also wear an expression of profound pathos. Their faces also
express much intelligence, refinement and spirituality. Though when one
realizes that they have no conception of the indestructible ego, the
latter terms seems misapplied.

Those wonderfully beautiful, gentle, graceful and gracious youths and
maidens are quite unlike the vivacious, self-assured young people of
some portions of our planet. If the lesson of to-day has in their
hearts found as full a response as it has found in my own, the
professor will not have spoken in vain.

What a grand thing it is to have lived to such splendid purpose as have
Genessano Allis Immo, the Lady Camariss[a:], and these, their sons.

De L'Ester--Truly so, and grander still that they continue to exist,
and that through their lofty spirituality they exert over the minds of
the Entoans an incalculable influence.

We now also will proceed to the Istoir[a:]. Yes, it is a pleasing
ceremony. Scarcely less white than the marble altar are the fragrant
rodel blooms laid on it by students and visitors, as they reverently
salute the stately statue of Genessano Allis Immo, crowning its
summit. This ceremony closes the observances of the present hour,
and the assemblage is quietly dispersing. In the hall we will await
their return. You have observed that a gentle seriousness is a marked
characteristic of all the Entoans you have seen, and I will add that
pathos is the minor chord of their being ever moaning out an appeal
for that light whose radiance alone can pierce the veil between mortal
consciousness and the spirit side of life.

Gentola--Inidor[a:], the more I see of your people the greater is my
surprise that in certain directions their knowledge is so limited.
For instance, it seems very strange that such intelligent, and as I
have been informed, such learned persons, as many of them are, have
not, despite all obstacles, some accurate knowledge of the science of
astronomy.

Inidora--Civilization and its expressions are not always along
straight or even lines. Thus, a people, in certain directions, may have
evolved to a lofty plane, while, through the retarding influences of
special environments, they, in other directions, may have progressed so
slowly as to have for a time remained practically inert. This condition
applies to the Entoans, who, though spiritually and intellectually,
highly evolved, have been for a time, and yet are, through the
retarding influences of special mental environments, in a state of
spiritual inertia.

Through ancient records and yet more ancient Ento spirits we have
learned that centuries previous to the establishment of our national
religion, the arts and sciences had attained a high degree of
excellence, and that among the different races were various phases of
religious beliefs, with universal tolerance of the same. That among
the learned ones were some who asserted that Ento was but one of many
worlds, and that through means of certain instruments these persons
attempted to prove their sacrilegious theories. But at the time of the
establishment of the national religion all these wild and reprehensible
fancies were set aside as unholy and as tending to invalidate the
statements of the Sacred Writings.

From what our friend Bruno and some ancient spirits of your spirit
spheres have related to me it appears that on your planet in a very
remote period civilization was in a very advanced state and that a
people known as the Chaldeans were learned in astronomy, chemistry
and other sciences and also were wonderful seers. That one Aromanes
calculated the procession of the equinoxes and the occurrences of
eclipses. Sosthene, another Chaldean, with whom I am personally
acquainted, calculated very accurately the distances of the planets
of our solar system from the Sun and their revolutions about it. Yet
many centuries later, through religious intolerance, our dear friend
Bruno was burned to death for like assertions. Thus you perceive that
the Entoans are not exceptional in not having evolved equally in all
directions. Even after the establishment of our national religion, from
time to time, daring and irreverent seekers after knowledge attempted
to teach the people strange doctrines, subversive of established
beliefs. One declared that the shining points in space were worlds
like Ento and that Andûman[a:] having created them he perhaps also
had peopled them as he had peopled Ento. And, heresy of heresies, one
Sivonadas more than hinted that the children of Ento had evolved from
lower life forms. Such pernicious teachings could not be tolerated, and
effective means were used to efface them. An instance illustrative of
attempts to break up the shackles of ecclesiasticism I will at another
time relate to you.

To you the religious beliefs of the Entoans appear extremely
superstitious, as indeed they largely are, yet, if I may draw a
conclusion from what I have learned relating to the many faiths of
Earth's peoples, I do not perceive that they have, as a whole, come
into a truer conception of the Infinite One who is the sum total of all
spirituality than have the peoples of this and many other planets.

Religious creeds and observances, albeit the expressions of states
of civilization, to an extent retroact as restraints, if not actual
barriers to progress, and rarely are the spiritual impulses of a people
forceful enough to divert into new channels the extreme conservatism
of established religions. Thus, though during later centuries the
spiritual impulses of the Entoans have been greatly intensified,
they tenaciously have clung to their hopeless beliefs as being the
only known channel through which their spiritual energy might find
expression. Like children learning to walk alone, they have not dared
to let go of one support while no other has been within reach.

Believing absolutely that Ento and all pertaining to it are special
creations of Andûman[a:], the Supreme One, whose glorious abode is in
Diafon ēvoiha (the Sun), whose beams are effulgent and life giving
because they are reflections of His majesty and power, and that beyond
the screen of the fleecy clouds is Astranol[a:], where dwell His
messengers, who note and bear to Him a record of the thoughts and deeds
of His children. Believing that Phra (death) the dread God, surely
will destroy those who may be sacrilegious enough to question the
statements of the Sacred Writings, or who may attempt to peer into the
dwelling place of the Gods, or to search into forbidding mysteries.
Believing that life, the jewel beyond price, is prolonged through
strict obedience to the commands of Andûman[a:], which, through His
messengers have from time to time been revealed to the priesthood, who
are the chosen custodians of all truth; believing all this, and more,
the Entoans are not likely to forsake old beliefs until they are shown
the way to a truer, happier faith. That spiritually, they are prepared
to accept a happier, more rational faith, is beyond question, and that
the time and means are at hand for this glorious consummation we do not
for a moment doubt.

De L'Ester--From what Inidor[a:] has said you may infer that he does
not regard civilization as a result of religious concepts. Neither
do we, for, through observation and experience, we have learned that
it is despite religious concepts, which invariably are more or less
erroneous, that the spirituality _innate_ in the spiritualized human,
impels the forward progress of civilization, which means clearer
recognition of truth, hence a clearer, higher conception of the all
pervading Infinite Spirit.

Spirit, recognized or unrecognized, is the positive, potential,
intelligent force of the universe, whose energies ceaselessly,
unerringly turn the wheels of evolution. So called decadence of
civilizations is but the recouping of spiritual forces adjusting
themselves to changing conditions. All man inhabited planets
necessarily pass through similar experiences. Like the alternate
flowing and ebbing of ocean's tides are the advancements and
retrogressions of civilizations, both being a fulfilling of natural
law, whose infinite, intelligent, forceful activities are known by many
names. From very advanced ancient spirits of Ento and Earth we have
learned of civilizations of both planets adorned by arts, sciences
and social conditions of a high order, but of an antiquity so remote
that, compared with them, the civilization of their time was more
than crude, and the revelations of their Yohoid[a:]s and Tsûf[a:]len
(teachers of the divine mysteries) of Ento and those of the alchemists,
astrologers and astronomers of Earth were as echoes of a dead past.
Yes, it is a truth that there is nothing new under the sun. That which
becomes perceptible to human consciousness is new only in the sense
that it is a special presentation and recognition of that which always
has existed. It is quite as true that all life forms of all inhabited
planets invariably evolve from involved conditions, that is they evolve
from the unseen into the perceptible, which is the symbol of the real,
and all ever are evolving into higher expression.

Certainly no thought or act (which is thought expressed) is ever lost,
and though peoples of remotest times have left no written history or
other record of their day, the impressions of their thoughts and deeds
unquestionably are an active force in the present.

Spirit force is the one and only force, and the spiritualized force
of humanity is cumulative, hence each succeeding generation becomes
heir to the accumulated energies of their predecessors. I am aware
that the records of extinct races and nations may appear to contradict
this statement, nevertheless it is correct. Thus it occurs that
Ento's peoples inherit a tremendous spiritual force, and the bonds of
ecclesiasticism once severed, eagerly they will turn from the old to
accept the new faith, and the very heavens will resound with their
pæans of joy and praise to the Supreme One, who, in answer to their
ceaseless prayers, has at last vouchsafed them the priceless boon of
an assurance of a continuity of life. Ah, professors and students are
reassembling, and for the present your questionings and our replies
must cease. The very distinguished looking person robed in white and
maroon is about to address the young people. Be attentive, Gentol[a:],
for I shall attempt to translate into your language what he may say.

Professor--Dear youths and maidens, in further commemoration of
the virtues and deeds of the illustrious dead, to whom we, and all
Entoans, owe so great a debt of reverential love, we have decided
that on this occasion it will not be amiss to deviate from our usual
order of exercises. Thus, in addressing you, I shall venture to touch
upon subjects hitherto considered too abstruse for immature minds. In
these enlightened days it is thought that the education of the young
should be of a more comprehensive nature; that, although a positive
knowledge of facts is an imperative requirement, it is well that
youthful minds shall also consider speculative theories, so that they
may readily judge between truth and untruth. Until recently it has been
thought not only unwise but irreverent to discuss the many theories,
doctrines and unscrupulous declarations of illy regulated persons, who,
through all times, have sought to mislead the people through calling
in question the authenticity of statements of the Sacred Writings.
But of late a growing belief of observant, thoughtful minds is that
that which is true is indestructible, and that the intelligence of the
people is quickened through comparing the spurious with the genuine.
Believing that these propositions are irrefutable I have carefully
prepared a paper which I anticipate will both interest and instruct
you. At least it will inform you of some of the strange and erroneous,
though possibly sincere, ideas which, from time to time, have occupied
the attention, not only of the ignorant and credulous, but also the
attention of some miscalled scientists.

To you all it is well known that Genessano Allis Immo and his family
ever were faithful observers of the teachings and rites of our
Holy Religion. Also you are aware that when the body of the Lady
Camariss[a:] was incinerated it was made known to the people that
no ashes remained, and that when the body of her adored husband was
consumed the same strange mystery occurred. By many it was and is
believed that because of the sublime purity and nobility of their
stainless lives they were, by the Deific Ones, borne to Astranol[a:].
But it is not for us to attempt to learn the secrets of the gods, to
whom our reverent thoughts are ever due.

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], stand near the youth in purple. He is Prince
Dano, and presently you will speak to him.

Professor--You will now honor me with your attention while I shall
read the result of some recent researches into records written in a
language of ancient times. It is related by Tsohûta that during the
ofen ryzo entevah (seventh century) succeeding the establishment of our
holy religion, Zēnano Yod[a:]s, a very learned man, but of a perverse
nature, who feared neither Andûman[a:] or the vengeance of the gods,
sought to gain a knowledge of forbidden things. Through the aid of
some strange device he professed that he had learned the mystery of
the realms of Astranol[a:], which he blasphemously averred had no
existence, and that neither did Andûman[a:] dwell in Diafon ēvoih[a:]
(the Sun), but was an ever active, all pervading, intelligent,
unknowable personality or principle. That there were neither gods nor
goddesses. He also dared to declare, and what was, if possible, more
sacrilegious, that Andûman[a:] had not created Ento, which was in a
sense self-created. With utmost seriousness he declared that in man
was an essence which was his life, and that at death of the body this
essence, which was intelligent, took form and somewhere continued to
exist. That these essences, not the gods, peopled space, and that,
under certain conditions, he had even seen these essences in form, had
conversed with them, had been touched by them, and, most incredible
of all, he claimed to have recognized in certain forms, friends and
loved ones who had gone into the silence. Of course these assertions
were the ravings of one of lost mind or the hallucination of one who
irreverently sought to gain knowledge of things known only to the
Deific Ones. We who continually mourn for our loved ones who have gone
into the silence, whither, reluctantly, our footsteps also tend, can
well understand that Zēnano Yod[a:] may have been bereft of his dearest
ones and in his despair became so disturbed in mind as to really have
thought the vagaries of a diseased imagination were realities. It is
well known that similar cases have been and are treated in our retreats
for mental illness. Certainly no man mentally whole would have dared to
be so impious as was he, and only one of unbalanced senses could have
imagined a thing so strangely preposterous as that the life essence
continued to exist after the form which had contained it had been
wholly consumed and whose ashes----

De L'Ester--Now, Gentol[a:], speak to Prince Dano.

Gentola--Emano, Ento noan ist[a:] parû tenû. Efon analos esto par[a:]
com bano Earth. Andûman[a:] esti com banû ēlos tissim[a:].

De L'Ester--Springing to his feet in great excitement, he cries aloud:
"Zēnano Yodas, est[a:] pûrv[a:]. Zēnano Yodas, esto pûrv[a:]. Emanos,
Emanos, Efon val[a:] genist[a:] tima. Ah, camano ûfan tsi non ist[a:]
valo? Camano ûfan tsi non ist[a:] valo?"

De L'Ester--Touch him on his face and hands. That will do. Trembling
and amazed, swooning almost, he staggers and falls into the arms of
his alarmed friends. The startled professors endeavor to quiet the
excited students who are crowding about them, eagerly questioning them
as to the cause of Prince Dano's strange seizure. All heard him cry
out: "Zēnano Yodas spoke truly, Zēnano Yodas spoke truly. Friends,
friends, I see a form. Ah, cannot you see it? Cannot you also see it?"
Professors and students alike are greatly disturbed. Really, I am sorry
for the professor, whose paper is thought to have had an effect quite
contrary to his anticipations. His mind is so full of misgivings as to
the propriety of having called attention to such an unusual subject
that he declines, though urgently pressed, to further pursue it. What
a commotion. Dano quietly, but strenuously, asserts that he did see a
form, the form of a strange appearing woman who was clothed in shining
garments. He also declares that she touched him on his face and hands
and that she said, "Friend, Ento is not my home. I come from another
world called Earth. Truly, Andûman[a:] is everywhere." He expresses
the hope and earnest desire that he may again see the Earth woman, and
he shall not be disappointed. Zēnano Yodas at least has one convert
to his belief. As yet we only can convey the consciousness of these
sensitives' detached sentences, but soon they will grow accustomed to
the new and strange experience, and will learn to remain passive, hence
receptive.

Gentola--Have not I, elsewhere, seen this Prince Dano?

De L'Ester--In the dwelling we first visited I called your attention
to the portraits of a youth and maiden. Dano is the original of the
portrait of the youth.

Gentola--Ah, yes, I recall the circumstance. The portrait is very like
the young man, who possesses a very fine and exceedingly handsome face
and form.

De L'Ester--We have held you overlong to-day, and having for the
present no further designs upon Dano or others we will now return you
to your physical form.

Gentola--May I ask if you have considered my request for an absence of
some weeks from home?

De L'Ester--We have, and very regretfully we acquiesce in your desire
for rest and a visit to your World's Fair. Of course we are aware that
your journeys to Ento exhaust your vitality, but constantly we have
guarded you with utmost care, and thus far the result is so encouraging
that it leads us to hope and expect that you will return home renewed
in health and with a willingness to fulfill your promise to us.

Gentola--When I return home I shall gladly place myself at your
disposal. Must I immediately return to Earth? I should like to hear the
next speaker, who appears to be greatly agitated.

De L'Ester--We do not consider it safe to hold you longer. You shall be
informed as to what may further occur or be said that may indicate that
the present state of involution is likely to be superseded by a marked
evolution of the religious thought of the Entoans.

How, with the promise that during your absence from home we will, as
far as we may, guard and guide you in all your ways, we will consign
you to the care of George and Inez, who will bear you safely to your
soul self, your objective personality, which, in a semi-conscious
state, awaits your return.

Now, make your adieux to these friends and then we all may say au
revoir.

George--Not one question, my sister. Always we are inclined to hold you
with us too long. You are surprised that the shadows of night already
are brooding over your city, and that here in your quiet room twilight
has deepened into darkness.

Gentola--George, Inez, bear my loving greetings to all our dear ones.
Good-bye, good-bye.




CHAPTER VIII.

SPIRITUALIZED MAN.


De L'Ester--Again you are at home, and we, your ever faithful friends
are here to greet and congratulate you on your improved health.

Gentola--And I with greater pleasure than I can express reciprocate
your friendly greeting. Yes, during my visit I was on several occasions
conscious of your presence, once especially so.

De L'Ester--That was when you questioned your architect escort as to
the dimensions of the rotunda of the building you were observing.
Mentally you were comparing it with the rotunda of the Galarēs[a:].

Gentola--That was the time to which I have alluded. I knew you were
touching my head, and once I knew that you and George were walking
beside me.

De L'Ester--Indeed we did not at any time leave you unattended. We
never do. You have such a genius for falling and other mishaps, that
ever we are on guard to if possible avert them. No, we will not go to
Ento to-day, but with your permission we will talk with you.

Gentola--I shall be only too happy to have you do so. May I ask for
your opinion of our World's Fair? Did it at all interest you?

De L'Ester--Truly, we all feel a degree of pleasure and pride in such
an exposition of the achievements of Earth's peoples. It was a grand
result of ages of evolution, and a fine illustration of the history of
their progress. Should we say that largely the marvellous exhibit was
the reflex of activities of the spirit side of life, you scarcely would
credit the assertion, nevertheless it is true. _All_ spirits submerged
in mortals, _subconsciously_ are en rapport with the spirit spheres,
and when the subjective and objective consciousness are fully en
rapport, they establish a medium, through which very advanced spirits
of exalted spheres can convey into visible expression the results
of their wisdom and attainments. But this is a topic we cannot now
consider.

We observed that you were greatly interested in the parliament of
religions, and the various ethical and other congresses. Could the
audiences have seen the multitudes of spirits who listened, applauding
or disapproving, they would have been astounded. Myriads of Earthbound
spirits were there, and spirits too from the higher spheres, not only
of our own planet, but of others, and all were deeply interested in the
proceedings. If it be true that in a multitude of counsellors there is
wisdom, at the parliament that somewhat rare jewel should have shone
resplendent. The numerous representatives of Earth's leading faiths,
each vieing with the others in presentations of their claims, as
possessors of truth, afforded a stirring spectacle. We also observed
your lively interest in the Orientals and their expositions of their
various faiths, which are more truly spiritual than are some of more
modern times. You have come to understand that a people may believe
an erroneous doctrine, yet be a spiritualized people. What they may
accept as truth is not so momentous as is their manner of living it.
The spirit of the Golden Rule is found not only in all the great
religions of Earth's peoples, but in all the religions of all peoples
_everywhere_, and if those who profess a belief in it practice it
they are not far from the kingdom of Heaven. Yes, positive beliefs in
this or that do, to a degree, influence conduct, and it is quite as
true that beliefs are the results of heredity and environment, which
are most forceful mediums for the perpetuation of good and evil,
characteristics of human good and evil being terms expressive of states
of development. _Truth is God, perfectly expressed_, and truth may
be likened to light which, falling through color, takes on the hue
of the medium through which it falls, but is light still. So truth
though discolored by its passage through the medium of Hindu, Buddhist,
Confucian, Christian, and other imperfect faiths, is truth still, and
ever its radiance steadfastly shines for the guidance of humanity.

Gentola--You have mentioned my interest in the Orientals. I assure you
that when I first saw Swami Vivekananda and other Orientals enter the
great hall, I was quite startled. It seemed to me that at some time
somewhere I had known them, or people like them, and I found myself
trembling from a sort of shock or surprise. To this day I cannot
account for the peculiar sensation.

De L'Ester--Do not try to account for it; later on you may be able to
do so.

Gentola--Doubtless you are aware that among scientists of our planet
there is much speculation as to a possible missing link between the
earliest humans and the most highly evolved animal forms preceding
them. While observing at the parliament the representatives of various
races it occurred to me that between them and their animal progenitors
there may have been a variety of missing links.

Humboldt--Gentol[a:], I fear that you have not well remembered some
lessons we have endeavored to convey to you. In the so termed chain of
human evolution, no link is missing. The expression is misleading, and
altogether unscientific. In a chain no one link is an outgrowth of
another link. It is an individual, special, observable creation of the
artisan, but from the earliest physical expression of the human to _the
period when the Earth man became a Spiritualized Being_, the degrees or
stages of his unfoldment were so indistinct, _so slightly emphasized_
as to have been imperceptible, save by the Infinite One.

Gentola--Do you know at what stage of his evolvement, and _how_ the
Earth man became spiritualized?

Humboldt--You have been informed that apart from the physical plane the
term time has no significance. When we freed spirits think of eternity
we think of that which had no beginning and can have no ending. When
we think of the universe, we think of that which is dimensionless, and
when I say that _always_ throughout the dimensionless universe, new
worlds have been, and are coming into existence, and that dead worlds
have been, and are undergoing disintegration, I but state accepted
facts. Always, when new worlds become fitted for it, they receive
that which Earth's scientists have not yet discerned--the quickening
potentiality, the life impulse, which is the Divine Energy pervading
the universe. In their tepid waters the first life expressions of the
vegetable, of the animal, and of the human animal are manifested.
On our planet, as on other planets, quickened protoplasmic, human
germs passed through all the gradations incident to their onward,
upward, ceaseless progress toward a period when as hairy creatures
with low retreating foreheads, protruding jaws, repulsive features,
and unshapely limbs, upon which they scarcely stood erect, they
instinctively drew themselves apart from all other life forms. No, in
no sense were they related to anthropoids; animals they were, but human
animals, with faculties so specialized as to place them above all other
creatures. Ages elapsed, and when sufficiently evolved, they became
spiritualized. How? As you cannot yet accept a belief in re-embodiment,
you may not accept my statement and the added testimony of these
friends, that in the spirit spheres of inhabited planets of our Solar
System and of other systems of worlds, there are myriads of Spirits,
of low planes of development, who, through the ministrations of those
known in the Spirit Worlds as Angels of the Visitation, are conveyed to
such human creatures as I have spoken of, and through their organisms
they are re-embodied, and become reborn as their spiritualized
children. And that was how the first spiritualized humans appeared on
Earth, and how they appeared on other planets prepared to receive them.
Could I not read your thoughts, your perplexed expression would assure
me that another question is on your lips.

Gentola--Yes, that is so. I am wondering where the first spirits ever
embodied came from.

Humboldt--My dear madame, when we shall have learned when the first
world came into existence, we also may learn where the first embodied
spirits came from. Concerning these propositions, my ignorance compels
silence. On what authority do I make the statement relating to the
spiritualization of the human animal? Upon such authority or proofs
as I have accumulated through visiting worlds in various stages of
evolvement. Worlds yet too young to receive in their waters the first
influx of life germs. Worlds in whose tepid waters, protoplasmic cells,
the wombs containing the germs of all life forms are teeming. Worlds
which have evolved vegetable and animal forms so huge, so grotesque
as to be appalling. Worlds on which the human animal is on the verge
of becoming spiritualized. Worlds where having become a spiritualized
conscious being, man is looking about him in fear and amazement.
Worlds where man has evolved varying degrees of civilization, and yet
other worlds, where the peoples, compared with those of Ento or Earth,
are as gods.

Gentola--You will pardon me, sir, if my question may have seemed to
involve a doubt as to the correctness of your statements. No such
thought was in my mind. On the contrary, I so implicitly believe what
you have said, that I realize that I am as an atom of a boundless
universe.

Bruno--But relatively the atom is as great as the universe. You have
been told that an atom is a universe in embryo, for in it are all
possible qualities, and in it are all the activities of Infinite
Intelligent Energy. So were you no greater than an atom, you yet would
be a necessary factor of Infinity.

Gentola--I do not question the truth of your statement, which humbles
rather than exalts my estimate of my own personality.

Bruno--He, who was the divinest man of any of Earth's saviors,
counselled his disciples to be as humble as little children, that thus
they might be great in the Kingdom of Heaven, and you will learn that
the further you progress in an understanding of the Infinity of God,
Who is the all, and in all the more will you desire to humbly adore the
Divine Spirit of the atom and the universe.

Gentola--I realize that I know so little. That I only am approaching
the threshold of the temple of knowledge. You, on the spirit side,
better than I, comprehend the limitations of mortals, so you will
not wonder that I grow impatient, because of my slow progress in a
spiritual direction; but with you, dear friends, to aid and instruct me
I shall hope to grow in grace and in a knowledge of the truth.

De L'Ester--Courage, Gentol[a:], remember that ever the stream must
flow onward to the sea. So if in your present incarnation you cannot
attain to loftiest heights the law of eternal progress will oblige
you to unfold the divinity within you. Neither you nor we will ever
find a halting place on this endless journey, which is ever onward,
ever upward toward the unattainable perfection of Infinite Spirit,
Intelligence, Energy and Love.

But we have grown too serious, and will talk of lighter matters. With
curiosity and amusement we regarded your perplexity, upon viewing for
the first time the beautiful white city. You were quite bewildered by
the oddly familiar appearance of the architecture, decorative, and
other features of the buildings, bridges, statuary, and so on. _Le tout
ensemble_ reminded you of scenes you could not at once localize.

Gentola--Yes, really I was for the moment rather bewildered. I thought
that I must have dreamed of a similar scene, then it came to me that on
Ento I had beheld that of which the White City reminded me. Did not you
all think it beautiful?

De L'Ester--Very, and we now promise you that some day we will show you
a greater and far more beautiful White City, than that ephemeral one on
the shore of Lake Michigan.

Gentola--I shall try to remember your promise. May I ask where are
Inidor[a:] and Genessano?

De L'Ester--Since your last visit to Ento a dread catastrophe has
occurred, and they and other Ento spirits have been, and yet are
engaged in aiding sufferers, both in and out of the physical body. They
were to meet us here, and we expect them at any moment.

To-day is the 29th of October, 1893. When will it suit your convenience
to accompany us to Ento? We hope that you may name an early day.

Gentola--You cannot be more anxious than am I to resume our journeys.
On November 1st I shall be ready. Ah, here are Inidor[a:] and
Genessano. You are most welcome. I have been inquiring about you, and
with regret have learned that some calamity has befallen Ento.

Inidora--I can say for my brother and myself that we are delighted to
again meet you, and doubly glad that soon you with our Band will resume
the duties of our mission to our sorrowful people. Yes, truly, a dread
calamity has befallen the inhabitants of a densely populated region
in a locality, corresponding, De L'Ester says, to about the latitude
and longitude of Berlin, in Germany. It is regrettable that fear of
ridicule, in case of mistakes, renders you too positive to be able to
record some scientific matters. Believe that I do not mean to chide
you. You do your best, and we are satisfied with your efforts.

Nearly two centuries of your time have elapsed since Ento has been
subjected to a destructive earthquake. Occasionally, in various
localities, slight seismic disturbances have occurred, but not since
the destruction of Petucy has there been a serious convulsion.
Corresponding with your morning of the 26th of September, peculiar
and alarming rumblings and tremors of the underground attracted the
attention of the people on the southern confines of the Province of
Dyrin. At intervals during two days and a night these disturbances
occurred, and in affright many of the more timorous or prudent
fled to other parts for safety; but thousands remained, praying to
Andûman[a:] and the Deific ones for protection. Their priests offered
the propitiatory animal sacrifices and the temple altars were laden
with offerings of the most precious things; but alas, Andûman[a:] and
the dwellers in Astranol[a:] were deaf to all entreaty. On the evening
of the second day Diafon ēvoih[a:] (the Sun), enshrouded in a mantle of
lurid clouds, from which angry gleams emanated, sank from view below
the faintly outlined horizon, and for a space deathlike stillness
reigned, and in mute terror the people waited. But not for long, for
suddenly tremors, faint at first, but quickly increasing in violence
seemed to shake the very foundations of Ento. Temples and other great
structures tottered, then fell in shapeless ruins, and smaller edifices
and private residences were utterly demolished. So appalling were
the convulsions that the affrighted, frenzied people ran hither and
thither, seeking to save their own and the lives of their dear ones;
but many were crushed under falling buildings, and thus passed from
death to unlooked-for life in our spirit realms. In one locality,
suddenly a great fissure opened, and as suddenly closed, engulfing
almost an entire village. Then the disturbance subsided, and on the
following morning the rising glory of Diafon ēvoih[a:] gleamed athwart
a pitiable spectacle. Homes destroyed. Great public structures fallen.
The living seeking the dead, and rescuing the injured, and to our
spirit vision spirits releasing themselves from their crushed physical
bodies were some of the features of the deplorable event.

Of course, our duty, as well as our sympathy, has impelled us to
assist them, and we have been engaged in the work of restoring to full
consciousness the many bewildered ones, who scarcely can be made to
realize the marvel, the joy of continued existence. So touching has the
experience been that many times my eyes have filled with tears. Other
Ento spirits are engaged in the incomplete work, for as you are aware,
some newly freed spirits, especially those who suddenly pass to the
spirit side, remain unconscious, not only for days, but for prolonged
periods. No, the spirit spheres of different planets are not alike, for
all correspond with the conditions of such planets as they surround.
Yet in a sense the conditions of all spirit spheres are so in harmony
with each other that spirits sufficiently progressed, and who have
learned the laws involved in these conditions, can visit any Spirit
Sphere of any planet. Yes, I recall that once during my childhood a
considerable seismic disturbance occurred under, and adjacent to the
plateau on which was our home, and that the alarmed people hastened to
offer sacrifices, and Andûman[a:] spared his offending children. The
Band approving, you may be shown the scene of the late catastrophe.
At present the conditions are so harrowing that it would not be wise
to subject you to them. The local and neighboring crematories, not
being equal to the incineration of the dead, many of the mutilated
bodies have been taken elsewhere. The cries and lamentations of the
living that no more shall they behold the forms of their dear ones is
pitiable in the extreme. Oh, that the time may quickly arrive when
Ento's despairing people may learn that their sorrowful belief in utter
annihilation is false. That continuity of existence is a glorious
reality.

Gentola--With all my heart I pray that it may be so, and if I, in
the slightest degree, may be made to further the fulfillment of your
desire, I shall rejoice that I have not lived in vain.

Genessano--Eman[a:] (friend), no one lives in vain. From the least
developed to the highest evolvement of the human of any planet, all are
fulfilling the Infinite, Intelligent, Divine Will. All are portions of
the waves of human progress, and no one can go forward without directly
or indirectly aiding his weaker, consequently less highly evolved
brother. In the spirit worlds, so well understood is this law that
sooner or later all spirits desire re-embodiment, that thus they may
not only aid mortals less evolved than themselves, but that in so doing
they also may advance their own spiritual evolvement. Yes, it would
appear that in this desire there is an element of selfishness. Not so.
It simply is the fulfilling of a law of the All Wise, Infinite One,
whom you name God.

Both Inidor[a:] and I long for the time when we shall be fitted to
return to mortal existence. Would we prefer re-embodiment on Ento?
I cannot say that our inclination is not in that direction, still
the feeling scarcely amounts to a preference. Then we well know that
the Angels of the Visitation will choose birthplaces best suited,
not only to our further evolvement, but where we may aid others in
their progress. Many spirits strongly desire to be reborn on the
planet of their last re-embodiment, and conditions favoring, they
may do so. Spirits from the higher spheres, reborn on any planet, as
saviors, leaders, prophets, or teachers, may or may not have been
former inhabitants of such planet. Through the law of fitness all
re-embodiments are controlled. You, ēman[a:], largely because you
cannot recall the past, cannot yet accept a belief in re-embodiment;
but when you shall have returned to the spirit side you again will
recognize its beneficence, just as in time all spirits recognize that
Infinite Intelligence, Love and Justice give to all, that which is for
their greatest good.

De L'Ester--We now will leave you. On the morning of November 1st
we will come for you, and you will not forget to take the usual
precautions against being disturbed. I may mention that on your
next visit to Ento, you will have the pleasure of meeting the Lady
Camariss[a:], mother of Inidor[a:] and Genessano. She will meet us at
Camariss[a:]. Until then, adieu.

_October 29th, 1893._




CHAPTER IX.

MEETING WITH CAMARISSA.


De L'Ester--We salute you, and are gratified to find you prepared for
our flight to Ento. As Inidor[a:], Genessano, and their mother await
us at Camariss[a:] we will journey quickly. George, allow your sister
to merely rest on your arm; thus she will grow stronger and more
self-reliant. Yonder is ruddy Ento, glowing and palpitating like the
heart of some living creature. Now glance backward at our own distant
planet. Yes, its radiant envelope differs in color from that of Ento.
What occasions the difference in the atmospheric coloring of the two
planets? Qualities of atmosphere, reflection and refraction.

Yes, it is difficult to realize that on our Earth world myriads of
creatures, humans and animals each in accordance with their inherent
qualities are reaching out toward the light which lighteth, not only
every man that cometh into the world, but which shines for the Earth
worm as well as for the angel. You think that a very comprehensive
statement? So it is; but is not the Infinite, Omni-present Spirit in
the atom as well as in the universe? Aye, and spirit is the one light,
and there is no other.

The beautiful city Camariss[a:] lies below us, and we will now descend
to our friends who await us in the arbor.

Genessano--Loh[a:]û ēmentos. We have been watching and welcoming your
approach. Gentol[a:], allow me the pleasure of making known to you our
dear, our honored mother.

Camarissa--At last I meet you, of whom I so often have heard. You have
given my sons a place in your regard, may I hope to also be so favored?

Gentola--It is I who am the favored one, and I shall esteem it a
privilege and a pleasure to number you among my friends. Your sons have
promised a relation from your own lips, of events occurring during your
mortal existence; so aside from the pleasure of mutual acquaintance
with much interest I have looked forward to your coming.

Camarissa--To recall events of my mortal existence will be like
recalling a not very well remembered dream. It may surprise you to
learn that not since my dear sons entered our spirit world, nearly four
centuries ago, have I visited Ento's physical plane. To explain why I
have not, would not suit the present occasion.

I perceive that since last my eyes gazed upon the once familiar face of
Ento, marvellous changes have occurred; not the least noticeable is the
educational institution erected near the site of my former home.

Long ere our departure into the world of spirits, my dear husband,
Genessano Allis Immo, and I were engrossed with the anticipation
of at some not far future time rearing a great Galarēs[a:], which
should not only serve to perpetuate our memory, but also should serve
the nobler purpose of educating future generations in science, art,
industries, and gentle modes of living. Other important interests so
occupied our time and attention that the fulfillment of our cherished
plan was delayed and the years passed, and still we found no time to
devote to the achievement of a work so dear to our hearts. At last a
period arrived when we felt that we might arrange for the erection
of the Galarēs[a:], but suddenly and most unexpectedly I passed into
our spirit world, and ere long my husband followed me. Age and most
arduous duties had brought him quite beyond the years of middle life,
but a still vigorous manhood gave promise of many years of usefulness;
but so stricken was he that I who had so long worked by his side,
who had been to him as the heart of his heart, the life of his life,
sharing with him the joys and sorrows of our mutual existence, that I,
his adored wife and the mother of our two sons had forever gone from
his sight, that he had not courage to long survive so great a calamity.
Realizing that he too was about to pass in to the silence, calmly he
arranged his affairs, and instructed our dear sons as to his wishes.
Then with the fortitude of a just man he yielded to the inevitable,
and passed, not into the silence, but into a glorious spirit realm,
where I awaited him. Soon our beloved sons, one by one, came to us;
but ere they came, they had well begun the work which their father
had delegated to them as a sacred trust, but which was to be left for
other faithful hands to complete. Now, as I gaze on yonder grandly
beautiful structure I am grateful that the Infinite One, who directs
the ways of his children, has made of me and mine instruments for the
good of others. Since passing into our spirit world my husband and I
have been informed as to events and affairs occurring on Ento, and our
satisfaction over the beneficent results of the introduction of the
irrigating and waterways system, which obviously is of incalculable
benefit to Ento, is inexpressible.

Changes which impress me with a sense of strangeness relate to this
plateau which, as I remember it, was considerably loftier than now,
and where in former times was an abrupt declivity, is now a gentle
incline eastward to the level of the waterway. I perceive too that
the massive seawall, built during the lives of my husband and myself
has disappeared beneath the waves of Indolois[a:], whose waters have
greatly encroached upon the land. At the time of my departure from
Ento, between Indolois[a:]'s eastern shore and the western face of
this plateau, there was a broad stretch of land, many dwellings and
other structures. Now I perceive that they and the great stone piers
and seawall have disappeared beneath the restless waves which have
so encroached upon the land as to threaten to wholly engulf it. None
too soon is yonder massive barrier being constructed as a protection
against further destruction of the greatly narrowed shoreland. As I
look about me I find it difficult to realize the many changes which
have occurred since I, a proud and happy wife, came to the home of my
adorable and adored husband. The winged years fled away, and our two
sons came to enhance our felicity. Other years added their days to
those of the past, and troublous forebodings, like creeping shadows
drew nearer, ever nearer. As you already are aware of the deplorable
conditions at that time prevailing throughout nearly all of Ento's
central regions, you will understand that finally the situation became
alarming, and one day, hand in hand, my husband and I walked to the
margin of the declivity, which abruptly fell away to the plain, and
as we gazed afar eastward over the dry and arid lands our eyes filled
with tears, and our hearts were sorely troubled. Imperceptibly, but
gradually, the fleeting years, nay, I should say ages, had brought
about a condition of such extreme aridity that the lands refused to
longer yield sustenance to the people, whose minds became filled with
despair, and a sense of enmity against those in authority over the
Provinces of the central regions. Like children deprived of proper
nourishment they grew fretful, rebellious and unreasoning, demanding
relief where more than temporary relief was unattainable.

For years my husband and I had vainly, incessantly striven to
alleviate the general distress and consequent discontent of the people
of our province, and now in silence we stood thinking, thinking.
Presently my husband, sighing heavily, said, "Camariss[a:], my dearest
one, I fear that my days are well nigh ended. The want and despair of
the people weighs so heavily upon me, that I stagger, and grow faint
under the burden. I know of no means by which we may afford them
prosperity and happiness. Have the pitiful Gods put into your mind
any thought that may serve to direct our future course?" After some
hesitation I replied, "Lord of my life and love of my heart, I know
not if in my slumber some God may have spoken to me, but I have had a
singular, and what your wisdom may deem a foolish dream. Shall I relate
it to you?" Smiling tenderly and sadly, he said, "Perchance in our
extremity, Andûman[a:] may have sent a messenger to whisper to your
sleeping senses. Tell me your dream. At least it will serve to occupy
the passing moments."

I then related that while I slumbered I dreamed that standing by his
side, just as we then were standing, we looked far eastward, and from
the base of the plateau, abounding streams flowed in that direction,
while at intervals other waters flowed from the north and from the
south, and borne on the bosom of a great waterway, huge vessels laden
with people and the products of many lands passed to and fro, and
that like some great bird with wide spreading wings, a beautiful city
seemed as though brooding upon the shining waters. It was a grandly
beautiful scene, and the wonder of it still remains in my memory.
"Heart of my heart," I said, "I have told you my dream. How shall it
be interpreted?" Silently, but with earnest attention my husband had
listened to the recital of my dream, and as I proceeded, his flushing
face, beaming eyes, and hurried breathing gave evidence of intense
emotion. Clasping me to his heart he cried, "Surely, Andûman[a:],
through His messenger has spoken to you, showing us a possible means
whereby our unproductive lands may be reclaimed, and the impoverished
peoples rescued from their present lamentable state. Camariss[a:], my
dearest, we will strive to understand the full meaning of the message,
and may Andûman[a:] and the pitiful gods aid us in our loving endeavor."

Days and nights of closest consideration, of closest calculation as
to adaptation of means to ends followed. So absorbed were we with the
tremendous problem which so suddenly had presented itself that we
scarcely ate or slept. At length greatly wearied I one day threw myself
on my couch and slumbered. Again the scene of my dream was before me,
but some years seemed to have elapsed since first I had gazed upon
it. How my vision was very far reaching, and I beheld fruitful lands
richly clothed with verdure. Cities, towns and villages adorned the
landscape. Want and discontent had disappeared, and prosperity like a
gracious ruler smiled upon the people. From overhead the fleecy clouds
dropped into the chalices of myriad, many-hued blooms, their sparkling
treasures. Among the spreading tree branches sweet throated birds sang
their love notes. Everywhere the shining waters gave drink to the
thirsty lands, and everywhere all things seemed to be breathing praise
and thankfulness to Andûman[a:], their creator.

After awaking, my dream remained a vivid, pleasant memory, but fearing
that my husband might think me grown fanciful, I shrank from speaking
of it; but as our thoughts and experiences ever were mutually shared,
I at length made my dream known to him. As before, he considered
it a message given not only for our guidance, but also for our
encouragement. "Ah, heart of my heart," he said, "your dreams may
yet become realities;" and my thoughts grew full of hope and eager
anticipation of some great good which might come to the suffering
people. Very soon afterwards, my husband proposed that we should go
to the capitol to lay before the supreme ruler, Tyvon Oiranz[a:], our
plans whereby we hoped to at least reclaim a portion of our unfruitful
lands, and thus rescue the people from their pitiable condition. But I
entreated that I might remain at home with our children, and he went
alone. With the result of his interview with Tyvon Oiranz[a:], you
already are acquainted.

Before the conclusion of our mortal existence the vast enterprise had
progressed far beyond our original plans and most sanguine hopes, and
my dear husband and I passed to our spirit world, fully assured that,
even as the arms of the loving mother encircle her child, so in coming
time would the beneficent system encircle Ento's entire central regions.

Ere meeting you, Gentol[a:], I with my sons surveyed the length and
breadth of the system, and my gratification that the great work goes
forward toward completion is beyond expression. My joy too, that the
time approaches nearly when Ento's sorrowful peoples shall rejoice
in the knowledge that life is continuous, is boundless. To you who
are devoting toward its accomplishment your time and very life force
will come your reward. That I may not by one hour retard the glorious
mission I shall for the present leave you, but not for long; for I
shall, from time to time, give myself the pleasure of meeting you and
these friends, and also of witnessing the progress of the children of
Ento out of darkness into the light of spiritual knowledge.

De L'Ester, I owe you more than thanks for your patient attempt to
translate into Gentol[a:]'s language my poorly expressed words, which
have at least made us better acquainted with each other. With loving
thoughts for all, I regretfully hid you Info oovistû (adieu).

De L'Ester--We now will proceed to the Galarēs[a:]. Ah, seated under
yonder vineclad arbor are two of our student friends, Prince Dano and
the Quend youth, Favēon. They very earnestly are discussing some topic
which may interest us. We will draw nearer.

Dano--Favēon, you are quite mistaken in your conclusions. Only
yesterday I had a demonstration of this not at all understood law.
After classes I as usual retired to my apartment where I amused
myself by sketching whatever for the moment caught my imagination.
Now it was a fragment of a half-remembered scene, anon it was a dream
face or some grotesque fancy, and thus in an idle fashion I whiled
away the moments. Presently, in some unremembered manner and through
what means I know not, I seemed to drift into an unknown country
where, through some unrecognized agency, I moved from one locality
to another beholding unfamiliar scenes, while beings of surpassing
beauty greeted me exchanging with me such kindly courtesies as one
stranger offers to another. Amazed, I asked myself can it be that the
gods have transported me to Astranol[a:] that I may behold the glories
of their blest abode? Although I felt exceedingly curious as to how
I had arrived in this strange country, it did not occur to me to
question any one; but as I stood musing over my perplexing position I
was amazed to see approaching me one whom in my childhood I had known
well, and whose surprise appeared to equal my own, as with extended
hand he hastened toward me, exclaiming: "Dano, Dano, son of my dearest
friend, Basto Andûlēs[a:], I give you a loving welcome to our world
of living ones, our world so beautiful, so glorious." For the moment
I seemed too shocked, too overwhelmed to reply, then collecting my
senses, I evasively answered: "My father often recalls the memory of
Iklos Mûyt[a:], and mourns that no more shall he behold your beloved
form or feel the warm clasp of your ever generous hands." Then I cried:
"Has not death claimed you? Do you indeed live here in Astranol[a:]?
I remember the lamentations of your family and friends over your dead
body and urned ashes, and I doubt the seeming evidence of my confused
senses. Tell me truly, do I behold Iklos Mûyt[a:]? Do I hear the
well-remembered voice of my father's honored, well beloved friend?
Surely, surely, I dream or my mind wanders, and I grow afraid, I grow
afraid," I tremblingly cried.

Taking my hands in his own he gently, soothingly said: "Dano, Dano,
dear youth, be not alarmed, calm your agitation, and listen to what I
shall say. As all of Ento's children have been taught, so was I taught
that only for Andûman[a:] and his messengers was immortality possible.
That when breath, the life of the body ceased, endless silence was the
fate of all. Ah me, I yet remember the bitter, hopeless anguish that
filled my mind, my heart, my days, when death came and I was bereft of
my dear ones. I only recall such sorrowful memories that you may be
reminded that the belief that death ends all of existence still holds
in bondage the heavy hearted children of Ento; and that you may be
assured that this dread belief is untrue let your visions wander over
the marvellously beautiful scenes of this world, which far exceed aught
that you may behold on Ento, and over these multitudes of happy men,
women and children who once lived, loved and labored and then passed
into this world of living ones, and who, with myself are taught that
through earnest striving to fulfill the law of love we all shall attain
to other realms far exceeding this in the glory of their inexpressible
beauty, and a happiness so exalted that I can neither comprehend or
realize it."

He further said that when death has stilled the activities of the body
the living principle, the real self, invisible to limited physical
vision continues a conscious, individualized existence in realms suited
to the requirements of the changed condition of the self. "This, dear
Dano," he said, "is not Astranol[a:], the fabled abode of fabulous
gods; it is but one of the realms surrounding Ento, as its petals
surround the heart of the rodel."

With profound attention I listened to this strange speech which so
moved me that I cried: "Oh, Iklos Mûyt[a:], tell me, I implore you,
will my dear ones, will I, continue to exist after passing into the
silence?" Releasing my hands, he, with a dignity, a majesty and a
tenderness of manner inexpressible, said: "There is but One Infinite,
Eternal, Intelligent Life Principle, and all things are partakers
of _it and cannot cease to exist_. Your body and the bodies of all
creatures must return to the elements from whence they originated;
but the self, the indestructible principle, will continue to exist in
the world of the immortals, and to the children of Ento this glorious
truth shortly will be revealed. Throughout our realms of the living
ones there is one thought, one resolve, one expectation, that but
little longer shall darkness and despair, like evil birds, brood over
your lives, turning your smiles into weeping, your joys into hopeless
sorrow. In this grand work I, alas, have no part. Not yet have I grown
strong enough to enter the repellent atmosphere surrounding Ento's
peoples; but in higher realms there are those who are as gods, and
they long have been striving, through such means as they command, to
penetrate this atmosphere; and to all who dwell in highest or lowest
realms the glad tidings have been heralded that soon the children of
Ento will emerge from the shadows of their cheerless beliefs into
the light of a joyous truth. I am not fully informed as to how this
glorious event is to be brought about. I only know that the means will
be equal to the desired end and I and all await with eager anticipation
the consummation of our dearest wishes. Dano, you now will return to
Ento, but remember that surely you will again come to this realm of
living ones, and I, Iklos Mûyt[a:] will be but one of many friends and
loving ones who will give you greeting."

Suddenly I awakened and found myself still seated by the table, pencil
in hand, and strangest of all this strange experience, as I slept and
dreamed, I had written all, and more than I have related. In what
manner can you account for this unusual dream, if dream it was?

Faveon--My dear Dano, I shall not attempt to account for your singular
dream further than that I presume that your waking thoughts and
imaginings were so impressed upon your mind that during sleep they
assumed familiar shapes, one of which appeared to utter unheard of
mysteries. I pray you, put away further indulgence in such misleading
fancies which may harmfully excite your too emotional nature. Through
our Holy Writings we are taught, and all experience confirms the fact,
that only Andûman[a:]'s Messengers dwell above yonder fleecy, floating
clouds, which, like a mistlike veil hide the glory of their shining
faces, which, as we know, sometimes irradiates the sky reminding Ento's
children that their sleepless eyes ever observe our good or evil deeds.
Always has it been and always must it be that when the breath of life
ceases the dead go into perpetual silence. Ah me, scarcely do we learn
to live, to love, to enjoy, ere death tears us from the embraces of
our loved ones, and naught is left us save a handful of ashes to be
cherished, to be ceaselessly wept over.

Dano--Think me not impious that I question _why_ Andûman[a:] has so
decreed that a life full of good deeds, of noble aims and achievements,
shall end as ends the life of the animal; shall suddenly, in the full
tide of a glorious career, cease to live and be no more. That we
now exist, and are conscious of the fact, is to my mind, as great a
marvel as that, in some unimagined state, we may continue a conscious
existence. Aye, a conscious existence in which to unfold our highest
abilities. You are aware, Favēon, that I am betrothed to Vallo[a:],
daughter and only child of our supreme ruler, Omanos Fûnh[a:], whose
wife, Sēlon[a:], died in giving birth to their only child. Emerging
into womanhood, Vallo[a:] displays such beauty of character, such
elegance of manner, such loveliness of face and form, such intelligence
and vivacity, that she enthralls me beyond expression, and I love her
with adoring tenderness. When I think of the possibility of death
approaching this charming, this adorable woman, stilling the breath of
her life, closing her luminous eyes and ending the music of her gentle
speech, I am filled with unutterable anguish. Oh, Favēon, if I sin, may
Andûman[a:] forgive, but to me it seems cruel that he permits the dread
Messenger Phra to take our all without making us, his children, some
recompense for the agony of bereavement, for the sorrowful certainty,
that we, and our dear dead shall meet no more.

Faveon--Dano, Dano, you shock and alarm me. No longer am I surprised
that your waking thoughts fill your sleep with strange, if not with
impious, dreams. I implore you to restrain your thoughts, your vivid
imagination, lest some harm come to you. You well know that your ideas
are contrary to the teachings of our sacred priesthood, who are the
expounders of our Holy Writings, which declare that in the beginning
Andûman[a:], through His love for His ignorant children instructed the
gods to commune with them, that thus they might gain knowledge, but as
they grew wise they also grew so arrogant and impious that they sought
to wrest from the gods the secrets pertaining to sacred things. Then
Andûman[a:] wrathfully forbade His Messengers to hold further communion
with His sinful children. In the beginning there was no death, but for
their sins Andûman[a:] decreed that henceforth death should serve as
a constant reminder that the Creator is greater than the created. We
being the created cannot, without sin, question Andûman[a:]'s laws,
hence, dear Dano, we should not only willingly submit to the will of
our Creator, but as obedient children, we should humbly revere the hand
that smites us.

Death having come to the children of Ento because of their impious
desire to obtain a knowledge of sacred mysteries, it does not appear
reasonable that even you, our beloved prince, may have been admitted
into Astranol[a:], and the Holy Writings mention no other realm of
living ones. To my mind, your dream partakes of the nature of the
hallucination which recently possessed you in the lecture hall. You
then insisted, and still insist, that a foreign-looking woman spoke to
you, and even touched you, yet no one save our fanciful friend, Lēta
Verronadas, imagined that they saw or heard aught. Certainly, it was
nothing more than the effect of a too highly excited imagination, to
which, I confess, I, too, occasionally am a victim. It appears that
Lēta is becoming subject to these annoying seizures, and his friends
are somewhat anxious for his health, which really appears excellent.

If my very practical remarks have served to becloud your usually serene
countenance, you will forgive me, and may Andûman[a:] forgive if I,
too, am sometimes filled with fear and bitter regret that inevitably
death is drawing near, that even in my youth I may pass into oblivion.
Were it not impious, gladly would I welcome a belief in a possibility
of a continuity of existence. Alas, we have no hope, or slightest
indication, that after death has seized the breath of our life, we and
our beloved ones ever shall meet again. So, my friend, it will be well
for us to strive to be thinkers and workers, not dreamers of dreams
which have no foundation in realities. Your heavy sigh finds an echo in
my own heart, and I fear that my face like your own tells the secret of
our sorrowful thoughts, so the signal for our return to study comes in
good time to end this profitless conversation.

De L'Ester--You perceive, Gentol[a:], that a spiritual force is
agitating the minds of some of Ento's people. All through the
centuries of their established religion there have been minds more
or less illumined by gleams of Spirit Inspiration, but necessarily
they have been so faint, so uncertain, so quickly repressed as to
have made but slight impression upon the masses of the people. Always
the priesthood of Ento have been an impregnable barrier between the
darkness of superstition and the light of Inspiration. That generally
they have been, and are sincere, we do not question. Sincere, or
otherwise, everywhere and always the priesthood move forward only
when the spiritual unfolding of a people obliges them to yield to an
irresistible pressure. Largely it was through the spiritual growth of
the people that, some centuries ago, Ento's priesthood were obliged to
discontinue human sacrifices, and it is through their further spiritual
evolvement that the densely positive barrier which ever has enfolded
them at length is yielding to forces from the spirit worlds. We rejoice
that now, as never before, spirits from Ento's and other spirit worlds
can penetrate and come en rapport with the consciousness of many
of the people. True we cannot, as you can, approach them directly,
but soon conditions will become changed and we too, will be able to
communicate with many sensitives.

We have shown you that all organisms throw off certain emanations,
the condition of the organism determining the quality of the
emanation. In their activities these emanations are either centrifugal
or centripetal. The centrifugal or positive being forceful, the
centripetal, or negative being passive, but, if I may use a paradoxical
term, energetically passive, and they form about inhabited planets
like, or similar to, Ento and Earth, a spiritualized atmosphere,
which, to freed spirits, is as palpable as is a stone wall to physical
touch. The positive atmosphere enveloping the peoples of Ento is very
repellent; but you, who are yet connected with a physical body, are
not so etherealized as we are, hence we can use you as a means of
communication with persons upon whom we can make no impression.

No, this spiritualized envelope is not what some of Earth's people term
the astral sphere, but it is a constituent of the first or so-called
astral sphere, within whose limits abide spirits not sufficiently
evolved to gravitate to a higher plane of being. In a sense such
spirits are _confined_ within the limits suited to their several
conditions. Confined, not through the arbitrary sentence of a just or
an unjust judge, but through an inevitable process of Natural Law,
which is God's Law. Around all planets inhabited by Spiritualized
humans and other organisms, the first Spirit Sphere, so to say,
materializes. As ages pass and humanity evolves to higher Spiritual
Planes other and in all directions greater, grander spheres, suited
to the requirements of more highly evolved beings are formed, each
succeeding sphere surpassing the preceding one.

Gentola--Do you know if there is a limit to the number of spirit
spheres surrounding any or all inhabited planets?

De L'Ester--I know there is no limit to the questions you can ask, and
for the present I must end our conversation by saying that we know of
no planet having more than seven spirit spheres, and by the time you
or we shall have arrived at the highest, Ento and Earth will have been
added to the list of dead worlds, and we may have become archangels.

Gentola--Please allow me to ask one more question. Am I to understand
that there is a law compelling spirits to abide in certain spirit
spheres?

De L'Ester--Spirits freed from the physical body, each according to
his or her evolvement inevitably go to "their own place," the only
place they are fitted for. No spirit can long remain in a sphere
with whose _vibrations_ he or she is not in harmony. Spirits from
the higher may, and do, enter the lower spheres, but, speaking from
experience, not with pleasurable sensations. You once were adventurous
enough to descend to the lowest level of one of the deepest mines on
your continent. You may recall the sense of oppression and difficulty
of breathing which nearly overcame you. Well, that is the best
illustration I can offer of the sensations experienced by spirits of
higher spheres who, for instance, enter our Earth's First or Spirit
Sphere. Why, then, do we return to mortal environments? Oh, my friend,
you yet must learn many sad lessons. You, whose destined work is to
serve as a teacher to spirits in darkness, will find the answer to your
query. You will learn, as we are learning, that only through loving,
unselfish service for those more needy than ourselves do we find the
stepping-stones by which we shall ascend to the heights where are the
exalted ones, who, through self-sacrifice and deepest self-abasement,
have attained knowledge and bliss unspeakable. It is they who inspire
us to strive for a like beatific state of being.

It occurs to me that of one feature relating to emanations I have
not informed you. I have stated that all organisms throw off certain
emanations, hence animal emanations are constituents of all First
Spirit Spheres. After physical death the myriad forms of animal, indeed
of all organized forms of life, for a time continue to exist within
the limits of the First Sphere. Then, through the activity of natural
law they in a sense become reincarnated, but not on the same plane of
existence as before, but a step higher, and always in a species of
their own order. That is to say, the soul of the horse never reappears
in the form of an ox, or the soul of the ox in the form of the dog, and
so on. No expression of life is ever lost. Thus the endless movement of
evolution is continuous, and the bird of prey swooping down upon the
finned beauty of lake or stream is quite oblivious of the fact that he
desires to dine off a distant relative of whose family he is a highly
evolved representative.

Genessano--With interest I have heard De L'Ester's lesson, and it
reminds me of an experience of Inidor[a:]'s and my own. When we passed
to the spirit side we were not sufficiently evolved to continuously
exist in a sphere higher than Ento's first Spirit Sphere, and for
more than half a century of earnest striving, assisted by the loving
devotion of our parents and dear friends who were more highly evolved
than were we, we were dwellers on the threshold of our second Spirit
Sphere.

During this period of instruction and progress our condition was far
more agreeable than that of mortals, but through brief visits to other
spheres, we soon learned that the degree of happiness we were enjoying
was but a promise of a more exalted state, and naturally we aspired,
not only to greater joys, but to higher attainments, through which we
might find closer association with our adored parents.

No, this period of instruction and progress did not appear to pass
slowly. You do not yet realize that to freed spirits time and space
are mere terms possessing neither value or significance. With us is
only an ever present now. The terms past and future involve an idea of
a beginning and an ending, and, as our friend Humboldt has stated, we
cannot conceive of either a beginning or ending of what is termed time
or a limit outside of which is nothing. No spirit of highest spirit
spheres claims to have a realization of either time or space or a
conception of the Infinite One, who ever has been, is, and ever must be
the dimensionless, unthinkable all.

De L'Ester--To-day we will see and hear what may transpire in the
classrooms. First we will observe what we may designate as an
astronomical lesson. The apparatus which the young, intellectual
looking instructor is arranging is unlike anything you have seen, and
I imagine that the lesson will be quite as unique as the apparatus. I
shall not attempt to give you more than a mere synopsis of it. Now he
calls the attention of the class to the well known fact that Ento is
not a perfectly globular body, but a somewhat elongated sphere, deeply
depressed at its extremities and revolving in space as Andûman[a:] in
the beginning decreed, that thus life giving beams of his abode might
vivify all portions of the home of his children. He alludes to the
Sacred Writings, which declare that in a very remote time Andûman[a:]
revealed to certain holy men an account of the creation of Ento and of
the living creatures who came into existence through the exercise of
His Will, and that later, when Ento was prepared for their reception,
He created His children, who should dwell upon it, and be the
recipients of His bounteous provision for their happiness. Evidently
this Instructor has no knowledge of the revolution of Ento around the
Sun, for he talks of the marvel of atmospheric pressure holding Ento in
position and also supporting the fair regions of Astranol[a:], beyond
which is the shining abode of Andûman[a:], which, with its foundations,
fill all outer space. It would not serve a useful purpose to further
speak of his lecture to his deeply attentive pupils, but it will please
us if you will attempt a brief description of this scene.

Gentola--Around a massive table, on which is an object suggesting a
globe, a number of boys and girls are assembled. The globe, if it may
be so called, is quite elongated, and, as you have said its ends are
deeply depressed. In the centre of the depressions are pivots which
rest in sockets in the ends of two upright supports. The surface of
the globe is divided into spaces by metal bands suggesting latitude
and longitude. Midway between the extremities of the globe is a broad
band with three narrower ones on either side of it. Extending from
the central band at intervals are seven metal rods tipped with what
appears to be diamond stars. Now the Instructor attaches to the ends
of the two protruding pivots flexible wires covered thickly with some
dark substance. The globe begins to revolve and now its velocity is so
great that the star tipped rods appear to form a luminous, iridescent
band about it, but I do not perceive what force makes it revolve. How
beautiful it now appears. All the bands are luminous, and I now see
that they are incrusted with different colored small jewels, and there
is a soft singing sound, like the notes of some musical instrument. I
do not understand where the sound comes from, and I cannot describe
the scene intelligibly.

Bruno--Be at peace, Gentol[a:]. We have neither anticipated or desired
that you should more than offer your impressions of the scene and of
this object which the Entoans believe represents the form of this
planet. The seven diamond stars symbolize the seven divisions of
Astranol[a:], but the Entoans do not venture to conjecture as to what
the abode of Andûman[a:] or those of their deities may be like.

Presently we will show you a marvellous piece of mechanism which is
an embodiment of vibratory energy. These wires form a connection
between it and this globe, and through its measureless energy this
and all the mechanical apparatus of the great Galarēs[a:] may be
set in motion. On Ento, for many purposes, vibratory energy has
superseded electrical energy, yet, in a sense, vibratory energy is an
expression of electrical force, which is the basic principle of all
energy. It permeates every atom of the universe, and its expressions
are so manifold that, though its presence may not be apparent, its
ever present energy is a fact. Ento is but one of many planets whose
inhabitants understand and apply both electrical and vibratory energy,
and, ere long, in the advancement of civilization on our own planet, it
will become a tremendous factor.

The Ento name for this object is esploin[a:], and it conveys the
Ento idea of latitude, longitude, the equator and zones. The colored
outlines indicate the natural divisions of land and water, which, as
you perceive, are not nearly equal. The revolution of the planet on
its axis is recognized as producing day and night, but the idea of a
very pronounced concavity at its extremities, or, as we would say,
at its poles is, of course, a conjectured absurdity. How did such an
erroneous idea originate? Inidor[a:] says that in the Sacred Writings
there are intimations of the form of the planet, and it would be a bold
adventurer who would dare to dispute such infallible authority.

I grow impatient for the ushering in of the coming revelation when this
grand civilization shall leap to the level of its evolution. And it is
coming, it is quickly coming. Even these youths and maidens shall share
in the splendor of Ento's religious freedom, which, like a radiant sun,
shall dissipate the shadows of its long Spiritual night. When that
long-hoped-for period shall have arrived, and Ento's peoples shall dare
to investigate in all directions, they soon will arrive at correct
conclusions concerning two sciences which to them are as unread books.
Of astronomy they are ignorant, of geology nearly so, their religious
beliefs deterring them from arriving at logical conclusions, lest they
might incur the displeasure of Andûman[a:] and His Messengers. You may
recall the Professor's dilemma over the fossilized saurian, and in the
record of the rocks they yet will learn equally startling lessons.

Yes, we are informed as to all important affairs of Earth, and we are
aware that daring minds contemplate the possibility of establishing
communication between Earth and Ento. Altogether a futile idea, as you
now must perceive. Why, the Entoans do not even dream of the existence
of a world other than their own. Inidor[a:], is not this true?

Inidora--Quite true. Ento's Sacred Writings, which are believed to be
infallible, make no mention of Andûman[a:] having created any other
world than Ento, but historians have written that antecedent to the
establishment of Ento's Religion there was a powerful nation south of
the equator which was in a very advanced state of civilization. This
nation was known as the Avalano nation. Zēnon Avados, one of their
learned men, who at this time is a Teacher in one of our Spirit
Realms, declares that he and other scientists of his time demonstrated
to their entire satisfaction that Ento was but one of many similar
worlds. They also made other astronomical discoveries, all of which
they made known to the people. Unfortunately, this nation grew very
rich and consequently very corrupt, and an inevitable decadence came
upon them. Their civilization lapsed into chaotic conditions, their
learned ones passed away, and thus to the Entoans a knowledge of facts
was lost, which, when again presented, they will be prepared to accept.

Bruno--Already you have learned that in many directions Ento's
scientific discoveries equal or surpass those of our own Planet. That
art, in its various expressions, has attained surpassing excellence.
That the luxuries and refinements of living are within the reach of
all. That constant and untiring effort is being put forth to elevate
the entire peoples. And that want and crime are so nearly minimized as
to seldom demand attention. Thus the soil is prepared to receive the
seed which soon will be sowed, and which surely will yield a bounteous
harvest. Ah, the demonstration is concluded and the Instructor is about
to address the class.

Instructor--This lesson demonstrates that as a cherished child rests
upon the bosom of its mother, so Ento, beloved of Andûman[a:], rests
upon the bosom of space. Afar off, in Diafon Evoih[a:], is the glorious
abode of Him who is the Creator of all things. When we, His children,
have done well He smiles, and Diafon Evoih[a:], golden and glowing,
sheds its life-giving beams over our beautiful world. He smiles and
fruits and grains multiply, that His children may have sustenance. He
smiles, and bûd, bloom and verdure cover as with a mantle the home of
all His creatures, for are not all living things precious in the sight
of their Creator? From the lowest to the highest expression of His love
all find their allotted places. All act in accordance with His Divine
Will. This esploin[a:] not only conveys a correct idea of the form of
Ento, but also it illustrates how we are encompassed by the abodes of
Andûman[a:]'s Messengers, whose ever-watchful eyes discern our inmost
thoughts, our most secret acts. Even as the Divine Ones guard the
Sacred Mysteries may we, O Andûman[a:], guard ourselves against wayward
thoughts and unhallowed desires and may we ever reverently adore Thee
that Thou didst create this World so fair and a people so blest as are
the children of Ento.

De L'Ester--Leaving this Instructor and his pupils to a discussion of
their odd mixture of science and religion, we will ascend to the second
floor. Yes, truly their religious beliefs dominate the lives of the
Entoans. Fear of consequences, quite as much as love of Andûman[a:] and
His messengers, occasions in them a constant watchfulness. Genessano
has related a droll occurrence which illustrates this very point. Once,
in his childhood, a falling meteorite attracted his attention, and he
ran to his parents shouting: "A god has fallen out of bed! a god has
fallen out of bed and broken his lamp." Both father and mother were
horrified at his irreverent exclamation, and in terror, lest harm might
befall their thoughtless lad, they hastened with him to the Istoir[a:]
to lay upon the altar a propitiatory offering.

Gentola--Genessano, you will pardon me for saying that the contrast
between the advanced civilization and the peculiar religious beliefs
of your people still surprises me. That they are intellectual and
generally highly cultivated is very apparent, and it seems remarkable
that they yield obedience to a creed so utterly at variance with
common sense. Have they never believed in a continuity of existence?
Have they never had clearer conceptions relating to the ego than they
now have?

Genessano--Since passing to our spirit world we have learned that long
previous to Ento's ancient written history, which antedated the Sacred
Writings, there were those who, through many embodiments, on various
planets, retained overlapping, partial consciousness of previous
states of existence. Through this consciousness, which is a feature
of so-called intuitive perception, such persons more or less clearly
realize the indestructibility of the ego, hence the continuity of
perhaps conscious existence. But, through natural causes too complex
for present consideration to the consciousness of the masses of Ento,
no idea of a continuity of existence ever has occurred.

When through repeated embodiments and attendant experiences humans
of any planet have evolved to a certain plane, conditions being
propitious, they unfold Intuitive perception, or more correctly Soul
consciousness. Evolvement and unfoldment proceeding the Soul faculties
tend to become dominant, and the Human seeks to discover the causes
of phenomena. He theorizes, he analyzes, he dogmatizes, and grows
presumptuous, and if unwisely, he ignores his inner consciousness,
the real spirit self, he is likely to stultify himself, and conclude
that there is no other than a physical existence, and no intelligence
higher than his own. Conditions favoring, soul consciousness may
become en rapport with the inner or spirit consciousness, and despite
intellectual materialism, which ever clamors for dominion, the human
may evolve a recognition of Spirit, hence a realization of the One All
pervading Spirit known to you as God.

Though their history cannot be traced back to their earliest appearance
on our planet, we know that inevitably the Entoans, like the humans
of other planets, have passed through all the phrases incident to the
onward and upward progress of humanity.

Since the establishment of the national religion, and consequent
ecclesiastical oppression and repression, which ever have been so
absolute that they have not dared to think for themselves, their Soul
consciousness has found expression in ceaseless prayers that death may
not seize upon their lives, or those of their dear ones.

As the bud, infolding flower and fruit, is quickened by the breath
of spring, so Ento's peoples will be spiritually quickened by the
effulgence of the coming revelation, and then they joyfully will claim
their birthright of ever increasing happiness and life eternal.

De L'Ester desires me to relate something I once read in an ancient
record now stored in the Library of this Galarēs[a:]. It states that
immediately succeeding the Establishment of the national religion
certain fanatics held peculiar beliefs. They asserted that Andûman[a:]
had spoken to them, assuring them that they were possessed of an
Essence, or Principle, which was the life of the body, and that this
Essence, or life Principle, after death of the body continued a
conscious, happy existence in a world unseeable by physical eyes. They
also asserted that Andûman[a:] revealed to them Laws which commanded
them to refrain from all evil conduct. To love one another. To act
justly, and to be merciful to all living things. Other Laws relate to
the duties of parents, of children, of those in authority, and so on.
Certainly they were of a character indicating a Law Giver of a high
order of intelligence. The record further states that this fanatical
sect for a time increased prodigiously, but persecution and other
causes finally led to its extinction.

Another historian relates that during the third century of the
Established Religion one Mēro Kalmon invented an instrument through
which he daringly and impiously gazed toward Astranol[a:]. He not only
declared that Astranol[a:] did not exist, but that there were other
worlds than Ento. He went so far as to declare that these worlds moved
through space, and he even made drawings and calculations relating
to these fanciful Worlds, which misled many into a belief in his
reprehensible teachings. Not content with filling the minds of people
with these vain imaginings he also hinted that these newly discovered
worlds might be peopled as was Ento. So eager is humanity to indulge in
new fancies that ere long he made many converts, and the Sacred Faith
was seriously menaced. Word of Mēro Kalmon's proceedings was brought to
the Supreme Ruler Mostēnû Stoiv[a:], who directed that he be admonished
to cease teaching fancies so pernicious, so sacrilegious, so devoid
of intelligence. He was admonished, but being either very perverse
or very much in earnest, he continued to teach his senseless ideas.
Gentle admonitions failing to correct his heterodox opinions, severer
measures were exercised, but still he held to what he pretended to, or
did believe, and it became necessary to offer him as a Sacrifice to
appease the righteous wrath of Andûman[a:]. The historian also relates
that as he was about to be Sacrificed, suddenly the sky became overcast
with threatening clouds, and partial darkness reigned, but that at the
moment that the priestly knife reached the heart of the blasphemous
Mēro Kalmon, Andûman[a:] smiled, and Diafon Evoih[a:]'s golden beams
gladdened the hearts of the assembled multitude. And thus, adds the
historian, was demonstrated the truth of our Holy Religion. At this
time _Mēro Kalmon is a re-embodied spirit_, and amid the galaxy of your
inspired, scientific minds he shines as a star of the first magnitude.

Nay, Gentol[a:], it would not be wise to divulge the present name of
the re-embodied Mēro Kalmon; but from this recital you will perceive
that notwithstanding opposing influences at various periods, light
from Inspired minds has striven to dissipate the spiritual darkness
overshadowing the lives of the Entoans. Yes, Mēro Kalmon was a
sensitive, as he now is.

De L'Ester--In this well lighted and well appointed room Dano, Favēon,
and others are engaged in microscopical studies. We desire, Gentol[a:],
that you shall become en rapport with Dano, but so absorbed is he in
his investigation that we doubt if you will succeed. We will wait for a
less positive condition of the youth's mind. In the meantime you will
please attempt a description of this scene.

Gentola--Seated around a long table are five young men, and two dark
skinned, handsome girls in the bloom of early womanhood. On the table
are instruments of a kind, quite unlike any I ever have seen, through
which all are intently gazing. All are taking notes, and making
drawings, and a most animated conversation is being carried on, in
which the young women take part. You say that those instruments are
microscopes, but they are quite unlike any microscopes I have ever
seen. There are five convex lenses, one above the other, but slightly
apart, and they are suspended between two slender rods, a few inches
in length. Above each microscope a tiny, blindingly brilliant light
is suspended, above which is a reflector which seems to focalize the
light and reflect it downward through the lenses, onto some odd looking
object. You say it is the eye of some small animal? Oh, I never could
have imagined that the eye is so complex, so wonderfully beautiful.
Yes, I now see it very clearly. Through the glasses it appears greatly
enlarged. Describe it? No, indeed, I am not so presumptuous as to
attempt it. You clever ones should describe things of which I am quite
ignorant.

De L'Ester--You have said all that we really have desired you to
say. Should a competent person give a technical description of these
instruments, and object under investigation, your caution would take
alarm, and you would become too positive for our purposes, one of which
is to inform the peoples of our planet that the Entoans are very like
themselves, and that their methods of acquiring knowledge are somewhat
similar to those of the neighbors who are so curious about them.

Gentola--Now that I better understand your motive in asking me
to describe various things I shall feel less sensitive over my
incompetence, and you may rest assured that after this microscopic
observation I shall set a higher value on my own eyes.

De L'Ester--I thought you might, and it is high time you should, for
you not only use, but you abuse your eyes. The controversy over the
lesson grows very animated. Be attentive, and I will interpret what may
be said.

Faveon--Nitana, both you and Dano certainly are mistaken in your
conclusions. Our Sacred Writings distinctly declare that Andûman[a:]
is Infinite in all His attributes. That He creates and destroys as He
Wills, but nowhere is it written that He modifies any creature in order
to fit it to changed conditions. To my mind it savors of impiety to
question the accepted interpretation given our Sacred Writings by our
scarcely less Sacred Priesthood.

Dano--I do not doubt but that Andûman[a:] is Infinite in all His
attributes, and I do not question but that He creates in accordance
with His own purposes, but I do not believe that any _one_ living
creature is a special act of His creative Will, but that through His
fixed purposes or Laws, which are a part of Himself, all things
come into existence. If each living creature is a special act of
His creative power, logically one must infer that all creatures are
perfect expressions of His Will. Yet it is an indisputable fact that
if animals of any species are for a prolonged period kept in darkness,
their organs of vision will become modified to fit them for their
environment. I cannot but think that our Priesthood misinterpret the
meanings of portions of our Sacred Writings, and that they are prone
to cling too closely to ancient interpretations. May Andûman[a:]'s
Messengers understand that I do not desire to offer my immature
ideas as infallible truths, and I pray that they may direct my ever
questioning thoughts.

Nitana--Ever our scientific investigations oppose themselves to the
teachings of our Holy Religion, occasioning in our minds unrest and
dissatisfaction with our conditions. Though our devoted Priests
continually admonish us against an indulgence in profane imaginings,
our truant thoughts go far astray, and we grow bewildered and afraid
lest the justly offended gods may visit upon us dire punishment. Even
while we strive to learn the complex meanings of life, we are shrinking
from death, and crying to Andûman[a:]'s messengers to bear to Him our
unceasing prayers for release from the dread God Phra (death), whose
dark form overshadows all our days.

Scientific research has reached a limit where boldest and most earnest
minds pause uncertain and appalled. They cannot turn backward, and
they dare not go forward. Oh, that Andûman[a:] may as in ancient times
hearken to the prayers of His sorrowful children, and grant to them a
clearer understanding of truth.

Faveon--Nitana, it is not we alone whose minds are full of unrest, for
alas, the people too are questioning and doubting, and none too firmly
are the priesthood opposing themselves to the further advance of
skepticism. I fear that we too indulge in too free thought and speech,
and are becoming dreamers rather than thinkers. Dano, your example is
contagious. I pray that I may not find myself also dreaming strange
dreams, or yielding to baseless imaginings.

Dano--And yet it may come to pass. Truly, it has not been through my
desire that recent strange experiences have come to me. May the Gods
pardon my presumption, if I sometimes dare to hope that they in their
own way may, through me, convey some new Revelation of Andûman[a:]'s
love for His sorrowful children, whose entreaties for release from
death, ever are the burden of their prayers.

If Mylta, Vērian, and you, dear friends, may not consider me of lost
mind, or altogether given to preposterous fancies, at least I may amuse
you by a recital of what you may regard as merely a dream. To Favēon I
have related a former experience, and his incredulous smile assures me
that he yet remembers it.

Yesterday after classes I laid on my couch to meditate and rest. I did
not at all feel inclined to sleep, but soon a semi-conscious state
stole over my senses. At the moment my gaze was resting on a great
cluster of tēmos blooms sent me by Vallo[a:], my betrothed, to whom
my tenderest thoughts, like bright plumaged song birds, were flying.
Presently the tēmos blooms were blurred from my sight by a shining
vaporous cloud, from which emerged a female form, so wondrously
lovely that I was overawed and amazed. The form was tall, and of
proportions suited to the form of a Goddess. Over her shoulders her
hair fell like a golden mist, and her eyes blue as the azure floor of
Astranol[a:], gazed tenderly, smilingly into mine. Rodels, floating on
Naro's gleaming waters are not whiter than was her face, which shone
with an indescribably strange, luminous glow. Floating rather than
walking toward me she extended her hands, and in a voice so gentle, so
tender, so mellifluous that it yet lingers in my memory like strains of
sweetest music, she said, "Dano, Dano, my brother, do not you recognize
your sister Ont[a:]? I am not dead, I live, and love you, my brother
Dano. It was but my physical body that died. I, the real Ont[a:],
am as alive as when hand in hand we strayed by Naro's waters. Dano,
believe that I am Ont[a:], for I shall again and again come to teach
you the mystery of life after death of the body. Happily you possess
clear seeing vision, which perceives the real, Immortal Self, and you
are to be a Teacher of our people, who through you will attain to a
higher conception of divine things. Already you begin to apprehend
the oncoming glory of a New Revelation, which will bring to the heavy
hearted children of Ento gladness immeasurable. Fear not, my brother,
your message of joy will not fall upon deaf ears, for the way is being
prepared, and the invisible ones, who possess the strength and wisdom
of the fabled gods, will not fail you in your hour of greatest need. I
know that already they have spoken to you through one of another World,
and soon your vision will grow so strong and clear that you will be
able to perceive them, as you now for the first time perceive me. I can
remain no longer, but soon will come again," she said, and as she came
she went.

As I dreamed I seemed to weep for joy that my beloved Ont[a:] still
lived, and as she ceased speaking I strove to clasp her to my heart,
but she eluded me, and ere I more than realized her presence she
vanished from my sight, and I sprang to my feet, not in fear, but in a
state of trepidation indescribable.

Mylta--But, Dano, do you believe that you really saw your sister
Ont[a:], or do you consider it all a vivid dream? Of course, as your
sister has long been in the Silence, it could have been naught else
than a dream. Favēon, be quiet. Yes, I am excited. Oh, how I should
like to have such a dream; and only think, if it really might be
true! It is so dreadful to die, to leave all that one loves, and more
dreadful still to lose one's loved ones, knowing that the utmost one
can do is to mourn until we too shall pass into the Silence. Ah, my
Vērian, our tears will not ward off----

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], quickly draw near to Dano. Touch his head
with your finger tips. That will suffice. Drowsily he leans back in
his chair, and passes his hands over his forehead and eyes. Now in a
startled manner he whispers, "Ont[a:], Ont[a:]; nay, it is not Ont[a:].
Ont[a:] has golden hair, and this woman's hair is dark hued, and she is
of a strange race. Ah, I now see her clearly, and it is the same woman
who twice has appeared to me. Speak, I pray you, that I may know who
you are, and why you come to me."

De L'Ester--Follow closely my dictation.

Gentola--Though I am not of Ento I have been named Gentol[a:]. Twice I
have been made to speak to you, and now I shall say that which you are
to remember for it relates to gravest interests.

I have come from a world closely resembling Ento. It is far away in
space, and by its inhabitants it is known as Earth. I have been brought
to you by persons who once lived on either Earth or Ento, but death
of their physical bodies having freed the imperishable, intelligent
Principle, they are known as Spirits and may go from World to World. I,
too, am a spirit, but, like yourself, am yet connected with a physical
body, to which I shall soon return. Through the activity of a wonderful
natural sense you are enabled to perceive me and to hear my words; and
later on, when your Spirit senses shall have grown clearer, you also
will see and hear Spirits who are wholly freed from the physical body.
Already you have perceived freed Spirits and your quickened senses are
unfolding, as unfolds a flower. Two of the Spirits accompanying me
are of Ento's Spirit World. During their mortal lives they were known
as Inidor[a:], and Genessano, sons of Genessano Allis Immo and of his
Wife Camariss[a:], who long have existed in a World invisible to your
mortal vision, but which is as real as is Ento. As I am unacquainted
with your language I speak from dictation of a Spirit who, from time
to time, will reveal to you truths which will bring to you and to
your people joys unspeakable. This spirit bids me say to you that in
boundless space there are countless Worlds inhabited by beings like
yourself. That all are Andûman[a:]'s children, and all, like yourself,
are immortal. That when, through death of the body, their spirits
become freed, they continue to exist in worlds' far more beautiful
than Ento, whose peoples now are on the eve of a revelation which, to
them, will be as the dawning of a day of supremest joy. But for you,
dear youth, will come a sorrow so overwhelming, a grief so poignant,
that it will well nigh rend you from your body. But courage, courage,
sufficient for your days will be your strength. You have chosen and are
being prepared to give to your despairing peoples a message so glorious
that its Divine effulgence will dissipate the shadows of the hopeless
beliefs which so long have held them in Spiritual bondage. Already
in the minds of many of your people there is a sense of unrest and
discontent with old beliefs and forms of worship. It is a premonition
of wonderful events which ere long will occur, for spirits of Ento's
and other Spirit Worlds have combined their forces to awaken the inner
consciousness of your peoples, and they feel the quickening impulse but
are unaware of its significance. Many are prepared to receive the glad
tidings that existence is continuous, and when this knowledge shall
have been revealed to them quickly they will emerge from the depths of
perpetual sorrow into the radiance of a consciousness of immortality.

You would know the nature of the sorrow that is to come into your life?
I shrink from saying that it has become necessary to inform you that
your betrothed, Vallo[a:] Fûnh[a:], slowly but surely is releasing
herself from her frail physical body. Slowly but surely, like some
sweet flower of an untimely season, she droops and fades away, and ere
long she will be your Spirit, not your Mortal Bride. Her father does
not realize that her days are nearly ended or even that she is really
ill, else ere now he would have called you home. You are to await his
or your father's summons, and you are not to speak of this or of aught
I have said to you. Soon again I shall be with you to further reveal to
you that which concerns yourself and others, and now, Info oovistû.

De L'Ester--Favēon, Nitana and the others are greatly amazed and
alarmed at Dano's strange condition, but as he breathes and moves they
know that he has not swooned, so silently they await his awakening, and
now he is arousing from his partially submerged state. He is so highly
sensitive that while en rapport with you he is almost wholly conscious
and fully remembers all that you have said to him, and though as yet
he does not comprehend his condition, in time he will do so. It is to
be regretted that such a heavy sorrow must fall into his young life,
but when finally he shall realize that his adored Vallo[a:] will not be
forever lost to him, with his sorrow will be blended joy inexpressible.

Dano--Have I again been dreaming? Surely it was more than a dream.
Heard you no one speaking? Saw you no form, dear friends? Yet truly
I again have seen a fair-skinned, dark-haired woman, clothed in
strange, shining garments, who has spoken to me of marvellous things.
If what she has said may be true, ere long into my life will come
a heavy sorrow and a great joy. But Andûman[a:] alone knoweth all
secret things. Through His love He created me and patiently I shall
await whatever of good or ill He may send to me. You, my friends, will
pardon me if I cannot now relate what this woman, who calls herself
Gentol[a:], has said to me.

Faveon--Dano, I pray you compose yourself. No, we heard nothing,
saw nothing, but I confess that I so sympathized with your abnormal
condition that for a moment I experienced a most peculiar sensation.
I seemed to feel some invisible presence near me, but soon I realized
that it was the merest foolish fancy, and quickly I aroused myself to a
sense of my surroundings.

Vērian, sweet cousin Vērian, your pallor betrays your perturbation, and
Mylt[a:]'s humid eyes evince a lively sympathy if not a positive belief
in Dano's hallucinations. Come, friends, we will walk abroad and soon
these baseless, idle fancies to which, I fear, we all are inclined,
will be dispelled.

Nay, Dano, you shall not be left to yourself to brood and dream. Too
close study and a natural inclination toward Mysticism are misleading
you, and we, your devoted fellow students, will be doing less than
our duty if we do not endeavor to induce you to yield to lighter,
pleasanter veins of thought.

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], to you this demonstration is little more than
curious. To estimate its meaning and value you would have to realize
what we and many other spirits long have been striving to bring about.
This we cannot now make plain to you, for could you fully realize its
significance it would so overwhelm you as to unfit you for the work
you alone can accomplish. This much I may say, that now as never before
we feel assured of the success of our mission.

Favēon felt not only your presence but also the wave of Magnetism
we passed over him. He is very sensitive, and when the time of his
enlightenment shall have arrived he no longer will imagine that Dano is
afflicted with morbid fancies, for he too shall stand as an Inspired
Teacher of his own people.

In the adjoining class room other students are engaged in Microscopic
examination of Crytogamic growths. For a short time we will observe
them. We perceive that the specimens are of various species found in
moist localities, or in ponds or other sluggish waters. That their
sporules, wafted by winds or through the agency of aquatic fowls, are
borne from one locality to another. That some are known to be inimical
to health, even to life, but that science has found means to oppose and
render ineffectual their virulence.

Yonder dark-skinned intellectual maiden is strongly inclined to
skepticism. Not perceiving the utility of these growths she contracts
her pretty brows, and, after some moments of inconclusive thought, she
turns her large, luminous, questioning eyes on the stately Professor
who stands near her, regarding her attentively, and says: "Professor
Doiko, will you inform us as to why Andûman[a:] has created these, so
far as science has discovered, worse than useless growths, and also
the parasites which infest the bodies of His children, and of all
creatures?"

Professor Doiko--Our purpose is to study the structure and habits of
these growths, not to question the purpose of their Creator. When we
shall have grown wise enough doubtless we will understand the mystery
of many things which now are obscure. As to parasites which infest the
bodies of living organisms science regards some of them not as enemies,
but as scavengers of refuse, which, when not speedily removed, generate
diseases of various kinds. Through our lack of knowledge we count as
foes many forms of life which probably, in time, we will come to regard
as friends. Andûman[a:], Creator of all things, makes no mistakes. It
is His children who err in questioning the results of His infallible
wisdom.

De L'Ester--The maiden looks rather discomfited than convinced. To
the quiet girl on her left, in a low tone she earnestly says: "One is
ever asking questions to which our learned ones give but half replies.
Always within me something cries out for a fuller knowledge of things.
If I question our Instructors or our Priests, or if I search written
authorities, the answer is ever the same, 'Andûman[a:] knoweth,
Andûman[a:] doeth according to His will,' and our Priests say that we
sin when we question the meanings of mysteries. Tonēne, what is that
within us which ever is impelling us to search into forbidden things?"

Tonene--Could I answer your query, Cassa, I should perhaps be wiser
than our Instructors. I know not why you are so perversely inclined,
but I think it may be well for you to defer to the opinions of those
who at least are far more learned than are we.

Cassa--But, Tonēne, it is said that Prince Dano believes that we are
more than we appear to be; that when the body dies the breath of life
does not die; that the real self is invisible, but that it possesses
intelligence and memory and speaks and moves about. I cannot quite
remember what else it can do. What perplexes me is, how can the breath
of life speak and move about without a body? I know not how Prince
Dano explains that. We all know that he is wise and learned beyond his
years, and there are those who regard him as one whom Andûman[a:] has
specially endowed, but others fear that overmuch study and thought
render him visionary.

Tonene--Any one hearing this inconsequent conversation would probably
consider us as visionary as is Prince Dano, and we will serve ourselves
better by attending to our lessons.

De L'Ester--In Cassa's somewhat rash remarks we find further evidence
of the unrest stirring the minds of the people, and it augurs well for
the success of our Mission when, despite their fears, even youthful
minds are questioning old beliefs.

Should we attempt further notice of the students and studies of this
class room it would oblige us to exceed our purpose, which is to simply
record sketches of people and things. You will bear in mind that in
calling your attention to apparently trivial matters we do so that you
may perceive that ideas and pursuits of the Entoans are noticeably like
those of Earth's peoples. Again we are holding you too long and must
immediately return you to Earth. Three days hence we will come for
you. George and Bruno will attend you. Until we all meet again, Info
oovistû.




CHAPTER X.

DR. BLANK'S LESSON.


De L'Ester--Notwithstanding that, logically, neither time or space
are realities, we, very illogically, have found ourselves somewhat
impatient with your visitors, whose prolonged stay has delayed us a
full hour. Ah that is well. Always secure yourself against sudden
recall. We are ready, George. Yes, to-day Earth's outer atmosphere is
very tranquil. You will find Ento's even more so. George, we will pass
directly to the Galarēs[a:]. Gentol[a:], an hour hence a friend will
meet us there. No, you are not acquainted with the gentleman, but you
have heard of him as a guide of your very dear friend, Mrs. S----le,
to whom he writes and for whom he makes slate drawings. She, for a
sufficient reason, has not given you his name. Should I do so I should
violate his and her expressed wishes. On this occasion he will be known
as Doctor Blank. Yes, we have journeyed quickly. In seven minutes to
a second. We will now proceed to the class room adjoining the one we
visited three days ago.

Genessano--Gentol[a:], you perceive that you and we pass through what
mortals term solid substances without experiencing any resistance. I
recall that after my release from my physical body I thought it one of
my strangest experiences of my new state of existence, and for a time I
could not realize that I could pass through a wall or other substance
as easily as through an open door. Newly freed spirits ever are
greatly surprised upon finding themselves possessed of this ability.
Indeed, Spirits of low planes of evolvement rarely realize that in
order to enter a dwelling they need not await the opening of a door or
window.

Gentola--I have observed and thought of it, but always there is so
much that is marvellous in this new experience that I have not found
opportunity to speak of it. Now I shall be pleased if some one will
explain the matter.

De L'Ester--All so termed solids are composed of extremely minute
particles of substance. Resolve the molecule into its most attenuated
state and atoms result. All energy is atomic, hence substantial.
Expressions of energy known as attraction, cohesion, gravity and
others, are embraced within what your learned ones term Magnetism, and
were it possible to comprehend what this term implies and involves,
it might be possible to comprehend the Infinite. Atoms contain all
qualities, and not only the atoms filling all space, but those
composing so termed solids are each surrounded by an aura all its
own. In Planetary language this aura is known as Rē, which signifies
Spiritualized Substance. It is a quality of all things everywhere, and
is so sublimated as to be incomparable to aught else. Yes, your learned
ones admit the separateness of the molecule and the atom, but they
fail to recognize the Spiritual quality of either. The Spirit body is,
so to say, organized from the atomic aura of the physical body, its
density depending upon the quality of the aura. The Spirit body of one
on the very lowest sensual plane necessarily is dense and gross; hence,
Spirits possessing such bodies find it difficult, perhaps impossible,
to pass through walls or closed doors. Were your mortal existence on a
low plane we could not use you for our present purpose; were it on a
still more advanced plane both you and we would not occasionally be at
cross purposes. It is not a flattering statement, but it is a fact, and
you will not misunderstand me.

Gentola--Not in the least. I am very sensible of my imperfections, and
am full of regret that my entire life has not been devoted to highest
aims and pursuits. I am only a little reconciled to my own shortcomings
through believing that I shall have endless time in which to amend them.

De L'Ester--So you will, and though we may not hasten the passing
years, we all may improve each moment of that which possesses neither
beginning or ending. Oh, yes, many persons are given to flippant
mention of eternity and perfection. Only the Infinite can comprehend
the one or possess the other, but through constant striving all may
attain to loftiest heights of Spiritual unfoldment. Yes, through
constant striving for higher unfoldment, both physically embodied and
freed Spirits grow wiser, purer and stronger. Spirit bodies being
organized from atomic aura, it follows that if the aura be sufficiently
pure, even as wind may pass through the meshes of a gossamer web, so
may the sublimated atoms of Spirit bodies penetrate any aggregation of
grosser atoms.

Gentola--At what period of a child's physical existence is its Spirit
body fully formed?

De L'Ester--From the moment of conception the formation of the Spirit
body begins, but not until the midway period of gestation does the
Spirit body assume a distinctive outline. From this period onward the
Law of Being compels the atoms composing the Spirit body to arrange
themselves in accordance with the Divine plan of organization. At seven
months' gestation the Spirit body of a child is fully formed.

Yes, the qualities of both the physical and Spirit bodies of children
largely depend upon parental conditions. So, also, if conditions
are of a high order, children begin their mortal life journey well
prepared for inevitable exigencies. If, unfortunately, conditions are
of a low order, they must encounter mortal experiences handicapped
from the moment of conception. Yes, this Law would seem to work an
injustice to myriads of humans born under untoward conditions, but,
to quote Professor Doiko, "Andûman[a:], creator and preserver, makes
no mistakes." When humanity evolves sufficiently to realize the vital
importance of conditions and the certain transmission of hereditary
traits, children become well born and in time the peoples of all
Planets do evolve to an understanding and observance of this, the most
important law of the ever ascending planes of evolution.

What becomes of children prematurely born? As the doctor has not yet
arrived I may briefly reply that the souls of infants prematurely
expelled from the matrix, are by appointed Spirits borne to a Realm
in which are conditions specially adapted to their requirements and
development, where, at the full period of gestation, they, in a sense
are born into conscious existence. Thenceforward until maturity,
guardian Spirits continuously conduct them to the physical plane, where
they are placed en rapport with their parents or with such conditions
as are required for their growth and development, bodily, mentally, and
to a degree Spiritually. Should the parents, especially the mother,
have passed to the Spirit side, the child will be brought into contact
with the family life of persons as nearly related as possible to its
parents. Generally such children are attended by the Spirit Mother
or one with a strong mother nature. It is a Law that children born
prematurely or who otherwise have passed to the Spirit side, must
become acquainted with mortal experiences; _thus the unseen members of
many families outnumber the recognized sons and daughters_.

On the Spirit side are countless numbers of women who, in their last
re-embodiment, did not fulfill the Law of their being; gladly they
become guardians of children requiring a mother's care and love.
Especially do such Spirits charge themselves with the care of waifs
prematurely expelled from the matrix by ignorant, thoughtless or
heartless mothers, who, on passing to the spirit side, are confronted
by the unlooked for evidence of their ignorant or criminal folly.
Yes, children prematurely born as the result of accident or of other
unavoidable conditions, are subject to the same laws that govern
children purposely thrust into the Spirit World. You are aware that
your sister Emma was prematurely born, consequently, her form is rather
diminutive and of a substance so refined as to remind one of that of a
pure white lily.

Yes, truly, it was Emma who came to Mynheer Weiss and you at Mrs.
Drake's seance. We were not surprised that Mrs. Drake thought her a
girl of about twelve years. Yes, it was she who knelt at the knees of
Mrs. S----r, and who afterward partially materialized her form. We
assisted her to our utmost, but much to her disappointment and our
own, she did not quite succeed. She is very devoted to your son, who
jocularly terms her the Infant Phenomenon. In form, features and traits
she resembles your and her gentle, gracious, loving mother.

Yes, so far as we have learned, the law of generation on other planets
is the same as that of Ento and Earth. Indeed the male and female
principles appear to be so universal that all advanced Spirits firmly
believe in even the duality of the Infinite Spirit. Yes, it requires
very robust faith to enable any one to realize the possibility of a
mother bearing a child whose father is too etherealized to wear a
physical body. My imagination is unequal to such a concept.

Ah, here is our friend the doctor. You are most welcome. As you all
have exchanged greetings, I now shall have the pleasure of presenting
you to our medium, Gentol[a:].

Dr. Blank--Madame, it pleases me to meet and greet you. At the request
of our mutual friend, Mrs. S----le, I have obtained permission to join
for an hour these mutual friends and you who are engaged in a mission
of loving endeavor which I pray may bear fullest fruition. If I also
may receive your gracious permission to, for an hour, join your Band I
shall feel more at ease.

Gentola--Truly, I am more than pleased to have you with us, if but for
an hour.

Dr. Blank--You will not I trust esteem me churlish because I, for a
well considered reason, desire that I may be known to you and to those
who may peruse these pages, as Dr. Blank? You will not? I thank you.
As I am something of a chemist, De L'Ester desires me to reply to such
questions as may arise relating to the lesson engaging this class of
students. So, madame, I am at your service.

Gentola--I perceive that the students are being taught as to the
properties and effects of poisons. As I am wholly unlearned in the
science of chemistry, I am not prepared to ask questions concerning the
lesson, but, if you may not consider the question absurd, I should like
to ask if poisons have any effect upon the spirit, either in or apart
from the physical body.

Dr. Blank--Here, madame, are a collection of mineral poisons, here
a collection of vegetable poisons, and here again an assortment of
animal poisons. Some are in the form of powders, others in the form of
liquids. All are labelled poison, yet strictly speaking there are no
poisons. The law of affinity, which is one expression of magnetism,
rules the domains of attraction and of repulsion. That like attracts
like is an axiom, and the inspired Hahnemann caught a ray of truth
when he perceived that similia similibus curanter. I must not allow
myself to offer a dissertation on this point, but I may say that
chemical affinities are qualities inherent in all substances and in all
organisms. Equilibrium of chemical affinities means health; the reverse
means disease. Remember that in all atoms are all possible qualities,
and that any one aggregation of atoms contains exactly the same
proportion of these qualities as are in any other equal aggregation
of atoms. It may come about that in a physical organism, through the
energies of attraction and affinity, an undue amount of a certain
quality may become preponderant; a condition of repulsion ensues, and
if extremely violent it may occasion dissolution of such organism. By
certain of your learned ones, so termed poisonous effects are fairly
well understood, the involved principles less so.

The foregoing remarks are preliminary to a more direct reply to your
question, the importance of which cannot be overestimated.

You are aware that Spirits possess tangible bodies. Tangibility
implies substantiality, and substance is a more or less close impact
of finer or coarser atoms. The seminal substances and all ovaria are
aggregations of atoms, to a degree impressed by the personality of such
creatures as may possess them. We will imagine a father addicted to
drunkenness, or continually under the influence of narcotics. In such
case the seminal substance being impressed or impregnated by alcoholic
or narcotic atoms, the germ of a new being must, from the moment of
conception, possess a bias toward alcoholism or narcotism. The mother
may be of a superior type of woman, but, through association with the
father of her unborn child, her mental emotions, which are substantial,
are reflected or impressed upon its organism, and if she is not strong
enough spiritually to equalize the influences of her environment, she
almost certainly will give birth to a being accursed, poisoned, if you
will, through the vicious habit of its father.

During the period of gestation such unfortunates form not only the
atomic physical body, but also the atomic spiritualized soul body,
and every atom of the new being has, through attraction and affinity
become, so to say, imbued with a tendency toward an indulgence in
so termed alcoholic or other poison. We have glanced at the effect
upon the physical plane and when, sooner or later, the victim must
pass to the spirit side, then, alas, the laws of attraction and of
affinity impel the impregnated atoms of the spiritualized soul body to
gravitate to their own kind. Truly, the child of a drunken father or
of an opium-eating mother is as surely poisoned as is one who swallows
prussic acid, and the father or mother who indulges in alcoholics
or in narcotics commits a damnable offense against their children,
against humanity and against themselves, for inevitably they and their
offspring enter the spirit world clothed with bodies so atomically
poisoned, so out of equilibrium that they are tortured through a
constant, insatiable desire for a gratification of their abnormal
propensities. A desire which personally they cannot gratify and which
to a degree they must outgrow before they can advance _one step_ onward
and upward. This overpowering desire for the gratification of abnormal
propensities leads many spirits to strive to influence unwary ones to
indulge in intoxicants, in narcotics and to commit various offences
against decency and against the interests of society, and I regret to
say that very frequently they succeed not only to their own, but to
the detriment of their victims. Yes, certainly, in time all Spirits
outgrow the evil tendencies of their physical existence, but if
mortals could realize that during this process, a century aye, in many
instances centuries, may elapse ere the progressed spirit can endure
the white light of higher realms, surely they would strive to avoid so
calamitous an experience.

But I must hasten. As I have intimated, when some one quality or
qualities preponderates over some other quality or qualities of
an organism, non equilibrium ensues, and thus persons become ill,
poisoned, so to say, through partaking of certain foods or liquids.
One may become ill, poisoned, through inhaling the perfume of a flower
which to another may afford exquisite enjoyment. Another may become
ill, poisoned through the aura of an animal whom another will unharmed
fondly caress. Thus, the fact is apparent that poisons, per se, do not
exist, but that under certain conditions all qualities are inimical to
physical existence.

Gentola--As you are aware, doctor, many persons with impunity
consume alcoholics and narcotics sufficient in quantity to kill one
unaccustomed to their use. How do you account for it?

Dr. Blank--Persons addicted to the constant use of these so-called
poisons, gradually become abnormal. The atoms composing their organisms
have, so to say, become saturated to a degree that will not admit
of the further entertainment of the qualities offered. Just as a
fully-saturated sponge, though plunged into an ocean, would reject
another drop of water.

We have drifted somewhat apart from our starting point, and I regret
to perceive that the lesson has disturbed your serenity, but I feel
assured that you desire that humanity may come to realize that in all
things cause and effect go hand in hand. That both in and apart from
the physical body, all are their own jury and judge. That mortal life
is the preparatory school in which all learn their lessons well or
ill, and that on the spirit, as on the physical side, _the school of
experience knows no vacation_.

From what I have said you will understand that the effects of some
so termed poisons are far reaching. I may add that every emotion of
the mind, food, drink, the dyes in textile fabrics, especially for
clothing, in fact the atoms composing all substances, more or less
affect the physical, consequently the spiritualized soul body. In
some persons a certain color or colors produces either exhilaration
or depression. They may not be conscious of the cause, though very
conscious of the effect. Your strong dislike for wholly black garments
is an indication that you should not wear them. _Sensitives never
should wear colors darker than the red corpuscles of their blood._
Azure blue, yellow, rose red, very light shades of purple and a certain
light shade of green are the colors suited to your temperament. Always,
advantageously, you may wear white.

I simply have touched upon some points which, with your and your
friends' permission, I may at another time elaborate. In chemistry I
am well enough versed to perceive that this is a splendidly equipped
laboratory and I learn from his remarks that the stately Professor is a
competent Instructor.

During my mortal existence I regarded myself, and was considered,
an authority in the science of chemistry, but I have learned that,
compared with Ento chemists, I was a mere tyro. They, through a larger
knowledge of the wondrous science, have made of the elements tractable
servants whose energies are tireless; whose adaptability is limitless.

Madame, the allotted hour has quickly flown. My promise to our mutual
friend is fulfilled and with measureless hopes and fervent wishes for
the success of your most worthy efforts on behalf of the mission, I
must bid you and these friends adieu.

Gentola--Adieu, and believe that I greatly appreciate the thoughtful
kindness of our mutual friend, at whose request you have afforded me
another strange and useful lesson.

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], at present we will look no further through the
Galarēs[a:], but will turn our attention to the zoölogical department
of this very comprehensive institution. This great corridor, lined with
admirable statuary, gleaming whitely through a luxuriance of palmlike
growths and blooming plants, conducts us to this broad flight of steps
leading downward to the Rinvoh (aquarium) of which this spacious and
imposing landing affords a fine view. You will attempt a description of
some of its features.

Gentola--Extending eastward and a little northward I see a small lake
divided into two sections by--and also surrounded by--a massive stone
wall the top of which serves as a promenade on which many persons are
passing to and fro. What appears to be heavy metal netting divides
the lake into numerous compartments and there are lightly constructed
bridges from which attendants are casting food to creatures in the
water. A portion of the lake is roofed over by a substantial wire
netting, and in many of the compartments are luxurious growths of
aquatic plants. The lake extends a little further north than the
northern wall of the Galarēs[a:], and bordering its northern extremity
and around on its western side I see a grove of great trees and
shrubbery, amid which are large and smaller structures and also numbers
of men, women and children, who are passing from one building to
another. In front and toward our right, basking in the vertical rays of
the sun, is a huge creature of familiar, if not pleasing, appearance.
Do you know its Ento name?

De L'Ester--Were the repulsive creature a denizen of earth we might
with propriety call it an alligator. Its Ento name is Inadillo, which
I shall translate as scaly armored. It differs from the alligator of
our planet in having larger and very protuberant eyes, a shorter and
more bulky head, a larger body and webbed legs. It is quite as much
at home on land as in the water, but is a very sluggish creature and
of a species nearly extinct. The lakes, for there are two, are wholly
artificial. One is supplied by fresh artesian water, the other with
salt water from nearby Indolois[a:], and in their many compartments
are specimens of Ento's various amphibious creatures and fishes. Now
look into the adjoining wire-covered tank. Ah! you shrink back from the
hideous creature moving its sinuous length through the limpid water.
Yes, it is a veritable sea serpent, and it has been in this Rinvoh
for about fifty years of our time. When captured in Tsoivan Cryfimo,
it was about one-third its present length which is quite eighty feet.
Extending backward from its neck are large webbed appendages with
which it swiftly propels itself through the water. When angered or
excited those folds at the back of its broad, flat head are erected
and projected forward over its vicious looking eyes, which glow and
scintillate in a most alarming manner. George is endeavoring to arouse
his snakeship and, evidently, is succeeding. See how he arches his
long, slender neck, turning his ugly hooded head this way and that in
quest of his disturber. Naturally, he does not find his enemy, and now
with hisses of fear or defiance he rushes away, lashing the water into
a line of white foam. Now he has reached the further limit of the lake
and is quieting down. George, we echo your _requiescat in pace_, for
Gandûlan[a:] rushing like a comet through the water is not a pleasing
object.

From reliable authority we know that this serpent is the last of his
species. In Ento's inland seas there are creatures of allied species,
but in comparison with yonder great serpent, now gently rocking himself
on the bosom of the tranquil lake, they are quite insignificant. If
Gandûlan[a:] has not quite fascinated you, you will please turn your
attention toward this ungainly object which appears to be intent upon
baking itself in the hot sunbeams.

George--I say, Gentol[a:], if we could drop this fellow through space
and he should arrive--say, in St. Louis--what do you suppose he would
be taken for?

Gentola--Soup, I suspect.

George--Ah, thanks. And what, may I ask, do you imagine the soupmakers
would name him?

Gentola--Without doubt they would think him a turtle.

De L'Ester--Certainly they would, for he differs very slightly from the
large sea tortoises of our planet. You understand, Gentol[a:], that we
are not showing you these creatures for the mere purpose of gratifying
a curious interest, but that you may through personal observation, note
the striking resemblance of many of Ento's to many of Earth's life
forms, and I pray you to observe closely, so that in coming time you
may remember the object lessons we are presenting to your notice. I
wish to reiterate that advanced Spirits of Planets of our, and of other
Solar Systems, unite in declaring that everywhere life expressions
are alike or very similar. That dissimilarities through environments
pertain more to bulk and density than to form.

As we move along you perceive that these compartments are occupied by a
great variety of fishes. Some of huge proportions and voracious enough
to devour their attendants; others as dainty as ever tickled palate of
an epicure, and others still too minute and pretty to serve a nicer
purpose than to flash their scales of gold or of silver within the
crystal walls of an aquarium.

In the bass or treble notes of the croakers who hide amid the shade and
coolness of those aquatic plants and grasses, is an indication that
frogs of various species are quite at home with the eel-like creatures
gliding through the water.

With both pleasure and profit we might devote more time to this
department, but only a glance here and there is possible, otherwise our
observations would fill a tome. We now will pass to the Acclinum (the
zoölogical section), where Genessano and another Ento Spirit friend
will join us.

Here at the entrance is an individual who regards us with both
curiosity and disfavor. Did not the strong bars of his cage interfere
he might attempt to resent our gazing at him. That he more or less
clearly perceives us is quite apparent, and it is quite as apparent
that he does not admire us. He, like many animals, possesses the
ability to see what is hidden from the majority of humans. No, neither
clairvoyance or clairaudience are in any sense spiritual gifts. They,
so to say, are qualities of the personalities of all highly organized
creatures, as the human, the anthropoid, the horse, dog and some other
animals. These qualities constitute an inner perceptivity of the
animal soul, by some of your thinkers designated as conscious mind or
objective self. They are independent of physical visuality and are
controlled through vibratory activity. You question as to how it is
possible for the law of vibration to affect the senses. I answer that
truly, "Nature knows no vacuum," that the atom is everywhere and mind
is as much substance as is the body of this forbidding looking creature
in whom we see a representative of a species of anthropoid named Bomûz
himmû, which in your language would signify manlike tree climber.
Grasping with his great hands the strong bars of his cage, he gazes at
us as though fascinated, affording us a rather disturbing spectacle.
His height, his anatomical structure, his intelligent expression and
pose, is painfully suggestive of a low type of the human, to whom in no
sense is he allied. George, he does not regard your friendly advances
with favor, he shrinks away from you, but his deeply set gleaming eyes,
drawn lips, and gnashing teeth, indicate a disposition to defend his
rights. If you feel poetically inclined in this adjoining compartment,
is a subject for lachrymose verse. Bomûz's mate evidently is in a
very despondent condition; her long, coarse hair falls over her low,
retreating forehead; her face is buried in her great hands, and she is
a picture of utter dejection. Pining perhaps for her home and friends
in some tropical jungle, or for orphaned children, bereft of a mother's
tender care, or who knows but that she bemoans a forsaken lover, or----

George--Since you have grown so sentimental I shall not be surprised
to soon find my occupation gone. All I ask is that you shall wear your
laurels as modestly as ever I have worn mine.

De L'Ester--With your illustrious example ever present I shall endeavor
to emulate your exalted virtues. In the meantime, Madame Bomûza,
aroused from her melancholy mood, appears to take a lively interest in
Monsieur Bomûz who utters peculiar sounds, pounds his hands against
the bars and probably is informing her of the proximity of strange,
sinister looking beings. That she now perceives us is evinced by her
alarmed manner, whimpering cries and poundings on the bars of her
cage which have attracted the attention of a keeper who hastens in
this direction. Yonder, too, are our friends hastening to join us.
Lohaû, Lohaû ēmanos, you are as welcome as you are prompt in keeping
your appointment. H[a:]-Moûfih, the favor of your presence with us is
esteemed at its full value.

Genessano--Gentol[a:] ēman[a:], one is with us who has not been so
long in our spirit world as have Inidor[a:] and I, consequently he
possesses personal knowledge of events transpiring on Ento during
recent times. Like my brother and myself, he does not at all understand
your language, and as a means of communication with you he must avail
himself of De L'Ester's kind assistance. It is my privilege and
pleasure to make known to you, H[a:]-Moûfih Ad[a:]ssi, whom we all hold
in our hearts as a dearly beloved and valued friend.

Gentola--I regret that I cannot converse with you directly, but through
this kind interpreter we shall become acquainted and I shall hope to
find myself no less in your favor than are these our mutual friends.

Ha-Moufih--Gracious lady, I salute you and owe you thanks that you
receive me so courteously. I too regret that we cannot more readily
exchange converse, but doubtless a degree of patient persistence will
suffice to make us mutually understood.

In accordance with a prearranged plan I shall undertake a relation of
some events which may serve to illustrate certain points. To do so will
oblige me to be more prominently personal than I could wish, but you
and our friends will excuse my using such means as may seem best fitted
for the accomplishment of a desired end. At the time of my birth my
father, H[a:]-Moûfih Ad[a:]ssi, was governor of the Province of Ondû.
I being the first born of my parents was given the name of my father.
You may not have been informed that on Ento nearly always the first
born son takes the name of the father as the first born daughter takes
the name of the mother. I am aware that with much of Ento's history
of the past four centuries you are acquainted, so for the most part
I shall confine myself to a relation of events occurring within the
years of my mortal existence, and of those following my departure into
Ento's Spirit World, where quickly I learned the law of return into
mortal conditions, and thus through observation and association with
recently freed spirits I have kept myself informed as to many things
relating to Ento's peoples and affairs to which I may find it expedient
to refer. During my youth I attended several Institutions of learning,
but the greater part of my education I received in this Galarēs[a:] of
Camariss[a:], and when my parents considered me sufficiently advanced
in age and in my studies, I, with other youths under the care of a
guardian, were permitted to travel through foreign countries, observing
the peoples, their customs and attainments with such other features as
might afford us a general knowledge of Ento.

An exhaustive investigation of natural history possessing for me
an absorbing interest, on my return home I besought and obtained
permission of my parents to, in my own way, pursue the engrossing study
which during the remainder of my mortal existence largely occupied my
time and attention.

At this moment it occurs to me that to avoid confusion of mind it
may be well for me to use your standard of time. Also to state that
I date my birth at a time corresponding to about the middle of your
seventeenth century, hence am an Entoan of a comparatively modern time.
Ere I began my journeyings a quarter of a century of my youth had
elapsed, and the close of another twenty-five years found me still a
wanderer over the lands of Ento. During all these years my restless
mind and untiring investigations led me to an exploration not only of
easily accessible climes, but also of the planet's frozen extremities.
Doubtless you have become informed that air transports traverse the
entire planet, and that wherever necessary or desirable, stations for
the convenience of travel and commerce long have been established. Thus
favored I pursued my travels until, save for one extensive equatorial
region far westward of Indolois[a:], of which presently I shall speak,
I had traversed the entire surface of Ento.

My absences from Camariss[a:] were of longer or shorter duration, but
the love of my pursuit so grew upon me that only affection for my
aging parents drew me to the arms ever ready to welcome me. Early in
my fifty-second year my mother passed to our Spirit World. My father,
grief stricken and aged beyond a century, quickly followed her, as, I
then believed, into endless silence, but as I how know, into realms
inconceivably glorious. Thus I became hereditary governor of Ondû.

Much against the wishes of my parents I had not married, my pursuit
affording me little time or inclination for the society of women.
Then, too, early in my youth I had observed that the most poignant
sorrows had their roots in human affection; that those who loved least,
sorrowed least. With pitying eyes and a pained heart I had often had
occasion to sympathize with those whose light of life went out, when
death tore from their clinging arms their dearest ones, and I fully
realized that should I allow myself the ecstasy of loving an adorable
woman I should only be courting for her or for myself eventual despair.
So I did not marry.

On becoming governor of Ondû I learned that the duties of my office
and other affairs left me insufficient leisure to care for the
valuable collections of many years, and I resolved to add them to the
already priceless treasures of the Syffondû (museum) of the Acclinum
(zoölogical department) and the Rinvoh (aquarium). During my wanderings
I had from time to time become possessed of strange creatures, some
living, some dead. The water serpent, which I learn you already have
seen, was captured in Tsoivan Cryfimo, which is one of a series of
salt lakes, or, as De L'Ester terms them, inland salt seas, nearly on
the opposite side of Ento. At the time of his capture Gandûlan[a:] was
about one-third his present size and I had been governor of Ondû for
quite forty years. Three years later I passed to our Spirit World,
and my paternal uncle, Und[a:] Gamond[a:], became my successor, but
only for a period of twelve years, when he followed me, and his son,
Und[a:] Gamond[a:], became and at this time is governor of the Province
of Ondû. Thus you may perceive that Gandûlan[a:] is not in his early
youth. How long he may yet survive as the last of his species no one
can say.

Und[a:] Gamond[a:] is a learned and most admirable man, under whose
administration this Province is most prosperous. Under his fostering
care manufactures, arts, sciences and industries are afforded every
possible opportunity for favorable progress, and those engaged in
the cultivation of the wonderfully productive irrigated lands which
occupy the entire Province of Ondû ever find him more than willing to
further their interests. He is an artist, too, of excellent ability,
and on yonder ornate pedestal symbolizing Commerce and Agriculture is
a statue, the work of his dexterous mind and hands, which is admirable
enough to command attention and high praise. In the poise of the noble
head, in the expression of the intellectual and extremely handsome face
and in the majestic pose of the stately form, true genius has found
fine expression. Und[a:] Gamond[a:], artist and kinsman in saluting
this symbolic marble I salute thee, and in the world of spirits one day
I shall meet thee face to face.

You are aware that the Entoans have no knowledge or even hope of a
continuity of life, so you may believe that when in our Spirit World
I became conscious of the stupendous, the glorious, fact that I still
existed, and that my dearly beloved ones who had preceded me were
embracing and greeting me, I was overwhelmed with amazement and a joy
so profound that for a time I found no utterance. Oh, the wondrous
delight of finding myself young and strong, with all my faculties
enlarged, and yet the greater delight of realizing the presence of
those over whose ashes I had shed many bitter tears. I was as one
intoxicated. I rushed hither and thither, eager to behold the strange,
beautiful World of Spirits. I took no thought of the past or of Ento.
I lived, I lived, and the unlooked for joy of it for a time rendered
me oblivious of the memories of mortal existence, but ere long they
revived, enkindling a desire to visit scenes which were still dear
to me. Under instruction of friends soon I learned to accomplish my
desire, and since then it has been my duty as well as my pleasure to
frequently revisit Ento. Thus I have kept in touch with such events and
conditions as concern its peoples.

I shall now speak of a past which also in a measure will involve
mention of more recent times.

About ten years prior to my demise a party of adventurous hunters
journeyed to a far northern region known as Tsoman[a:]. It lies well
within the Arctic Circle, where in certain localities, are great
mining interests and a dense population. Well equipped for their
purpose these hunters journeyed by air transport to one of the mining
centres, thence by other means they sought the habitat of a species of
animals of a very fierce and courageous nature. De L'Ester and others
have informed me that on your planet there is no weapon even remotely
resembling our yarû-testo, which is an electric instrument of deadly
power. With it some of the animals were slain and several of their
young captured and brought to this Acclinum, where, in apartments
sufficiently cooled, they grew to maturity, and since then largely the
Acclinums of other countries have been supplied from their increase.
Perhaps you may not have been told that through various natural causes
animal life on Ento is not very abundant, more especially domestic
animal life. The animals of whom I have spoken are known as gowhy[a:],
and if it may please you to enter their abode you now may do so.

Gentola--Am I dreaming, or have I suddenly dropped into an Earth
cavern? Surely those are bears or animals very like them. Now that I
look more closely the resemblance is not quite so striking. Describe
them? I will try. They are larger than any bears I have seen. Their
limbs are long and so are their bodies, which are not very bulky. Their
heads are large in proportion to their bodies, and their necks are
longer and more slender than are the necks of our polar or other bears.
Their long, drooping ears and deeply set eyes give them a peculiarly
sinister expression, and with their enormous, savage looking jaws and
huge feet, armed with long, sharp claws, they look as though they in an
instant might tear one to bits.

George--Gentol[a:], come here. See these cubs, they are not at all
repulsive in appearance.

Gentola--Oh, the queer looking little creatures. How soft and pretty
their brown hair is. It seems a pity that they must grow to be such
big, savage, shaggy haired, ugly animals as are their parents.

De L'Ester--In appearance and characteristics these animals are enough
like our polar bears to claim close kinship with them. They are
hibernating animals, as are some others of Ento, but their present
environments are not conducive to that habit, and it is growing less
and less marked. If your curiosity is satisfied we will look elsewhere.
Our dear friend H[a:]-Moûfih's visit with us will be so brief that we
must take advantage of its every moment.

Ha-Moufih--Friends, I regret that I can remain with you for only a
limited time. I, Gentol[a:], am in our Spirit World a teacher of
natural history, but for a purpose have been assigned for this duty
which affords me much pleasure. On my return to my pupils we will visit
and investigate a planet on which De L'Ester was once re-embodied.
Where is it? In the constellation known to you as the Great Dipper.
The planet is in the angle between the handle and the cup. No, neither
these friends nor I are sufficiently progressed to journey beyond
certain limits. Yes, it is a great pleasure to visit other planets with
my pupils who like myself ever are eager to observe, to compare or to
demonstrate and then to return to our own place to dear friends, and to
further study. Because of my limited stay with this Band you have been
turned aside from observation of the Comin[a:] da[a:] (class rooms),
but later that will be resumed.

You have seen Bomûz himmû, one of the largest of the A-Mûista[a:]
(anthropoids). Now you will see one of the most remarkable members of
the A-Mûist[a:] family of this or of any planet we have visited. We
desire that you shall describe it.

Gentola--Stretched along on a thick limb of a low, wide spreading tree
is a creature so very human in appearance as to be unpleasant to look
at, at least it is to me. It is as tall almost as am I, and that is
five and a half feet. Its body, hands and feet are extremely like
those of a human; were its head equally so I should feel rather abashed
to be standing here staring at the sleeping creature. Its arms clasping
the limb on which it lies, are quite shapely, its legs less so. Now
it opens its large, expressive eyes, raises its head and evidently is
observing us. Its head, in proportion to its body, is rather small, the
forehead narrow, low and retreating. Falling over its forehead and eyes
is a white, silky fringe, which is in strong contrast with its very
dark gray covering of short, coarse hair. To me its oddest feature is
its long, white beard, falling over its breast. As George approaches it
it grows alarmed and now it scrambles feet foremost to the ground, and
on its hands and feet rushes away in long leaps. Really, it is so like
a human that it is revolting.

Ha-Moufih--Kyn-nûyn[a:]o (tree dweller) is what the Entoans name this
species of anthropoid. Structurally this tailless animal is very like
the earlier human forms of young planets. Its most marked unlikeness to
them is in its head and face. There, ages ago, as is evinced in fossil
remains, development came to a conclusion.

At no great distance from Indolois[a:]'s western shore its waters
encompass an island of considerable area, which is clothed with
gigantic trees and luxuriant vegetation. This island is inhabited
by a peculiar people who for many centuries have led most peaceful,
uneventful, secluded lives. For the most part their priests are their
teachers, not only of religion, but of such educational branches as
are not sufficiently advanced to come within courses of instruction of
educational institutions. The island is very salubrious and so prolific
of grains, fruits and fine woods, that air and water transportation
are in constant demand for carrying to other parts these and other
products. In the interior of the island the kyn-nûyn[a:]o find their
habitations in the gigantic bûd[a:]s tree tops, where their young are
born and reared with watchful care, their human neighbors regarding
them with a sort of veneration. Never wilfully are their homes
disturbed, and only by order of the supreme authorities is any one
permitted to capture and remove one or more of the creatures. Then
it is done under protest of the islanders, who consider them their
especial possession. They do not breed in or long survive captivity,
yet when placed anywhere away from the island they never attempt to
escape.

Darwin, your great naturalist and my friend, pronounces the
kyn-nûyn[a:]o a marvel of structural formation, but like myself, he
considers the line of demarcation between them and the human as being
sharply and unmistakably defined.

In this Acclinum are representatives of all the existing animals of
Ento, but for lack of time we can only glance at some of them as we
pass along. Those small animals racing across the sward and through
the branches of the trees are of the A-Mûist[a:] family, and in some
localities they so multiply as to become pests. They are very cunning
creatures who are given to forming themselves into multitudinous bands,
and with a unanimity denoting an understanding of the situation, they
swoop down on fields of grains and fruits, eating their fill and
deftly carrying off all that their hands will hold. Yonder are two
of the little creatures engaged in conversation. One chatters and
gesticulates, the other emits some faint, listless sounds. Now the
chatterer grows excited and angry, and the other shows its sharp,
white teeth and breaks away a little, followed by the aggressor, who
strikes out with one hand, now with the other, dodging return blows
as it scrambles to the ground followed by the other, and now they are
joined by a number of their friends and foes, who are all scratching,
screaming, biting and altogether behaving in a most unruly manner.

Gentola--Certainly they are very amusing, droll looking little animals.
Their round, upright ears, small, round heads and impish faces give
them the appearance of aged dwarfs. See how they wrap their long tails
around the tree branches and swing to and fro like so many pendulums.
Yes, George, I should like one for a pet, and really it seems strange
that I cannot carry anything back to Earth. This body of mine appears
to be as substantial as my physical body, and often I forget that I am
millions of miles away from it.

George--After you shall have again become a fully freed Spirit you soon
will lose all sense of having possessed a physical body, from which,
as you are aware, your spiritualized soul body differs only in being
composed of more sublimated substance.

Ha-Moufih--Pardon my interrupting you, but we must attend to more
commonplace matters. Here is an animal nearly allied to bomûz and
bomûza. One of the peculiarities of this species is that always they
build their homes near fresh water in which they delight to pass much
of their time. They are known as the frilvodii (housekeepers) from the
fact that their habitations in the loftiest trees are constructed on
a special plan and are kept with much neatness. Observe how this one
picks up particles from the floor, thrusting them outward through the
bars of his cage. He is a much handsomer animal than is bomûz and the
expression of his eyes is remarkably amiable and intelligent. A keeper
is entering the cage and frilvodii rushes at him and embraces him, rubs
his face against the man's breast, emitting soft, plaintive murmurings
suggestive of pleasure and affection. Now he discovers something in the
keeper's hand and playfully but earnestly wrestles for its possession,
the keeper tantalizingly holding it out of his reach. Frilvodii is a
cunning fellow and while he pettishly goes into a corner of the cage
and covers his face with his hands he peers between his long fingers at
the amused keeper who shows him a luscious scarlet etz[a:] (a sweet,
pulpy fruit resembling an orange), coaxingly entreating him to come for
it. Finding his blandishments of no avail the keeper tosses to him the
fruit which he deftly catches in his hands and proceeds to eat it with
evident satisfaction and much daintiness.

During my early wanderings I captured a young male of this species
and sent him to my parents, who made much of him and he grew to be a
general favorite. His intelligence and affection were indeed remarkable
and he was permitted to roam at will through our residence and grounds,
playing with children, who taught him to carry things and to accompany
them in their rambles and frolics. What most delighted the creature was
to be arrayed in garments such as the children wore. On such occasions
his pride and satisfaction knew no bounds. Once, while decked out in
some cast-off finery something angered him and in his fury he rolled
over and over in a pool of water, and when he came to his senses
he found himself very much bedraggled and the children laughing in
derision at his forlorn appearance. Seeming to realize his ludicrous
plight, he tore off every shred of his garments and with an air of
intense mortification, fled to his own domicile. For some time he
refused to be adorned, but finally his vanity got the better of his ill
humor and again he strutted about decked in gorgeous habiliments. Poor
Dēho; a host of his friends sincerely mourned over his unlooked for,
his untimely end. Climbing to the topmost branches of a lofty tree for
fruit he attempted to carry some down to the waiting children, lost
his footing and falling to the ground was instantly killed.

Gentola--It seems to me that I have seen an animal like this, but I do
not recall when or where.

De L'Ester--We have been expecting you to see the resemblance between
this living creature and his metallic representative in the mansion we
looked through during an early visit to Ento.

Gentola--Ah, I now remember.

Ha-Moufih--We now will proceed to the Rinvoh (aquarium) where, under
a wire-covered space you will see some creatures which ever are the
marvel of Ento's naturalists and ornithologists. The habitat of the
progenitors of these singular birds, perhaps I should say water fowl,
now so serenely floating on the bosom of the little lake, is far
westward of Indolois[a:], and is a considerable body of salt water
which, until quite recently, was so out of the route of general travel
as to be little known to modern Entoans. Yes, once the entire region
between it and Indolois[a:] was densely populated, but during many
centuries preceding my birth it, like other unirrigated equatorial
regions, was too arid for occupation and few cared to traverse its
wastes.

The wings of those great creatures have an expanse of from twelve to
fourteen feet, which, with the broad, strong membrane connecting wings
with thighs affords a tremendous lifting power, enabling them to rise
with marvellous velocity to a great height. When in flight their long
tail feathers spread like a huge fan, not only augmenting the rapidity
of their flight but steadying it. Observe their feline heads, which,
like their short, thick necks, are covered with feathers so minute as
to resemble hair. Instead of bills they have protuberant mouths lined
with a bony structure in which are embedded short, sharp teeth with
which they can, as once I learned to my cost, inflict severe injury,
though really they are of a gentle nature, as is evinced in their
large, mild, fearless, inquiring eyes.

When fully grown, from tip of mouth to tip of tail, they are about
eight feet long. Their great plumed wings and tails and their heads so
feline in form and appearance suggest the idea of composite creatures,
partaking of the characteristics of both bird and animal, and when in
flight they present an imposing but most uncanny appearance. Only the
males have mottled plumage; the females uniformly are of a dull brown
color.

As I have stated, west of Indolois[a:] is an extensive region which,
for many centuries, has been a desert waste, which has been shunned
and left to the forces of the hot winds, ever blowing its loose sands
in blinding, stifling clouds over its levelled surface. Recently air
transports passed over this forbidding waste, but at the time of which
I shall speak, practically it was nearly an unknown land. Prior to the
death of my parents I, with some scientific friends, some students
and attendants, were, for the purpose of ascertaining the feasibility
of reclaiming some portions of the waste lands, exploring the desert,
which, to our inquiring minds, offered many attractions. Leisurely we
had journeyed from southward to northward, but we were very weary,
as were our milch and burthen bearing animals, who were panting from
fatigue and the excessive heat. Overhead the azure sky was like a great
canopy in which the glowing sun with slanting beams gave promise of the
longed for coolness of the approaching evening. Suddenly, high overhead
appeared a large, shadowy form, flying with exceeding swiftness. As it
flew farther away our gaze followed it with eager curiosity, for in our
indistinct view of it we recognized that it was a bird quite unknown
to us. When it had almost disappeared from our view it turned about and
with incredible velocity came toward us, curiosity seemingly impelling
it to a closer scrutiny of our party. When nearly overhead, in ever
narrowing circles it dropped lower and lower until it was no more than
two hundred feet or so above us. A strange bird, cried some. A winged
animal, cried others. A monster, was the final verdict of all. As it
gazed at us curiously and apparently without apprehension, we, agape,
stood as though spellbound. With much astonishment we observed that
apparently it had become motionless above us, and we distinctly heard
a humming sound with rising and falling inflections which we supposed
were vocal notes, but later we learned that the sounds were occasioned
by the rapid vibrations of a peculiar wing attachment. For a short time
the creature remained intently regarding us, then swiftly, in ever
widening circles, it rose to a great height and again flew westward.

With the enthusiasm of one whose bent of mind mainly is in one
direction I at once resolved to search for the habitat of our strange
visitor. Of the islands of Indolois[a:]'s waters and of its boundaries
southward and northward we possessed accurate knowledge. With its
immediate western shore lands we also were acquainted, but of the
desert extending far westward we knew comparatively little. After
counselling together we decided to proceed northward until we should
reach an irrigated region, where we would rest, supply ourselves
with food and possibly with some information relating to our strange
visitor. Four days' travel brought us to the northern limit of the
desert and to a pastoral people inhabiting the irrigated productive
lands extending along its arid border. From them we learned that only
very recently had any one beheld the great birds, whose lofty flight
precluded more than an indistinct view of them. That it was thought
that they made their home near Lois[a:] Rûmēs[a:] (Rûmēs[a:], a
goddess), which with burthen bearing animals we might reach in about
six days. That Lois[a:] Rûmēs[a:] was a body of fresh water we knew and
that its northern shore was waste and uninhabited we also knew, so,
with some misgiving, but with determination to succeed in our quest
we left our hospitable entertainers and travelled westward along the
northern limit of the desert, gathering such information as might serve
our purpose of a coming time. So impatient were we to reach Lois[a:]
Rûmēs[a:] that we travelled early and late and the afternoon of the
sixth day brought us to its northern shore, where its sparkling waters
sharply indent the sandy waste.

It is a matter of regret to your friends, and I doubt not to yourself,
that an attempt to impress upon your memory anything of a technical
nature immediately arouses your cautiousness and renders you so
positive as to be unreceptive. No, I shall not vex you by attempting to
urge you to give the latitude and longitude of localities.

Gentola--Do not, please, for I so fear mistakes that I cannot risk
making them. I do indeed regret that I possess such an inconvenient
mental trait, for I have found it so much in my own way that I do not
find fault with my Spirit friends for objecting to it.

George--Never mind, Gentol[a:], we are glad enough to take you as you
are and thankful that you are no more objectionable.

Ha-Moufih--You understand George's badinage, and you also understand
that I do not mean to chide you. On the contrary I am surprised and
delighted with your docile and matter-of-fact manner of accommodating
yourself to an experience that well might overwhelm you.

Lois[a:] Rûmēs[a:] is about one hundred and forty miles long and
nearly one-third as wide. On the west its waters wash the base of a
low, picturesque mountain range named Diaf[a:]-avin[a:] (many hued),
which, from northward to southward extends the entire length of the
lake, thence curving eastward it grades itself into inconsiderable
hills, which at length are lost in an irrigated fertile plain. Your
friends contemplate showing you Lois[a:] Rûmēs[a:], but I shall not
have the pleasure of accompanying you.

For seven days we remained on its northern shore where nearby was some
herbage for our animals, and constantly we were on the lookout for the
great birds. Each succeeding day brought us only disappointment, yet
did not lessen our ardor or determination to find them. Then, slowly,
for three days we journeyed along the eastern shore when again we
encamped amid a broken, fertile space of considerable extent. Here
we found herbage and wild fruits in abundance, and such numbers and
variety of birds that the air was vocal with their notes. Water fowls,
too, of various kinds made of the rocky locality a breeding ground and
the contents of their nests afforded a welcome addition to our food
supply.

During out first day in our new camp my eyes continually scanned
the sky and the surface of the lake but the sun disappeared beyond
the mountain, and the shadows of night, lighted by Entol[a:] and
Ementol[a:] (Ento's moons) brooded over the quiet water of Lois[a:]
Rûmēs[a:]. Scarcely had twilight deepened into darkness when our ears
were assailed by murmuring musical sounds interspersed with harsh
grating cries and sharp hisses, and by the dim moon light we perceived
huge, shadowy forms, slowly descending to the quiet surface of the lake
where they remained silent and apparently motionless. The night waned,
and earliest dawn illuminated a scene so weirdly strange that our
hearts beat with unwonted celerity. High up in the quiet air, so high,
indeed that they appeared like mere shadows, ten of the great birds
with wide-spreading wings sailed in circles or were as motionless as
the stars, which yet were shining dimly. So startling, so unusual was
the spectacle that our attendants were quite alarmed; even our animals
grew restless, crowding together in evident terror. As dawn brightened
into day and the sun arose above the horizon the creatures slowly and
with the same peculiar humming sound, descended to the bosom of the
lake where, for a time, they were rocked by the undulating waves, then,
in a body, they arose to a great height and flew westward. During
fourteen days they came at nightfall and in the morning disappeared,
always in the same direction from which we inferred that elsewhere,
while the females were brooding or rearing their young the male birds
made of the shallow waters of the eastern shore of Rûmēs[a:], a night
resort; so, patiently we awaited developments. So fearless were the
creatures that frequently they swam ashore, walking leisurely along its
margin and eyeing us with amusing curiosity, but when we attempted to
approach them they hissed sharply, and, stepping into the water, swam
away. We might have killed or captured the great fearless creatures,
but such an ignominious act was far from our thoughts. It seemed
little less than a crime to disturb their serene confidence in their
security, so while we closely observed their habits we were careful to
neither molest or alarm them. At nightfall of the fifteenth day among
the creatures, for a time there was an unusual commotion, followed
by profound stillness. At earliest dawn there was the usual rush of
wings and upward flight of shadowy forms, and when the light grew
strong enough to see objects clearly the sight that greeted our eyes
filled us with amazed delight. Leisurely moving on the bosom of the
lake were seven great birds of a dull brown color and of the same
species as those sailing overhead. Each female was accompanied by one
or two young birds about as large as a--Ah, De L'Ester, to what shall I
compare them? A duck? What a droll word. Later we learned that on the
mountainous, western shore of Lois[a:] Rûmēs[a:] the young had come
into existence from whence on the broad backs of their mothers, who
now solicitously were caring for them, they had been borne hither. At
once we set about arranging for the conveyance of some of the young
to Camariss[a:]. As we were provided with water tight receptacles in
which to place them, it only remained for us to learn how the little
creatures were nourished. This we quickly observed was accomplished
through their mothers feeding them small fishes, or larger ones torn in
bits by their strong teeth and webbed talons.

All things being in readiness we launched our portable boat, and
easily captured three pairs of the pretty struggling creatures. To
our surprise the parents offered but slight opposition, and quietly
followed their progeny quite to the shore, then turned and swam away.

Early in the dawn of the following day we began our return journey to
Camariss[a:]. That we might remain within easy reach of fresh water
and live fishes we travelled southward along the eastern shore of the
lake. Five days brought us to its southern extremity, and at the close
of two days' further travel in a southeasterly direction, we arrived at
an air transport and Tuzamo Station, and quickly thereafter we and our
captives were in Camariss[a:]. Not all of them, however, for two had
succumbed to the vicissitudes of the journey.

This great wire-covered compartment afforded the survivors conditions
suited to their requirements, and although the young creatures were
very delicate, one male and two females survived, and during after
years their offspring so increased in numbers that several pairs have
been presented to other Rinvohs. They are known as gariffo tsûvon
(bird of the cloudgod, Tsûvon). No, they are neither long lived or
of a migratory habit, and previous to our unlooked for discovery of
them they were thought to be an extinct species, and strangely enough,
within a few years afterward, not one in a wild state survived.

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], again we are holding you too long, and at once
must return you to Earth. It might be wise to defer for a few days your
next visit to Ento, but as H[a:]-Moûfih soon must leave us, we greatly
desire that you shall be with us to-morrow. If we find you unequal to
the journey, we will not risk your safety. Previous to coming to you we
propose that H[a:]-Moûfih shall attempt a short visit to Earth, so we
will not be with you until two o'clock P.M. Now, George and Inez will
convey you to your home where you must _rest, rest, rest_, and where
ministering loving ones will strengthen you.

 Info oovistû.




CHAPTER XI.

IN THE GALARESA.


De L'Ester--Comment vous portez vous, Madame Gentol[a:]. H[a:]-Moûfih
is with us and awaits your greeting.

Gentola--Ento friend, I cannot find words with which to express my
surprise and pleasure that you are here.

Ha-Moufih--Your kindly welcome assures me that you do not consider my
presence an intrusion. Yes, since passing to our Spirit World I have
visited many Planets, inhabited, or, as yet, uninhabited by humans,
but, until now, neither my inclinations or duties have brought me to
Earth. Now that I have had a cursory view of the natural divisions
of your planet, of its scenery, its peoples and the expressions of
their spiritual and intellectual growth, I perceive that in their
characteristics the Entoans and Earthians are very much alike. Upon
visiting planets other than their own, spirits of a scientific turn
experience great surprise at the striking resemblances existing between
all planets approaching a like degree of evolvement. Really, bulk,
density and atmospheric conditions constitute the most noticeable
differences. Yes, through our own observation and that of Spirits far
more exalted than are we, we are convinced that everywhere the human,
the God man, is expressed in the same form. I too regret that for the
present I can devote no more time to observation of all that pertains
to Earth, but, like the swiftly flowing waters of a stream, the days
glide by, and ere many years shall have elapsed you again will be a
freed spirit, and then we both may become better acquainted with your
Earth-World, of which you know comparatively little. But I detain
you, and De L'Ester grows impatient to be off. With your and George's
permission, I will assist you.

Yes, the view is indeed grand. It is well that mortals have no
conception of what awaits those who have fulfilled the laws of their
being, otherwise their physical existence would be unbearable. I have
been told that you greatly regret your inability to remember all that
occurs during your absence from your physical body. Were it possible
for you to fully retain such memories you would become unfitted for the
performance of the duties of your daily life. I also have been informed
of the vicissitudes of your present embodiment. Of how you have
combated seen and unseen difficulties. Of what your spirit friends have
had to overcome in turning aside your aspirations in directions that
would have unfitted you for this mission for which you were brought
into the mortal plane. Unwittingly you have been building better than
you have dreamed of. Sometimes in joy, sometimes in sorrow, yet ever
you have been building the conditions of a higher, a more comprehensive
existence.

Yes, we near our destination and our friends have preceded us to the
Rinvoh. Ah, how the memories of this scene hold me as by the links of
an unbroken chain. So intimately was my mortal existence connected with
all relating to this great Galarēs[a:] that, as I gaze upon the stately
structure adorned by most artistic statues, beautiful fountains, groups
of towering Bûdas trees, an endless variety of blooming plants, the
Acclinum (zoölogical department), the Rinvoh (aquarium) and other
admirable features, all forming a most comprehensive educational
system, memory recalls bygone years when I believed, as all Entoans
still believe, that the present existence was all of life and that to
fulfill to the utmost all righteous obligations and duties should be
the chief pleasure of the life graciously bestowed upon His children
by Andûman[a:], the All Wise, the Loving Creator of all things. This
rule of righteous living requires no amendment; but, alas, obligations
and duties fulfilled do not fill the measure of human happiness; one
also must possess assurance of a to-morrow with all its possibilities.
The present, which offers no promise of a joyous to-morrow, is as a
night with no promise of the dawn; and thus it is with the Entoans,
who cherish neither expectation nor hope of the joyous to-morrow of
continuous existence. That they may deserve the favor of Andûman[a:]
and His all Seeing Messengers their every thought and act is in
accordance with the teachings of the Holy Writings which, indeed,
contain many exalted precepts, but no intimation of continuous
existence.

De L'Ester, you are most patient in your endeavor to convey to
Gentol[a:] a sense of what I wish she might directly understand. I
shall regret if I may weary both you and her.

De L'Ester--Be assured that we are interested, not wearied, auditors.
Gentol[a:] says that she will look forward to the time when she will be
free to journey with you from world to world and, like you, be able to
retain memories of all the wonders of Spirit existence.

Ha-Moufih--Knowing that the desire will bring its fruition--its joyous
to-morrow--we contentedly will await its certain coming.

We now will join our waiting friends. Ah, George, I see that you are
observing an old acquaintance of mine, but I doubt if he will inspire
in you a spirit of poesy. Is he not a pompous, self-conceited looking
for creature? Gentol[a:], you will kindly attempt a description of this
impersonation of arrogance.

Gentola--I fear that my ability is inadequate to a description of the
creature. He is nearly twice as large as an ostrich and his legs are
so long and stout that he appears to be walking on tall stilts. His
feet are webbed and of surprising length and breadth, as well they
need be to support such a huge body. In proportion to his size his
head is rather small. It abruptly rounds up from his long and very
broad bill, and is surmounted by a large tuft of beautiful, snowy,
drooping feathers. His neck is extremely long, slender and very erect
and, like his body, is covered with an iridescent admixture of black,
green, purple and bronze plumage. His wing and tail feathers are
long, abundant and, like his plumed crest, snow white. As for his
large, staring eyes, they are the coldest, haughtiest, disdainfulest
eyes I ever have beheld. As he majestically struts away he is the
impersonation of an aristocratic, an ineffable swell. Really, his airs
are most amusing, and certainly he is a very handsome bird.

Ha-Moufih--So he is, and, notwithstanding the cold, supercilious
expression of his eyes, he has a not unamiable disposition, though I
must say that his virtues are of a rather negative character.

I caught him in his very early youth and he is the sole survivor of
four of his kind. When I brought him here from his semi-tropical home,
I did not anticipate that he would outlive me, but he has and looks as
though he may survive for years to come.

This species of bird is known as Vûln[a:]-kymos (crowned majesty), and
they are found in but two localities. Only when desired for some Rinvoh
do the authorities now permit them to be disturbed. In habit they
are semi-aquatic, and they build their nests on the margin of bodies
of fresh water. Two years previous to my passing to our spirit world
a strong desire for exploration overcame me and, with a scientific
friend, some attendants and necessary supplies, we took passage on an
air transport to a station on nearly the further side of Ento, but
in a latitude approaching the Temperate zone. There we procured some
burthen bearing animals and in an aimless fashion began a journey which
would terminate when my appetite for wandering should become satiated.
The charm of feeling myself free from cares, which never were to my
liking, delighted me and for nearly two days we leisurely wandered
along the shore of a considerable fresh water lake known as Lois[a:]
[a:] lûtyēnos (lake of rushes), so shallow, so limpid, that when rowing
in our portable boat, we plainly saw fishes, large and small, darting
hither and thither through its greatest depths, which were thickly
grown with rushes, rodels and other aquatic plants. Along the shore
large trees and a close undergrowth of shrubs rendered our progress
rather tedious, but as we were in no haste we and our animals enjoyed
the shade and coolness of the forest, which like a wall of living
verdure, encompassed the lake. Toward evening of the third day we came
upon a small, cleared place on the margin of the lake and an unexpected
scene which quite upset our gravity. In the shallow water of the shore
line amid a luxuriant growth of grasses, rushes and weeds, was a huge
nest built of sticks, stones, grasses and clay and, with a leg on
either side, the body of a large and consequential looking bird rested
on its summit. Evidently he was on guard duty and did not enjoy it. His
attitude and preoccupied manner were sufficiently droll to cause us to
burst into laughter. The unusual sound alarmed him, but courageous and
faithful to his charge he stanchly remained on the nest, loudly calling
to his mate who, at a distance, was feeding among the rank growths of
the shallows. Instantly, with shrill cries and hisses, half flying,
half running, she rushed to the defense of her possessions. Our
attendants drew further away, but that we might observe the creatures,
my friend and I secreted ourselves amid the underbrush. The two birds
held a hurried consultation; then the female shaking her beautiful
plumage dry, with one leg on either side of the nest brooded over its
contents while the male bird in stately but watchful fashion promenaded
in the margin of the lake, now and anon unbending his dignity that he
might snatch from the water some unwary fish or other creature.

I was not unacquainted with this species of water fowl, but at that
time our Rinvoh did not possess them, and as then there were no
restrictions against our doing so we resolved to await the appearance
of the young brood which we would transport to Camariss[a:]. The
brooding time being well advanced, on the morning of the third day of
our waiting the birds exhibited much excitement, shaking themselves
and uttering low cries, while, gazing into the nest from whence came
a sound of continuous chirping. The parent birds were most devoted in
their attention to their young; one or the other continually bringing
them food and not for a moment were they left alone. On the morning of
the third day of their advent, with her bill the mother lifted them
one by one from the nest, dropping six downy little beauties into the
shallow water, where they paddled about in apparent enjoyment. At
sunset she carefully deposited them in the nest, hovering over them
while her mate quietly, but alertly, watched by her side.

The young birds grew prodigiously and in a few days were able to care
for themselves and were no longer returned to the nest, but, with the
parent birds rested in the margin of the lake. When old enough to be
removed with safety, at nightfall I cautiously approached them and with
a large net captured the entire brood. The frightened parents fled away
in the darkness but soon they returned and finding their young gone
their cries of distress resounded through the night. Their grief so
appealed to my sensibilities that in the morning I returned to them two
of the captives, over whom there was great rejoicing. In a commodious
water receptacle the four young birds were conveyed to Camariss[a:] and
placed in this Rinvoh. Later on I gave to the Rinvoh of Dao a pair of
them. The mate of this lonely widower lived until three years ago, and
now her prepared body graces a space in the Syffondû.

The incidents I have been relating may appear to you somewhat trivial;
they are intended to serve the purpose of acquainting you with
certain life forms and conditions of Ento, thus enabling you to draw
comparisons between what may come under your notice on this planet and
such forms and conditions as you may have knowledge of on your own.
After a glance at the creatures occupying compartments on the further
side I shall regretfully leave you. Here are shell covered reptiles
which Agassiz says are very like some of your salt water reptiles.
This unhandsome creature, sluggishly lying in the shallow water of its
capacious tank, is nearly one-third as broad as it is long, and its
length is quite twenty feet. The large brown and white scales covering
its body are erectile, as are the smaller ones on its long, slender
neck to which its long, narrow head and vicious looking eyes give a
serpentlike appearance. Now, as it moves into deeper water, one sees
the dull orange color of its belly. Its tail, with which it partly
propels itself through the water, opens and closes like a folding fan;
see how it curves under, then is projected outward with much force,
impelling the creature onward. You perceive that in swimming it also
uses its short, sinewy legs and webbed feet. It is strictly a water
reptile, never venturing into shallower water than that of the tank. It
is known as Pylo-akēdon (scaly armored), and is a species of reptile
nearly extinct.

Here are other water creatures which, in structure and form, are said
to closely resemble life forms of Earth. On other planets I have seen
very similar forms.

Of course only a limited number of Ento's various aquatic creatures
find homes in the different compartments of this Rinvoh, but they
represent both the rarest and the commonest species. The collections of
the Acclinum and Syffondû? (museum) are very comprehensive, the latter
containing a representation of life forms of the remote past and of
more modern times. In the Acclinum the collection of fossils is very
curious, but as you will be shown all that may be considered necessary
for the purpose in view, I need not particularize.

Gentol[a:], the moment has arrived when, for the present, I must leave
you and these friends. It would delight me could I remain with you and
them until the consummation of this mission, but it cannot be. May the
Divine Spirit of all that is unfold in us a fuller consciousness that
only through earnest endeavor can we attain to higher Spiritual planes
of being. Emanos, Info oovistû.

De L'Ester--We now will proceed to the arbor where a learned Ento
spirit, Zenest[a:] H[a:]o, will join us. He is a kinsman of Inidor[a:]
and Genessano, and once was a teacher of languages in this Galarēs[a:],
but as we have requested him to relate to you some of his personal
history I shall not further anticipate what, I doubt not, will interest
you. Ah, he awaits us. Loh[a:]û loh[a:]û, Zenest[a:]. You are most
welcome and I most happy in making known to you one whom you have
expressed a desire to meet.

Gentola--Sir, I trust that I may not be so unfortunate as to cause you
to regret your desire.

Zenesta Hao--Long have we of our Spirit World heard of you as of one
who, in the fullness of time, would aid in conveying to the Entoans an
assurance of continuous existence. I offer to you the homage due to
one who lovingly yields time, strength and an indulgence of personal
aims for the welfare of others, and may the time quickly arrive
when, through this mission, the darkness of certain conditions may
be dispelled from the minds of the children of Ento. You have been
informed of their pitiable despair which ever grows more unbearable;
it is the logical, natural result of the advanced spirituality of the
masses, in whom every sense and emotion have become exalted. In them
the love element is so spiritualized that when death takes from them
their dearest ones they do not mourn as do those of grosser natures.
They reach after them with a longing, agonizing, persistent, hopeless
grief, only conceivable by those whose Being is on an exalted Spiritual
and intellectual plane.

I know not your language perfectly, but when I may find myself at a
loss these dear friends will supply my needs. I am here, not only
through my own desire, but at the request of this Band, who believe
that I may serve a certain beneficent purpose. During many years of my
mortal existence I was a Professor of Languages in this Galarēs[a:];
thus I am as a link connecting the past with the present and, if I
may add to the interest of your experiences and of this mission, I
also will add to my own happiness. Friends, you will lead the way, and
Gentol[a:] and I will follow.

Ah, how memory recalls the years passed in this Galarēs[a:]. Years so
full of mingled joys and sorrows. Certainly, if my mortal experiences
may seem of value to you, I shall be greatly pleased. In my early
youth I came here as a student, my mind filled with eager, glowing
anticipations, and here I remained until I was fitted to graduate with
honor to myself and credit to those whose patient labors and excellent
ability had won my loving reverence and lasting regard. Following my
graduation I was offered the distinction of a professorship in the
department of ancient and modern languages; I accepted the honor and
entered upon a career which terminated only when mortal existence
gave way to that which was a step higher on the ever ascending rounds
of evolution. Four years elapsed and I had won some renown as an
instructor and what, to me, was my heart's dearest desire--the love of
the woman whom I adored and who was, through the years of our wedded
life, the heart of my heart. Children as comely and as sweet as rodel
buds came to us, but ever as their mother and I with fond solicitude
watched these buds maturing and bursting into bloom, we looked into
each other's eyes and saw sombre shadows lurking there. Intelligent,
generous hearted, our children grew to maturity. Our sons were all that
our fond hearts could desire. Our daughters were as lovable and as
lovely as their mother. I could desire for them no greater excellence.
I then was in the full vigor of manhood, my wife in the full maturity
of comeliness and of many virtues. Our children were growing learned
and accomplished in such directions as their abilities and inclinations
led them. No perceptible danger threatened us or them. No cloud of evil
portent rose above the horizon of our sky, yet ever in our minds and
hearts the shadows lurked, for we knew, we well knew, that ever unseen
an implacable foe drew nearer, nearer, and that inevitably, one by one,
we must pass into the silence. We who shared each joy or sorrow, we who
so loved that when apart time was robbed of half its value. Ah, me!
Ere long a fatal hour arrived and now after the lapse of years and the
inexpressible happiness that has come to us, I find myself shrinking
from the memory of it.

One day a party of youths went pleasuring on Indolois[a:]'s treacherous
water and our three sons were with them. With the heedlessness of youth
they permitted the wind to waft their boat far out on its restless
bosom. Suddenly the wind became violent, the boat was capsized, then
engulfed in the tempestuous waves and ere assistance reached them
nearly all of the party were drowned. Two of them were our sons Liefton
and Clermond. A year later our remaining son, Faladon, lost his life in
a vain endeavor to save the life of a comrade who, recklessly leaning
far over the guard of a rising air transport, lost his balance and
Faladon, who stood near at hand, attempted to seize him, but the sudden
strain was greater than his strength, and both he and his friend were
dashed to death. These repeated disasters were more than my dear wife
could endure, and within a year her urned ashes were placed beside
those of our three sons.

In my heart was desolation and anguish unspeakable, but, for the sake
of our dear daughters, I strove to cheerfully bear my awful burthen
of sorrow and to, as far as possible, brighten the darkness which
overshadowed their young lives. They would not marry and we three
bereft ones walked as in one pathway, and thus I reached a period
of age equal to seventy of your years. Then, as though death again
remembered us, our youngest daughter was stricken with a fatal illness
and ere we reckoned it serious the breath of her life had ceased. Our
eldest and last child survived until I had aged to ninety-two years;
then, with scarcely more than a sigh, her worn heart ceased to beat
and I was left alone--aged, sorrow stricken and without desire for a
continuance of a life which no longer held for me either charm or hope.
Mechanically I fulfilled the duties of a position which had brought me
the consideration of many worthier than myself, but, alas, no power
could bring back my dear dead or give me peace. Laden with a heavy
burthen of sorrow, the years passed tardily, and among a youthful
generation whose tastes, occupations and aims had quite outgrown my
own, I walked almost alone. The friends of my youth and of later years
had passed into the silence, or had sought other lands as dwelling
places, and I no longer cared for new friends. In my home there were
those who ever were kindly attentive to my simple wants, but my utter
loneliness no one could alleviate. In the midst of a multitude I was
as one lost, as one whom death had forgotten and at last I longed for
oblivion.

Ninety-eight years brought me to a hot, languorous day, and the
humid air was laden with the fragrance of flowers, glowing amid
the surrounding greenery, or in riotous luxuriance, climbing over
walls, trellises and windows. I had come from the Galarēs[a:], and
ere entering my home I, for a little, gazed on the quiet, lovely
scene. Presently a sense of drowsiness stole over me and I entered my
residence and laid down to rest, perchance to sleep. For a moment I
experienced a peculiar sensation; then suddenly I slept and as suddenly
awakened to perceive standing near me with a smile on her lips, a
wondrously beautiful woman, whose face and form seemed strangely
familiar. In great surprise and unaccountable awe I gazed upon her;
then, breathlessly, I cried, "Who art thou, oh vision of a dead past?
Art thou a Goddess in the guise of my beloved, my lost Armēn[a:]?
Speak, I implore thee, ere I die of anguish." Smilingly she drew
nearer to me. Gently she stooped and clasped me in her arms. Tenderly
she murmured, "Zenest[a:], knowest thou not Armēn[a:], thy wife, the
mother of our children, who wait nearby to greet and embrace thee? My
beloved, thou didst but sleep a moment, to awaken and find thy dearest
ones. Nay, shrink not from me; I am not dead and thou dost not dream,"
she said. "Here are our children who will bear thee hence to the world
of living ones, where is neither death or sorrowful separations,
but where, with us, thou shalt learn of the immortality of the life
essence and of joys beyond aught thou hast conception of." The joy and
wonder of this was so great that I seemed to swoon, and, when again
consciousness came to my senses I found myself in a beautiful home,
surrounded by many dear ones and friends of my youth and later years,
who welcomed me to the world of living ones. And wonder of marvellous
wonders, my aged body had fallen away from me and I stood amid our
three stately sons as young as were they. As I looked into the faces
of those whom I had thought dead and forever gone into the Silence,
I could not utter one word. My wife and our beauteous daughters, all
with their dear arms about me, whispered words of explanation and of
assurance that I did not dream. Then our dear girls, Armēn[a:] and
Irmian, gathered loveliest flowers and showered them over me and their
mother. They led me through the beautiful white structure they said was
our home and still, while countless questions surged through my mind, I
was so overwhelmed by contending emotions that I only could mutely turn
from one to another. Finally I was made to comprehend the wondrous,
unlooked for change which had come to me while I slept. Birth, not
death, having opened the gateway of the new phase of life, gladly,
reverently, I took up the threads of the tangled web and woof of a
past condition, and gladly, reverently, in an existence of illimitable
opportunities, I have striven to weave a fabric adorned with loving
thoughts, loving words, and loving service.

I beg your indulgence for this lengthy reminiscence of a bygone time.

Gentola--Sir, you owe me no apology for your relation of that which
has more than interested me. Through death I, too, have lost many dear
ones, and only that I know that we shall meet again, I should be in as
deep despair as were you, as are the peoples of Ento. Your sad recital
has added to my desire to lend my poor aid toward bringing to your
peoples the priceless knowledge of continuous existence. May I ask how
long you have been in your spirit world?

Zenesta Hao--According to your computation of time, I passed from
Ento's physical realm nearly eighty years ago. Yes, since then, but not
very recently, I have visited Ento, but only when duty has impelled
me to do so. You may know that on entering the atmosphere, or aura
surrounding the scenes of their mortal existence, Spirits experience
mortal sensations, and unless duty requires, or attractions are
exceedingly powerful, spirits progressed beyond the first, or physical
sphere, do not care to undergo the discomfort of return.

Somewhat to my regret it has not fallen within my sphere of duties to
be engaged in the work of this mission, but through my own desire and
the solicitations of the members of this Band, for a time I shall be
with you and them. Rather recently I have become acquainted with some
of these friends, but my first meeting with De L'Ester and Giordano
Bruno occurred soon after I entered our Spirit World, which, of course,
was previous to your present re-embodiment, but not previous to your
having been chosen as a possible Instrument for the furtherance of
this mission. You may have been informed that this is but one of
many missions, for many purposes, in many worlds; that this one may
prove successful it is necessary to use as an intermediary one still
connected with the physical body. Yes, through our own experiences and
those of spirits of other Planetary Spirit Worlds, we have learned
that generally sensitives can be approached directly, but on Ento
conditions are so positive that although spirits can aid in developing
in those who are highly sensitive such phases as are most prominent,
they cannot become directly en rapport with them, so cannot control
them. Oh no, this is but one of many attempts to reveal to the Entoans
the truth of continuous existence, but never before have conditions
been so favorable as they now are. The culmination of certain events,
which must exert a tremendous influence in assuring the success of this
Mission, draws very near, and countless hosts of Ento's, Earth's and
of other Spirit Worlds, watch the movement with deepest interest and
ardent longing for the dawning of a glorious day for a people who long
have lived and died in a hopeless faith.

Gentola--While I am deeply interested in their spiritual condition, I
should like to know more of the social condition of the Entoans.

Zenesta Hao--Within certain limits the government of Ento is absolute,
and the Supreme Rulers never exercise a power exceeding these limits.
Neither do they permit any infringement of the laws, which are simple,
direct, forceful and just. In the Supreme Ruler is vested the privilege
of appointing such Counsellors and other officials as may be necessary
for the proper administration of laws enacted for the general welfare,
and being the representative of such laws, it is his or her bounden
duty to see to it that they shall be strictly observed. By the Entoans
it is considered no more a duty than a privilege to be of one mind in
their obedience to both civil and religious enactments.

Nominally, ever since the establishment of the national religion, the
Supreme Rulers have been its chief representatives, but through the
following centuries, gradually, an ever arrogant Priesthood assumed
claims to certain prerogatives, which grew into such oppressive abuses
that eventually the people, unable to longer endure, rebelled, and
the priesthood were obliged to abolish the horrible rite of human
sacrifice. Yes, this occurred during a rather recent century. Since
then the Entoans have grown, or rather they have outgrown the rigidity
of old beliefs, still they have but one religion. If at times certain
restless minds have dared to question the statements of the Sacred
Writings, or impiously have indulged in new and vain theories they
have been silenced. Ever Ento's Supreme Rulers have set an example of
entire obedience to the Priestly interpretation of the Sacred Writings,
and as they have believed so have the people believed. Should Omanos
Fûnh[a:], Ento's present chief representative, arrive at a belief in a
continuity of existence, generally, the Priesthood will oppose such a
radical innovation, but with the tide in the minds and hearts of the
people setting in that direction, they will be obliged to yield, indeed
many of them will gladly yield, for Priests, like other people, love
and sorrow.

Gentola--But how will so great a change of religious belief be received
by the less enlightened peoples? May it not occasion strife, or even
war?

Zenesta Hao--Oh, no. That is not possible. Ento's peoples are too
highly evolved to indulge in violent recrimination, which inevitably
must result in harm to all concerned. War is purely barbaric, and on
Ento there are no really barbaric peoples. There are those who are
somewhat primitive in their ideas and modes of living, but they are
far too civilized to think of murdering their neighbors. Largely, such
peoples are engaged in agricultural pursuits, and not being constantly
in touch with the finest expressions of civilization, they, to a
degree, lack its nicest distinctions of speech, manner, dress and so
on, but innately they are just, truthful, generous and humane peoples,
possessing the essential principles of true civilization.

Oh, yes, the Entoans are very human, and at times differences of
opinion relating to commercial, social, scientific or other matters
arise, but Governors and Advisory Councils of the various Provinces,
being arbitrators of provincial affairs, such trifling difficulties are
readily adjusted. It is an Ento axiom that "he who injures or condemns
his neighbor injures and condemns himself." So universally is this
axiom accepted that seldom is it disregarded.

Gentola--With deepest attention I have listened to what you have said,
and I feel that I better understand not only the motive for but the
conditions relating to this undertaking, which, through my increasing
interest in all concerning it, renders it a little difficult for me to
patiently await the unfolding of events.

De L'Ester--The unfolding of events soon will oblige us to further
enlighten you as to our plans. Necessarily, we have been somewhat
reticent so that gradually you might become prepared for your part in a
drama upon which Spirit Worlds are anxiously gazing. Ere long you, with
our entire Band, will repair to Dao, the capital of Ento, where dwells
Omanos Fûnh[a:], Osy Hûn, whose only child, Sēlon[a:] Vallo[a:], slowly
but surely, is releasing herself from her physical body. The hour of
her departure into Ento's Spirit Realms cannot long be deferred, then a
united and supreme effort will be made to open the way for the incoming
of the new revelation, but ere the arrival of that hour much must yet
be accomplished.

A highly spiritualized man is Omanos Fûnh[a:], who reverently obeys
what he has been taught to regard as Andûman[a:]'s Divine Law. Ento
never has been favored with a Supreme Ruler of broader views, of
kinder heart, or of a finer sense of justice. I believe that you
are aware that translated into your language Osy Hûn is Supreme or
Sovereign Ruler. Early in Omanos Fûnh[a:]'s wedded life his adored
wife, Sēlon[a:] Vallo[a:], passed to our spirit world, leaving as his
chiefest consolation an infant daughter who bears her mother's name.
She is the original of the portrait you saw in the first dwelling you
visited on Ento. Yes, the young girl reclining on a couch while Prince
Dano stands near smiling on her. She has grown a most beautiful and
admirable woman, but is as frail as the phantom-like blossoms of the
roin[a:] draping yonder marble statue. Her father idolizes the fair
girl, and she returns his devotion with tenderest affection. Of late
into his mind has stolen a chilling dread, for, despite all that his
love can suggest or science can accomplish to increase her strength,
she grows weaker and more fragile. She is, as you are aware, affianced
to Prince Dano, and ere long he will be summoned to Dao, where his
parents reside. Ere now this would have occurred, but Omanos Fûnh[a:]
shrinks from admitting to himself that Vallo[a:] is in a perilous
state. That gradually, but surely, she is being overshadowed by the
invisible terror, the dread god Phra (death). Still he lays on the
temple altar votive offerings, praying that the pitiful gods may
restore her, and the days pass and the end draws near.

I tell you this, that you may to an extent understand the present
situation at Dao.

In the adjoining studio is Prince Dano, and other art students. We
will enter and observe them and their work. Dano, as he leans against
a column, regarding a dainty piece of statuary, upon which evidently
he has been working, wears an expression of care and preoccupation.
Yonder is a group engaged in drawing from the nude, the model a lad as
symmetrical, as beautiful as one of their fabled Gods. Further away
other youths and maidens draw from still life, and here is a large
class engaged in modelling heads and other objects from a plastic
material, and beyond Dano, two girls and several youths are attempting
to release from marble forms more or less attractive.

What a spacious studio, and each department so perfectly equipped.
Those carved panels, separating the sky lights of the lofty ceiling,
are of exquisite design and execution, and the arrangement of the
shades and draperies is very admirable. The Drawing Instructor is about
to address his class, and Dano draws near to listen. We will do the
same.

Instructor--I desire to impress upon your minds that each element
of art is as perfect as is art in its finest, fullest expression;
hence, to slight the minutest detail is to slight the whole. In the
straight line are all the elements of highest art. The curve itself
is a succession of minute straight lines which also are capable of
expressing light, shade, form and color, for are not colors the results
of light impinging upon various arrangements of the straight line?

In the admirable work of Prince Dano which very appropriately he names
a dream child, we behold an example of the value of the straight line.
The curves of the upraised arms and dainty limbs. The modelling of the
beautiful head and exquisite face. Even the dreamy expression of the
half-closed eyes, all are the results of--but you are inattentive--and
disturbed--why, Dano, dear youth, are you ill? A cup of water, Lēta. I
believe there is no occasion for alarm, he only has swooned and shortly
will revive. Thanks, Lēta, I will bathe his face which, doubtless, will
arouse him.

Leta--Professor, I pray you to desist. He is subject to such attacks,
and soon will return to consciousness. It is Doctor Vyond[a:]'s opinion
that he overtaxes his strength, and----

De L'Ester--Zenest[a:], he is so thoroughly submerged that I believe
you safely may attempt to possess his organism. Gentol[a:], do not
move; the circle must remain unbroken, or Zenest[a:] cannot hold him.
Be courageous, be firm, Zenest[a:]. Ah! that is well done.

Dano--Friends, I who address you am not Dano; I am Zenest[a:] H[a:]o,
once a teacher of languages in this Galarēs[a:], but now a denizen of
the world of living ones. Know that what you term the breath of life is
your real, intelligent self. This self or personality is an expressed
portion of the Thon Eyam[a:] Yanos (Infinite Intelligent Energy),
which in man finds its highest representation and, consequently, is
as indestructible as Andûman[a:] (God). Friends, I pray you to hear
me silently and patiently. Once I was as you now are, and to me my
wife Armēn[a:], bore sons and daughters. Their urned ashes with their
mother's and my own, may be found in the Istoir[a:] Lēmah (Temple of
the dead). Like you, I sorrowed for my dear dead. Like you I knew not
that in a world surpassingly fair, I should continue to exist in a
state of inexpressible happiness. But finally death released my real
self from my worn body, and to my unutterable amazement and delight I
found myself possessed of what I shall term a spirit body, far more
admirable than the one I had during my mortal existence inhabited. I
also found myself possessed of enlarged capabilities, and of a sense
of freedom indescribable. And, oh joy of joys, in my new life I found
all my dear ones whom I had not hoped to ever find again. Learn, dear
friends, that death of the physical body does not mean death of the
Self. Learn that continuity of existence is a law of the Thon Eyam[a:]
Yanos (the Infinite Intelligent Energy). Learn that surrounding this
Ento world, invisible to physical vision are realms so glorious that
language cannot describe them, and that at death of your bodies, in
them your immortal selves will find all that loving hearts and highest
aspirations can desire. Oh, my friends, no longer walk with downcast
eyes. No longer despair because you have been taught to believe that
your loved ones and yourselves will go into the Silence, and be no
more. Children of Ento, lift up your hearts and rejoice, for so surely
as you now exist, so surely will you continue to live, to love, and
to learn lessons of Divinest Wisdom in a radiant world not subject to
mortal conditions.

Dano, your Prince and fellow student, is one chosen as an instrument,
through whom soon will be given to you a wonderful revelation, which
will make of sorrowful Ento a world of hopeful, happy men and women.
Dano does not dream. Through his inner senses, which are the senses
of the Self, he discerns Spiritual things, and you too, Lēt[a:]
Veron[a:]d[a:]s, are on the verge of enlarged spiritual perception, and
in the swiftly approaching days you will stand by his side, a teacher
of a new faith. Now I will depart, and the Self of Dano will repossess
his body, but ere I go hence with loving thoughts for all, and with
loving memories for this Institution in which I passed my youth, and
ended my mortal usefulness, I, Zenest[a:] H[a:]o, say to all, Info
oovistû.

De L'Ester--Well done, well done, Zenest[a:]. I had not thought it
possible for any fully freed one to so entirely possess the youth. But
Gentol[a:] having paved the way you did so admirably. Do not you think
so?

Zenesta Hao--I congratulate both Dano and myself that we have safely
concluded this experiment, which nothing would induce me to repeat. He
became so entirely submerged that had I retained possession a moment
longer, he certainly would have become freed, and I--well, you all know
what the consequence would have been. I understand De L'Ester. You are
no more at fault than am I, but we must not again permit our zeal to
get the better of our discretion.

Leta--Professor, this is not the first time I have seen Dano in this
strange condition, and almost I am persuaded that while he slumbers,
some god communes with him. May not it be that Andûman[a:] has taken
pity on His sorrowful children, and that at His command His Messengers
are using Dano as an instrument through whom to convey to us the
knowledge that indeed existence is continuous? Ah, he moves, and his
color is returning, but his slumber is very prolonged. Oh, that we soon
may come to understand this mystery, if mystery it may be.

Instructor--I am amazed beyond expression by this strange occurrence.
Zenest[a:] H[a:]o, do not we all know of his great learning, of his
deep researches into ancient languages and records? What can this
mean? What report shall I make of it to our superiors? Lēt[a:], raise
his head a little. He now appears to be in a quiet slumber, still it
may be well to call Doctor Vyond[a:]. Hasten, Rûf[a:], to call Doctor
Vyond[a:] to come to Dano.

Oh, that it might be true, this story of continuous existence. Have not
I lost a noble son, who was your fellow student? A beloved daughter,
too, with whose life her mother's life and mine were bound as with
one chord. Alas, alas, sorrow leads one to reach out after visionary
nothings. Ah, he is awakening. Why, Dano, apparently you have been
slumbering, and really we have been a little disquieted, in fact so
disconcerted as to scarcely know what course to pursue. You are not
ill? Speak if you can, and set our fears at rest. The cup of water,
Lēt[a:]. Ah, now you are quite restored.

Dano--Friends, I regret that I have occasioned you some anxious
moments. No, I am not ill, and I cannot explain these sudden attacks
of unconsciousness. I only am aware that I have been in a deep slumber,
which came upon me so suddenly that I could not avoid it. Perhaps I
should obey Doctor Vyond[a:], and for a time cease pursuing my beloved
studies.

Leta--Dano, can it be that you are unaware that while you slumbered,
you spoke to us strange, and in a measure unintelligible words? With
permission of our Instructor I will relate to you what you have said.

Dano--Lēt[a:], your narrative fills me with dismay. Surely you are not
jesting. Your serious face assures me that you are not. May Andûman[a:]
forgive if unwittingly I have spoken lightly of sacred matters. Lately
I have been subjected to what Doctor Vyond[a:] terms self-induced
hallucinations. But I am not conscious of inducing them, and certainly
I do not desire to indulge in such folly. I would not err, I would not
sin, yet during these seizures I give utterance to expressions which
are not in accord with our Sacred Writings. I pray the pitiful gods
that I may not be held accountable for these unconscious utterances.

De L'Ester--Two Professors and a Physician are hastening this way.

Professor--My dear Dano, we have been quite alarmed to learn that
again you have been attacked with faintness, and rejoice that you
are recovering. Here is our good Doctor Vyond[a:], who speedily will
restore you.

Dr. Vyonda--Certainly, certainly. It is nothing serious. Really
there is no occasion for alarm. Such attacks are quite common. The
high temperature of the season, and too close application to study
superinduces such seizures. Dano, you must relax a little of your
ardent pursuit of knowledge. You must indulge in lighter veins of
thought. Youth is the age for enjoyment, innocent enjoyment of course,
and for acquiring knowledge, but with, moderation, my dear Dano, with
due moderation.

Your eyes are yet a trifle heavy. Allow me to administer this agreeable
potion, which will dispel this sensation of lassitude. On retiring,
you will take this palatable powder, which will insure quiet sleep. No
visions, no hallucinations will disturb your repose, and in the morning
we will counsel together as to the best course to be pursued. But no
more study to-day, Dano, you understand, no more----

De L'Ester--Quickly, quickly, Gentol[a:]. He is not fully aroused from
his entrancement, and his spiritual perception is very exalted. Follow
my dictation.

Dr. Vyonda--He again is relapsing into unconsciousness. Order a litter
at once, and have him conveyed to his apartment. Really this seizure is
inexplicable, but I doubt not will yield to----

Dano--Doctor Vyond[a:], I am told to request you to quietly remain
where you are.

Dr. Vyonda--This is most perplexing, most perplexing. Apparently he is
unconscious, yet he bids me to quietly remain where I am. No. No. Not
just now. We will wait a little. Put the litter further away. Give him
more air.

Gentola--Dano, I am Gentol[a:]. This name has been given me by some
persons who understand your language. I have told you that I come from
a world named Earth, which is so far away in space that to Entoans it
appears as a brightly shining point in the night sky. Try to understand
that the vital, animating principle controlling all the activities of
your physical body, is the immortal Self, the real Dano. Aside from
certain of your Priests, but few Entoans are so highly sensitive as
are you, who soon readily will perceive wholly freed Spirits. Because
that I still am connected with my physical body you see, hear, and feel
the touch of my real Self, the Spirit woman. For the reason that your
Spirit consciousness, which is self perception, is highly evolved, you
are thus favored.

This is no dream, no hallucination of an overtaxed mind. I am as real
as are you. So are the wholly freed spirits who bear me from Earth to
Ento. So was your sister Ont[a:], who has appeared to you, but who,
until you are further prepared, will not again attempt to do so.

In time you will be made to comprehend the laws involved in spirit
return, but at present I cannot explain them. The Spirits with whom
I am associated, and hosts of Spirits, of Spirit Spheres, of other
Spirit Worlds, have combined their forces in a supreme endeavor to
release the peoples of Ento from the hopeless religious beliefs, which
long have held them in a state of such pitiful despair that as I gaze
on their almost smileless faces, my heart throbs with sympathy for
their perpetual sorrow. Dano, fear not, but rejoice that you have
been chosen as a message bearer to them. Rejoice that through your
instrumentality light from your spirit world soon will dissipate the
shadows enshrouding the lives of your peoples.

The hour draws very near when Omanos Fûnh[a:]'s fair daughter, your
affianced bride, must pass into your Spirit World. Only now does
Vallo[a:]'s father realize that her days may be drawing to a close,
and through fear and grief he is well nigh crazed. Daily in the Temple
Zim he sacrifices to Andûman[a:], imploring with agonizing moans and
tears that his precious Vallo[a:] shall not be taken from him into
the dread silence of death, but still she fades, as fade the lovely,
fragrant rodels on Bascama's limpid water. Vainly your father, Basto
Andûlēs[a:], endeavors to allay Omanos Fûnh[a:]'s fears, to assuage his
grief, for at last he and your mother perceive Vallo[a:]'s perilous
state, and they propose to immediately call you home, hoping, as does
Omanos Fûnh[a:], that your presence may arouse and aid the drooping
girl to prolong, if not to recover her waning life.

It is indeed pitiful to see the light dying out of her beautiful
azure eyes, and the bloom fading from her lovely young face, which
grows as pallid as roin[a:] blooms. As her physical strength declines
Vallo[a:]'s vision grows more Spiritualized, and as through a thin
veil she sees the spirit forms of her mother and of other dear ones,
who whisper to her unfolding Spirit senses words of loving cheer for
her, for her stricken father, and for you, dear youth. She fancies
that she dreams, and when smilingly she relates to her father the
loving Messages from the dream-world he is filled with consternation
lest her mind is being lost, and in the privacy of his own apartments
he prostrates himself, crying to Andûman[a:], and to the mighty gods
to suffer her to live, or if that may not he, to take her in her
perfection into Astranol[a:].

I am made to tell you this, that in a measure you may be prepared
for the ordeal awaiting you, and to urge upon you to be strong and
courageous, for you will require both strength and courage to sustain
you. Even now a swift Messenger comes from Omanos Fûnh[a:], bearing a
letter from your father, so hasten to prepare for your journey to Dao.
To these persons who gaze on you in breathless expectation of they
know not what speak of what I have been made to say to you, for I know
that when you shall have regained control of yourself you will imagine
that you have had a fanciful vivid dream. Remember that I charge you
to speak of what I have said to you. And now I am bidden to say Info
oovistû.

[Illustration: ROINA]

Dr. Vyonda--Ah, he is reviving, his pulsations are quickening, and
his color returning. This seizure is peculiar, very peculiar. Such
long continued unconsciousness indicates a low state of vital energy.
Professor Dalmaon, with your approval, I shall at once advise his
father that he for a time must have entire mental rest and change of
scene, which will assist in his recovery from his present devitalized
state. Why, my dear Dano, you have been quite unconscious of the
anxious interest which for a few moments has disturbed our minds. But
as I have said, it is nothing serious, nothing really uncommon, quite
a natural result of continued mental strain, and you must rest, Dano,
for a time, you really must rest and recuperate. Do you now feel quite
yourself?

Dano--Friends, I wish to say something that will surely try your belief
in my sanity, but if your kindness may permit you to listen to what
I desire to relate you will make me your grateful debtor. Doctor, I
believe that I am quite myself, but after I shall have related my story
I shall not find fault should you all question my opinion.

While you have thought me unconscious I have been as fully conscious as
yourselves, but unable to move, or to unclose my eyes, or to utter a
sound. Yet in some strange manner I have seemed to see for the fourth
time a fair skinned, dark haired, strange woman enveloped in shining
garments, who says that she is from a world known in her language,
as Earth, which is so far away in space, that to us it appears as
a shining point in the night sky. She says that her Ento name,
Gentol[a:], has been given her by some who understand our language,
which she does not. That she speaks from dictation of those who do
understand it, and she has told me of something so sorrowful that for
the present I shall not speak of it. She declares that through me a new
religious revelation is about to be given to the children of Ento. But
as Andûman[a:] only speaks through the great God Tymonas to the most
high Priest, this declaration cannot be true. She also has said what
is altogether improbable, that from our Supreme Ruler comes a swift
Messenger bearing a letter from my father, who desires that I shall at
once return to Dao, and that I shall make immediate preparation for
the journey. Do not I pray you, gaze upon me with so much concern.
I realize that this peculiar experience is the result of too much
abstinence from youthful pleasures for which I care but little, and of
over close application to study, for which I perhaps care too much.

Doctor Vyond[a:], I promise you that this unpleasant experience will
cause me to mend my ways, not so much for my own, as for the sake
of those who love me. Very true, doctor, very true, but since life
is so full of sorrow, since the certainty of the approach of death
so overshadows even youth's brightest days that ever our smiles are
drowned in tears, life to me ever grows more valueless. Oh, that
Andûman[a:], whose power is infinite, may make these dreams of mine
prophecies of a reality so glorious that scarcely dare I think, much
less speak of it.

Gentle friends, I pray you pardon me for having caused you some moments
of anxiety. Make yourselves my debtors, and I shall be as patient with
you as your affectionate kindness prompts you to be patient with my
vagaries.

Instructor--Ever youth cherishes baseless hopes, dreams and illusions.
Age alone knows the tranquillity of the inevitable. Although the midday
of my life is gone, dreams wearing the semblance of realities come to
me from the Region of Nowhere, then drift into the Realm of Shadows.
No one is wise enough to account for the illusions of sleep, those
phantasms emerging from the unknown and vanishing like mist wreaths
from Indolois[a:]'s waters. I pray that it may not be accounted a
sin that to me has come the thought that these dreams may be shadows
of somewhere realities. That while we slumber our senses may perceive
what our waking vision is too imperfect to discover. Who can say as
to what may be in the regions of Astranol[a:]? Is not it written that
to the Lady Camariss[a:], wife of Genessano Allis Immo, came a vision
which so impressed her husband that it led to the introduction of the
vast Irrigating and Waterways System, which has made our waste lands
so fruitful and prosperous? From whence came this vision? No one can
certainly say, but Andûman[a:], who knoweth His own ways, may have
chosen the Lady Camariss[a:] as His Instrument, through whom He spoke
to Genessano Allis Immo. And, friends, may not the woman of Dano's
dream be an Instrument through whom he may be given a new revelation of
Andûman[a:]'s love for His sorrowful children? Do not we all know that
when Andûman[a:], through the great God Tymonas declared to the Most
High Priest Moukara that no more should unwilling human sacrifice be
offered, He also declared that in some coming time another Revelation
of His love for His children might be vouchsafed?

Andûman[a:], Creator and Preserver, may if He so wills, perpetuate
that which is the essential part, the life of every animated creature.
Adoringly and reverently I implore that He may take pity on His
children, the children of His love, and grant us the ardent desire of
our hearts that we may not pass into perpetual Silence, but that in
some unknown region, we, with our beloved ones may continue to exist
forevermore.

So strangely have our lessons been interrupted that but little has been
accomplished. However, every incident of life teaches some lesson, and
we to-day have received an exemplification that in its expressions it
is many sided, and that at times it affords us glimpses of what may be
beyond what we now know of.

Urvan, I advise that you shall remodel this foot, which is not
quite up to your usual excellence. Lēta, this hand so delicately,
so perfectly modelled indicates true artistic sense. Veradon, your
execution is almost beyond criticism. Kiafû Rûvan[a:], our greatest
sculptor of either ancient or modern times, taught that the hand was
the most expressive member of the body. That by its form, markings
and movements, it afforded a true indication of the character and
emotions of the possessor. As the hands of no two persons are exactly
alike, there is in their expression an infinite variety which, to the
observing student, may afford infinite opportunities. Dano, we rejoice
that you appear quite recovered from your very peculiar seizure, and I
pray that you may heed Doctor Vyond[a:]'s advice, for, truly of late,
you have been over studious. Surely you do not attach any importance
to the dream prophecy of your speedy departure for Dao? That you may
wholly dismiss it from your thoughts I suggest that we all shall repair
to the gymnasium, where vigorous exercise may restore us to our usual
serenity. Doctor, will not you and our honored Professors favor us with
your company?

Dr. Vyonda--Certainly, for a little I shall attend this imprudent
youth. Come, Dano, no more illusions, no more melancholy. Look on the
bright side of life; yes, yes, on the bright side of life. Leave to age
the shadows; walk in the sunshine while you may. Come, gentlemen, we
can do ourselves no better service than to look on while these young
people take the exercise we older ones used to so enjoy. Ah, me, age is
very inconvenient, very inconvenient indeed.

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], from what the doctor and Art Instructor have
said you may infer that the Entoans are very like some of our beloved
Earth folk who consider everything outside their everyday experiences
as illusions of diseased imaginations. Certainly, Soul consciousness,
which should not be confounded with Spirit consciousness, is subject to
illusions; thus one should be patient with sensitives who, at times,
unknowingly misrepresent Spirit phenomena. Only minds capable of
earnest, critical, patient fairness should attempt to test the truth
or falsity of unusual occult occurrences. But the Messenger from Dao
is about to arrive, and we will proceed to the gymnasium that we may
observe how the doctor and professors may receive the fulfillment of
the prophecy.

These wide and lofty passageways lead to various Departments of the
Galarēs[a:], but into many of them we cannot at present even glance.
At the head of this grand staircase is a department we later on will
visit. Now we will enter the gymnasium and you, Gentol[a:], will
briefly describe whatever may attract your observation.

Gentola--Knowing so little of gymnasiums of our own planet I fear
that I may not intelligibly describe this one. The apartment itself
is immensely large and the domed ceiling very lofty. There are many
large windows and they and the ceiling or roof are filled in with what
appears to be opalescent glass set in metal frames. Depending from
the roof are swings and ropes and various contrivances of whose uses
I am quite ignorant. Attached to some of the ropes are huge balls of
apparently an elastic material, which Dano and the other youths are
so vigorously striking that they bound away, only to return again for
further punishment which they are capable of resenting, for one has
struck yonder youth a staggering blow.

That dark-skinned boy climbs that rope with the agility of a monkey,
and yonder handsome blonde youth, hand over hand, climbs another rope
depending from the very apex of the roof and now he comes down head
foremost, and--oh--I thought he was about to fall, but he has turned
a somersault and landed on his feet on a--ah, I see. That part of the
floor is covered with spiral springs over which is a padding of some
elastic material similar to curled hair; no, it is some sort of fibrous
stuff and over it, stretched tightly, is a covering resembling rubber
sheeting, which is so elastic that the gymnasts bound from it like so
many rubber balls. Many of the appliances I have no knowledge of, but
there are horizontal bars on which some of the youths are exercising
with what appears to me utter recklessness. See that young giant
swinging, swinging from that suspended bar, and there he goes through
the air, catching another bar, and, oh my, I do not like to see that. I
suppose that if he should fall that net would catch him, but it looks
dangerous. Now he sits on the bar swinging to and fro, and now he drops
and catches the bar, and now, with a great leap, he has caught a rope
and is descending head foremost. I do not understand why any one takes
pleasure in such risky performances.

If I say that those young men are practising with Indian clubs will I
be greatly mistaken? How gracefully they handle the clubs and they,
like their classmates, may be called handsome; but, somehow, I do not
grow accustomed to the extraordinary size of the Entoans. Why those
dark-skinned youths, including Dano, appear gigantic and the lighter
hued youths, compared with you gentlemen also are giants.

The doctor and professors are looking on with apparent enjoyment and
interest, especially commending Dano's energetic movements, but--ah,
see, an attendant is presenting to the white-bearded Professor a
letter. As he glances over its contents he pales visibly, and is
greatly disturbed. In a low tone he says, "Friends, I have received a
letter from Basto Andûlēs[a:]." Now he calls to Dano.

Professor--Dano, Dano, I would speak with you. This moment a message
from your honored father has arrived. You will listen while I shall
read what concerns all here.

  "To the renowned Professor Byr[a:]don Ov[a:]dos and his honored
  co-workers of the Galarēs[a:] of Camariss[a:], in the Province of
  Ondû I, Basto Andûlēs[a:], send loving greeting.

  "Your sorrowful regret will equal my own when you learn that our
  beloved Supreme Ruler, Omanos Fûnh[a:], grieves sorely over the
  continued ill health of his daughter, the lovely and amiable Princess
  Vallo[a:], who slowly but, it is feared, surely declines toward the
  ending of her young life. She craves the presence of her affianced,
  my son, Dano, whom I hasten to summon to Dao. You, through all
  reasonable means, will facilitate his departure on the special
  transport awaiting him.

  "Your kind heart and good judgment will guide you in breaking to
  my son this painful news which otherwise might assail him with too
  sudden force.

  "With profoundest regard I honor myself by being your friend,

 "Basto Andulesa."

Dano, dear youth, strive to compose yourself. Alas, how strangely
true were the words of your prophecy. Andûman[a:], thy ways are
incomprehensible. We implore Thee to aid us to understand the lessons
Thou art offering to us, but which, in our ignorance, we fail to
comprehend.

Dano, our loving sympathy is with Omanos Fûnh[a:], your parents and
you, our beloved Prince and pupil. Hasten to prepare for your departure
and we will arrange for your comfort and speedy conveyance to Dao,
where, we will pray the pitiful gods, you may find your beloved
Vallo[a:] recovering her precious life.

Gentola--Poor Dano, I feel so sorry for him. That Professor should
not have announced the dreadful news so abruptly. A woman would have
known better. These Entoans are a peculiar people. I do not mean that
I do not admire them, for indeed, I do. They are so sympathetic, so
ingenuous that I could wish that our Earth folk might be like them.

De L'Ester--They are some centuries older than our disingenuous Earth
folk; consequently, have grown honest.

Gentola--Do you think our Earth folk will ever grow equally honest?

De L'Ester--It is to be hoped that they may. Certainly, if our fair
planet may continue to hospitably entertain them for an indefinite
length of time they may improve their ways of thinking and, as a man
thinketh, so is the man.

George--Dano will journey by Special Transport. Shall we see him off?

De L'Ester--Yes, and then Gentol[a:] must embark on our air transport
which will bear her across millions of miles in less time than Dano
will journey to Dao. Aye, in less time than will be consumed in his
passage between the Galarēs[a:] and the station. He has made his adieux
and is entering a Motor conveyance. We will precede him and his friends.

Gentola--I wonder if our Earth folk will ever have such carriages? One,
two, three, four, five, six, seven passengers in it, and it moves off
so silently, so swiftly that it must be a pleasure to ride in it. What
beautifully paved streets, and how perfectly clean they are.

Oh, dear, I keep thinking of Dano. I wish I might comfort him. I do not
understand why there need be such misery of one kind and another. If I
were----

De L'Ester--Pardon me for interrupting you, but here is the station
and the conveyance approaches. Ah, Dr. Vyond[a:] will accompany Dano
who, as you have remarked, seems dazed.

Here is the special transport and a luxurious one it is. No, we cannot
accompany the sorrowful youth. We have much to show to your inquiring
eyes before you shall be taken to the capitol. Then, too, affairs are
not in readiness for our presence there, but, ere long, they will be.

The Transport is rising and Dano and the doctor are waving adieux to
their friends. To you we offer a like courtesy. George and Inez will
again assist you back to Earth. One week hence we will come for you.
In the meantime, that you may renew your vital energy, live as much as
possible in the open air.

Info oovistû.




CHAPTER XII.

EUROPE AND THE FAR NORTH.


De L'Ester--This is the seventh day since we have had the pleasure of
greeting you. We are a little early but, as we have in store a joyful
surprise for you, you will not chide us for our haste. Why, how sad
you are. Ah, I understand. It is four years to-day since your son,
Bernard, passed to our side of life. We have informed you that, aside
from other motives, the stimulus of a strong desire to be all that
your mother love wishes him to be has impelled him to strive for rapid
progress, and that his urgent entreaties to allow him to accompany you
on these journeys had won our consent. Yes, he soon will be with us;
but now close your eyes and be passive. That is well, and--here is your
surprise.

Gentola--Oh, my boy, my boy, my own dear boy! Is it indeed my boy,
Bernard?

Bernard--Dear mother. Dear, darling mother. Yes, it is I. Do not I
look as I used to look? Do you see me clearly? Am I indeed so greatly
changed? Why, mother, on entering the Spirit World every one changes
in appearance. And you think I look younger than when I was on Earth
and more spiritualized? I am glad if you see that for, mother, dear,
as you well know, during my mortal existence I was not a spiritually
minded man. I, foolishly, and against your loving entreaties, lived on
a very material plane, and when I passed to the spirit side I went to
the place or condition I was fitted for--_the home I had earned_. Do
not cry, mother, please do not cry, for that bitter, but necessary,
experience is a lesson of the past. Yes, mother, from soon after I
passed to the Spirit side until now, I often have been with you and
have so regretted that, while I could see and talk with you, you could
not see me. On that morning when I kissed you good-bye how little
either of us thought that we would in the mortal body, see each other
no more. Mother, you know I was such a strong man and death seemed
so far off that I did not think it possible that it could, for many,
many years, come to me. When I found myself in the Spirit World, grief
and dismay so filled my soul that I cried and prayed that I might
return to mortal existence, if only for a little while so that, as
far as possible, I might undo some thoughtless acts which, for the
first time, I saw in their true light. To add to my despair your grief
over my unlooked for death was so agonizing, that it was feared that
you might pass from your physical body which, accidentally, had been
more seriously injured than you or any one realized. During the first
three days of my new existence I, with others of your dearest ones,
watched for the change that might come to you. Mother dear, the aid you
received from the Spirit Side was what kept you here to do the work you
now are engaged in. On the fourth day the crisis was passed and you
know what followed. Yes, because of your devitalized state, we were
deterred from further communion with you.

For myself, under the loving care and instruction of dear friends, I
soon came to understand that the change called death was a rebirth into
a higher life and that, through earnest endeavor, I might progress out
of conditions that held me where I was. I learned that on entering the
Spirit World, one finds themselves the result of all the successes and
failures of all their past, including their last embodiment. For such
successes as I found to my credit, I was thankful. For my failures,
through loving service for mortals and Spirits, I have been, and am
striving to pay my indebtedness. I also have learned that earned
progress is a righteous law and that only through its fulfillment can
any one grow in grace and such knowledge of truth as may further their
Spiritual unfoldment.

From time to time you have entreated me to inform you as to my
condition on the Spirit Side and always, for a reason, I have evaded
a reply, but now that I have risen far above the shadows of the Earth
sphere, I am rejoiced to be able to quiet your anxious thoughts and
fears. No, dear mother, I do not now desire to return to Earth life.
Since I have risen above the shadows I am very happy and exultant in my
freedom from physical conditions. Then, mother dear, you know that it
will not be very long before you and other dear ones will come to the
glorious Spirit World, and until then we will be waiting and watching
for you and them.

But, dear friends, we are forgetting that we are delaying the journey
to Ento.

De L'Ester--Dear lad, no apology is required. Yours and your mother's
joy but adds to our pleasure. Yes, you shall journey by her side, and
such assistance as you may need gladly will be offered.

Gentol[a:], we will not immediately pass to Ento. That you may be
better prepared to compare certain of Ento's with some of Earth's
divisions, we will direct our course across the Atlantic Ocean to
England, of which, with her immediate possessions we will take a
hasty survey. Also we will glance at France, Italy, Germany, Russia
and Siberia, and, if we may find it expedient, we may pass over that
dimensionless point termed the North Pole, where reigns perpetual
winter and unbroken silence, save when crashing avalanches of ice and
snow break the somber stillness, or when ethereal disturbances occasion
tempestuous storms to rush and roar across the frozen, desolate wastes
of the extreme north.

Yes, we are aware that at this time some daring and ambitious men
are determined to reach the North Pole, and their heroic enterprise
deserves a richer reward than they will obtain. No, I do not mean to
say that no one in the physical body will ever reach the North Pole,
for, in time, it will be accomplished. Spirits, scientifically trained,
are engaged in impressing Earth minds who steadily are progressing in a
knowledge of electrical forces and appliances, while other scientific
minds whose attention is directed towards solving the problem of aërial
navigation are becoming more and more nearly en rapport with spirits
who are aiding them, and at no very distant time Air Transports will
traverse Earth's aërial passageways with the same ease and security
that Air Transports pass over Ento's North and South Polar regions.

Now we must be off. George, that is well arranged though, really,
Bernard will require but slight assistance. Gentol[a:], below us is
New York city and harbor. We have come this way that you may form an
idea of the number of vessels passing between the eastern seaboard and
Europe. Truly, Liberty does enlighten the world, and license, which so
often masquerades in the garments of the famed goddess, plunges nations
into crime and barbarism. Yonder symbolic statue accentuates the fact,
that at least one aspiring mind comprehends the divine idea of freedom.

What an immense number and variety of vessels are moving in all
directions, and what an immense number and variety of vessels rest
on the bed of this vast ocean; while over them and the pallid hosts
who are entombed beneath its waters, white crested billows moan a
perpetual requiem. Its bed is indeed a vast cemetery on which, side by
side, lie noble and ignoble, rich and poor, friend and foe, for death,
the reaper, makes no distinction. The tares are garnered with the wheat.

We are approaching England, the marvellous. England the heroic,
the masterful, but _never the magnanimous_. The lion well typifies
her people who are courageous, aggressive, persistent and, where
her interests are involved, _politic_ in an extreme degree. Ever
with unclosed eyes, with but half sheathed claws, the lion waits
and watches, waits and watches. So wait, so watch, thou guardian of
Europe's, aye, of the World's peace, and seldom may thy vigilance be
disturbed.

You have expressed a desire to see the Thames River. Below us is the
noisome stream, and this is the great city of London. Observe it
closely so that you may compare it with a certain city you will see on
Ento. A city not so extensive or so populous, but far more beautiful.

Yonder, toward the east, is St. Paul's with its great dome and crucifix
crowned spire; and that is Bow Church and facing us is old St. Paul's,
with its spire reaching some hundreds of feet into the rather smoky
atmosphere. Yes, it is a somber but also an impressive structure. That
rather squat looking building is the Bank of England. No, it is not an
imposing edifice. Yes, that is the famously infamous Tower, where so
many unfortunates have found time to consider the vanity of ambition,
the insecurity of royal or of popular favor, and of other unstable
quantities. No, this really fine Shaft does not compare favorably
with those you have seen in Camariss[a:]. You wish to see Buckingham
Palace? Then look at the structure facing us. And you are disappointed?
Yet it is quite a grand structure. Ah, I see, you are comparing its
architecture with that you have seen on Ento. I confess I anticipated
hearing expressions of disappointment, so am not surprised. Yes, I
promise you that, after the inauguration of our mission if you may so
desire, we will bring you here and, at your leisure, you may observe
whatever may interest you.

George, we now will hastily pass over England's rural-districts, then
we will move northward. Yes, the landscape views are indeed fine.
Nature, in her tranquil moods, ever is charming.

Beneath us is bonnie Scotland, with her many lakes and heathery
heights. Yonder is Loch Lomond and is not it a lovely sheet of water?
But, to my mind, not more so than others of Scotland's many lakes. No,
we cannot now devote time to seeing cities; it is the geography of the
countries we are passing over that we wish you to observe.

George, we will devote a few moments to an observation of the Isle of
Man. Gentol[a:], on our side there are Spirits who remember a time when
the ocean was many fathoms deep above its slowly rising surface. That
is the island, and it appears a rather precarious abiding place. Some
time I may tell you of its origin, which differs from the accepted
scientific view.

Now you may salute the Emerald Isle, the birthland of your nearest
ancestors, who were of Scotch blood. You have desired to see Lough
Neagh, near which your father was born. Its rippling water is beneath
us now. Of Ireland's lakes, mountains, holy wells and fairy lore
doubtless your father has told you many strange stories, but the
strangely tragic story of wrong and oppression for which Ireland
furnishes a piteous theme is as yet, unwritten.

Yes, this southern portion of the island is very picturesque and
broken; the same may be said of the inhabitants. No, we will not visit
Wales. From Ireland we will pass directly to France and to Paris
which, as has been aptly said, is France. Is not it a very beautiful
city? During my Earth life I regarded it as being so perfect as to be
changeless, but now as I gaze upon it, I see but few vestiges of nearly
three hundred years ago.

Oh, Paris, Paris, thou aggregation of opulence and squalor; of much
that is admirable and more that is detestable; aye, of all that is
good, bad or indifferent in human nature; since first I knew thee in
thy beauty, luxury and arrogance, thou hast grown superb, but while
decking thyself with costliest raiment and priceless jewels, thy feet
tread in the mire of debauchery. In thy hands thou bearest a crucifix
yet in thy heart thou art a wanton. With one breath thou chantest Laus
Deo, with the next thy lips are smirched with ribald song.

Oh beautiful, oh pitiable Paris! Through whose broad or narrow ways
pass unseen angels of mercy, who continually are striving to raise the
thoughts and aspirations of thy sensuous people above the insensate
follies of vicious tendencies. Not yet, not yet, but in a coming time
the tribulations of thy people will turn them away from the spell of
thy enchantments, and with clearer eyes and purer aspirations they
will seek the heights of Spiritual progress. Beloved France, land of
my birth, home of my childhood, youth and manhood, I look backward
through the years and I behold thee regnant in power, or tossed as a
shuttlecock in the hands of thy foes. Then I behold thee dancing gaily
on the brink of a precipice and, as I gaze, out of the shadows emerges
the dread Reign of Terror, which stained thy garments with the best
blood of thy children. Still I gaze, and out of the blackness of thy
despair a strong hand, guided by indomitable will, and measureless
ambition, rescues thee from the abyss into which thy mad and ignorant
folly hath plunged thee, and then a new day, whose effulgent glory
blinds the eyes of other nations, dawns for thee. Again deep shadows
eclipse the effulgence of thy glory, whose beams gleam fitfully
through some troublous years, and thus amid brightness and shadows the
centuries have flown, and again, though in their hearts they spurn the
plebeians whom they have chosen as rulers, thy children cry, "Liberty,
Equality, Fraternity," and the fateful years go by.

Liberty and equality are the finest jewels in the crown of any nation,
but alas, it is the few, and not the many, who are able to estimate
them at their full value.

Now reluctantly my gaze turns toward Alsace and Lorraine, who, like two
orphaned children are obliged to carry water on both shoulders, yet no
one dares to lift their burthens, or to restore them to their own. With
sorrowful sympathy I have watched their changeful history, and the end
is not yet.

An Alsatian born am I, and though it is nearer three than two centuries
since I passed to the Spirit Side, my heart clings to the land of my
birth and I dream of a time that may, nay, will, arrive, when France,
regenerated and with garments undefiled, shall take her rightful place
amid the galaxy of Earth's greatest nations.

Southward now to Italy, the land of music, of art, of sunshine and of
flowers. As we gaze upon the verdure clad slopes, the smiling valleys
and upon the cities whose storied greatness reaches backward into
classic times, I recall that one has written, "Oh, Italy, thou art in
one the glory and the shame of Christianity, for while upon the pages
of thy history are names heroic, thy garments are stained with the best
blood that hath flowed in the veins of thy children. Alas! that through
thy ignorant zeal thou, in a bygone time, didst torture those whom thou
shouldst have worn upon thy bosom as jewels beyond price. Tortured
them, too, in the name of the genuine Teacher of a religion of peace
and good will toward all men."

Gentol[a:], two members of our band, Galileo and Giordano Bruno, attest
to the horrible cruelties and crimes which, in their days, were, in the
name of religion, perpetrated upon helpless men and women. No, Spirits
do not forget; but ere they can progress they must and do forgive.

Although at this time a humane, wise and liberal minded man is King of
Italy, there is a power _under his throne_ that chafes and schemes to
overturn it but, happily comprehensive ideas are illumining the minds
of his people who stand as a bulwark between it and those who, for
their own selfish, ambitious and unrighteous ends seek its destruction.
Yes, all religious systems are beset with fanaticism and always
fanatics are, in some sense, dangerous. Then, too, to what lengths will
not ambitious self-seeking, lead mortals, even blinding them to every
principle which ennobles and elevates humanity.

On your account we regret that our time is too limited to admit of
sightseeing, but we will slowly pass over Rome so that you may gain a
general idea of the appearance of the antiquated one who, despite her
powdered and patched wrinkles, still dreams that she again will be
mistress of the world's destinies; that her voice is as the voice of
God and that her outreaching arms will yet embrace spiritually, if not
temporally, all the nations of the Earth.

Germany next claims our attention. Below us is Berlin, where dwells
the young Emperor whose highest ambition is to act as arbitrator for
all Europe. Naturally aristocratic and domineering, his tendency is to
override all obstacles. He cannot tolerate advice, much less coercion.
He is angered easily, yet with a kindly word is pacified. He is quick
to take offense, and as quickly he forgives. When he conceives that the
glory of Germany or his personal honor are called in question in his
demand for redress he is adamantine. At an hour's notice he is ready
to appeal to arms, yet he is moved to pity by a cry of distress. In
this scion of a stern, as well as gentle ancestry, ambition, arrogance,
courage, integrity and a large admixture of the love element, serves to
form a most unique character.

Yes, Berlin is an imposing city, but in it, as in all large
aggregations of humanity on our planet, luxury and squalor are such
near neighbors that the songs and laughter of the fortunate do not
drown the moans of the wretched.

We now are crossing the border line between Germany and Russia. Over
what a vast area the autocratic Czar holds sway. Does it not seem
marvellous that to one man millions of people yield more or less
willing obedience? Yet marvellous only when one loses sight of the
fact, that in all manifestations of nature; or, if it may please you
better, of God, necessarily there is a central, dominant principle.
Among the millions of this great empire are many who are the Czar's
equal, and others who, in the sense that makes a man worthier than his
fellows, are his superiors. Yet these millions of humans are subject
to him, because that in his rank is involved all the principles that
the government of Russia stands for, and all governments require a
figure-head, be it emperor, king or president.

The Czar is a man of fine intelligence, of an affectionate and generous
nature, but he is so hedged in by pride of birth, by love of power and
the precedents of usages that he possesses but a scant understanding
of the needs of the diverse races who people his dominions. Yes, he,
like most of Earth's rulers, walks on the verge of a precipice over
which, at any moment, some ruthless hand may topple him. No nation of
Earth has yet outgrown the naturally turbulent animal element which,
in the human, ever is snapping and snarling, and it is only when
humanity has evolved beyond it that an observance of the Golden Rule
becomes possible. Earth's peoples not having evolved to the height of
such a possibility, rulers must needs be guarded by steel and served
by slaves, both rulers and slaves being held in bondage through fear
of consequences. No, I do not recall that I ever have cared for the
ephemeral distinctions of mortality's brief days.

We near St. Petersburg, an extensive and populous city, which, like the
country, is covered with snow. Yes, the cold is very severe, and rivers
and lakes are bound in icy fetters. Never mind, the time is not very
far distant when you shall be free to not only visit the city, but you
even may unceremoniously call on the royal family.

Now we are crossing the Ural Mountains, and in a moment we will be
passing over Siberia. One is tempted to moralize over those exiled from
home and country to this far northern land. Ah me! What tragedies have
been enacted, what crimes committed against humanity, perpetrated, too,
in the name of justice, who is not so blind that she will not some time
reckon with the perpetrators.

Since starting on our journey but little more than an hour has elapsed,
and--yes, we have reached the North pole of our planet. For certain
mentalities there is a charm in attempting difficult undertakings, and
serious obstacles but spur them on to greater enthusiasm, to higher
endeavor. To ordinary mortals the awful wastes of ice and snow over
which we have passed would be utterly appalling, but for some the scene
would possess a sort of enchantment. So courageous explorers will
continue to seek for this point, and many valuable lives will yet be
lost in the attainment of a nearly futile object. Yes, ambition and
curiosity are forceful and apparently necessary incentives of human
endeavor.

Now gaze downward and as far as your vision may extend and describe the
not at all pleasing view.

Gentola--How shall I describe the wonderful spectacle so terrible, yet
so weirdly fascinating. Overhead the clouds are heavy and threatening,
and a shadowy darkness as deep as twilight prevails, and in the partial
light there is a peculiarly luminous quality as though the atmosphere
might be laden with diamond dust, on which light from somewhere
is falling. De L'Ester, do you know what occasions the singularly
beautiful radiance?

De L'Ester--This luminosity is the effect of the magnetic aura
emanating from the polar centre. No, I do not mean magnetic centre, but
polar centre. Under certain conditions it produces or creates what is
known as Aurora borealis. Yes, I mean that there are certain planetary
activities which create magnetic storms, and when such disturbances
occur our northern earth sky presents a more or less beautiful display
of what, by many, are termed northern lights.

Gentola--Were I in my physical body would I perceive this luminous
appearance, and is it at all times luminous?

De L'Ester--You and very many, but not all persons in the physical body
would be able to perceive the magnetic aura, particularly when, as at
present, it is very pronounced. You forget that I already have said
that the emanation is continuous, which is the same as saying that it
is at all times luminous to those who can perceive it. Please resume,
for we soon must hasten to Ento.

Gentola--I cannot find words adequate to a description of this scene
which is so peculiar that it overwhelms me. The loveliness of color,
radiating and pulsating through the atmosphere like some living thing,
is so marvellous that one can imagine its pulsations are the heart
throbs of the planet.

As far as my vision reaches I see no land, no water, no living thing,
and everywhere it looks as though great waves of a tempestuous sea had
climbed toward the sky and suddenly were frozen into immobility. Amid
the swirl and commotion of the elements, avalanches of ice and snow are
crashing downward from the crests of snow mountains, whose peaks tower
toward the clouds. To my mind it is not only a sublime but an awful
scene. I should think one might go mad if obliged to long remain amid
such desolation and such tremendous sights and sounds. But, De L'Ester,
once you mentioned the existence of a former open Polar Sea. Will you
tell me of it?

De L'Ester--As you please, madame, though but in a few words. At
another time a member of the Band will speak of it at length. Our
planet has experienced two Glacial periods. Previous to the first
period there was at the then North Pole an unfrozen, but very limited
sea. Twice through the activities of natural laws a slight tilting of
our planet has occurred. During its existence, again and again the
same catastrophe must repeat itself. Always accumulations of ice and
snow at the North Pole preponderate over the same at the South Pole.
The centre of gravity seeking an equilibrium, necessitates a changed
position of the planet, which will account for the finding of tropical
vestiges so very far north. Some of Earth's scientists very naturally
have concluded that the glacial drift forced these vestiges to their
present position, but through eminent scientists on our side of life
we know that this is a mistaken idea. Were it possible for mortals to
search under these tremendous accumulations of ice and snow, they would
find the fauna and flora of a tropical region, and what would be more
startling, the well preserved remains of very primitive humans and
somewhat of their belongings.

During our too brief hours of camaraderie, it is not practicable to
note all that comes under our observation, but be assured that much
that cannot be written you, more or less vividly will remember as food
for thought through coming years of your mortal existence.

Now take a last survey of the dreary expanse below us, to which you
will not say good-bye, but au revoir, for, doubtless after you shall
have been freed from the physical plane of being, under more favorable
conditions you will revisit this scene of which you now have but a
limited view. And now, mes amis, off for Ento.

Gentol[a:], recently you inquired of Genessano if the Entoans composed
poetry and he replied yes, but his modesty forbade his saying that
previous to passing to the Spirit World he had attempted versification.
We have prevailed upon him to recall some sad lines which we deem
apropos to the object of our mission, and as on this ever wondrous
magnetic current we speed toward Ento, he will recite them and I, to
the best of my ability, will translate them into your language.

  _An ocean whose waves reach Eternity's shore,
  Rolls silently on; not a sound is heard
  Of the wrecks that go down in its depths profound,
  To rest on its bed and are heard of no more._

  _Oh, Ento, thy children so loved, so deplored,
  Ever fade from our sight never more to return,
  And in measureless anguish we cry unto Thee:
  Spare, spare us our dear ones, Andûmana, dread Lord._

  _Around us are falling, like leaves from the trees,
  Our loved ones, our friends whose forms are so dear
  That we wear them as jewels enshrined in our hearts,
  And yield them to Death, so Andûmana decrees._

  _Oh, pitiful gods! Andûmana implore.
  To succor His children who lie at His feet,
  And cry in their anguish and deep despair:
  Give lack to our arms our loved ones once more._

De L'Ester--As I have done my best, I shall not apologize for my
unmeritorious translation of Genessano's meritorious poem, which voices
the ceaseless cry of Ento's sorrowful peoples.

Gentola--Genessano, my friend, so worshipful is my love for my dearest
ones, that I understand the emotion impelling you to give expression
to this wail of despair. When this dear boy, journeying by my side,
passed into the world of spirits, only my knowledge of a continuity
of conscious existence sustained me under my sudden bereavement, so I
rejoice that the time draws near when the peoples of Ento may come into
a knowledge of this consoling truth.

Genessano--Oh, Ento! beloved Ento! I too, rejoice that ere long the
shadows which have so obscured thy spiritual radiance shall drift away
from thee, even as under the golden beams of Diafon-evoiha the mists
of dawn drift from off thy fair face. Hail to thee! Hail to thee Ento,
thou beauteous world of the starry realms of space! With exultant heart
I gaze on thee, for soon in thy spirit realms the glad words will be
heralded that the day of thy rejoicing has come; that henceforth the
eyes of thy downcast children shall be filled with the light of a joy
divine, the joy of knowing that death of the physical body releases
into a higher life--the immortal self. Only those who have loved, lost
and sorrowed for the dear ones gone into endless silence can comprehend
the joy that pervades my Being as I realize the ineffable gladness that
soon will fill the hearts of the peoples of Ento.

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], you perceive how enthused we all are over, I
may say, the certainty of the success of our mission, which is ours
only in the sense that we are assisting others who, like ourselves, are
interested in the righteous undertaking.

Yes, all greatly beneficent enterprises for the uplifting of humanity
of any planet originate in the spirit realms. You are aware that on
our planet all persons are not equally receptive, which is the same as
saying that they are not equally sensitive. The same is true of the
peoples of other planets. The law of Being is universal, but, through
heredity, which is the sum of preceding existences, also through the
influences of social and other conditions always, among all peoples,
there are individuals apparently ahead of their time. Not through
their own desire, but through conditions, to which I have alluded, the
most dominant being ecclesiastical repression. As a whole, the Entoans
are very positive, but among the ascetic priesthood are individuals
so sensitive that, like Dano, Lēta and others, they are impelled to
manifest it. These are they who apparently are ahead of their time; in
reality they are the forerunners of spiritual upheavals, not of to-day,
perhaps not of to-morrow, but of a time that surely will come.

Largely through their ardently affectionate nature the Entoans are
growing approachable. Love and sorrow are retorts in which are
consumed the dross of human passions, beliefs and prejudices. Thus,
through their love and their sorrow, their souls are unfolding for
the reception of spiritual influences and the perception of spirit
presences.

We have so loitered that Zenest[a:] H[a:]o, who awaits us yonder at the
Galarēs[a:], well may have grown impatient. Loh[a:]û emano, Loh[a:]û.

Zenesta Hao--Friends, you are late. What has so delayed you?

De L'Ester--We fear that we may have taxed your amiability and
patience, but, after consideration, we decided to afford Gentol[a:] a
view of certain of earth's regions with which she was unacquainted, so
that she might compare them with regions of a corresponding latitude
and longitude of Ento. The youth who accompanies us is the son of
Gentol[a:], who four years ago passed into our spirit world and this
is his first visit to Ento. Bernard, dear boy, this is our esteemed
Ento friend, Zenest[a:] H[a:]o, once a Professor of Languages in this
Galarēs[a:].

Bernard--Sir, I am happy in making your acquaintance, and deeply
grateful that these dear friends have allowed me to accompany my mother
to your planet.

Zenesta Hao--Inidor[a:], Genessano and I, as representatives of our
people, with much good will offer the son of Gentol[a:] a cordial
welcome to Ento.

Bernard--For which you and they have my thanks.

Zenesta Hao--Friends, previous to my coming here, I visited the invalid
at D[a:]o. Dano's arrival has stimulated Vallo[a:]'s life forces, and
a ray of hope lights up Omanas Fûnh[a:]'s despairing heart. It is but
the fitful burning of the expiring flame and the young creature can
survive but for a brief time. As the union between herself and her
physical body weakens, she grows more spiritualized and sensitive; so
also does Prince Dano, who does not deceive himself with false hopes
of Vallo[a:]'s recovery, and both gladly are growing into a clearer
understanding of the wondrous truth that life is continuous. With
timorous joy they whisper of a time when they may be reunited to part
no more, but it is pitiful to listen to their murmured words of love,
of sorrow and of the newly born hope which yet is too marvellous to be
fully realized. With tears in my eyes and tenderest pity in my heart I
turned from them, for I remembered, aye, I remembered when my beloved
Armen[a:]'s life went out and left me desolate and despairing.

De L'Ester--For your report which partakes of both joy and sorrow,
we thank you, and we will so shape our movements as to meet all
emergencies.

Gentol[a:], you are aware that early in the present century there lived
a man of Scotch birth named Hugh Miller, who was so orthodox that
he found himself unequal to the feat of balancing the Bible in one
scale, and the results of his geological investigations in the other.
Despairingly he abandoned the futile attempt, and suddenly crossed over
the Scottish border into a world, not of effects, but of causes. Come
forward, sir, and afford me the pleasure of introducing to you our
intrepid medium Gentol[a:].

Hugh Miller--Madame, this is a strange meeting between one who was,
and one who yet is an inhabitant of our Earth plane, where once I
earnestly, anxiously, prayerfully strove to go toward the light. During
my investigations evidences, which I could neither dispute or explain
away, so perplexed me that I fell into a vortex of doubt and dismay
that whirled me into the world of spirits. I perceive that you do not
know my story. I pray you acquaint yourself with it.

While in the physical body the study of geology was with me a positive
passion, and when in the world of spirits I recovered from my temporary
aberration of mind, gladly and naturally I continued my favorite
pursuit.

Yes, madame, I was greatly surprised, I may say overwhelmed, when upon
regaining full consciousness I found the spirit world so unlike all
my preconceived notions, but as real, as substantial, as the old red
sandstone which had so perplexed and upset all my ideas concerning the
creation of our world. I had been taught and did believe that in six
days God created the heavens and the earth, and all that was therein,
but geology told another story. It related that the Earth had not been
created, but that through ages and ages it had evolved from cosmic
matter into a measurable world, which through other ages had become
fitted for the abode of myriad life forms. As a thoroughly orthodox
believer my very Soul revolted against these evidences of nature, and
finally under blows of a small hammer upon a leaf of God's revelation
in stone my reason reeled, and I---- But no more retrospection.

Friends, I am at your service, and shall be happy if in the least I may
add to your profit or your pleasure.

Ah, this is the geological department which is very complete, very
comprehensive. What a vast apartment and so beautifully arranged and
kept. Madame, observe those supporting columns; are they not in style
nearly Corinthian? To you it may appear a somewhat startling fact,
but when understood it is not. The so-termed Primary colors are an
expression of a universal natural law, and form is equally so. As
water, in freezing, inevitably forms certain crystallized shapes, so
in the human mind, inevitably, form assumes certain curves, lines and
dimensions. These friends will bear witness that not only on Ento and
Earth, but on other inhabited planets we have found the Arch, with its
Keystone, and columns of the various orders employed in architecture
here and on our Planet.

You observe that this great apartment is divided into several
departments. In this one is a fine collection of fossils which, for
lack of time, we must pass by. De L'Ester says that we shall only
glance at this wonderfully complete display of gems which ever are
dear to the heart of a woman. Now here----

De L'Ester--Friends, for a little while we will defer the examination
of the gems. Nearby an Instructor is addressing a Class of students who
may afford us opportunity for an experiment.

Instructor--For as in it there is much that cannot be accounted
for, geology affords room for speculation (and I regret to say for
irreverent expression), not found in any other science. Our Sacred
Writings declare that out of substances within Himself Andûman[a:]
created Ento and all living creatures, into whom He breathed the
breath of life and to whom He gave the power of procreation. That at
death of the body the breath of life returns to Him, and again and
again is breathed into the newly born. One of our most learned men,
Ziro Emyd[a:]s, estimates the circumference of Ento as being koid[a:]s
ferm[a:] itsa[a:] fonitû ûvon soynas (little less than 12,000 miles).
No mind can realize the immensity of Andûman[a:], Who out of His
personality, created Ento and all things.

Ziro Emyd[a:]s intimates that after the creation of Ento, Andûman[a:]
did not at once create all living things, but his deductions are
somewhat illogical and by some are thought to be impious. His statement
he terms the Theory of Stratification, and it is so specious that I
hesitate to quote from it. Generally it is admitted that the science of
geology demonstrates that the formation of Ento is stratified, and that
each stratum presents an appearance peculiar to itself. For instance,
here is a stone from the third stratum which largely is composed of a
variety of minute shells. Here are others from the fourth and fifth
strata, each varying from the others in their composition, and the same
may he said of the strata nearer the surface. Phrysos, you who, to an
extent, favor Ziro Emyd[a:]s's theory, dare you give utterance to what
these stones indicate?

Phrysos--May the gods prevent my uttering aught that may oppose the
truth. At times the thought enters my mind that possibly our Priesthood
may not fully comprehend the meanings of certain words of our Sacred
Writings. Ziro Emyd[a:]s questions the infallibility of their
interpretations. He declares that Andûman[a:] alone is infallible, and
that Gods and men are but His Instruments through whom He works His
will. That the Priesthood have called him to account for what they
term his lack of reverence for Sacred things has not deterred him
from firmly adhering to his declarations, and I confess that while my
immature mind does not wholly grasp the presentation of his Theory,
I greatly admire his courage and no one, I believe, questions his
sincerity.

I am but a beginner in this fascinating study, but already I realize
that one must closely adhere to established theories else one easily
may drift into unauthorized and dangerous speculations, but I, no more
than yourself, question the infallibility of the Sacred Writings, and
yet----

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], place the tips of your fingers near his head,
now speak to him.

Phrysos--And yet--and--yet--friends, I seem to hear a voice--it speaks
to--speaks to me, and I feel--a strange--sensation stealing--over--me.
I--I----

De L'Ester--Now place your hands over his eyes. Ah, how readily he
yields.

Instructor--What ails you, Phrysos? Why, I believe he is falling into a
swoon. Phrysos! Phrysos! Triss[a:], hasten for a cup of water. Raise a
window, Avilla the air may be too close.

De L'Ester--Rapidly but distinctly follow my dictation.

Gentola--I am one who already hath spoken to thy friend, Prince Dano,
of a new and glorious Revelation which very soon will be given to the
peoples of Ento. Thou hearest my voice but seest not my form standing
near thee, even as thou shalt stand near Dano as a Priest of the new
Revelation. I am Gentol[a:]. Remember and fear not.

Instructor--Thanks, Triss[a:]. It was but a momentary faintness,
probably occasioned by the oppressive atmosphere.

Why, Phrysos, really we thought you were about to swoon; you whose
boast is that you never have known a moment's illness. Was it the
closeness of the atmosphere that occasioned the attack?

Phrysos--I cannot say what occasioned it. I fancied I heard a voice
coming from some one or somewhere, and I grew faint. No, I was not
unconscious, but could not open my eyes or reply to your inquiries. It
must have been occasioned by the closeness of the atmosphere. You will
excuse me and I will walk about, and in a few moments I shall recover
myself.

Evylon--To what strange days have we come. Phrysos, one of our
athletes; Phrysos, one of our brightest and closest students, attacked
much as was Prince Dano. Yes, I was in the art studio when Dano became
unconscious, and when he was revived he spoke strange words which
surprised and shocked all who heard them. But, evidently, Phrysos was
not unconscious, for his countenance expressed great surprise and
lively emotion. He says that he seemed to hear a voice, but we heard no
sound. I pray the Gods that no such attack may seize any of us.

De L'Ester--Touch this youth's hands. First the right, now the left
hand. See how he stares and rubs one over the other. Touch them again.
Greatly excited he springs to his feet, exclaiming, "Something has
touched me! Touched me twice on my hands! No, I see nothing that could
have caused the sensation. I fear that my sympathy for Phrysos has
rendered me imaginative. I, too, pray you excuse me and soon I shall
walk off all morbid fancies."

Instructor--As our lesson is concluded we will join you. You do well
not to yield to what you very properly term morbid fancies. It is well
understood that one mind can affect another mind, and then the question
arises, what is mind? Fr[a:]tos, one of our most learned and brilliant
thinkers, declares that----

De L'Ester--We cannot afford time to learn what Fr[a:]tos declares,
probably that mind is matter in an active state.

Gentol[a:], we are delighted that you can so successfully approach Ento
Sensitives. One other of those students could have been made to sense
your presence, but we must not permit our enthusiasm to get the better
of our judgment, else a panic might occur.

Genessano, you have reason to be hopeful for the success of our Mission
for, evidently, the Spiritualized faculties of many of your people are
highly evolved.

Genessano--Oh, that the hour may swiftly arrive which shall usher in
the dawn of the brightest day that ever has come to Ento. A day that
will mark an epoch of gladness in the history of a sorrowful people.

Before proceeding with our investigations, you desire to know the
result of my very recent visit to D[a:]o. As Zenest[a:] has said,
Dano's arrival momentarily has stimulated Vallo[a:]'s life forces, but
she fades away as fades a rodel broken from its stem. As gradually she
releases herself from her physical body her inner vision grows clearer
and she reaches out and greets the dear ones who have preceded her
into our spirit realms. Sēlon[a:] Vallo[a:], the golden haired, died
in giving birth to Vallo[a:]. She was the wife of Omanos Fûnh[a:]'s
youth, and no one has taken her place in his affection or by his side.
While mourning his irreparable loss, ever his chiefest solace has
been the golden haired, blue eyed child who now is the image of her
mother. In the hour of his approaching bereavement Omanos Fûnh[a:]
will, when convinced of its truth, gladly embrace a faith that shall
give assurance of a reunion with those whom he holds dearer than all
else. Basto Andûlēs[a:], his nearest kinsman and closest friend, in all
possible ways sustains him. In character they are much alike and both
are wise, loving and spiritualized men. To them Vallo[a:] smilingly but
earnestly, insists upon the reality of her visions, and the Messages
her mother, Sēlon[a:], sends to her husband and the Andûlēs[a:]s. And
thus the days and nights pass, and the way is being prepared against
the time when the lovely girl shall be borne from them into higher
Realms.

De L'Ester--Dear friend, your report favors our Mission, but how
pitiful it is, and geology is an interesting science, but as we are
humans, the affairs of humans lie nearer our hearts and I confess
that my sympathy for Dano, Vallo[a:], and the grief stricken father,
is greater than my interest in all the Sciences of all the Planets
in the Universe. Gentol[a:], you are surprised and our friends smile
at my impulsive utterances, but they understand, as you do not, that
with longing unspeakable, I look forward to the hour when my own shall
return to me. Ever I am waiting and watching for an angel of love and
mercy, who strives to lift out of degradation and wretchedness mortals
whose ignorance and debaucheries drag them down into darkness. Her
present embodiment has placed us far apart, but duties fulfilled are
converging our ways and ere long, face to face, we again will gaze into
each other's eyes and read there the assurance of our Eternal Union.
It should not so surprise you to learn that in the spiritual marriage
two entities, male and female, form an inseparable whole, and that
there is no other real union possible, all others being temporary, yet
not necessarily on the merely animal plane. When, to a certain point,
we shall have completed our present undertaking, we hope that you may
be induced to listen to talks on this and other subjects, for the more
clearly you understand Spiritual Laws, the better you will be prepared
to enter the Spirit World.

As our Scotch friend is accustomed to our erratic ways I need not
apologize for so abruptly interrupting him.

Hugh Miller--Certainly not. Indeed I have been so interested in what
has transpired that, for the time, I quite lost sight of the occasion
of our coming here. Madame, you will observe that here, arranged in
orderly sequence, are fragments of the various stratifications of the
several ages of this Planet which exactly correspond with those, not
only of Earth, but of all planets sufficiently evolved to have become
fully stratified. Perhaps you have been informed that in matter there
is a universality of homogeneity, and that vibration, attraction,
cohesion and gravity are the observable expressions of Infinite
Intelligent Energy, the _one_ law controlling all things that live,
move and have Being. In a general way, the Entoans recognize this Law,
also in a general way, they recognize the structure of their Planet,
but in certain of their conclusions they are quite mistaken. When one
takes into account their religious beliefs and their consequent lack of
knowledge of astronomical and geological facts, it is not surprising
that some of their conclusions are altogether erroneous. Happily the
new Revelation will dissipate their fears of Andûman[a:] and His
Messengers, and with their wonderful mathematical and mechanical
ability, soon they will construct such aids to physical vision as will
fill the minds of their Star-gazers with amazement.

Owing to its exceedingly level surface, during the spring this planet
becomes inundated and engineering skill of a high order long has been
required to not only obviate disasters, but to provide storage for
water which later on furnishes a necessary but inadequate supply for
the requirements of the peoples. To in a measure meet this demand,
wells of enormous depth are bored and from them volumes of sweet, cool,
refreshing water gush forth. Through the agency of these borings many
geological facts have been forced upon the attention of the learned
and through other agencies these facts have been confirmed. But always
religious beliefs have stood as barriers between fact and fancy, and
thus the science of geology is but partially comprehended, much less
are its conclusions admitted.

Here are specimens of various coals whose properties are the same as
those of Earth. And here are specimens of peat or bog fuel. Embedded in
this block of peat is a piece of wood closely resembling oak, and here
is another in which is embedded wood much like the beech.

In this compartment are specimens of gold-bearing quartz, and here are
nuggets of free gold and a receptacle filled with grains of gold; and
here are samples of scale gold which are nearly pure.

Here, too, is an exhibit of Ento's various silver ores. Observe these
peculiar formations which resemble skeins of silver threads, snarled
inextricably. In these compartments is an effective arrangement of
specimens of all minerals not accounted precious, as copper, iron, tin,
zinc, lead, in short all minerals of our Planet are represented here.

To spirits sufficiently advanced, two facts are evident. One is the
universal homogeneity of what you term matter. The other is the
universality of a Law whose activities everywhere are the same, but
I do not mean to say that everywhere the results are the same for,
of course, environments and conditions modify results; but where, as
on Ento and Earth, environments and conditions so nearly correspond,
necessarily, results must at least bear a general resemblance.

We now will pass to the adjoining apartment where an aged custodian is
poring over an ancient looking volume, which is one of many ancient
volumes stored in this Galarēs[a:]. What a quaint but pleasing figure
he presents. His long white hair waving over his shoulders forms a
fitting setting for his dark-hued, intellectual and refined face, and
the blue gemmed silver fillet confining his hair harmonizes with his
loose, graceful, dark blue robe falling quite to his feet. Despite his
hoary locks and aged appearance, to my mind he is a very handsome man.
The volume he so earnestly endeavors to read is quite unknown to me.
Perhaps Zenest[a:] may be acquainted with it.

Zenesta Hao--Let me see. Ah, yes, this was the language of a race
known as the D[a:]hûlo, who occupied the Province of D[a:]hûlo which,
some thirty centuries ago, bordered on Indolois[a:]'s southern shore.
They were highly civilized and, like the Quends of to-day, did not
intermarry with other races. The province was not then infertile,
and through their manufacturing industries, one of which was the
production of rich silken stuffs, they became the most opulent race
of Ento. Then gradually arrived the not infrequent sequence. The very
rich grew arrogantly selfish, and the masses with unperceiving senses
yielded their rights and fell into idleness and consequent poverty
which bred discontent, and soon discontent merged into turbulence
and almost suddenly they turned upon their despoilers and in an
incredibly brief time such devastation occurred that cities, towns and
villages and country places were little less than ruins. The Governor
of the Province appears to have been a timorous, incapable man who,
realizing that he could not control the frenzied people, appealed for
aid to the Supreme Euler, Imraû Ilvoit[a:]s, who was a wise, just
and thoroughgoing man, who quickly adjusted affairs by renaming the
Province Zil-Ammon, and obliging those whose selfish greed had led to
the riotous proceedings, to make reparation to the wronged people and
also to remove elsewhere. These vigorous measures must have been an
effective object lesson, for never since has a like event occurred.

The volume further relates that through the encouragement of Imraû
Ilvoit[a:]s, people from other Provinces emigrated to Zil-Ammon and
thus the exclusiveness of the D[a:]hûlo race was broken up, but the
Province never regained its former prosperity. At that time there was
a lack of systematic irrigation and the central regions were steadily
growing so infertile that long previous to the birth of Inidor[a:] and
Genessano the Province of Zil-Ammon was little less than a desert. Only
within two Ento centuries has an attempt been made to reclaim this
waste country.

This volume, which once I translated into the present Ento tongue, is a
history of the extinct race of D[a:]Hûlo; from its pages I have culled
the fragment I have related. I should like to assist this gentleman in
his effort to read the volume, but I fear he might be greatly alarmed
could he even perceive me looking over his shoulder.

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], you now understand the process. Try to lightly
touch his hands.

It is more than amusing to note the haste with which he deposits
the volume on the table and turns his hands this way and that in
an endeavor to learn what has occasioned the singular sensation.
Touch him again, but only on his left hand. There, that will do.
We do not desire to alarm him. He is quite startled and looks about
questioningly, but as he perceives nothing out of the common he picks
up the volume murmuring, "Ah me, age is burthened with infirmities and
strange fancies, and I grow old, old, and the dread Silence draws very
near." Again he lays the volume down and with a pathetic, troubled
expression, paces back and forth. Too bad to have so disturbed him, and
we beg his pardon.

Hugh Miller--Madame, will you now observe this department, which
contains examples of all the precious stones of Ento.

Gentola--I have been thinking of how beautiful all this is. The great
apartment itself is exquisitely finished in various beautifully colored
woods so richly, yet so daintily carved, that they match the loveliness
of the Mosaic floor, which seems too fine for common use. These
crystalline compartments, too, with their velvety linings and fine
mouldings, containing this great collection of cut and uncut, set, and
unset jewels, forms a spectacle beyond my ability to describe. In this
first compartment are many gems of various tints of green, and how very
beautiful they are. Are they not emeralds?

Hugh Miller--Yes, and they are very large and very fine gems. I am
informed that Officials of a certain Rank wear emeralds as Insignia of
their special dignity. For instance, the fillets worn by Zenest[a:],
Inidor[a:] and Genessano, are only worn by Governors of Provinces.
Oh, yes, all who choose may wear the gems as ornaments, but only the
fillets worn by governors are set in this peculiar style. No, the
Supreme Ruler does not wear a Crown. His golden fillet of a certain
width, richly ornamented with diamonds and sapphires, is the Badge of
his high Office. As fillet gems, Princes and Princesses wear diamonds
and rubies. Other persons of distinction wear their fillets variously
gemmed. Yes, the fillet, its gems and style of setting, always denotes
the Station of the wearer, in which there is no suggestion of caste
or special privilege. But of this and other matters, you later on
will learn more. By the Entoans diamonds are not regarded as being
more valuable than are some other gems. Inidor[a:] will offer you an
explanation of the matter.

Inidora--The Irrigating and Waterways System starting at Camariss[a:],
passes eastward until it emerges into Gandûlan[a:] Lois[a:]. The great
work being completed to its western shore, immediately its eastern
shore became a centre of ceaseless activity. Ere the lapse of many
days a diamond deposit was discovered, which induced such a state
of excitement that, for a time, work on the System was abandoned.
In their eagerness to secure the gems, laborers set aside all other
considerations and I well remember that such numbers of stones were
found that dealers in the gems were threatened with financial ruin.
Quickly the situation grew so serious that a General Council was
convened, which resulted in our Supreme Ruler issuing an edict to the
effect that all diamonds found in that locality should be the property
of the government; that they should be sold at their value, and that
the proceeds should be used toward defraying the cost of the Irrigating
and Waterways System, which, as all persons knew, was for the general
good. This ended the excitement and thereafter the work of the system
proceeded uninterruptedly. During many years the Government worked
the diamond deposit, and the accruing revenue greatly assisted in
furthering the interests of the System. A time arrived when the deposit
became exhausted, but that was after our parents, my brother and I had
passed into our Spirit Realms. Never since the finding of such numbers
of the gems have they, as previously, been valued beyond what you name
the emerald, the ruby and some other fine gems.

Gentola--I never have much cared to possess jewels, but this display is
so very beautiful that I cannot find words to express my admiration of
it. Diamonds, diamonds, diamonds--glowing and scintillating like stars,
and what a range of coloring they possess--blue, rose, yellow and
various other hues, and all so beautiful. Do you think, sir, that on
our Planet there are diamonds comparable in size, purity and coloring
with these?

Hugh Miller--Yes, in size, purity and coloring, our planet possesses
diamonds equal to the finest of these. Why not? The constituents of the
two planets being exactly alike and conditions sufficiently similar,
naturally the same causes that produced the crystallization of these
beautiful gems, would be operative in the formation of the diamond and
other gems of our planet. Yes, the diamond is pure carbon, and to my
mind it is the most attractive of gems. We will now pass to the next
compartment.

Gentola--Oh, how lovely, how very, very lovely. I am sure that those
are rubies, and to my taste they are far more beautiful than diamonds.
What a variety of shades of color--some pale to deep rose, from deepest
rose to blood red and in their hearts is a glint of fire that makes
them seem alive. I never have seen a ruby so large or so brilliant as
that beautifully cut, unset stone on the white velvet cushion. How I
should like to hold it in my hand.

De L'Ester--You may attempt it.

Gentola--Ah, I cannot lift it. Why is it that I cannot? I feel quite as
substantial as when in my physical body, yet I cannot lift even that
diminutive stone, which is no more than an inch in diameter.

De L'Ester--Your _physical_ body has an affinity for matter on the
_physical plane_. Your Spirit body has an affinity only for that which
is Spiritual. Diamonds, rubies, indeed, all things are composites of
matter and vitalizing spirit. At present, you attract only the spirit
of things, but as you are not strong enough, we will form a battery,
which will assist you to accomplish your desire. Friends, you will aid
us. Now place your left hand on mine, your right hand under the stone
and strongly desire that you shall hold in it the Spirit of the ruby.
Try again, concentrate your will power, and--ah, that is well. Now
slowly withdraw your hand, and lo, in your palm is the glowing Spirit
of the rose hued gem, which in a moment must be returned to its home.

Gentola--This is a marvellous lesson. Now I better comprehend what
you term the Spirit of things. How wondrously lovely is this glowing,
palpitating Spirit gem. Why, really, it appears to possess life. Oh,
must I so soon return it?

De L'Ester--Yes, unless you would have its now lustreless home quickly
vanish into imperceptible atoms. Touch with your finger tips the
material stone. Now we will break the circle, and you will have an
illustration of the Law of Affinity. Observe that as the Spirit is
being absorbed the material stone is regaining its glowing beauty, and
now it is as it was before its Spirit Self was attracted by Spirit on a
higher plane of Being.

Our experiment concluded, and your vital energy well nigh exhausted, we
must return you to your material home.

That we may intelligently direct our future movements, we now will
visit Vallo[a:], and George, Inez and your loving lad will accompany
you Earthward. If possible, to-morrow at nine o'clock, be in readiness
for our journey.

Au revoir.

Bernard--Oh, mother, I am so happy to be near you and to know that to
you I am as real as when in Earth life you tried to impress Spiritual
truths upon my very material mind. Never mind, mother, the Law of Self
atonement is a righteous law, and having emerged from the shadows of
earthly conditions to me the light is all the more glorious. Seeing
with clearer eyes, earnestly I desire and strive to grow in grace and
in a knowledge of all truths. Mother, is not this a strange experience?

Gentola--Very strange, my dear; so much so, that often I imagine that
I must have been dreaming strange dreams. While, as now, I am apart
from my physical body, it seems as real as is my daily home life, but
were it not that I have been made to keep a record of these journeys, I
would retain no realizing sense of them.

How quickly we have journeyed, and until to-morrow I must lose sight of
you dear ones.

Bernard--While you yet can see me, kiss me, mother, dear.

George--And kiss us, too, dear sister. Good-bye until to-morrow.

_January 12th, 1894._




CHAPTER XIII.

ENTO'S PRECIOUS STONES.


Bernard--Good-morning, mother, dear.

Gentola--Good-morning, my son, a thousand kisses for my dear boy.

De L'Ester--We, too, greet you, and regret that mentally you are so
disturbed. Pray console yourself; affairs seldom go so awry that they
cannot be righted. Soon yours will be so adjusted that you will not be
subjected to interruptions, which are harmful to you and vexatious to
us. Your west window is not sufficiently shaded. Be pleased to arrange
it. Now try to tranquillize yourself. Join with us in Invocation to the
One who is the Spirit of Harmony; thus we also will grow harmonious.

Infinite, Divine Intelligence of the Universe, we, the children of Thy
Love, aspire to grow into a more conscious realization that we are,
because that Thou art. As step by step, we strive to climb the ever
ascending heights of progress, Thou art our support. When, through our
weakness and lack of wisdom we go astray, Thou leadest us into straight
paths. Ever are we reaching toward Thee, who art our Father and our
Mother, and Thou givest Thy Angels charge concerning us. So will it
ever be, and lovingly we adore Thee, in Whom ever we will abide. Amen,
amen.

George, we are ready. Nay, dear lad, you will require all your
strength, for we are late and must journey quickly, but you shall
remain by your mother's side. Gentol[a:], previous to these visits to
Ento you could not have conceived an idea of the rapidity with which we
are traversing space.

Gentola--No, and I cannot yet realize it. We must be moving with the
velocity of lightning, still I perceive but a slight sensation of
motion. It seems as though we are nearly stationary, while space glides
away from us. As I grow accustomed to this sensation, I, too, at times
lose consciousness of time and space.

De L'Ester--To fully freed spirits this sensation is even less
emphasized. This leads me to mention that, upon becoming wholly freed,
Spirits, as a rule, are not for a time able to recall vivid memories
of their mortal existence. Upon attempting to manifest through some
Sensitive almost invariably they are asked, "What is your name?
Where did you live? When did you die?" The Spirit endeavors to place
himself or herself en rapport with physical conditions involving
time and space, and becomes too bewildered to give a correct reply.
Should some other Spirit be present, as is usual, the bewildered one
may be instructed as to how to make a proper statement. Those who
have made a study of the spiritual philosophy and phenomena possess
some understanding of the process of communication between the two
worlds, and though both their premises and conclusions may be faulty,
such knowledge as they may have acquired will, when they exchange
the physical for the spiritual, serve them well. Not only will it
prepare them for the surprises in store for them, but also for a more
intelligent and intelligible return into the conditions of their mortal
existence.

Gently, gently George, we must not forget that neither your sister or
Bernard are as strong as some time they will be.

There are our friends awaiting us. Lohaû, ēmentos. Ah, Zenest[a:], you
are ever punctual, and you, Humboldt and Bruno, shame us for our late
arrival. It seems very ungallant to say that Gentol[a:] belated us.

Gentola--Nevertheless it is true, and I beg your indulgence. I am
learning that things temporal are likely to conflict with things
spiritual, and this morning I have had an unpleasant demonstration
of the fact. However, I believe that it was less my fault than my
misfortune to be unprepared at the appointed time.

De L'Ester--As we, the jury, are in possession of the facts, we
unanimously pronounce you not guilty, and now we will proceed to the
department we visited yesterday. Here is the venerable antiquary still
patiently poring over the story of the D[a:]-Hûlos.

Zenesta--I sympathize with the earnest, gentle looking man, for
I recall having passed many days and sleepless nights in similar
undertakings. For many minds there is a peculiar fascination in
striving to translate an unknown language. I well remember what delight
it once afforded me, and the charm of it yet clings to me. But here is
our geologist who will afford you further instruction in relation to
these gems.

Hugh Miller--Madame, we first will observe this magnificent collection
of sapphires which are so varied in their hues, so large and
beautifully cut that they challenge our highest admiration.

Gentola--They are indeed wonderfully beautiful gems. It is a delight
to only look at them. You say that oriental rubies are a species of
sapphire. Why, I supposed that all sapphires were blue. And this, you
say, is an oriental amethyst, which also is of the sapphire family. I
fear that you think me, as indeed I am, very ignorant in this direction.

Hugh Miller--My dear madame, we do not expect you to be learned as
to the varieties or qualities of these collections of gems; I am only
concerned in instructing you for a purpose. The blue varieties are the
true sapphires, as they alone possess both quality and color. They bear
to both the oriental amethyst and ruby the same relation that the true
white diamond bears to stones off color.

Gentola--Pardon me if I am interrupting you. Here is a gem--that one
resting on the white cushion--that is so large, so radiantly beautiful,
that one can imagine it of Celestial origin. Is it not a true sapphire?
Yes? Ah, I thought so; it possesses such a living radiance. Since I
have learned that gems are both Spirit and matter, I shall admire them
all the more. How very lovely those rainbow-hued gems are; are they not
opals?

Hugh Miller--Yes, they are opals, in whose depths the Spirit of the
gem glows like fire. Some persons regard these gems as uncanny. Some
time I will tell you something uncanny concerning them. No, not now;
it would be unwise. A sober-minded scientist would declare that it is
through the arrangement of the silicious matter largely composing these
gems that the iridescent effects are produced. Such an assertion would
be but part of a fact. Spirit is infinite in its modes of expression,
and were it withdrawn from those gems, bits of flint would be quite
as valuable as those glowing, scintillating jewels, which are lovely
enough to adorn the Crown of an Empress. Now, madame, what do you
suppose these green gems are? Emeralds? No, they are beryls; and these
are aqua marines; they are of the same family, the aqua marines being
the transparent variety. Yes, both are pretty stones. In this adjoining
compartment is an admirable collection of--but perhaps you know what
they are.

Gentola--From their color I should think that they are topazes. I do
not greatly admire yellow jewels.

Hugh Miller--Do not make the mistake of thinking that all topazes are
yellow, for there are other colors of the same gem, but the pellucid
yellow stone is considered the most desirable variety. These are
garnets, and are fine specimens of the stone. Here are deep red ones
holding in their hearts imprisoned flames and yellow stones like bits
of sunshine. And here are green, brown and black varieties, all more or
less attractive and useful for various purposes. The next compartment
contains carbuncles and some of them are beautiful enough to grace a
coronet. Yes, there is a resemblance between the carbuncle and the red
garnet, but their qualities are dissimilar.

You have been shown this collection of jewels as a demonstration of
their existence on this planet, and be assured that the Entoans, like
our Earth peoples, regard them with high favor. For lack of time we
cannot critically examine this wonderfully fine and comprehensive
collection of stones and minerals, whose exact counterparts are
portions of Earth's treasures.

You express surprise that this enormously valuable collection is not
better protected against evil-minded persons. Perhaps Inidor[a:] or
Genessano may enlighten us as to that and other features pertaining to
this department.

Inidora--Previous to the death of our father, he made known to my
brother and me that he possessed a large and valuable collection of
jewels which were the accumulations of generations of both his and our
mother's ancestry, and that some of them, through certain associations,
were especially prized. The ruby which Gentol[a:] held in her palm
belonged to our dear mother, who received it as a bridal gift from her
mother, and it was worn sometimes on the arm or bosom, but generally
as a brow ornament. Our maternal grandparents possessed a remarkably
fine collection of gems, which, at their death, our dear mother, who
was their only child, inherited, and as with our father gem collecting
was a passion, and as he also had inherited many rarely fine gems, it
came about that at his death my brother and I found ourselves possessed
of these joint accumulations of Ento's most beautiful and valuable
jewels. As neither my brother or I desired to marry, we entered into an
agreement concerning them that was mutually satisfactory.

I need not more than refer to the desires and plans of our parents to
found at Camariss[a:] a great Galarēs[a:] which should be of lasting
benefit to the children of Ento. But I may say that our minds were as
one in our desire to carry out their wishes, and that we might speedily
accomplish our purpose, we resolved that our vast inheritance should
be devoted to accomplishing the object so near our hearts. As we were
young and inexperienced, we counselled with our Supreme Ruler, Tyvon
Oiranz[a:], who was a man of most generous views, and he encouraged
and aided us in various ways. So with the enthusiasm of youth and with
ample means at our command, we began to prepare for the inception of
our work, and soon, to our boundless joy, we saw our cherished plans
taking form. As the massive walls began to rise, our hearts were
filled with exultation and as the great structure assumed proportions
and the various outer departments began to environ it, we grew so
excited, so absorbed, that we scarcely ate or slept. Day and night
we counselled together and planned for the glory and usefulness of
the Institution which for all time should stand as a reminder of our
honored and adored parents. As though it were but yesterday, I recall
the last conversation between my brother and myself relating to this
Galarēs[a:]. The day had been sultry and the darkening clouds gave
intimation of a storm, but in our eagerness to hasten the work we had
labored until the day was nearly ended, and as we slowly walked toward
our nearby home, the lurid Sun was dropping below the further shore of
Indolois[a:]'s quiet waters. Suddenly Genessano passed an arm about my
shoulders, and in a voice tremulous from emotion, said, "Inidor[a:],
what if death should come to one or both of us ere our work shall be
completed? May Andûman[a:] preserve us, for what should I do shouldst
thou be taken and I left? Should I be taken, thy wisdom would suffice
for thy needs, but I, alas! I dare not further speak of it."

As we gazed into each others' startled faces tears filled our eyes, and
sadly, silently, we entered our home, the dread shadow of Phra (death)
falling over our hearts like a pall. But I strove to be courageous,
and at once set about arranging our affairs so that should Phra, at an
untimely hour, claim me, Genessano would understand my wishes which I
well knew he would make his own. Ere long Genessano was left to execute
our mutual wishes which he did with faithfulness and zeal. Heavy
hearted he labored until death claimed him, and to others was left the
fulfillment of our plans. That they did so faithfully and efficiently
no one can question.

Concerning the security of the gems, I have only to say that the
Galarēs[a:] and all pertaining to it belongs to the peoples of Ento
and they are not so foolish or so evil minded as to despoil their own
possessions.

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], the time allotted for this series of object
lessons has expired, and to the Galarēs[a:] and our friend the
antiquary who is tranquilly dozing, we will say au revoir.

We now will view Camariss[a:], so that you may form an idea of its
extent, its architecture and other features. Observe this slope
largely is devoted to detached private residences, and that the
wide, beautifully paved streets intersect at right angles. At
each intersection is a statue or group of statuary, or a fountain,
or column, or other ornamental feature. This group of heroic size
represents Genessano Allis Immo and his wife, through whom this great
city honors itself by bearing her name. These statues are faithful
representations of two of the most admirable spirits I ever have met.
Yes, Genessano is very like his father, and Inidor[a:] resembles his
mother, who is a marvellously lovely woman.

From the slopes eastward the city extends about ten English miles,
but from its northern to its southern limit is quite twenty English
miles. Being the head of the Irrigating and Waterways System, naturally
a large population has centred here and it is, with the exception of
one other, the most populous and wealthy city of Ento. The population
is about one million seven hundred thousand, and it is the greatest
manufacturing and commercial city on the Planet.

Beneficent, indeed, was the conception and execution of the System
which has recovered for the uses of the people lands which long ago
would have become deserts. The system now extends more than four
thousand miles, and rapidly is progressing toward encircling the
planet. On our planet the undertaking would not be considered feasible,
but with the means at command of the Entoans, it is not now regarded
as extraordinary. With them the science of engineering in all its
expressions is far in advance of what is known of it on Earth. Then,
too, they so well understand the energies of electricity and vibration
that, if they desired, they might shatter their planet into fragments.
Looking along the waterway we see lofty columns whose massive bases
are of stone, but the columns are of a metal known to the Entoans as
Flaûen. It is very light and very ductile. As yet it is unknown on
Earth. The elements do not corrode it, and it is a non-conductor
of electricity, which renders it suitable for this and some other
purposes. Those columns are used as electric light towers, and so
high is the illuminating power that it well nigh turns night into
day. Electricity as an illuminant and for all possible purposes is so
cheaply procured as to be within the means of all requiring its use.
Throughout the irrigated belt and on most portions of Ento there are
Stations where thoroughly trained persons attend to the production and
distribution of electric currents, and so valued is life that accidents
are of very rare occurrence.

Were we not obliged to hasten our movements, we would take you through
some of those stately as well as through some of those less pretentious
residences. As you perceive there are no mean or squalid homes.
Nowhere on Ento are there impoverished persons, and everywhere there
is cleanliness, comfort and more or less of the elegancies of culture.
Ento has progressed beyond the crime of privileged classes, those
generators of debauchery and poverty. Industry is made obligatory upon
all able to work and few, excepting the very aged, are unable to labor.
Right living engenders health and aside from their dread of death which
depresses them mentally, consequently physically, the Entoans live
righteously and enjoy length of days.

No, there are no jails, penitentiaries, or almshouses. Those whom age,
accident, disease or other causes have rendered helpless, are cared
for, not as paupers, but as hapless children of Andûman[a:] for whom
it is a pleasure and a duty to provide. Alcohol in its various forms
is a commercial commodity, but drunkenness is forbidden and unknown.
Chastity is universal. Polygamous relations do not exist. Official
corruption or betrayal of a trust are reckoned as heinous crimes
against society, and no one seems inclined to sin in either direction.
Have I answered all your questions?

Gentola--Yes, all that occur to me at this time, and while paying
close attention to your replies I have been gazing at this great and
beautiful city and those wonderful Air Transports, rising like huge
birds, then moving away so steadily, so noiselessly, save for that
singing sound which is rather agreeable. I am curious to see their
mechanism, but first allow me to see more of Camariss[a:]. When all
those great light towers are ablaze, from this elevation the view must
be magnificent. You have said that some time I should see Ento by
night. Pray do not forget your promise.

With all my heart I wish that some of our Earth architects might see
some of those grandly beautiful temples and public buildings. I miss
one feature of our temple architecture, which is the spire, but I
consider those great shining domes with their delicate ornamentation,
far more beautiful.

What flower lovers the Entoans must be. Wherever we have gone there is
such an exquisite display of blooms that constantly I am wishing that I
might carry some of them home with me, and really it seems odd that I
cannot.

See that great vessel coming so swiftly along the waterway and what a
swarm of smaller ones go darting along the street canals. De L'Ester,
how are they propelled?

De L'Ester--By an electric appliance. On Ento an understanding of the
science of mechanics is far in advance of the same on Earth. You may
have observed that in persons who have lost or never have possessed the
sense of sight, there is an abnormal development of other senses, for
nature ever is striving to maintain an equilibrium. Thus, the Entoans,
whose religious beliefs have for so long stood as an impassable barrier
between them and an understanding of certain sciences, notably
of astronomy and to a degree of geology, have developed in other
directions.

You have expressed a desire for a closer view of the Air Transports,
so we will visit yonder Station. I will assist you. Look downward now.
Is not Camariss[a:] a wonderfully beautiful city? Ah me, it will be a
long time before Earth will possess a city so free from the blemishes
of poverty and degradation. The architecture, the statues, fountains
and other features form such a harmonious and charming picture that one
is constrained to admire the genius and culture of a people capable of
presenting such fine effects. I have said that the Entoans make small
use of more than two motive powers. I must correct that statement,
for, to a very considerable extent, for certain purposes, they also
use compressed and liquefied air. We now will descend to the Station.
None of our present party are learned as to electrical appliances,
but we may enlighten you a little. One of a line of Transports is
about to rise, and it is laden with passengers and merchandise. Stored
electricity is the motive power of this and of most Air Transports,
but all are provided with Generators, to if necessary, increase the
supply. It is not advisable to attempt a detailed description of the
form and dimensions of this Transport, which is one of average size,
but I shall call your attention to its principal features. You perceive
that underneath and running its entire length is a cylindrical shaft
of the metal known as Flaûen. Around it, arranged spirally, are huge
Flaûen fans, which are set in motion by the swift revolutions of the
screw like cylinder. At the rear is a fan shaped Flaûen structure,
which presently you will see revolving with tremendous velocity. Across
the front is this great horizontal Flaûen rod, which is held in place
by strong metal sockets, in which it revolves. The ends or arms of
the rod, extending on either side, are surrounded by Vossal[a:][a:]
(climbers). When the Transport rises you will better understand this
part of its mechanism. All Transports are cigar shaped, so that they
may offer slight resistance to the atmosphere and when they alight,
those compressed air cylinders prevent concussion.

The doorways are being closed. From the windows the passengers call
Info Oovist[a:][a:] (adieus) and now the Transport is about to
rise. Now the fan encircled, cylindrical shaft and the arms of the
Vossal[a:][a:] begin to revolve, the climbers, like great wings, open
out and the Transport, with long sweeping undulations rises, rises, and
at an altitude of a thousand or more feet, goes eastward.

To at all understand the construction of these truly wonderful
Air Carriers one must be versed in both mechanics and electrical
engineering, and we are not learned in either of them. Do not make the
mistake of thinking that Spirits know everything; we know only what we
have learned, and we are and ever will be students in a school which
never graduates its pupils.

Another transport is about to rise and we will be invisible passengers.
All aboard, friends. Now we rise for a hundred feet or so; now we dip a
little; again we rise, and with an undulating movement we have ascended
far above Camariss[a:], which sits among the shining waters and under
the silvery mist veiling, but not concealing its beauties.

Genessano--Gentol[a:], let me ask you to turn your gaze toward the
Galarēs[a:]. Is not it a grandly beautiful structure? And even at this
distance, you may perceive the majestic form and benignant face of my
father smiling us a farewell.

Gentola--It is indeed grandly beautiful. Its lofty, cream-tinted walls
surmounted by those magnificent statues, and its great, shining dome
towering toward the blue sky, present a most charming spectacle. I
clearly perceive the statue of your father, whose majestic form and
benignant face will retain a place in my memories of Ento.

De L'Ester--The leaves of the climbers and the fans of the cylindrical
shaft are revolving with tremendous velocity, and the Transport is
moving through the air, nearly a hundred miles an hour; yet one
perceives only a slight vibration. The entire mechanism is under
perfect control of the engineer and his assistants, and not for a
moment do they relax their alert attention to their duties. The
passengers, who appear quite at their ease, converse or gaze from
the windows at the widespread panorama. We will repair to the rear
platform, which will afford us a finer view. No, accidents scarcely
ever occur to these aërial conveyances.

Gentola--How marvellous this all is. This swiftly moving Transport,
like a great bird flying through the air, and yonder wonderful System
of Irrigation and Waterways on which vessels great and small are
passing in all directions. At night, when those great light towers
illumine cities, towns and country, the scene must be enchanting. Two
features of Ento strike me forcibly. One is the universally apparent
prosperity of its peoples, the other is the architecture of cities,
towns and country places. Even the country houses are picturesque
and very pretty. I do not recall that I have seen one squalid, mean
dwelling. I shall not soon forget the first time I stood in the Court
of Honor of the White City of our World's Fair. It looked so familiar,
so like some scenes that some time, somewhere, I had beheld, that a
sense of bewilderment came over me, and for a time I thought that I
must have dreamed of some similar scene. Then you, De L'Ester, spoke
to me, and I recalled that on Ento I had beheld structures and scenes
similar to, but far more beautiful than those presented by the Court of
Honor. No, I do not as distinctly remember these Ento experiences as I
remember some dreams which really sometimes come true.

Bruno--By some persons dreams are regarded as the reflex of incidents
and impressions of waking hours, and frequently they are the result of
more or less related and distorted images, which from time to time are
impressed upon the Animal Soul, or so termed objective consciousness.
But there are dreams and dreams. A genius, so called, is a Sensitive
whose waking dreams are the conceptions of exalted Spirit minds,
reflected or projected upon his or her aura, which, like a mirror,
receives the impression and in turn reflects it upon the brain of the
Sensitive. To the great poet Sensitive come the words and rhythm of
songs which stir the hearts of the world. To the great sculptor comes a
waking dream of beauty, and from marble he releases a form so flawless
that through centuries it commands the adoring admiration of artistic
souls. To the great painter comes a conception of enchanting scenes
or of forms and faces whose witchery enthralls all beholders. To the
great architect, the true builder, come ideals so exalted that neither
human intelligence or human hands have yet executed them. Ask the great
architect and builder of your time, if he has even once succeeded in
embodying his highest ideal of his art, and I do not hesitate in saying
that he will answer no, no.

Be assured that all so called geniuses are Sensitives, whose births
were not of yesterday, for to spirit there is neither beginning or
ending.

Ento's fine architecture is the result of impressions received not only
from exalted Ento Spirits, but also from Spirits of other Planetary
Spirit Realms. As there can be but One Mind in the Universe, all its
expressions must vibrate in harmony with either its major or its minor
chords; thus, the architects, designers and other artists who spoke
into form and color, your beautiful White City, were as truly inspired
as were some of olden times, who declared, Thus "saith the Lord."

De L'Ester--Below us is Gandûlan[a:]'s shining waters, extending from
north to south, a little more than one hundred miles. From its western
to its eastern shore its length is quite sixty miles. You perceive
that its outline is nearly oval, and that at intervals its shores are
dotted with towns and villages, whose inhabitants are engaged in the
various pursuits of well conducted communities. In the larger towns are
manufacturing and commercial interests, but residents of the villages
are engaged in cultivating the surrounding lands. For the convenience
of transportation and for the retention of the yearly over-flow,
Ento's lakes and rivers have been greatly enlarged; thus, the depth
of Gandûlan[a:] Lois[a:] nearly equals that of Indolois[a:]. Ento's
atmosphere being extremely humid, and the rain and snowfall of both
the northern and southern hemispheres being very heavy, since time
immemorial it has been necessary to provide means of protection against
the annual inundation, which comes and goes with phenomenal rapidity.

All over the cultivated portions of the planet are artificial lakes of
considerable extent, which really are storage receptacles, at times,
of much needed water. What were the principal causes leading to the
aridity of the Equatorial lands? We have informed you that largely it
was through the levelling of the planet, which led to extreme porosity
of the soil. But another factor contributed to the calamity. Previous
to and for centuries after the establishment of the national religion,
the Entoans were so unwise as to, for various purposes, denude the
equatorial forests. In time they perceived their error, and during
later centuries they have been endeavoring to restore them, thereby
increasing the rainfall and oxygenating the impoverished atmosphere.
Yes, we know that ages ago the equatorial regions were traversed
by mountain ranges that now are mere vestiges of their once lofty
grandeur, and where now are desert lands, were lakes and abounding
water courses. Once Gandûlan[a:] Lois[a:] was one of a series of great
fresh water lakes, extending far toward the northeast, but for many an
Ento century previous to the inception of the Irrigating and Waterways
System it had been an ever lessening and isolated lake. Since then
it has been greatly deepened. Naturally, the equatorial lands have
suffered from the levelling process to a greater degree than have the
lands of the temperate and colder regions. The temperature of the
equatorial regions being high, induces rapid evaporation, and the soil
to a great depth being very porous, it so quickly absorbs water that
the flood of to-day is the drought of to-morrow. Thus the necessity of
water storage is apparent.

Beneath us is the eastern shore of Gandûlan[a:] Lois[a:], which marks
the boundary line between the Provinces of Ondû and of Wy[a:]mo.
Camariss[a:], the capital city of Ondû, is a little south of the
equatorial line, which at this moment we have crossed, and now the
Transport is descending to the large town on the lake shore. Down,
down, we are dropping. How carefully the descent is regulated, and with
what precision the Transport alights upon the platform. Gentol[a:],
observe the passengers as they descend from the transport.

Gentola--That is what I am doing. That magisterial looking personage,
wearing a white robe, bordered with purple, has exceedingly fine eyes,
so large, so brilliant, so full of expression. And that swarthy
gentleman, robed in dark blue, with gold embroidered collar and
sleeves, is a very striking figure. What a number of passengers there
are. Some are very dark complexioned, others less so, and here are two
men and a woman, who are blue eyed, very fair complexioned, and they
have the loveliest blonde hair, waving quite to their shoulders. I
must say that of all the Entoans I have seen, not one could be called
ill-favored, and very few less than handsome. Then their sincere and
gentle expression, their nobility of carriage and pensive gravity of
manner inspire me with both admiration and sympathy, especially so,
since I have come to understand their hopeless religious belief.

Yes, I greatly admire the clothing worn by both men and women. The
Robes worn by those gentlemen add much to the grace and dignity of
their appearance, but the Robes worn by the women, to my mind, are
still more admirable. They are not so voluminous as to conceal the
outlines of the form, and at the waist line they are loosely confined
by beautiful girdles of various designs and materials. As to fabrics,
style of cut, and ornamentation, there is much diversity, but all are
more or less attractive, and certainly they must be comfortable. No, I
have not on Ento seen one shabbily clothed person, which is more than
I can say of our planet, for among the many millions of earth there
are multitudes of poor, degraded, wretched beings, whose poverty,
misery and rags are a continual protest against the selfish inhumanity
of those of higher estate. It seems strange that although the peoples
of our planet for the most part believe in a continuity of existence,
they live as though the present existence is the end of all. Each
man's hand is against his brother, and among nations the struggle
for place and power drenches our world with blood and our prisons,
almshouses, asylums for the insane are filled with criminals and other
unfortunates. Compared with the gentle, civilized, unbelieving Entoans,
we are uncivilized, believing savages. I no longer wonder that to the
Spirit Worlds our Planet is known as the Sorrowful Star.

De L'Ester--Patience, patience, Gentol[a:]. Although the contrast
between Ento's and Earth's social conditions is very marked, evolution
means progress, and slowly, but surely, the peoples of our planet are
emerging into higher conceptions of truth. Inevitably, a period will
arrive when the surface of Earth will have become as level as is the
surface of Ento. Just so surely a period will arrive when the unequal
social conditions of Earth will be a thing of the past, and there will
be a universal recognition of the rights of all. What is it, Genessano?

Genessano--I wish Gentol[a:] to observe the person who, at this
moment, is ascending the steps of the Transport. He is a Priest of
the Inner Sanctuary of the Temple Zim. One of those with whom the
Gods commune. One whom we would term a Sensitive. Accompanying him
are several Novices, who have not yet made Vows of Consecration. I
recall days of long ago, when as youths, Inidor[a:] and I knelt before
Priests of this Order, receiving from them instruction relating to our
religion. To us they then appeared too holy to share the common fate
of Andûman[a:]'s other children. Indeed, outside of their Order, no
one ever learns of their death. They disappear and no one questions
as to what has become of them. Knowing this, our boyish imagination
invested them not only with uncommon sanctity, but, as did our parents,
with a certain mystery. You have become aware that usually Spirits can
read the thoughts of mortals, and thus I can say that, as a rule the
priesthood of Ento, especially the Sensitive Priests, serve sincerely
their conception of the Infinite One. It may interest you to learn
that the Ento name of this order is Oimû vosten-d[a:] fanûlist[a:],
which in your language, De L'Ester says, would mean "consecrated to
the mystery." It is true that they are consecrated to a mystery which
they wholly misunderstand. Being Sensitives, they commune with Spirits
on a level with or possibly above the level of their own spiritual
evolvement, who still cling to and encourage them in an observance of
the old superstitions.

For the reason that a peculiar qualification is requisite, the number
of Priests admitted into this Order is quite limited. Of course, we
understand that the qualification is the Sensitive condition.

De L'Ester--Friends, as the Transport is about to rise, we will embark.
George, George, you are incorrigible. Gentol[a:], if you lend yourself
to participation in his mischievous pranks you will demoralize those
staid Entoans. By your touches on his face and hands, you have so
disconcerted that Official that he has quite forgotten the dignity of
his position. It is amusing to see him turning this way and that, in
a vain quest for the person who has taken such uncourteous liberties.
Gentol[a:], with all your gravity you, too, are inclined for a bit of
fun.

Gentola--It is the old story: George did tempt me and I weakly yielded.
That Official looked so serene and so very dignified that I felt a
strong desire to startle him. His expression of dismay as he looked
at his hands and rubbed his face and found no one near him, who could
have touched him, was most laughable. He still looks disturbed and
thoughtful. If he could hear me, I would ask his pardon.

George--Upon my word, I think he might hear you. I perceived that he
is a very sensitive person, else I should not have asked you to touch
him. Shall we test him, De L'Ester?

De L'Ester--Not now. The Transport is rising and we must not delay our
journey. We will remain on the balcony, so that Gentol[a:] and Bernard
may view the country.

We still are passing in a direction north of east, and across the
Province of Wy[a:]mo, which is more extensive than is Ondû. You
perceive that the surface of the country grows a trifle more rugged,
and now we are passing over the diamond bearing locality, spoken of by
Inidor[a:]. Though unlearned in the sciences of civil and hydraulic
engineering, one realizes the wonderful skill through which this
vast area of irrigation and navigation is controlled, so that even
during the season of floods, no disasters occur. The elevation we are
crossing is a vestige of an ancient mountain range. Not seriously
interfering with the System, it was because of its picturesqueness,
left undisturbed. Its length is about one hundred miles and at
intervals there are natural rifts through which this Waterway and
canals have been carried. Later you will observe that Ento's Waterways
are double; that is, there is the Waterway proper and its Feeder, which
at times furnishes such supplies of water as may be needed to keep the
main Waterway at a proper depth. Yes, the Feeder is for small vessels
navigable, but as you will see a large portion of the System, you
will better understand this matter. You perceive that the height is
clothed with verdure and dotted with residences, istoir[a:]s and other
structures. How prolific this region is, yet not so very long ago it
was nearly a desert. Now its large population obtains from its rich
lands not only ample sustenance for themselves, but great quantities
of grains, vegetables and fruits are exported to other localities.
All manner of tropical fruits are grown, and I can assure you that
some varieties are very like some fruits grown in our own tropical
countries. I know your fear of ridicule through making such statements.
Do not concern yourself. Your astronomers and other scientists of less
than half a century hence, will have obtained information concerning
Ento that now they do not even dream of.

Our journey of to-day embraces a portion of the Irrigating and
Waterways System, which is continuous toward the east. I have mentioned
that the system is about 1,400 English miles wide, and that at this
time it is more than 4,000 miles long. Understand that I now am
speaking of the system embracing the equatorial desert lands, and
other arid lands adjacent, for, as you will have occasion to observe,
irrigation is general all over the arable portions of the planet, and
I do not wish to have you confound the general with the _special_
System, which is a most scientific work and quite apart from ordinary
methods of irrigation. The waterway which now is beneath us, runs in a
straight line to Lois[a:] Taimon, which we are nearing. On its shores
are many towns, villages and a not very extensive city, named Gûlnoyas
(crescent shaped). There is another city--but of that I shall not now
speak. A feature of Ento is that wherever there is a body or stream of
fresh water, there the people congregate. Thus, around Taimon there
is a dense population, many of whom farm the rich and fertile lands
beneath us. Next to death, the Entoans dread isolation and darkness. By
a residence in cities, towns and villages they escape both.

Gentola--Why is it that to-day we have seen no animals?

De L'Ester--For the reason that Ento's orientals seldom, if ever, eat
meat. For other purposes they do not require animals. No, there are
no positive religious restrictions relating to the eating of meat,
but orientals do not seem to care for it, and then nearly all Entoans
shrink from taking life, even of animals.

Climatic conditions on this, as on other planets, exercise a strong
influence in the selection of human foods. In the colder regions an
oleaginous diet is necessary. In temperate climes this requirement is
less marked, and in oriental countries generally there is a positive
aversion for animal food. Aside from climatic influences there is
another factor to be recognized. As humans evolve beyond the influence
of the animal plane, they grow less inclined to kill that they may eat.
This is a universal, though generally unrecognized law. In earlier
ages, the Entoans, to a greater extent than now, were meat eaters, and
at present, in colder climes, the people consume larger quantities of
various fishes, which rather illogically, they scarcely regard as meat.
As air transports bear to them the products of all lands, they do so
from choice.

Yonder is Taimon, the beautiful, reflecting in its placid depths,
fleecy clouds and sapphire sky. That it might serve as part of the
System centuries ago, it, like Gandûlan[a:] Lois[a:], was greatly
deepened; otherwise the huge vessels traversing the waterways could
not ride on their waters. On your first visit to Ento you saw in the
distance something resembling railway cars. You now may have a closer
view of Ento's Tuzamos, for yonder is a long train drawing into a
station, nearby the Transport Station to which we are descending. Those
tramway carriages traverse a large portion of the Planet, the motive
power being electric. We will not await the landing of the transport,
but will proceed to the Tuzamo Station, where doubtless we shall find
matters of interest to you two voyagers. First, we will visit this
telegraphic station where dispatches are being sent to and received
from all portions of the Planet. We are not learned in this marvel of
atmospheric telegraphy, which is the system generally in use on Ento.
By means of this delicate mechanism, which appears so simple, but is
so complex, messages instantaneously reach any designated point. The
clumsier method of ground currents, still to a limited extent, connects
rural Istoir[a:]s with Temples. Not for many centuries have wires been
used. Ground currents superseded that system, which in turn has been
set aside by the atmospheric system. We have informed you that the
entire public service of Ento is under the supervision and control of
the general government, which holds all officials and employes to a
strict account of their several duties. The general government not only
controls, but also owns, the Tuzamo System, the Transport System, the
Irrigating and Waterways System, the Telegraphic and other Systems in
which the interests of all the peoples are concerned. The lands, too,
are owned by the general government, and no proprietor occupies more
than a specified acreage, which in no case exceeds the needs of his
or her household. On occupied lands there is a rental, or taxation,
which is so slight as to be far from oppressive, and the revenues
derived from this and other sources are used for the support of the
general government, and for the prosecution of enterprises for the
general good. Always, residences and other improvements, belong to the
proprietor and may be sold or transferred.

Bernard--Mother, dear, although this spacious Station and all
pertaining to it is new to you and to me, and those people of various
races are, in size, dress and other peculiarities, somewhat unlike our
earth people, still there is such a strong, general resemblance to them
and to this scene that I scarcely can realize that I am on another
Planet. Then, look at those Tuzamos, are not they in appearance, very
like our Railway Cars?

De L'Ester--Certainly, their construction is similar to that of our
railway cars, but if you will observe closely you will perceive that
they present several striking differences. For instance, the driving
wheels are enormously large, and there are three sets of truck wheels,
the middle set running in the groove of the central rail, and the rails
are not in sections, all being firmly welded into continuity, which
greatly adds to their permanence and to the safety of those connected
with the Tuzamo service, or who travel in those elegantly appointed
carriages. Genessano, can you inform us as to when Tuzamos first came
into use on Ento?

Genessano--I am not quite certain, but Inidor[a:] may know. Inidor[a:],
ino intess[a:] varo mûy[a:] Tuzamos inga fosdû?

Inidora--At the time of the Establishment of the National Religion
they were known, for in the Sacred Writings they are referred to, and
not as though they then were a modern invention. I recall that during
my mortal existence I saw pictured representations of those ancient
conveyances, which were quite unlike these admirably constructed and
artistically finished carriages.

George--I have been looking about the city and if you are through with
your observation of the Tuzamos, I can promise Gentol[a:] and Bernard a
view of something that may interest them.

De L'Ester--Come, friends, and learn what our enterprising Englishman
has discovered. Gentol[a:], allow me to assist you. Ah, a temple, and
how beautiful it is. In form it is perfectly circular, with great
flights of steps surrounding about two-thirds of its circumference.
It is built of white marble, and from base to dome its walls are
so covered with intricate and delicate sculpture that it presents
the appearance of beautiful filmy lace. George, this will interest
more than Gentol[a:] and Bernard, for this is the first time that
Inidor[a:], Genessano or I have seen this somewhat noted Temple
Soy[a:]von Teliss[a:]. (Name of Andûman[a:]'s cup bearer.) Gentol[a:],
you will attempt a description of its interior, but as you are not apt
at estimating dimensions, I will say that its diameter is about one
hundred and twenty feet, and that its height from the floor to the apex
of the dome is quite one hundred feet. You now will proceed.

Gentola--Though it is not so spacious or so magnificent as some of the
temples of Camariss[a:], to my mind it is the most beautiful temple I
ever have seen. The walls are marvels of decoration in tinted woods,
paintings and sculpture, which I cannot attempt to describe. The seats
are arranged as in an amphitheater, thus affording a full view of
the altar, which is in the centre of the temple and directly under
the dome. The altar of pure white marble is circular in form, and it
rises tier above tier to a height, I should say, of thirty feet, and
is surmounted by a wonderfully lovely life-size female figure, whose
marble lips are parted by a smile of adorable sweetness. The three
tiers are supported by flower-wreathed marble columns and male and
female forms, their drapery falling about them in such filmy folds that
it seems as though a breath of air might stir it.

Each tier of the altar is sculptured in designs of grains, fruits and
flowers, so delicate, so exquisite, that one scarcely can believe it
the work of mortals. On the lower tier are great golden bowls filled
with grains and fruits, and the air is perfumed with the fragrance of
flowers, whose yellow and crimson blooms are in vivid contrast with the
snowy altar and its adornments. The floor is a mosaic, realistically
representing the azure sky, and radiating from the base of the altar
of sun rays in shades of red and yellow. The temple is lighted through
the great crystal dome, whose blended sun-rays, falling downward onto
the whiteness of the altar, produce an indescribably beautiful and
peculiar effect. Over the temple entrances are inscriptions which you,
Zenest[a:], will be kind enough to translate into my language.

Zenesta Hao--I shall do so with pleasure. Over the eastern entrance
is inscribed, "To Andûman[a:], the Supreme One, Who giveth life and
all that is." Over the northern entrance I read, "Divine Messengers of
Andûman[a:], we implore you to bear to Him our ceaseless supplications
for prolonged life." Over the southern entrance is a prayer which is
the keynote of all Ento prayers. "Sorrowfully, but submissively, we
yield ourselves to Thy decrees, oh Thou Who at Thy pleasure createst
and destroyest."

Gentol[a:], you have come to realize that love of life is the dominant
desire of my people, and I who remember the desolation which death
brought into my own mortal existence can well understand their ever
increasing dread of the certain approach of the unseen, relentless God
Phra (death).

Observe that the western doorway opens into a lofty and wide hallway,
leading to the residence of the high priest and his attendant Priests
and Priestesses. It now is on the stroke of the noon hour, and in all
the temples of Ento prayers and offerings will be made to Andûman[a:]
and His Messengers. You now will resume your descriptive remarks.

Gentola--In the gallery over the western doorway male and female
voices, accompanied by the low tones of a voûhoid[a:] (resembles a pipe
organ) chant softly and continuously. Now the wide doors slide into the
wall, and six boys clothed in red garments enter, bearing golden bowls
filled with grain. They are followed by six girls clothed in yellow,
who bear golden trays of various fruits. Ranging themselves around the
altar, these children place upon it the bowls of grain and trays of
fruit, and retire backward a short distance. Now six youths and as many
maidens approach; the youths bear vases of red, the maidens, vases of
yellow blooms, which also are placed on the altar, and all retire to
near where the children with an expectant air are standing. Quietly
the worshippers have entered, and the chanting of the singers and the
strains of the voûhoid[a:] have grown so mournfully pathetic that I
cannot refrain from tears.

Now the music swells into fuller tones, and with stately tread a
majestic looking Priest advances through the western doorway. He is
clothed in a rich silken red robe, and around his head, holding back
from his forehead his dark, abundant, waved hair is a gold fillet
ornamented with red jewels. Over his forehead the fillet supports a
Sun of red and yellow jewels which are dazzling in their splendor.
In his left hand he carries a long golden rod tipped with a Sun of
red and yellow jewels. As he approaches the altar the people rise,
and with bowed heads stand motionless. Attending him are priests and
priestesses robed in red and yellow, wearing gold fillets adorned with
red and yellow jewelled Suns which gleam against their dusky hair.
Now the high priest raises the Sun tipped rod toward the dome. The
attendant Priests and Priestesses with uplifted hands bend low before
the altar. The people still stand with bowed heads, and the voûhoid[a:]
seems to be murmuring a wordless prayer as he passes around the altar,
touching with the rod each bowl and vase. Having made the circuit of
the altar he bends low toward the east, the north, the south, and the
west, and now, with upturned face, he extends his hands toward the sun
crowned dome, and his lips utter words that I do not understand. Now
as he turns toward the altar his dark hued face glowing with religious
fervor, his luminous eyes shining with the brightness of the jewelled
Sun above his forehead, his majestic form towering above the low
bending worshippers, one might imagine him a veritable God. Zenest[a:],
I beg of you to conclude the description of this scene.

Zenesta Hao--The sun is at its meridian, and its glowing radiance,
falling through the red and gold of the dome, glorifies the snowy altar
and the high priest, who with upraised arms reverently intones a prayer.

High Priest--Andûman[a:], onos zelois[a:] noifen finos endess[a:] raos
t[a:] valo, mûyen quandest[a:]. Raos t[a:] flûen, tsensen toivan oomii.
Neffan imh[a:] vamûny[a:] ēdist[a:] oimen. Endemiss[a:] kenoit[a:]
lotas talit[a:] Neffan doy[a:] tēman gamin[a:]s Di[a:][a:]. R[a:]û.
R[a:]û. R[a:]û.

Zenesta Hao--The midday service is concluded, and to the tremulous
tones of the voûhoid[a:] and the low chanting of the Singers, the High
Priest followed by his attendants and the offering bearers, retires
through the western entrance. Silently the worshippers have dispersed,
and we are the sole occupants of the temple.

Rendered into your language this is the sense of the High Priest's
closing prayer:

Andûman[a:], we beseech Thee to accept our humble offering and our
reverent adoration, and we implore Thee to bestow upon us Thy most
precious gift, lengthened life.

In this instance R[a:]û signifies so be it.

Gentola--Inidor[a:], I should think that this service would remind you
of bygone days.

Inidora--Truly, it does, for my brother and I, with children of
families attached to our parents' estate, were offering bearers of our
home Istoir[a:], of which our father's brother Foras Immo, was Priest.
It was the ardent wish of our Uncle, Foras Immo, that Genessano should
enter the priesthood, but my brother did not favor the idea, so it was
abandoned. On our estate were a number of families whose co-operative
labor afforded them more than an ample subsistence, and Genessano
and I, with their children, who were to us as brothers and sisters,
attended the estate school, over which, for as long as his short life
lasted, our beloved Uncle Foras presided.

De L'Ester informs me that on your planet strange social distinctions
prevail. That employer and employed occupy different social levels.
Since all are the children of the same creative power, how can that be?

Gentola--For the reason that our people are yet very immature; they
do not, as a rule, act justly; thus, there are various grades of
society whose members may be worthy or the reverse. I regret to say
that, on Earth, frequently the accident of birth or the inheritance or
accumulation of wealth, confers upon very unworthy persons high social
distinction and power. I should like to know how this state of affairs
compares with social conditions of Ento.

Zenesta Hao--As De L'Ester desires that I shall reply to your query, I
shall say that with all Entoans merit is the measure of men and women.
I have learned that on your planet official position confers honor and
dignity upon an incumbent. On Ento it is the character and conduct of
the incumbent that confers honor and dignity upon the office. On Ento
official position is regarded as a trust, and woe be to the man or
woman weak or wicked enough to betray it. I may safely say that not
within many centuries have men or women been base enough to, through
official misconduct, forever set themselves apart as something to be
shunned by right minded people. I also have learned that on your
Planet all persons are not equal before the laws of your various
national governments. On Ento, from the Supreme Ruler to the humblest
citizen, all possess equal rights and all are held amenable to the
written and unwritten laws and customs, recognized as being standards
of right conduct. It is true that Ento's Supreme Rulers, in a sense,
are autocratic, their decisions confirming or annulling any law or
usage deemed unsuited to conditions or times; but, whatever the laws
may be, their observance applies to ruler and citizen with equal force.

Of course, this state of society has not always existed; indeed, Ento's
historical records relate that, during many centuries preceding the
establishment of the National Religion, between nations whose rulers
were cruel, ambitious men or women, there was continuous warfare, and
thus the peoples were urged on to mutual destruction. Finally, one
Foras Ah-Hû, of a far north land, gathered about him an immense army,
with which he subdued all opposition and established absolute law and
order. As he proceeded in his mission, the common people hailed him
as their deliverer, as one sent by Andûman[a:] to rescue them from
extermination, but it took quite ten Ento years to allay all disorder
and to establish the government under one Supreme Ruler. Thereafter,
from time to time, insurrections occurred, but ere long unruly persons
came to understand that the laws were for all, and that all must obey
them. The reign of Foras Ah-Hû was one of continuous effort for the
rights of all peoples, and he lived to see the Entoans united under one
ruler, and at his death his eldest son, Foras Ah-Hû, succeeded him as
Supreme Ruler. Emulating his father's admirable example, he established
more firmly such laws and usages as were found to subserve the highest
interests of the entire peoples. From that period onward, the
Entoans, under the protection and control of a firm but beneficent
government, have continuously unfolded in their conceptions of all
that pertains to the welfare of humanity, until in these days the
expressions of their civilization give promise of a grand future. Not
yet have they conceived an idea of the impersonality of the Infinite
Spirit. Not yet have they learned the inestimable fact of their own
immortality. But in thy time and way, oh Thou Infinitely Supreme One,
Thou wilt bring them into a knowledge of the grandest of all truths,
the continuity of life. Friends, if I have spoken at too great length,
you will pardon me. One thought so easily leads to another, and old
memories, like ghostly shades, so clamor for recognition, that they,
not I, must make my apology.

[Illustration: ERINC[A:] MICAN[A:]]

De L'Ester--Make no excuses for having made us your debtors, but here
is George, every line of his face suggesting that he has discovered
something of interest.

George--I cannot say that I have made a discovery, but nearby is
something that will interest Gentol[a:] and Bernard.

De L'Ester--Lead the way and we will follow. Ah, a fountain and the
temple garden and conservatories. Gentol[a:], more than two years ago
Aaron Poole drew for you a flowering vine he named Enrica; look about
you and learn if it may be one of this great variety of shrubs, plants
and vines.

Gentola--It is indeed; the moment we came here I noticed it draping
that trellis and climbing up yonder wall. With its luxuriant foliage
and profusion of pink blossoms, how very pretty it is. Poole did not
tell me that it was an Ento vine, and when I questioned him he only
said, "It is not of this Planet."

De L'Ester--That is just like him. I fancy that he thought to some time
surprise you by showing you the original.

George--He has promised to meet us here, for indeed it was here that
he sketched the Enrica vine which afterward he drew for Gentol[a:].
Always he is so prompt in his engagements that I am surprised that he
has not yet arrived. While awaiting his coming we may look at this
pretty fountain. The central figure of the group, holding aloft the
cluster of rodels (the national flower) is very fine, indeed the entire
composition of male and female figures is admirable. That sun illumined
jet of water, thrown high into the air, thence felling downward
envelops the group as with a shining veil. Gentol[a:], Bernard, come
and look into this basin.

Bernard--Mother, dear, as sure as anything these are gold and silver
fishes. Do not they exactly resemble those you have on Earth? Yes, they
are larger, and their tails and fins are oddly shaped; otherwise the
resemblance is very close.

De L'Ester--Lohaû, lohaû, ēmano Poole. For some time George has been
fretting and fuming over your late arrival; now he is so occupied as to
be oblivious of your presence.

Aaron Poole--I greet you all, and I beg a thousand pardons for having
kept you waiting.

George--Aaron, I shall no longer hold you up to admiring worlds as a
model of punctuality. You are a full hour late.

Aaron Poole--Allow me to greet Gentol[a:], then I shall explain my
delay. Gentol[a:], I rejoice that at last we meet face to face.
Although for nearly ten years we have held frequent converse, and your
face has grown as familiar to me as is my own, only now you see me.

Gentola--I am equally rejoiced that I can see you. Ever since I have
known you and some other spirit friends, I have been curious as to your
and their appearance. I have thought of you and of them as one thinks
of physical personalities. Yet in some way I have formed nearly correct
ideas of your and their forms and features. But I must say that you are
taller than I had thought you might be.

Aaron Poole--My height is six feet and one inch, and that is nearly
the height of a particular friend of yours who has been permitted to
accompany me on this visit to Ento. This way, my blond Apollo.

Gentola--Well of all the wonders of this wonderful experience, this to
me is the most surprising. Will Cox, you dear, dear boy. Oh, I am so
glad to see you. So, so glad, and to think that after all these years,
we meet on the Planet Mars--I mean on the Planet Ento. George, do be
quiet; I shall cry if I wish to. Will, you dear boy, you are handsomer
than you were in Earth life. Oh, I wish your mother could see you, your
mother who so adored you, and who never ceases to mourn for you. While
I laugh and cry, do tell me something of yourself. Why, Will, you, too,
are crying. Don't do that. I was so surprised that I--I forgot myself;
but I won't cry any more, and you shall smile too. There, that is like
yourself.

William Cox--My dearest friend, let me call you Lady Sara, as I once
did. I am so overjoyed to meet you, so glad, so thankful to the Divine
Spirit that we both have learned that life is continuous. When at the
home of Mr. Wicks we were about to part to meet no more on Earth, you
said, "Oh, Will, promise me that if you die before I do, and shall
continue to exist, and can return to this world, that you will come to
me to tell me if there is another life than this," how little I knew of
what would come to me and to you, too, dear Lady Sara. When I passed to
the Spirit side and to my own place, almost my first Earth memory was
of my promise to you, and for your sake, and that you might be better
able to comfort my dear, sorrowing mother, I, with the assistance of
kind spirit friends, strove to reach your consciousness, and when,
after two years, we succeeded, I wept for very joy. I should so like to
talk with you indefinitely, but I must not abuse the special privilege
of this visit to you. Then, too, I am one of a Band of Spirits to whom
has been assigned the accomplishment of a certain mission, and my leave
of absence must not exceed the time specified. Be assured, dear friend,
that I never lose sight of you. Your sorrows have been my own, and when
Bernard passed to our side of life, and your condition was so critical
that we feared that you, too, might come before this Mission should be
accomplished, your friend Will was one of many who sustained you with
our strength until you regained composure and a degree of health.

I have learned that these friends have given you a new and I must say
an appropriate name, but for the sake of old times and memories, to
me you are Lady Sara, and when the hour of your coming to the Spirit
side shall arrive, I will be one of many loving friends to meet and
greet you. Some day my dear mother and other dear ones may learn of
this meeting, and she and they will know that I love them always. Now
kiss me good-bye until we shall meet where not even a thin veil hides
beloved faces from the gaze of lovelit eyes.

Gentola--Good-bye, Will, good-bye, and watch out for me, for the years
are falling away like beads off a broken string, and it will not be
long before I shall come to the World of Spirits. Until then I may not
again see your face, but I will not forget, no, I will not forget.

Aaron Poole--It was a little unfair to take you so by surprise, but
Will, dear fellow, insisted upon it. He was curious to learn if you
would recognize him. You will be glad to know that he is very
aspiring and ever ready to lend a helping hand, and that his progress
is all that those who love him could desire.

[Illustration: FLOITZA]

Now I shall tell you why my coming was so delayed. You all are aware
that I have been on the Spirit Side nearly thirty years, and that at
the time of my passing over I was a little under thirty years old.
Within a few following years, my dear parents also passed to the Spirit
Side, my four brothers and two sisters, all younger than myself,
surviving them. Suddenly, this morning, my eldest brother also came.
Leaving him in the care of our parents and other loving ones, I have
hastened here, but desire to as quickly as possible return to assist in
restoring him to consciousness. Gentol[a:], you may not know that those
who suddenly pass from the physical body require special treatment for
restoration to a consciousness of their changed condition. The occasion
of his sudden passing over was arterial suffusion of the brain, which
almost instantaneously released him.

Gentol[a:], the special reason for my coming at this time is that we
may select from this fine collection of plants a subject or two for
illustration. You no doubt have recognized the Enrica vine. I had
thought to have the pleasure of showing it to you, but, as De L'Ester
would say, "L'homme propose, et Dieu dispose," which perhaps is as true
as many other aphorisms. Now we will look about for a subject or two.

Gentola--Here is a pretty vine laden with pink blooms. Is it too
delicate for our purpose?

Aaron Poole--Rather so; still I will sketch it. Its name is Ilsoimen
galistan (bride of morning). As it is difficult to control we must
select simple if less beautiful forms. Here is a flowering shrub, the
Floitza, that I will venture to sketch. It is attractive, and its
foliage and blooms are not at all complex in structure. Yes, those
are varieties of the same shrub, pink, purple, blue and white. We will
attempt the blue variety. Now we will look through the conservatories
and you shall select the next subject.

Gentola--Dear me, there is such an endless variety, and all so pretty
that I cannot decide; were it not so difficult to control me, I should
select this lovely crimson flower, but the foliage is so extremely
delicate that it is not to be thought of. George, you have mentioned a
certain plant that I should like to see; then I will decide. Ah, that
is indeed a very attractive plant; looks as though it might be of the
cactus family. Aaron, what do you think of it? Is it too complex for my
poor ability?

Aaron Poole--I cannot quite determine, but we will try it. I shall
have to ask one of our Ento friends to give us the name of this plant.
Inidor[a:], as you are something of a botanist, you may enlighten us.

Inidora--It is Ilno bers[a:]. Zenest[a:] says that in Gentol[a:]'s
language it would be hairy crawler. The habit of the plant is to crawl
over rocks or any like support, though here it is trained over both a
rockery and a low trellis.

Aaron Poole--This hairy crawler is Ilno bers[a:], and the vine with
its wealth of pink blooms is Ilsoimen. The shrub is the blue Floitza,
a pretty name for a pretty shrub. With these three sketches for the
present we will content ourselves.

Now I must leave you, but as soon as my dear brother shall have
regained consciousness and grown somewhat accustomed to his changed
condition, I shall be free to again be with you. Gentol[a:], while all
your dear ones are deeply interested in this Mission, they long for its
culmination, so that you may find leisure to receive them, for they,
perhaps more than yourself, miss their former frequent communion
with you. With pleasure I shall bear to them your loving message. Now,
mes amis, au revoir.

[Illustration: HNOBERSA]

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], these great conservatories, devoted to the
special cultivation of these red and yellow blooms, furnishes the
temple flower offerings, which, with the crystal Sun of the dome, the
mosaic Sun radiating from the altar, and the red and yellow robes
and ornaments of the High Priest and his assistants, symbolize the
imaginary abode of Andûman[a:].

Now, George, we will rise and move slowly around Taimon, thus affording
Gentol[a:] and Bernard a view of the scenery and architecture of the
many towns and villages beautifying its shores. Gentol[a:], again we
have for you a surprise and the fulfillment of a promise, which we
anticipate will add to your enjoyment of your visits to Ento. Bernard,
dear boy, you are only strong enough to sustain yourself. Allow George
to assist your mother. Is not it pleasure enough to journey by her
side? Ah, fond hearts, I understand, I understand.

Gentola--I am sure that you do. Never mind, dear lad, I will take the
will for the deed. Do not rise higher, friends, else I shall not see so
clearly as you all do. What lovely views. Certainly the architecture of
those towns and villages is very beautiful. Yonder is a long train of
Tuzamos rushing across the country, and see those huge vessels crossing
the lake in all directions and coming and going on the Waterway. To me
those Waterways are a source of continual wonderment. How were they
excavated? How have the Entoans found courage, endurance or means to
accomplish such gigantic works?

De L'Ester--To show you the process of excavation, which is so
excellent as to not require extraordinary courage or endurance, will
be the most satisfactory reply to your first two questions; as for the
means required, the general government attends to that. I promise
you that, a little later on, you shall observe the construction of a
Waterway.

Gentola--I shall not forget to remind you of your promise. Yonder is
another pretty town, and there are one, two, three circular temples,
and again it occurs to me that nowhere have I seen a spire.

De L'Ester--The tall, pointed spire is not a feature of Ento
architecture. On our planet its origin dates back to a period when
humanity was on a low animal plane. Yes, the architecture of Ento is
exceedingly ornate; exteriorly, to my mind, it is used to excess,
while interiorly, sculpture, carvings and mosaics produce wonderfully
rich and beautiful effects. In some of the public edifices and
sumptuous private residences which you yet will see there are mosaics
so exceedingly fine that nowhere have we seen anything of the kind
surpassing them. On certain edifices you have observed lofty towers
of excellent design. They are not merely architectural features, but
are towers of observation. Not skyward, oh, no, but for horizontal
distances.

You have been informed that their religion prohibits the Entoans from
attempting to learn aught concerning Astranol[a:], the imaginary realm
beyond the clouds, wherein dwells their revered and feared Gods and
Goddesses, so their telescopes, which are of great excellence, are
used only for field purposes; that is, for observation of the annual
floods and the like. But soon the radiance of their Spirit World will
penetrate their consciousness, and advanced Spirits will be able to
disabuse their minds of their fallacious beliefs relating to the here
and the hereafter, and ere long, aided by enlarged telescopes, their
learned ones will be gazing upon the wonder of myriad worlds, moving in
stately grandeur through measureless space.

Extending from northward to southward is an elevation covered with
great forest trees, undergrowth and vegetation. It is another mountain
vestige, and once the waters of Lois[a:] T[a:]imon bathed its rocky
base, but now a level stretch of some miles lies between it and the
lake. Look now far along the plateau toward the north, and tell us what
you see.

Gentola--Afar off I see a great city, extending from the lake shore
across the plain, up the slope, across the plateau, down its further
side, and--that is as far as my vision reaches.

De L'Ester--We will draw nearer. Now what do you see?

Gentola--I see a city so extensive, so marvellously beautiful, that I
am almost persuaded that you have brought me into some spirit realm.
Never have I seen anything so grandly, so magnificently beautiful as
yonder white and gold city, and this is the fulfillment of your promise
to some time, somewhere, show me a city surpassing any city of Earth.
To, if possible, enhance its beauty, nature has luxuriantly draped
sculptured walls and loftiest towers with wreaths of flower-laden
vines, amid which are bees and birds innumerable, all adding their
beauty to the enchantment of the scene. The streets are of great width
and paved as smoothly as floors. There are no small, mean-looking
houses, no evidences of poverty or degradation. With all my heart I
wish that this city might be exhibited to our Earth peoples as an
example of what humanity may attain to. The streets are alive with
people, and motor and tramway carriages are passing in all directions,
yet there is very little noise and no apparent confusion. I should like
to know why those tramway carriages are so noiseless.

De L'Ester--I only can say that they are so scientifically constructed
that I cannot explain their mechanism. The tramway rails are welded
into unbroken lines, which, at short intervals, rest on cushions
of an elastic substance very like caoutchouc, which prevents noisy
jolting and jarring. Then, too, the speed of all manner of vehicles is
carefully timed and regulated. Unlike the immature peoples of our own
immature Planet, the Entoans are exceedingly careful of their own and
the lives and rights of others.

You perceive that all street intersections are spanned by elegantly
constructed bridges, over which people and vehicles pass slowly and
safely. No, the Entoans are not indolent, but they are too wise to rush
toward the undesired end of their existence. Indeed, every possible
precaution against injury or death is observed. No, owing to the annual
inundation, underground transit is not feasible. Yes, of course, the
construction and maintenance of such public utilities is costly, but as
Ento has no wars, the governmental revenues are amply sufficient for
all necessary purposes.

Now we will descend to the lawn of yonder white golden-domed residence
of the governor of this Province of Wy[a:]mo, whose capital is the
white and gold city Kûltymo Tylû, which, in the English language would
be Elevated City. It is the largest, and to my mind, the most beautiful
city of Ento.

Facing us is the governor's residence. To the right are the official
departments. To the left is a spacious structure devoted to such
amusements as Entoans indulge in. Yes, they dance, but in a rather
serious fashion. The movements of the various dances are slow,
graceful, stately and rhythmically in harmony with the musical
measures, with which their forms, more than their feet, keep time. Yes,
the drama, too, finds its place among the amusements of the people, but
its purpose is to instruct as well as to amuse. I scarcely know how
to characterize the plays. Certainly, they are not tragic, neither do
they represent the serio-comic. I should say that they are more nearly
on the plane of high comedy, and Earth's pleasure loving peoples would
consider them very tame. I can say for them that, in composition and
representation, they are models of purity and of art. This is one of
Ento's finest official residences, and in every niche and angle of its
massive walls are sculptured forms of divinities or of distinguished
Entoans, so finely executed as to command one's profound admiration.
A grand flight of steps leads up to the spacious portico, whose lofty
roof is supported by massive fluted marble columns, whose capitals are
a strong reminder of the Corinthian capital.

Observe this imposing entrance, whose rose tinted doors are framed
in rose tinted woods, so highly, so exquisitely colored, that their
beauty is but slightly enhanced by these very artistic carvings. We
will now enter and afford you and Bernard a view of the interior of the
dwelling. This wide and deep hallway, with its broad staircase, leading
upward to a second floor, thence to other floors and the domed roof,
is very admirable. It is a composition of rose marble, onyx, carved,
rose colored woods and mosaics so exquisitely beautiful, as to be
incomparably artistic. It is well that the dainty blooms, child faces
and lovely arabesques of the floor are protected by these fine rugs.

Evidently the staircases are more for ornamentation than for use, for
at the further end of the hallway is an elegantly appointed elevator,
into which, at this moment, a stately looking gentleman is stepping. He
is Darraon Olēv[a:]s, Governor of Wy[a:]mo, and as uninvited guests we
will proceed to the dining hall of his excellency's residence. To do
so we will pass through this panelled vestibule, whose ornamentation
of inlaid fruits and flower designs, is indeed very fine. The light
filtering through the large rose and opalescent crystal window
irradiates it with a softened glow which is a fitting prelude to the
rich coloring of the apartment beyond this sumptuous silken drapery.
Stand here, Gentol[a:], and attempt a short description of this
immense, elliptically formed room and its appurtenances.

Gentola--Where shall I begin? With the floor? Well, to my taste, it
presents the most beautiful mosaic work I yet have seen. It is so
exceedingly lovely that it seems a profanation to step on it. The
field is opal tinted, and the border is very broad and rich, but not
at all highly colored. From among its foliage and flowers, vines and
delicately hued blossoms trail all over the field, and they are so
realistic that they seem to be growing there.

At equal distances around the walls of the great room are wide panels
of a wood resembling mahogany, but tinted a dull rose color. In the
centre of each wide panel is a narrow fluted one of a lighter shade
of rose colored wood, and all are carried up the walls and across the
curved ceiling, where they meet under large rosettes of rose colored
woods. In the centre of each rosette is a lighting apparatus, which is
not at all like a chandelier, and which I am not competent to describe.
I can only say that it is a combination of gold filigree work and many
rose tinted crystal lilies inclosed in a gauzelike network of some
transparent material.

De L'Ester--You might add that when the electric light is turned on,
the network forms a sort of halo about the flowers, whose pale rose
tints lend a softened and beautiful effect, and I will add, that, in
the near future, one of your inspired ones will invent a very similar
electric appliance.

Gentola--Where the panels curve between the walls and ceiling there
are great carved clusters of flowers and foliage, of woods of various
colors and the shadings are so fine that the compositions are very
beautiful and lifelike. Between the panels, the walls are opalescent,
and are adorned with paintings and handsome shelf-like projections, on
which are the loveliest vases, statuettes and other bric-a-brac. At the
west end of the room are two wide and lofty windows, over which falls
exquisite lace and rich rose colored silken draperies, the borders
ornamented with gold embroidery. Between the windows is an immense
buffet, built into the wall, which appears to be a combination of
carved and inlaid woods, of precious metals and jewels. On its highly
ornamental shelves are various wares, very like some of the fine wares
we have on our planet, and there are goblets and other vessels of
crystal that shine with the brilliancy of diamonds. Some pieces are set
with jewels of various colors, and they are exceedingly pretty. Through
the crystalline doors of its compartments I see vessels of gold, of
silver and of a metal that appears to be enamelled in tints of pale,
lustrous green. The latter are ornamented with stones of a deeper tint
of green, and they are so beautiful that I should like to have one of
them. As for the shapes of these many lovely things, I am surprised
that they are so like the forms of Earth's china, glass and other wares.

De L'Ester--Recall a lecture you heard in the Galarēs[a:], in which it
was stated that not only is art long, but that form in its manifold
expressions is universal. It is the manifestation of a natural law, and
in accordance with the degree of their evolvement, everywhere, not only
humans, but all orders of life express it in finer or cruder fashion.

Gentola--I believe that it is true, for through my limited observation
of our moon, and my larger observation of Ento's and Earth's forms,
whether natural or mechanical, I have found startling resemblances;
frequently exact likenesses of the forms of either planet.

To return to a further description of the buffet. Its table of pearl
tinted onyx, veined with palest green, is bordered by a luxuriant
vine, whose leaves are composed of minute green stones, so shaded as
to present a very natural effect. The vine and tendrils also are of
stones, representing their brown and green tints. The large, purple
clusters of fruit are of amethysts or similar stones. Genessano says,
that the vine is a taliss[a:] fûen[a:], but I should say, it is a
veritable grape vine. Anyway, it is very pretty, and its purple fruit
suggests a question. Do the Entoans make wine and other intoxicants?

De L'Ester--These Ento friends, Inidor[a:], Genessano and Zenest[a:]
H[a:]o, say that, since time immemorial the Entoans have used fermented
and distilled liquors, but never as intoxicants, their Sacred Writings
forbidding the abuse of any of Andûman[a:]'s gifts to His children. No,
although of a wine drinking race, I never during my mortal existence,
experienced a sense of intoxication. Did mortals understand that
drunkenness is not alone a benumbing of the senses, a more or less
pronounced anaesthesia, but that gradually it occasions a separation
between the ego and the animal soul or conscious self, and that
continued excesses lead to a wider separateness, a final domination
of the animal soul, and that when dissolution occurs, the alcoholized
spirit body has become a fit tenement for its wretched occupant, in
fear and horror they would recoil from a peril so deadly. These friends
will verify my statement that on no other planet have we observed such
a strong tendency toward drunkenness as exists on Earth. Why is this
so? Briefly then, the activities of heredity never fail, and some
dominant primitive races of Earth, having looked upon wine when it was
red, transmitted the vicious tendency to their descendants, and they
in turn to after generations unnumbered. Certainly, it is true that,
what are termed acquired tastes for this or that, are nearly, if not
always based upon hereditary tendencies. Now, pray proceed.

Gentola--Against the walls are many chairs of beautifully carved,
rose tinted wood. The seats are not upholstered, but are of a highly
polished, very pale rose tinted wood, and oddly enough they are held or
rather they hang on pretty golden brackets projecting from the walls.
There is no dining table or even one small one. On what is food served?

De L'Ester--Wait a little and you shall learn. In the meantime we
will enter an adjoining room used for the storage of table and other
appointments, which doubtless we will find attractive. You will please
mention such as may interest you.

Gentola--How very beautiful. What a wonderful collection. Gold, silver,
crystal and other lovely wares in endless profusion. Evidently many
of them are for decorative purposes. Such a collection is enough to
make one covetous. Imagine me landing in my own home with one of these
magnificent vases in my arms. Not for a moment would any one believe
that it came from the planet known to them as Mars. Neither would I
believe it were I some one else.

Again, I cannot refrain from a sense of surprise that I find here
plates, pitchers, bowls, cups and saucers and all that constitutes an
elaborate table service. And here are goblets, and a great variety
of drinking glasses and other pieces of glassware, of such beautiful
shapes and of such exceeding brilliancy that it is superior to any cut
glass I ever have seen.

De L'Ester--Zenest[a:] says that in a province immediately south
of Ondû is a deposit of a peculiar sand especially adapted to the
manufacture of this fine glass. Although diligently sought for,
nowhere else has a like deposit been discovered; hence, this ware is
highly prized. Observe this elaborate centre piece of gold, crystal
and precious stones. It is a great, four handled bowl with a small,
beautiful vase on either handle. The bowl is for fruit, the vases for
flowers.

As your question relating to the serving of food is about to be
answered, we will stand in this doorway, which, you perceive, is
slightly above the level of the dining hall floor. Observe that nearly
the entire length of the floor is in two equal divisions, so nicely
adjusted as not to be perceptible. Now they separate, and noiselessly
are drawn under this and the opposite apartments, and from below rises
a sumptuously appointed table laden with viands of most tempting
appearance. Thus is your question answered.

Observe that the floor on which the table rests is of highly polished,
deeply tinted, rose colored wood, which exactly fits into the space
left vacant by the withdrawal of the mosaic floor. Yes, in most fine
Ento dwellings dining halls for special occasions are arranged in this
manner. In ordinary dwellings dining room floors are stationary, as is
the floor of the adjoining family dining room. Now a very important
looking person enters, takes a critical survey of the table, touches
a button in the wall, and a number of attendants enter and quietly
detach the seats from the walls and place them about the table. There
are twenty covers, and evidently the repast is more of a luncheon than
a dinner. Observe the floral decorations. A centre piece, quite as
beautiful as the one we have been admiring, is filled with golden hued
fruit and sweet scented, creamy blooms, and at either end of the table
are lovely vases filled with clusters of the same fragrant blossoms.
Though the food is generous in quantity and variety, the table is not
overladen. There are breads of various kinds with dainty dishes of
fruits and confections nice enough to tempt an epicure, but you will
observe that there are no meats, save fishes, which are prepared as a
salad. Inidor[a:], what is the name of this luscious looking fruit?

Inidora--Oond[a:] we name it. It is agreeably acidulous, of an aromatic
flavor and grows only in tropical and in semi-tropical countries.
Gentol[a:] may recall that in the vicinity of Camariss[a:] and somewhat
further northward there are many extensive plantations of low, wide
spreading trees, wearing dark green, glossy foliage. Those were
oond[a:]s lot[a:]s (oond[a:]s trees) and these are their fruit and
fragrant, lovely blooms. Nay, you owe me no thanks.

Gentola--I hear a sound as of sweet, low toned bells, and voices of
persons coming nearer and nearer; and now they are entering preceded
by a very tall, extremely handsome youth of bronze complexion, fine
features, large, dark, brilliant eyes, blue-black, waving hair, held
back by a gemmed fillet, and white teeth gleaming between his parted
scarlet lips. As he approaches, bearing aloft a golden tray heaped high
with oond[a:] blooms, he presents a picture of uncommon beauty. There
are nine men and as many women, the latter clothed so beautifully in
loose, graceful, white silken, gold embroidered robes that, henceforth,
I shall detest the dress with which I have been accustomed to torment
and disfigure myself. The important looking person seats the guests,
and the youth crowns each one with a chaplet of oond[a:] blossoms. But
two seats, one at either end of the table, are still vacant. Again
the sweet toned bells are sounding. The guests rise, and with a most
graceful movement of their hands, salute a stately, handsome man and a
very lovely woman, who with gracious smiles and graceful salutations,
approach and take the vacant seats, and the guests resume theirs. Now
the youth approaches the host and hostess, tendering them chaplets
of oond[a:] blossoms, which they receive and retain in their hands.
Inidor[a:] will be kind enough to continue the description which to me
grows somewhat unintelligible.

Inidora--As a recognition of Andûman[a:]'s gift of this golden fruit
to his children the annual feast of the oond[a:] is observed by all
Entoans. Oond[a:] in your language would mean divine, and as it is the
favorite fruit of the dwellers in Astranol[a:], it is thought to be
appropriately named.

Those who have this moment entered are the governor of Wy[a:]mo,
Darraon Olēv[a:]s and his wife, the Lady Noûni[a:]. Now the governor
rises, and bearing aloft his chaplet, he approaches his wife and places
it on her head, fervently praying: "Andûman[a:], Creator and Giver of
all good gifts even as I crown Thy child with oond[a:] blooms, so crown
Thou her with the priceless blessing of a long and happy life;" and the
guests respond, "R[a:]û, r[a:]û, r[a:]û." Now he kneels by the side of
his wife, and as she places her chaplet on his head, with trembling
lips she implores Andûman[a:] to prolong the days of her beloved,
and that they may be as full of the fragrance of noble deeds as are
oond[a:] blooms full of the perfume of Andûman[a:]'s breath, and again
the guests respond, "R[a:]û, r[a:]û, r[a:]û."

De L'Ester--We regret that we cannot devote further time to
observation of this attractive festival, but affairs relating to
our mission grow more pressing than you are aware of, and we must
hasten our movements. We now will ascend to the upper floors. Yes,
the decorations and furnishings of these spacious apartments are
of the best art productions of Ento, and certainly they are beyond
unfavorable criticism. You have learned that Ento's textile fabrics
are surpassingly excellent; so you are not surprised at the beauty of
designs, coloring and quality of these draperies, rugs, upholstery and
other appurtenances of this elegantly appointed residence. Yes, in most
Ento residences, large or small, somewhat sumptuous furnishings are the
rule, rather than exception. In arts and manufactures the Entoans have
progressed beyond the tawdry and mean, and all who so desire, may, at
small cost, gratify cultivated tastes.

We now will go out on the balcony, George. Yes, the dome balcony. Do
not you think that Vil Tylû (White City) would be as appropriate a name
for this city as it was for your World's Fair City? And now that we
have fulfilled our promise, may we hope that you are not disappointed?

Gentola--Dear friends, the fulfillment of your promise exceeds my
anticipations, and as I gaze in all directions I am filled with wonder
and admiration for this extensive, this grandly beautiful White and
Gold City. The absence of all indications of poverty is in itself a
charm, and it appears so immaculately clean and so new, that one might
imagine it the creation of a very recent time.

Genessano--On the contrary, previous to the inception of the Irrigating
and Waterways System, it was a city of importance, and as now, the
capital of Wy[a:]mo. At the time that the proposed irrigating system
was under consideration the then governor of Wy[a:]mo was one of
its most enthusiastic supporters and later an indefatigable worker
who lived to see the System assume unlooked for proportions and
incalculable beneficence. His successors followed his fine example,
and a time arrived when the Irrigated Belt touched Kûltymo's limit
on the north, and you perceive that now it penetrates quite into the
System. During later centuries the population has so increased as to
necessitate encroachment upon the agricultural lands northward, and
now in that direction the city's suburb is parallel with the northern
shore of T[a:]imon.

Kûltymo Tylû is favored beyond any city of our planet, for though
it is within the equatorial zone, it is far enough northward to
possess a moderately temperate and most salubrious climate. Then
northward, Lake T[a:]imon and the great Waterway affords an outlet for
shipping, passing not only in that, but in all directions, and Cēhylû
Ooltēm[a:]h, rising in the far north, runs southward, pouring its
immense volumes into the System, thus affording highways for vessels
of the largest size. In the distance, and toward the northeast, is
Lake Komû-tēles[a:] (lake of Springs) another considerable body of
fresh water, and if you will look in that direction you will perceive
that, through a continuation of the Waterway, it communicates with
T[a:]imon, and that on its placid bosom vessels great and small are
passing to and fro. Later, through observation, you will learn that the
Waterways with their attendant feeders, directly or indirectly connect
with nearly all the freshwater lakes and rivers of our Planet, and that
all within certain degrees of latitude are embraced by the system.
Thus, Kûltymo Tylû has at its doors extensive water transportation,
added to which Tûz[a:]mos and air Transports bring it into ready
communication with all portions of the planet, from whence it receives
all manner of products. In turn Kûltymo Tylû exports immense quantities
of manufactured goods and art wares, but its principal distinction
is its great art school and library, to which come students from all
over Ento. I, like yourselves, am enchanted with the beauty of this
white and gold city, which to me suggests a great white bird, its
body resting on the broad plateau, the tip of one snowy wing touching
T[a:]imon, the other spreading toward the lovely valley Ins[a:]lû,
and the neck and head gracefully curving downward over the northern
slope of the plateau, to drink of the shining, vivifying waters of the
beneficent System. Bernard, have you naught to say of this great city?

Bernard--Yes, aside from cities of our Spirit World, I have seen none
to compare with it. As my dear mother has said, the beauty of its
architecture, its exceeding cleanliness and absence of poverty are its
most attractive features, and I quite agree with her. But, Genessano,
you did not complete your simile; you forgot to give your bird a tail.

Genessano--You are very right; I did forget. Well, for my tailless bird
I shall from among yonder gleaming, golden domes and snowy towers,
whose symmetrical beauty is heightened by a southern background
of fleecy clouds and azure sky, gather plumage as fine as that of
alzoyt[a:]s, the sacred bird of Astranol[a:], whose wide-spreading
wings over-shadow death's darkened realm.

Gentola--I beg that you will not take offense at my boy's inconsiderate
speech. During his Earth life always he saw the droll side of things,
and in that direction I do not find him changed.

Bernard--Mother, dear, I meant no offense; so Genessano could take none.

Genessano--That is as true as truth. Bernard and I are as two opposing
mirrors, each reflecting images upon the other's face; thus one never
misunderstands the other's motives, and Bernard's ever are kind. Let
this fraternal embrace assure you of our mutual good will.

De L'Ester--We will rise to the upper balcony, from which we will
command a still more extensive view of the city and its suburbs, and
you, Gentol[a:], will give expression to whatever may impress you.

Gentola--To me the extent of this city is surprising. Eastward its
limit is beyond my power of vision. Southward domes, turrets and lofty
columns lose themselves amid the mists of the horizon. Northward,
for mile after mile, on the level; thence down the sloping plateau
and across the far reaching plain, the white and gold wonder spreads
itself. In that direction, in the middle of some of the wide streets,
are canals, on which small boats, carrying passengers or freight, are
passing to and fro. At intervals the canals are spanned by handsome
bridges, over which a variety of vehicles are passing. Toward the
southwest T[a:]imon, which you say is nearly twenty miles away, mirrors
in its waters the great warehouses and manufactories which line its
shores. It occurs to me to ask why chimneys are not features of Ento
architecture. Even those great structures have none.

Inidora--Many centuries previous to my existence on Ento electrical
appliances had come into such general use that in all cities, towns,
villages and pretentious country places, they almost were the sole
agencies for heating, lighting, culinary and other purposes, and yet
some families of the Soûvannallos and of another race far southward,
still adhere to ancient domestic usages. Certainly they are the only
Entoans who persist in using fireplaces and chimneys, which no longer
are features of Ento architecture.

De L'Ester--Northward and southward, along the level of the plateau,
and eastward and westward, toward Ins[a:]lû-Valley and Lake T[a:]imon,
there are many stupendously tall and massive towers, whose average
height is about one thousand feet, and whose bases seem substantial
enough to support Ento's satellites. The skill and daring involved in
their construction is both admirable and surprising. In their interiors
are elevators which carry to the height of their summits persons and
things connected with their service. They are used for a system of
electric lighting, and also as watch towers during the annual floods
and on their summits are as fine observation telescopes as we have
seen. Yes, when those great towers are lighted, night is well nigh
turned into day. How little the peoples of our planet yet comprehend
what may be, and ere long will be, accomplished through the agency of
electricity, whose civilizing power is illimitable. I should like to
inform you as to one of its achievements, and at another time will do
so.

You are exhausted, and we must hold you no longer. We will not come for
you to-morrow morning, but at two o'clock in the afternoon. Earlier we
will be at D[a:]o to meet friends who are interested in our mission.
Yes, friends from Ento's and other planetary Spirit Worlds. Be patient;
the time is near when you will see them as you see us. For yet a little
while Spirit forces will hold Vallo[a:] in her physical form, for it
would not be well should she pass to the Spirit side before all things
are in readiness for the culmination of our mission.

Friends, George, Bernard and I will bear Gentol[a:] safely to her home;
then I must go elsewhere, but to-morrow we all will meet at D[a:]o.

Gentol[a:], rest your right hand on George's shoulder. Bernard, place
your right arm about your mother and your left hand on my shoulder, and
now for the Sorrowful star, toward which this mighty magnetic current
bears us with the velocity of thought, and here in your quiet room,
where twilight shadows have fallen, we leave you until the morrow.
Bernard, make your adieu, for before she may be disturbed, I desire
to see your mother recover herself. Ah, that is well. Yes, we still
are here, and pleased that you so readily have regained your usual
condition. As we have held you overlong to-day, I pray you, rest, rest,
rest. Now au revoir.




CHAPTER XIV.

DANO AND VALLOA.


De L'Ester--Exactly two o'clock, and you are awaiting us, so at once
we will be off. Only George and I have come for you. Bernard and our
friends will meet us at Kûltymo Tylû. Now, be at rest. Ready, George.
No, mortals can have no realization of the rapidity with which wholly
freed spirits are able to move. You, who to a degree are freed, do not
realize it.

Gentola--No, I do not. Always, to me, we appear to be stationary, while
all else is falling away from us. Now, as we near Ento, it seems to be
rushing toward us, and now I perceive its divisions of land and water,
and yonder is Kûltymo Tylû, and on yonder great tower our friends and
my dear boy are watching and waiting for us. A greeting for you all,
dear friends, and for you, too, my dear lad. Yes, from afar off I saw
you waving your hand to me, you dear, dear boy.

George--While De L'Ester shall relate to you something that certainly
will interest you, Inez and I will make a hurried visit to D[a:]o, but
ere he shall have concluded his narration we again will be with you.

De L'Ester--We find that, until our mission shall have culminated, we
must defer visiting certain localities of peculiar interest, and as
some untoward event might, during your mortal existence, prevent your
gaining through personal observation, information concerning them, we
have decided that I shall endeavor to acquaint you with some of their
features.

Far within Ento's Arctic and Antarctic regions there are lands which,
during a large part of the year, are covered with ice and snow. Still
farther northward and southward and at the poles such intense cold
perpetually prevails that the land surfaces are uninhabitable. In
these regions are vast deposits of precious and other ores, and to
gain access to them many difficulties had to be surmounted. I say had
to be surmounted; for, during many centuries, mining within the Arctic
and Antarctic Circles has been a settled industry. In remote times, as
at present, throughout Ento's Torrid and Temperate Zones, the mining
industry has progressed northward, and to a lesser degree southward,
and so gradual have been its movements that, almost imperceptibly,
it has penetrated polar lands, and mainly through the agency of
electrical appliances has the achievement been made possible. You have
been informed that more than fifty Ento centuries ago, the Entoans
understood electrical engineering and many electrical appliances, and
that then, as now, Tûz[a:]mos and air Transports were used as common
carriers, but, of course, they were less perfect than those of to-day.
Still, they served the requirements of their time, which were less
exacting than the requirements of to-day. But you have not known that,
quite within Ento's Arctic and Antarctic Circles, there are large
underground communities of men, women and children, whose occupations,
almost solely, are connected with the mining industry. Naturally, one
might infer that the disadvantages of their environments would be both
discouraging and depressing. Not so. Through the agency of electricity
their underworlds are brilliantly lighted and where necessary
comfortably warmed, and it enables them to keep in constant touch with
the outer world which, at any time, they may visit, and from whence
they may command such luxuries and comforts as they may desire.

Lines of Tûz[a:]mos penetrate far northward and southward, and where
they cannot go air Transports can and do go. Thus these communities
are not at all isolated, and they go and come where and when they
will. Some time, if you may so desire, you shall visit some of them,
and I may assure you that you will find them very interesting. Yes,
all mines are owned by the general government, and the remuneration
of those engaged in them is so liberal, so equitable, as to assure
to them prosperity and contentment. At the entrances of the various
great mines are enormously lofty light towers, whose several floors
are devoted to educational and other purposes. In the schools some of
Ento's foremost scientists of the past and of the present day have
been taught electric and hydraulic engineering, geology, mineralogy
and other specialties. Other floors are for living rooms, nurseries,
hospitals and the inevitable Istoir[a:]. The several departments are
attractively finished and furnished, and are quite as desirable as are
well appointed dwellings of milder climes. On the summits of these
lofty towers are immense electric lights which are to navigators of
space what beacon lights are to mariners of seas. To air voyagers
they afford cheering assurance of their whereabouts and of hospitable
entertainment; for, at all mining centres, are air Transport Stations
for the accommodation of travellers and for shipping purposes.

Frequently, in Arctic and Antarctic regions, terrific snow storms
occur, and were it not for the far reaching tower lights, air pilots
would not be able to find Transport landings, which ever are kept in
readiness for their arrival. Yes, the mines are located in mountainous
regions, for as the poles are approached the planet's surface is
very rugged and mountainous, and as on all stable planets the more
nearly the poles are approached the vaster are the mineral deposits.
Yes, the same law applies to Earth, and were I not somewhat opposed
to prophesying, I might say that within ten years the insatiable gold
worshippers of our planet will set up their altars in localities nearly
as frigid as are Ento's northern and southern mining regions. Much more
in this direction I might relate, but we anticipate that later on we
may afford you views of what I have given you a mere idea. Ah, here are
George and Inez.

George--I fear that we may have abused our leave of absence; if so I
can only say that we have been so engrossed as to not note the passing
moments. Since our visit of the early morning her Spirit attendants
have succeeded in temporarily stimulating her vital energy, but ere
long they will have to yield to the inevitable, and Vallo[a:], the
golden haired, will be borne to Ento's Spirit World. Evidently she
realizes that death, the dread terror, is drawing near and it is
touching to see her young, lovely face wearing a smile while her
faintly throbbing heart is full of anguish at thought of leaving her
adored father and Dano, her betrothed. Inez, my dear one, will you tell
our sister about the dying girl?

Inez--Words cannot describe the pathos of the scene. Since witnessing
it my heart is burthened with measureless sympathy for mortal sorrow.
By one side of Vallo[a:]'s couch sat her father, his woful face
betraying his consuming grief and anxiety. By the other side knelt
Dano, his rapt gaze wearing the expression of one who sees with clear
eyes. So emaciated, so wan is Vallo[a:]'s lovely face that it is as
snow amid the wealth of her golden, flowing hair. As we looked and
listened she turned to her father with encouraging words, then she
smiled into his and her lover's eyes, and said, "Dearest ones, pray
do not regard me so wistfully. I am growing stronger; soon I shall
be well;" and they, to hide from her their despair, smiled back at
her, assuring her of their confidence in her speedy recovery. About
her were Ministering Spirits who, to their utmost were sustaining her
physical energy, and for a moment I stood near her and Dano, who with
a startled look, turned toward me, and quickly I moved away. He grows
very sensitive, and Vallo[a:]'s Spirit vision is so clear that as she
recedes from the mortal condition, in exceeding bewilderment she gazes
into the thinly veiled Spirit World, whose glory fills her soul with
ecstasy. I now am satisfied that our Band have acted wisely in not
taking you into the presence of the dying girl, for assuredly your
easily aroused sympathy would endanger your safety.

De L'Ester--Which we dare not trifle with, as in it is involved the
success or failure of our Mission. This, you perceive, is the loftiest
tower of the city. It is a signal tower, and through this telescope,
which is one of its scientific features, it commands a view of the
immense distances of this levelled portion of the planet. Gaze now over
the city and express your impression of the view.

Gentola--Beautiful, wondrously beautiful! Toward the east the city
gently inclines downward, and across Ins[a:]lû Valley, merging itself
into the country, which is so closely dotted with white dwellings and
Istoir[a:]s, gleaming amid the green of lawns, orchards and lofty
bûd[a:]s and other forest trees, that one cannot say where the city
ends and the country begins. Southward the plateau rises gradually in
broad terraces, on which are white and gold structures like stately
palaces, amid blooming gardens and the feathery foliage of bûd[a:]s
trees. Some are less spacious, but scarcely less attractive in the
beauty of their architecture and surroundings. There are open squares
lined with palatial white and gold residences and other structures
whose great domes and towers look down upon fountains so lovely as
to defy my descriptive ability. Upward and upward the terraces rise
until against the background of the deep blue sky the southern portion
of the city appears as a dim, mist-veiled, never-to-be-forgotten,
magnificently lovely picture. I cannot imagine a scene more beautiful;
no, not even in Celestial Worlds. Seeing this wonderful city and
learning to what heights humanity may attain arouses within me a hope
for the future of our own sorrowful planet.

De L'Ester--Alas and alas, that many, many centuries must elapse ere
your hope shall bear fruition. Development of the peoples of a planet,
as a whole, is not a matter of centuries, _but of ages_. Centuries come
and go, and only Infinite Intelligence can discern that all along the
line one step has been taken. Like the rising and falling of ocean's
unquiet waves, now amid mad tempests, dashing their white crests toward
the sky, anon with gentle undulations laving the sand strewn shore, so
amid storm and calm, the peoples of planets slowly, but surely, evolve
toward higher planes of being.

Wars, with their lamentable features, are the upheavals of the animal
impulses of crude civilizations, and Earth's peoples are far from being
civilized. All over our planet civil corruption and social, selfish
greed and ambition for place and power are eating into the very vitals
of society, hence of governments, and if Spirit agencies cannot sway
the minds of some who may serve as Saviors, the poverty and agony of
the masses in time will produce a state of delirium, in which the sense
of accountability will be lost; then woe be to those who, through
standing on the shoulders of their defrauded and oppressed brethren,
have climbed to high places.

Man is in one, angel and animal, and ever as the angel strives
for ascendency, the animal snarls and shows its teeth, and you may
believe me that, were it not that Spirits of highest Realms control
illumined minds of Earth, who serve as restraining influences in the
consciousness of the masses, a chaotic state of society quickly would
ensue. Apparently, it is a provision of Divine Law that the wise and
strong shall aid the unwise and weak; that the higher shall reach down
to uplift the lowly, and those who fail to fulfill this righteous
law thereby so lessen their Spiritual estate that, in the world of
equitable adjustments, they find themselves in a state of poverty
undreamed of by mortal man.

Yes, even as the peoples of Earth agonize in the throes of evolution,
so in past ages have the Entoans agonized; so, to a degree, do they yet
agonize, for though they are more highly evolved than are the peoples
of our planet, they, as I have once said, are yet in their swaddling
clothes.

Yes, ages elapsed ere they evolved from savagery to a civilization
which made it possible for their ideals to assume form and expression
in the construction of this wonderful and beautiful city. Wonderful not
only in its architecture, but in its many fine expressions of science,
of art, of social amenities and usages, and other admirable features of
an advanced evolution, which has carried from the past into the living
present such lessons of wisdom as have been learned in the school of
experience. The school whose pupils never play truant and who ever are
learning their lessons well or ill, and who, perforce of natural law,
_must_ advance onward toward clearer, higher views of the meaning of
life, of love, of God in humanity.

Now again look southward. Is not it a vision to enrapture the soul
of an artist or a lover of the beautiful? See how temples, domes and
light towers lose themselves in the cloudlike, luminous haze which
the slanting sun rays glorify into an indescribable loveliness. Toward
the lovely valley Ins[a:]lû the shadows of declining day are falling
over the whiteness of the city and over domed temples and light towers.
Afar, gray and empurpled mist wreaths are rising and veiling the pallid
beauty of fountain groups, whose silvery treasures, thrown high into
the quiet air, are tinted by the glory of the setting sun, which gleams
athwart T[a:]imon, over which, like dream phantoms, vessels great and
small are noiselessly gliding. Lower, lower sinks the red disk of the
solar king, and fleecy clouds, catching the reflection of his last
beams, put on their robes of crimson and gold, and like angels in
flight, drift across the deepening azure of the sky.

George, we now will ascend, but not to a great height, for soon the
light towers will be ablaze, and you, Gentol[a:] and Bernard, will
witness a spectacle you will not soon forget.

Look downward now. Shadows are brooding over the great city, and save
for the musical tones of the temple bells every sound is hushed, but
wait a little and the scene will change.

Ah, you are startled, as well you may be. Is not the transformation
marvellous? Is not the scene grandly, weirdly beautiful? Below us is
the wide-spreading city, whose lofty electric light towers suddenly
have turned night into day, and southward, where the terraced plateau
attains its greatest elevation, is the great light tower on whose
summit is an immense golden and crimson crystal Symbol of Andûman[a:]'s
abode, and as the afterglow of its radiance fades from the sky,
suddenly the Sacred Symbol will blaze into the splendor of its amazing
beauty. Now, from every temple, the music of chiming bells floats
upward and the atmosphere is vibrant with their rhythmic notes.
With expectant gaze, all eyes are turned toward the Symbol of their
Religion, and now flashing upon the bosom of night behold the glowing,
scintillating, radiant wonder. Simultaneously from every lip bursts
forth a prayer, which I will translate into your language.

Andûman[a:], Creator and Preserver, even as the shadows of night
wrap us about, so may Thy Love infold us while we sleep, and may Thy
Messengers, who read our inmost thoughts, bear to Thee the fervent
adoration of Thy loving but ever sorrowful children. Oirah, oirah,
oirah. (So be it.)

In low, plaintive tones the chiming bells accompany the intoned prayer,
and every face is uplifted toward the great glowing Sun, whose dazzling
radiance penetrates the dense fog enveloping the city as with a snowy
mantle.

Gentola--Ever since you promised me that some time I should at night
behold some portion of Ento, I have tried to imagine how it might
appear, but never have I imagined a scene so grand, so beautiful, so
marvellously strange as this.

Oh, that the peoples of our planet might, if but for a moment, behold
this illustration of the possibilities inherent in humanity, for surely
it would stimulate them to higher endeavor, to emulate the attainments
of the Entoans, whose peace, prosperity, learning, culture, refinement
and kindliness is in strong contrast with the turmoil, poverty,
selfishness and lack of real friendliness prevalent among the masses
of our rightly named Sorrowful Star. Yes, I know that the Entoans are
sorrowful, but it is not of a nature that debases them, and I hope and
pray that soon it may give way to measureless joy.

De L'Ester--So hope, so pray all who are engaged in this Mission.

Gentola--As I listen to the chiming of the temple bells I do not
distinguish one discordant note, and all ring in perfect unison. I
should like to know how this is accomplished?

Inidora--All Ento temples possess chimes of bells, and all the chimes
of each city are tuned to the same key note. They are electrically
connected, and by means of electrical mechanism all are simultaneously
rung. Our people have stated times of worship, which are at sunrise, at
midday and at sunset, and when in a few moments yonder radiant Symbol
of Ento's faith shall be extinguished, again the waiting people will
implore Divine protection through the night, and the chiming bells
again will ring their plaintive Oirah, oirah, oirah. (Amen or be it so.)

Yes, in cities and towns and country places the same religious
ceremonies are observed. At sunrise the blessing of Andûman[a:] and the
protection of the Divine Ones who dwell in Astranol[a:] are invoked. At
midday all Sacrifices and Offerings of value are laid upon the altar.
At sunset in temples flowers alone are laid upon the altar, and the
High Priest invokes for his people the protection of Andûman[a:]'s
Messengers. No, it is only in Kûltymo, D[a:]o, Camariss[a:] and two
other cities of Ento that there are such Symbols as we now are gazing
upon. But see, the glory of its beauty is paling and--now it has
disappeared. Again the chiming bells fill the air with melody. Again
from every lip ascends a prayer for protection through the darkness
of night. Gradually the melody dies into silence, and through the
deepening twilight and the soft radiance of its many light towers,
Kûltymo Tylû gleams in pallid whiteness, in phantom-like loveliness.
Quietly, tranquilly, the people are returning to their homes. No sounds
of traffic or of labor break the stillness of the great white and gold
city, but from soiv[a:]s (parks) and ilofēn mûn[a:][a:] (amusement
gardens) strains of sweet music float upward and thither, presently,
men, women and children will wend their ways.

And thus, Kûltymo Tylû, queen city of my beloved Ento, we leave thee,
and as our faces turn away from thee, our backward, lingering glances
stray over thy peerless loveliness, and we regretfully murmur Info
oovistû.

Gentola--Dear friends, so strange, so enchanting are some of the
experiences that you are affording me that I am at a loss to express
either my emotions or my boundless gratitude. Oh, if only I might
remember all that I see, all that occurs. Why is it that, after I have
regained full consciousness, I can no more recall these experiences
than I can recall a dimly remembered dream?

De L'Ester--Cannot you comprehend that it is _you_, the Ego or Spirit
Self which alone takes cognizance of these experiences? That the
magnetic chord connecting _you_, the Spirit Self, with your conscious
mind, which is the animal soul consciousness, is, so to say, the
telegraphic wire through which, under our control, your physical
organism is made to automatically record the words transmitted by
whichever member of our Band may be acting as operator? While you are
with us your Soul consciousness is in abeyance; hence, is not an active
factor in these experiences, and can record nothing concerning them.
Take comfort from this statement. When under my control you shall
rewrite, and as far as feasible correct the imperfect record of our
journeys to and experiences on Ento; imperfect because you are not yet
fully developed in your peculiar phase of mediumship; your memories
relating to our Mission will experience a sort of resurrection, and you
will recall much, if not all, that has and yet will transpire while
engaged in our endeavor to serve as we would be served. Not until
you shall be wholly freed, will you fully comprehend this statement,
but when you shall be enabled to recall these experiences, also
to a degree, you will realize that they are more than dreams. Yes,
doubtless, there are those who will regard you as a visionary. That
will be their mistake, not yours.

Now we are over the intersection of the Central Waterway, with one
running toward the northwest, which also intersects with one traversing
a portion of the North Temperate Zone. Since Genessano Allis Immo
demonstrated the practicability of great Waterways, several have been
completed and others are in course of construction. Through them
and their feeders the retention of the annual floods and control of
irrigation has been greatly simplified and their measureless value
demonstrated.

To-morrow we all will meet at this point. We held you too long
yesterday and you are yet somewhat devitalized. We will see to it that
you shall sleep restfully to-night, and in the morning at nine o'clock
we will be en evidence.

George, Inez and your wistful-eyed lad will see you safely home, and we
will repair to D[a:]o.

Au revoir.




CHAPTER XV.

RE-EMBODIMENT.


De L'Ester--We find you difficult of control this morning. Like the
legendary Martha you are anxious about many things. Our journey of
to-day is less in your thoughts than are the exasperatingly high prices
of household supplies or the letter you have been reading. How do I
know? Have not I said that I can read your thoughts as you might read
an open book? No, I cannot at all times do so; it is only when, as now,
I am en rapport with your soul consciousness.

You are not resting easily. Ah, that is better. Now you are tranquil,
and now--you are free, and we are off for Ento. Yes, glorious indeed
is this sense of freedom from physical conditions, which only to a
limited degree can you either perceive or realize. It may surprise
and disappoint you to be told that in your present state you cannot
perceive Spirit Worlds. That you may perceive us, we and these Ento
Spirit friends are obliged to, in a sense, etherealize. No, not as
Cabinet Spirits etherealize, but in a more sublimated sense. At the
culmination of our Mission conditions may be such as to enable you to
behold Spirits as they really are. No, I do not promise it, but it may
occur.

No, mortal ears are not attuned to sense ethereal vibrations. Hearken
to the grandly sublime, sonorous under-tone coming from Eternity's
shoreless sea and rolling in rhythmic measure onward, onward
forevermore. Beethoven, Handel, Mozart and others of Earth's illumined
ones, in moments of inspiration caught faint notes of music celestial,
and with ardent longing strove to give them expression. Believe me that
a so termed musical genius is a musical medium, whose subconscious
mind, like an aeolian harp, vibrates in unison with the unwritten music
of the Soul of the Universe.

We are nearing the intersection of the Waterways, and our friends
perceive our approach. Lohaû, ēmenos. We greet you all and apologize if
we have kept you waiting.

Gentol[a:], you will please give me your attention. At no great
distance the branch running in a southwestward direction forms a
junction with another Waterway which is not yet completed, and which
later on we may observe. For the present we will continue our course
toward the northwest. The large town at this intersection is an
important shipping point, and yonder is quite an imposing temple, two
smaller ones and some pretty suburban Istoir[a:]s. There are some
imposing public buildings, many handsome private residences, a pretty
park, and the streets are wide and beautifully kept, and along the
margins of the street canals are borders of blooming plants. Really,
it is an attractive town, but at present we cannot give it further
attention. It is named Fûn[a:]voh Ritz[a:], which in your language
would mean Town of the Intersection. Passing in either direction are
vessels of various sizes, some of them equaling in dimension and
tonnage the huge steamships traversing the seas and oceans of our
planet, and it is not too much to say that in point of scientific
construction and beauty of finish and furnishing Earth does not
possess their equal. They are so scientifically constructed as to be
practically indestructible, and electricity is the propelling energy;
also it lights them, and when desired heats them. For a brief period
we will take passage on the vessel about to leave port. Gentol[a:],
come to the bow and observe how swiftly and almost noiselessly it
cleaves the water. At this rate of speed it will soon cross the second
intersection, and before to-morrow will be traversing the broad expanse
of Villostû Nykon (Sea of Many Islands). We now will glance through
the interior. These great saloons and luxuriously appointed sleeping
apartments are finished in rare carved woods and inlaid designs of
Ento's fruits and flowers through which peer lovely child faces of
marvellously delicate and artistic execution.

You perceive that this vessel carries many passengers, and all in
equal comfort. Unlike the vessels of our planet it carries no steerage
passengers, for on Ento such an atrocity is as unknown as are class
distinctions, which the Sacred Writings distinctly forbid. This is the
Sacred statement: "I, Andûman[a:], the Creator of all that is declare
that of one blood, one bone, one flesh, I have made all the children of
My Love, so let no man dare say, I am better than my brother," and I
can assure you that the Sacred commandment is obeyed.

On this deck are the offices, saloons, sleeping, culinary and dining
apartments. On the deck below, to which we will now descend, are the
engineer's and his assistants' apartments and departments, and also
storage for freight. For the motive energy, the mechanism is partly
here, and partly in what may be termed the hold. These vessels are
so like and so unlike the seagoing vessels of our planet that should
I attempt to describe existing differences I would consume too much
time and space, but we desire that you shall bear to the peoples of
Earth a knowledge of the fact that it is possible for vessels of the
largest size to be propelled by electric energy, and also that now on
Earth there are men inspired by Spirit Electricians who are working
to that end, and that ere long there will come into the Earth sphere
men, who, on the Spirit side, have learned the higher applications of
electric energy, and who will know how to use them. The time is not far
distant when, on our planet, steam as a motive power will have become
as obsolete as it is on Ento.

Your continued surprise, at seeing on Ento much that corresponds with,
or at least bears a resemblance to Earth forms, is so natural that we
do not marvel at it; still, if you will bear in mind a fact we already
have stated, that form is the expression of a universal principle, and
that in conformity with the degree of his evolvement, man expresses
it, you will cease to wonder that our next door neighbors, the
Entoans, shape the keels of their vessels on the same lines as Earth's
shipbuilders shape the keels of their vessels. Adaptation of means to
ends is an expression of form. Thus the savage who shapes the primitive
dugout, or his more advanced brother who constructs the more shapely
bark canoe, intuitively applies the principle of form as a means to an
end. As the Entoans of the present are the result of the Entoans of the
past, you may rest assured that their progenitors also used dugouts and
bark canoes, and only through their larger accumulated experiences do
they, in some directions, take precedence of their less mature Earth
brethren, who, in time, will outgrow their youthfulness. We now will
ascend to the upper deck, for we are approaching one of the circular
basins which are features of all Waterways. They occur at intervals
of about twenty English miles, and through the system of atmospheric
telegraphy the movements of all vessels are so perfectly controlled
that their passage in opposite directions is accomplished through the
medium of the basins, and thus collisions never occur.

Observe how swiftly, how gracefully, yonder huge vessel sweeps around
the further curve of the basin, cleaving the water like a thing of
life, and leaving in its wake great undulating billows of snowy foam.
Across the basin friendly salutations come to our fellow voyagers, and
they cry back, "Lohaû, lohaû. F[a:]endos [a:]yon mûya." Ah me, it is
hail and good-bye to most things, and now it is good-bye to this fine
vessel which for a time has given us hospitality and you an object
lesson.

George, we now will ascend. Sweeping northward and southward, yet
tending eastward, we will afford you a comprehensive view of the
equatorial lands and portions of the North and South Temperate
Zones. Observe how diversified is this Equatorial region. Cities,
towns and villages dot the wide expanses which largely are devoted
to agricultural pursuits, and so productive are the lands that they
not only afford sustenance for local populations but admit of great
quantities of grains, fruits and vegetables being shipped to other less
favored localities. Truly, Ento's Irrigated Belt is the garden of the
Planet. George, we now will quickly pass northward to the headwater of
Cēhylû Ooltom[a:]h (Rushing River).

Gentol[a:], in this chain of spring-fed lakes the great river rises,
and during a considerable portion of the year its volume is greatly
enlarged through melting snows and frequent rains of this rather cold
but humid region. We will follow its course southward so that you
may observe the cities, towns and villages lining its banks, and the
various kinds of craft traversing its navigable length. You perceive
that Pfylonna, the city beneath us, is at the head of navigation, and
we with profit and pleasure might pass an hour in viewing its points of
interest, but not now, for time is flying and at any moment we may be
called to D[a:]o.

Yes, this northern region is more picturesque than are the lands of the
Temperate and Equatorial countries, which, as we proceed southward,
stretch into great level plains which sustain a dense population,
largely of agriculturists. Yonder, on the eastern bank of the river,
is a pretty, wooded height, the remnant of a mountain chain of the
long ago. Now its slight elevation is little more than a sufficient
barrier against the tumultuous floods, which during the spring pour
down between it and the stone embankments of Cēhylû Ooltom[a:]h's
western shore. Yes, Ento's Waterways, Irrigating System, Embankments
and other stupendous works excite wonder and admiration for the skill,
industry and enterprise involved, but generally, when self-preservation
is at stake, humanity rises superior to emergencies. Inidor[a:], while
we hastily survey the surrounding country, will you learn if the
Istoir[a:] may be interesting enough to engage our attention? Some
rural Istoir[a:]s possess very attractive features.

Inidora--I feel strongly impelled to gratify your curiosity and my own.
I shall be gone but a moment, and if worth while will summon you.

De L'Ester--Again we are near the northern limit of the Irrigating
and Waterways System, and to what a state of perfection it has been
brought. Those great Structures are pumping Stations, and so excellent
is the mechanism employed that the water distribution is under perfect
control. The government of Ento indulges in no half-way measures.
Whatever is done is done as well as can be accomplished.

What can so delay Inidor[a:]? He must have found the Istoir[a:]
unusually interesting. We will seek him there. Ah--see how like one
enchanted he stands gazing upon a woman kneeling before the flower
laden altar. Over her white robes falls a wealth of dark, waving hair,
which, like a silken mantle, partly conceals her large, dark, luminous
eyes and marvellously lovely face, in which yet lingers the timidity
and guilelessness of childhood. So entrancing is the young creature
that Inidor[a:] is unconscious of our presence. Now she prays to
Azēon, God of Love, to send her a lover who shall be handsome, tender
and true, and she will be faithful and loving until death shall call
them into the Silence. Prayer from a heart so pure, uttered by lips so
tremulous, so beautiful, might move either mortal or Spirit. Genessano,
speak to your brother, for truly he is lost to all save this lovely
girl.

Genessano--Inidor[a:], my brother, have you found in this beautiful
suppliant your other Self? Nay, start not; it is I, Genessano. You were
so absorbed that you did not observe our coming in search of you.

Inidora--Yes, yes, I indeed have found my other Self, and cannot claim
my own. Oh, thou beauteous Spirit Amilla, for whom I have searched the
worlds of space, clothed thou art in flesh, which holds thee as the
shell holds the pearl. Blind and deaf thou art to the presence of thy
lover, thy other Self, whom thou prayest Azēon to send thee. Drawn to
thee through the law which attracts each to its own, I again have found
thee, and henceforth I shall guard and guide thee until thou art free;
then again wilt thou find thy lover tender and true, and I shall claim
thee for my very own. Amilla, dearest, loveliest one, reverently I
kiss thy perfumed hair, thy upturned brow, beneath which thy luminous
eyes shine like twin stars. I touch with mine thy parted lips, and the
fragrance of thy breath is as the fragrance of rodels, but thou knowest
not that I am near thee. Amilla, Amilla, oh, couldst thou know, that as
of old thy lover so tender, so true, stands beside thee, how quickly
wouldst thou turn toward me thy face, which is as beautiful as is the
face of an angel. But thou dost not know, thou dost not know. Alas,
thou hast so forgotten the past that I am as naught to thee. Oh, it is
pitiful, pitiful, that I cannot make thee understand. Fain would I
this moment free thee, but I must not, I dare not. Friends, bear with
me, for until I shall have brought her Soul into harmony with my own
I shall remain with my regained Amilla, whose repeated embodiments,
like my own, have held us far apart. This accomplished, I at intervals
will be with you, and when my love shall be freed, oh, joy of joys!
we together with you dear friends will for love's sake labor for the
upliftment of humanity.

De L'Ester--Even as thine own shall one day come to thee, so ere long
shall mine own come to me. Inscrutable are the Laws of the Infinite
Duality through whose seemingly devious ways apparently we are impelled
toward destined ends. As to-day I walk alone, so one brief hour ago,
walked our Inidor[a:]. A seeming chance, a sudden impulse, and lo!
for our friend the face of the universe is changed. Gentol[a:], you
comprehend that, during past embodiments, Inidor[a:] and Amilla have
known of their indissoluble relationship. That you may come to further
understand the law of re-embodiment, I briefly will relate a portion
of my life story, involving comparatively recent experiences of my
own, and of one who is my other Self, for, as you have been told, the
male and the female are the two halves of a whole, and it is a law of
nature, or if it pleases you, of God, that, somewhere or somehow, the
halves shall become as one, not as one entity or individual, but as one
in perfect Spiritual harmony.

More than a century ago, after a prolonged separation, suddenly my Soul
Mate and I came face to face, and I knew my own. I a freed spirit,
she a creature born of lust and fallen in the mire of a dissolute
existence. Vainly her Spirit Self warred against and strove to escape
from the bondage of inherited animal passions which held her fast as
with chains of steel; so, patiently, lovingly I did for her what I
could, until one drunken with wine and frenzied with jealousy, struck
her body dead at his feet. I, who waited and watched for her release,
drew her away from the scenes of her degraded mortal existence to
her own place, aiding her as other loving ones also did, to undo the
tangled threads of her sorrowful Earth life. She, who well understood
the Law of Being, quickly realized that if she would progress out
of the conditions of her previous embodiments, she again must enter
the Mortal Sphere of our or of some other planet, and with slight
hesitation, this she resolved to do.

It is well that you shall learn _that all mortal experiences_ are
necessary for the perfecting of character, which is but another term
for Spiritual growth. The tendency of the real Self, the Spirit, is
ever onward, ever upward. The tendency of the animal Soul or conscious
Self, ever is toward the material plane of Being; thus, in the
Spiritualized human, there is a constant warfare between the Positive
or Spiritual man and the Negative or Animal consciousness and no one
comes out of the battle unscathed.

You question the justice of a law which demands from humanity that
which from an elevated mortal standpoint is objectionable; but, my
friend, have not you learned that the crust of bread earned by sweat
of the brow is sweeter far than the whitest loaf to the palate of the
idler? Be assured that when again you shall find yourself on our side
of life, you will prize the crusts you have, through sad experiences,
_earned_, far more than the white loaves you might have eaten to
your hurt, and I do not question but that in time you not only will
acquiesce in the justice but in the beneficence of a law which admits
of the undoing of mistakes, and of the acquisition of much that only
can be learned through repeated mortal experiences, and of what is of
greatest moment, the Rebirth of exalted Spirits, who may be Saviors of
humanity.

You, who in your mortal state, but partly realize that Love, the
Divine Principle, impels all things into harmonious relations, into a
fulfillment of the Law of Love, may experience a sense of surprise,
that after a period equalling no more than forty of Earth's fleeting
years, my Romēne, grown strong and learned in many things, announced
her desire to at once take on mortal form, that as a Teacher she might
serve women undergoing such experiences as to her were most sorrowful
memories.

Yes, Romēne is the name of my other Self, and at her desire one of
the Spirit Bands, known as Angels of the Visitation, sought out
suitable environments for her next step on the ever ascending ladder of
progress. Why did she so quickly become re-embodied? She did so that
thus she might fulfill the Law of Love, for remember _that it is only
through loving service_ that Spirits in or out of the mortal body grow
strong, wise and purified. Although Romēne and I understood the _fact_
that for all losses there are adequate compensations, it but slightly
mitigated the sorrow of our separation. We simply submitted, as all
must, who desire to progress toward the unattainable perfection of the
Infinite Spirit, Who alone is Perfection. Desiring that I should not
interfere with, or even be cognizant of her mortal experiences, Romēne
exacted from me a promise that I should not seek for her or endeavor
to learn on what planet she might be re-embodied, and I have kept my
promise. When the moment of our parting arrived, there was one close
embrace, one lingering look into each other's eyes, then a loosening
of clinging hands, and then--and then I stood alone, for the Angels of
the Visitation had borne my Spirit Romēne away to, I know not where.
At times word comes to me of one who lives a life of self-abnegation,
of an Angel of pity, who ministers to fallen ones, inspiring them with
clearer views of their duties to others, to themselves, thus to God.
That ceaselessly she walks amid the squalid homes of the ignorant,
the wretched children of men, instilling into their dulled minds a
desire for knowledge, which is the bread and water of life. Thus she
is _earning_ her crust of bread. Thus she is _earning_ the reward for
duties fulfilled.

It is a provision of the Law of Re-embodiment that those who return to
the Mortal Plane retain little or no recollection of past experiences,
but to some peculiarly constituted persons, in moments of Spiritual
exaltation, come gleams of memories of a wondrous past existence,
which, like the lightning's flash, come and are gone. I know not if
to my Romēne these gleams of memories ever come, but I know that with
me her Spiritualized Image ever abides, and that with measureless
longing I wait and watch for her return. Never have I purposely sought
for my vanished one, but ever as I journey from world to world, with
vague expectation I scan the faces of women, hoping that in some one
of them I may find at least a resemblance to her who on some planet is
fulfilling the Law of Love, and the years go swiftly by and soon, ah,
yes, at any moment she may return to me.

This recital I purposely have given as a lesson for you who so revolt
against the Law of Re-embodiment.

Gentola--Certainly I do not desire to avoid learning any truth, however
unpalatable it may be, but to one whose latest religious education has
been thoroughly orthodox, the facts and statements of the Spiritual
Philosophy are somewhat startling. I have outgrown some of my former
beliefs, but I confess that I have not grown far enough to receive with
equanimity a belief in Re-embodiment. Yes, I am aware that the belief
did not originate in Modern Spiritualism, indeed it is only of late
years that I have heard any Spiritualist advocate it. If it is a truth,
why is it that most returning, perhaps I should say communicating
Spirits are so reticent concerning it? During the twelve years of my
Mediumship, to me it has not been more than hinted at. From your own
story I infer that Re-embodiment is a matter of choice, yet clearly in
order to progress of necessity one must yield to this law. When it may
suit your inclination I should like you to more fully explain this very
mystifying matter.

De L'Ester--To your quite reasonable remarks I cannot now reply, but
at a more opportune time I shall do so. This much I may say, that
although a willing consent to an _unavoidable necessity_ is somewhat
paradoxical, when there is a choice between a lesser and an infinitely
greater good, even at cost of ease or inclination, one is apt to choose
the greater good. As with most persons some of the experiences of your
present Embodiment have not been so agreeable as to induce in you a
desire for their possible repetition, yet I venture to predict that a
time will arrive when, through your own desire, you again will take on
mortal conditions.

Gentola--It may be as you say, but now I recoil from the thought of
again passing through the sorrowful experiences that of necessity are
a part of mortal existence. But come what may, in all sincerity I can
say, "Thy will be done."

While we have been conversing I have been watching Inidor[a:] and the
kneeling girl and it seems strange that she does not perceive his
presence, he who appears so real, so substantial. As he gently touches
her hair, she thinks the breeze is toying with it, and with her shapely
hand she smooths its rippling waves. He kisses her forehead over which
flossy curls are straying; again she fancies that the breeze is playing
with her tresses, and somewhat impatiently she tucks them under her
jewelled fillet. Now she rises to her feet, raises her hands toward
the golden Sun crowning the altar and silently, but with an expression
of intense devotion on her lovely face, bows low, murmuring, "Oirah,
oirah, oirah," and now with Inidor[a:] by her side, quietly, serenely
she passes from the Istoir[a:]. What a strange scene, but in keeping
with all these strange experiences.

De L'Ester, all my preconceived ideas relating to spirits are
vanishing. What were my preconceived ideas? I scarcely can say, but
certainly I have not conceived it possible that such a scene as the one
we have witnessed could occur. Like other mortals, in a sense, I have
regarded Spirits as superhuman, and I confess that it is something of
a shock to realize that you are as human as myself. Then again, as I
believe that you would not mislead me, I am constrained to accept your
declaration that Re-embodiment is a fact, and in my mind the question
arises, why does not the Infinite Potentiality create humans so perfect
as to preclude the necessity of their experiencing the many trials and
sorrows incident to repeated Embodiments?

De L'Ester--Why the Infinite Duality does this, or does not do that,
only the Infinite can reveal, but this we do know, that as Spirits in
or out of the mortal body through high endeavor and loving service for
others unfold their infolded attributes they _grow_ into a _clearer
realization_ that whatever really is is right, and that in the Universe
there is but one Principle which is wholly good, hence, logically,
there can be no evil, and that so termed evil is a manifestation of
unevolvement, which inevitably must yield to the divinity inherent in
all that is real.

As to Spirits, the only difference between those in and those out of
mortal bodies is the change in their environments. So termed death is
the casting off of a coarse garment for one of finer texture, and a
subsequent removal from one to another condition of existence, which in
no way changes the higher emotions.

Why does not the Infinite Potentiality create humans so perfect as
to not require added virtues? As well may we ask when, where, how,
did the first humans of the universe appear, for neither we, or
most exalted Spirits, or Angels of the highest Heavens know. The
utmost that is known is that in the evolution of the human animal
germs, of any planet, a period arrives when the evolved human animal
becomes a conscious Soul, and in him the Ego, the Spirit entity,
finds an instrument through whom it may express its God likeness or
attributes. How do we know this? Because that on various planets we
see it exemplified. Upon what basis do we declare Re-embodiment to be
a fact? Because we constantly see its demonstration. Why do not all
communicating Spirits declare this truth? May I ask why do not you
speak Greek, Hebrew or Sanscrit? You may reply, because I have not
learned those languages; besides, should I speak them but few persons
would understand them. Precisely so, and it is quite as true, that
only Spirits advanced to certain planes of Spiritual Being are learned
in the Law of Re-embodiment, and equally as true that until of late
comparatively few Occidentals have been prepared to accept a truth so
repellent not only to orthodox Christianity but to the many whose minds
reject all beyond the material plane of Being. Communicating Spirits
may be ignorant concerning Re-embodiment, or too wise to offer that
which might excite distrust or aversion. At times silence is indeed
golden.

Among the older civilizations of our planet a knowledge of this truth
and of the significance of the Karma are so incorporated with all that
concerns their existence that their every thought and act are shaped
thereby, and it is but a question of time when the western peoples will
receive and retain the impress of their forcefulness.

Yes, I am aware that by most of your thinkers the law of heredity
is thought to be accountable for the great diversity of forms,
features and mental characteristics of families, and to a degree
they are correct, but only to a degree. For instance, you are one of
ten children (not including Inez and Emma, whose growth has been on
the Spirit Side) of the same parents, subjected to nearly the same
antenatal influences and after environments, yet in physical likeness,
temperament and mentality, you were so unlike your brothers and sisters
as to be regarded as somewhat uncanny. We know that heredity only
partly covers your case.

As another illustration, we will select a not exceptional instance of
a low type of parents, whose ancestors may or may not have been below
their own level, _but certainly not above it_. To these parents are
born a number of children who may more or less closely resemble them,
but among the brood is one so entirely unlike any of the others as
to perhaps arouse suspicion as to his or her paternity. Though the
other children possess very ordinary mentality, and physically are
uncouth, the exceptional child is unusually intelligent, straight of
limb, erect of head, open eyed, handsome featured, and with a certain
grace of bearing which sets him or her quite apart, not only from the
other children, but from the parents to whom he or she ever is as
much a stranger as though of another family. Does the law of heredity
satisfactorily account for an instance of this kind? _And it is not an
isolated one._

Your scientists assert that not only through successive, but
_intermittent_ generations, mental and physical traits are
transmitted, and I admit the fact; on the other hand I assert that
it is not possible _through heredity_ or fortuitous circumstances
to, through a low type of parentage, produce a type possessing the
very best characteristics of the human. One does not gather figs
off thistles or roses from noxious weeds. Believe me, Gentol[a:],
entertaining Angels unawares is of common occurrence, and Angels are
Spirits who, through repeated embodiments, have attained to more or
less exalted states of Being.

Yes, very exalted Spirits, desiring to compass certain ends, on our
or other planets, are, so to say, reborn, and generally into lowly
conditions. If you will acquaint yourself with the mortal origin of
the Saviors of our Planet, the men and women who, during the crises of
humanity's upheavals, have come to the front as leaders or teachers,
you will learn that as a rule it has been, not the nobly born, but the
lowly born, who have been the champions, the deliverers of the people,
whom "in the fullness of time" they came to serve, perchance to save.

To return to your own case. You are aware that your parents were
very upright, very pious and intelligent persons; these and other
characteristics fitted them for parentage of more than average merit.
Your father was strong physically and mentally, and of a most generous
nature, which impelled him to assist all who came his way. At the same
time he exhibited a certain ruggedness of character, amounting to
brusqueness. Your mother, frail physically, but with high Spiritual
development which afforded her fine intuition, formed with your father
a combination through whom Spirits well advanced might return to
further fulfill the Law of their Being. Physically, you are somewhat
like your father, and also your mentality possesses a coloring of his
positive, unswerving honesty of purpose, but largely it is through your
mother's Spirituality that you possess a free entrance into the Realm
of Intuition. So much and more I yield to the law of heredity. Then
again arises the question, all having been born of the same parents
and under like conditions and environments, why are not you and your
brothers and sisters more alike? When you return to our side of life
you will be better able to reply to this question.

You desire that I shall tell you something of your embodiment preceding
your present one. You were an Oriental, your parents being Egyptians,
dwelling in Alexandria. Your father was a dealer in rich stuffs and
jewels. A man of stern character, yet withal of a rare tenderness of
nature. Your mother, a woman of great beauty and fine intelligence,
gave you birth, and almost immediately passed to the World of Spirits.
Toward the close of eleven years of Earth life you joined your mother
who had guarded and guided you until you were released. Yes, previous
to your present Embodiment you clearly understood that you were to be
the Special Instrument for the accomplishment of this Mission, and
gladly you re-entered the mortal plane that thus you might further
fulfill the Law of Love. Throughout your present Embodiment you have
shown decidedly Oriental tendencies. Your love of light, of high
temperature, of rich colors, of flowers and fruits, and your equally
strong dislike of darkness, of cold and of animal food, indicates
a sort of overlapping of the tendencies of your previous Earthly
existence.

For some time I have had it in my thoughts to answer some of the
unasked questions agitating your mind, but until now no opportunity has
presented itself. I am quite aware of the inadequacy of my replies, and
of my inability to verify such statements as I have made, nevertheless
they are as true as Truth.

Gentola--I thank you for your patient endeavor to instruct me, and I
earnestly desire that I may grow into a knowledge of all that is true.

De L'Ester--We better than yourself comprehend why you so revolt
against the idea of Re-embodiment. Your nature is very pitiful, very
sympathetic, and it is not so much your personal sorrows as your
consciousness of the fact that on our Planet ignorance, injustice,
cruelty and poverty so prevail as to render life undesirable, that
occasions you to shrink away from further mortal experiences.

Yes, it is true that the struggle for power and luxury among those best
equipped for the battle is indeed a sad spectacle, only a little less
sad than is the struggle for mere existence among the toiling millions
of Earth's children. On the surface the strife between prosperity
and poverty appears very unequal, but to those who see beyond mortal
existence, and who know that it is the sum of mortal deeds that
determines the condition of all on the Spirit Side, how pitifully small
and mean are all the ephemeral dignities and luxuries for which men and
women barter their best, their immortal interests!

We are not surprised that you now shrink from the thought of again
returning into this seething maelstrom of human passions and misery,
but remember that under all this strife and agony is the ever uplifting
lever of evolution which unfailingly brings to the surface and
perpetuates that which is worthiest. Cannot you yet conceive of the
lofty devotion of discarnated ones, who, seeing their opportunity and
their duty, hasten to the rescue of struggling humanity, sustaining
the weak, restraining the wayward and consoling the sorrowful, thus
fulfilling the Law of Love? Thus presenting to humanity higher views of
Truth.

Ever the onward marching army of humanity is calling for leaders who
shall direct their ways toward a better land, and ever the supply
is equal to the demand; for ever the Angels of the Visitation are
preparing the ways and making them straight for the advent of Saviors
who are to be the Leaders and Teachers of humanity. At present the
affairs of Earth's peoples are tending toward a most destructive
culmination. It would seem that only the Infinite One can stay the
mad strife for place, for power, for gratification of selfish greed,
which, from day to day, grows fiercer and more aggressive. Almost
certainly they are sowing a wind that will develop into a whirlwind
whose destructive fury will efface so many landmarks that survivors
will find themselves at a loss to discover their whereabouts. Those who
are at the head of Humanity's Signal Service should heed the outlook.
Will they? We think not. They and the accumulators and hoarders of
the wealth that should serve humanity's needs are so besotted with
selfishness that they are blind and deaf to the cries of suffering
millions who know not where to turn for bread, and who now dumbly
endure, but who, when the day of reckoning shall come as come it will,
will hold their oppressors to an account of their Stewardship. At no
time during the history of our Planet have the Rulers of the Nations
been less humane, less selfish, less merciful, less just than at
present. True, the Sovereigns of some of the more enlightened Nations
do not, as in times past, indulge in wholesale or ruthless butcheries
of their subjects, who have evolved too far to tamely submit to such
cruelties, but it is a Truth as true as God that a sovereign or nation
who idly, perhaps exultingly, looks on while another nation is being
butchered for the crime of self-defense, are aiders and abettors of
murderous crime. At this moment fear of consequences alone stays the
hands of the leading Sovereigns of Europe from flying at each other's
throats and sacrificing on the altars of their unrighteous ambition
hecatombs of innocent, unwilling victims. Understand, Gentol[a:], I
am not finding fault with a condition, which, in the present state of
evolution of the peoples of our Planet, cannot well be otherwise. I
simply state facts and deplore their unwelcome existence.

Not only I, but all Spirits of right mind, long unutterably for an
opportunity to say to mortals, if but this much: Learn to love one
another. Learn that the good of one is the good of all. Learn that a
cup of cold water from the hand of a friend is better far than a cup
of choicest wine from a grudging hand. Learn that loving charity and
pitiful mercy are as two radiant Angels whose brightness will lighten
your pathway to the brink of the river beyond whose further shore you
will reap the harvest whose seed you have sowed while on the mortal
side of life. Learn that gentle words spoken and kindly deeds done are
treasures laid up in the heaven of your own consciousness, and that
throughout eternity they will be as precious jewels in your crown of
endless existence. And learn, oh, learn that, above and beyond all
else, Love is the fulfilling of the Law of the Infinite.

Yes, everywhere the processes of the progress of humanity appear to be
much the same, and so advanced and harmonious are some of the peoples
of some Planets of our and other Solar Systems, that compared with the
unevolved, inharmonious peoples of our Planet they are as Gods. Yet so
surely as on this height the Sun is shining, so surely will a period
arrive when Earth's peoples will be as brethren living in perfect unity.

Courage then, my friend, courage. With such ointment as you may
possess, anoint the worn and weary feet of your fellow travellers,
and though on Earth's plane they may neither understand or value your
service, be assured that on the Spirit Side their risen Selves will
turn and bless you.

I have consumed so much time that only in the briefest manner can
I reply to further questions. You desire to know if all mortals of
our Planet have been Re-embodied? Yes, repeatedly. You think it
strange that Spirits of a low plane of evolvement willingly become
reborn under such conditions as inevitably must occasion them much
wretchedness. I reply that Spirits seeking Rebirth are aware that they
cannot re-enter mortal existence on a plane higher than the one for
which their progress on the Spirit Side has fitted them, and gladly
they take up their cross that thus they may _earn_ their crown of
Spiritual progress. At another time I will inform you as to how Spirits
recognize their Spirit mates. Too long we have tarried on this pleasant
height. Now we must hasten elsewhere. George, your sister awaits your
assistance.

George--I have been taking a survey of this locality, and have learned
that the proprietor of the surrounding estate, with his family and
domestic assistants, occupies the nearby fine residence, to which is
attached this attractive Istoir[a:]. On its eastern side the height
gently slopes toward an extensive area of irrigated lands. When we
rise you will observe the pretty village occupied by those who, with
the proprietor, are engaged in their cultivation, which apparently is
very successful. De L'Ester has informed you that on Ento seldom are
laborers mere wage earners; all enterprises, of whatever nature or
magnitude, being conducted on a co-operative plan.

I also have glanced into the residence and found it a finely appointed
and luxurious rural home. I left Inidor[a:] enraptured with Amilla, who
sang a love song accompanying her voice with the soft, sweet notes of
the harplike Loit[a:]. She is the only surviving child of parents quite
past middle age, and she resembles her rather dark skinned father,
though indeed she also resembles her mother, who is fair enough to be
of the Quend race. In the Istoir[a:], back of the altar, are tablets
setting forth the family history of births and deaths. R[a:]imon
Kenoid[a:]s is the father's name. Amilla bears the name of her mother.

De L'Ester--As usual, George, you make us your debtors. Now we will
rise, and while following the course of the river we will obtain a view
of areas of the Irrigated Belt. We are journeying nearly due south,
though further on the river curves slightly toward the east, then
gradually toward the west, but the general direction is southward until
it empties into Hûyd[a:]fon Lois[a:] (Bottomless Lake), a fresh water
lake, partly within the South Temperate Zone, and which is a part of
the system. Now the river widens and the elevation grows so pronounced
as to suggest a period when its rocky peaks pierced the clouds. Yes,
ages have passed since that remote time.

Those great embankments along the western shore are for the purpose
of confining the prodigious volume of water which in the spring pours
down from the north, threatening to inundate the broad, level stretches
toward the west. You have yet to witness, and shall, if all goes well,
the spring floods of melted snow, to which are added such downpours
of rain as will astonish you. To one unused to the spectacle it might
appear as though Ento were about to have an experience similar to the
legendary Noachian deluge. As already stated engineering skill has
risen equal to all emergencies arising from the spring floods, which no
longer are regarded as disastrous, but as a special blessing.

What vast expanses of growing grains, of vegetables and fruits. Yes,
Ento's labor saving machines are of such a high degree of excellence
that they serve all the purposes of a fine system of cultivation.

Below us now the mountainous height abruptly slopes to the level
of the plain, rendering necessary the great embankment which, as
you perceive, is carried to the further side of the gap, where it
terminates at the foot of the broken mountain, which extends the length
of the river. Gam[a:]lûfan (Town of the Gap), the large town below
us, whose wharf is lined with vessels great and small, and in whose
Basin a number of large vessels await opportunity for discharging or
for taking aboard lading and passengers, is a manufacturing centre of
some importance, and its wide, beautifully paved, flower bordered and
shaded streets and numerous fine residences indicate a considerable
population of highly cultivated people. As is usual, the Temple is
the most attractive feature of the town. Its white, sculptured walls
and lofty golden dome, on which glows the many rayed emblem of Ento's
religion, stands out in bold relief against the background of the
verdure covered slope at whose foot it is built. In the large building
to the right of the temple is a fine library, and to the right of it
is the town school, to which at this moment a large number of children
are hastening; not with the noisy hilarity of youths of our Planet,
but with the gravity of their elders. It is a pathetic feature of Ento
child life which we will hope may ere long disappear.

Why do not we in this region see any Tuzamos For the same reason
that on our Planet a time will arrive when, as on Ento, railways, in
certain localities, will be impracticable. You have been informed
that, in certain regions of this planet, to a considerable depth, the
soil is friable and as porous as a sponge, rendering it too unstable
for a Tûz[a:]mo roadbed, which the spring floods undermine and render
unsafe for transportation. It is only where the soil is coherent that
Tûz[a:]mo lines are practicable. Of course, as Air Transports can go
anywhere over the Planet, for many purposes they are preferable to land
or water transportation.

Yonder is a fruit laden vessel drawing to its mooring at the wharf. We
will descend so that you and our lad may examine the crates and baskets
piled high with the luscious fruits of the various countries. Observe
how each variety of fruit is surrounded by its own peculiar aura, which
mortals term aroma. It is the vital principle or Spirit essence of the
fruit, and is the portion of which Spirits partake, and I can assure
you that an indulgence in this direction is never followed by a fit
of indigestion. You may believe my assertion that the aura of animal
foods attracts Spirits of gross appetites, and the feasters at meat
laden boards ever have guests they little dream of entertaining, and
the drinker of intoxicants hobnobs with boon companions for whom he
unwittingly pays the score.

While on this subject I shall tell you another fact. In all households
there is a certain fluidic condition originating in the emanations
of the persons composing the family, and also from the emanations of
the foods partaken of by the family, and of visitors who in a slight
measure contribute to the condition. So sublimated is this fluid that,
as a rule, only discarnated Spirits fully perceive it, yet there are
instances where it is so decided, so perceptible, that, to a degree,
visitors unconsciously are influenced by it, and according as this
fluid is Spiritualized or sensualized, will be the class of persons
attracted by it. Hereafter, upon entering different homes, observe your
sensations, and soon you will recognize the meaning of this statement.

No, animal food does not necessarily debase Spirituality; yet I would
not advise you or any one to partake of it. Comparatively few persons
are positive enough to repel unseen, uninvited guests, but only decided
positives have any assurance that they are not entertaining to their
hurt, guests whose mere proximity is a menace. But enough of this,
for I do not feel quite certain that this information is not somewhat
premature, but let it pass.

Now we will resume our journey. Yes, the generally levelled surface
of these Equatorial lands precludes much variety or picturesqueness
of scenery. We now have reached the southern confine of the Province
of Vohûak[a:], and the river curves a little toward the southwest,
rushing through this rift in the mountain, which is known as Yoid[a:]s
hû[a:] (bow shaped). Below us, in the angle formed by the mountain
and the river, is the capital city of Vohûak[a:], which is known as
Endoin[a:][a:] Tylû (City of Bridges), and aptly it might be termed
the Venice of Ento. To my mind it is a very beautiful and unique city.
Gentol[a:], what do you think of it?

Gentola--It also impresses me as being a very beautiful city. Through
nearly all of the streets are canals spanned at intervals by handsome
bridges, so ornamental, so apparently unsubstantial, that it seems
surprising that they sustain the weight of the numerous vehicles and
multitudes of people passing over them. The margins of the canals are
lined with great palmlike trees, whose leaves are in incessant motion,
and as the pretty, passenger laden and other boats glide along under
their rustling branches they seem to be whispering to each other.
And, dear me, see those lovely, lovely flowers, growing all along the
margins of the Waterways, their rich, glossy green leaves and great
snowy blooms trailing down the walls and onto the water, where they
rest like enthroned Queens of the flower world. Yes, I perceive their
aura, and how wonderful it is. Please take me nearer, so that I may see
them more clearly. Genessano, you are a flower lover, will not you tell
us something concerning these beauties?

[Illustration: RODEL. The National Flower.]

Genessano--This is the rodel, the beauteous flower whose delicate
perfume is considered far more exquisite than that of any other of
the many fragrant blooms of Ento. With fervent prayers to Andûman[a:]'s
Messengers that, through loving deeds and duties fulfilled, its life
may be made as beautiful as is the heart of the rodel, its unfolding
buds are placed in the hands of the newly created infant. Bridal and
other special ceremonies are graced by its peerless loveliness, and
its snowy blooms cover from tear dimmed eyes the pallid faces of the
beloved dead. Also it symbolizes Life and Death. In early morning its
opening chalices turn their hearts toward Andûman[a:]'s rising abode,
their sweet fragrance ascending as an Offering to Him Who is the Source
of all life. At close of day its white petals fold themselves over its
golden heart and it sleeps the sleep of death, for it blooms but a day,
ere its sweet life ends. Look into its heart and you will see a golden
representation of the shining rays surrounding Andûman[a:]'s glorious
abode, hence it is regarded as a Divine Symbol, and in a sense it is
idolized, or perhaps I should say reverenced as being possessed of
Sacred qualities. Where nature has not provided suitable conditions for
its growth it is artificially cultivated; besides, the matured buds are
shipped all over the Planet, so that no occasion need lack the office
of the Sacred flower.

Gentola--Many thanks for your interesting information. To me all
flowers are more or less beautiful; these are especially so. What
immense leaves and how oddly pretty their frilled edges are, and they
stand up in a rim all around the---- Oh, my, Bernard, look at that
droll little creature blinking at us from that large leaf. What is it,
De L'Ester?

De L'Ester--If you should come across one of its kind on Earth probably
you would call it a frog. Genessano may have another name for it.
Brillo? That is rather a nice name for the comical looking creature.
Ah, there it goes headforemost into the water, and now may be relating
to its comrades its narrow escape from the clutches of some strange
looking beings. Observe how substantially these canals are walled.
The masonry is about six feet thick and impenetrable by water, and
at intervals spaces are arranged for the growing of rodels and other
plants of an aquatic nature. The Entoans, universally, are flower
lovers; so, in your next Re-embodiment, you will find other inducements
than grapes to tempt you to become an Entoan. We will ascend a little
so that we may command a better view of the city. Yes, the scene is
very attractive. The canals are alive with passing boats, and overhead
are Transports coming or going.

You have observed the immense basin wherein a number of large river
vessels await their turn to load or unload their freight. Those
numerous small, heavily laden boats are the carriers to or distributors
for the large vessels which, of course, could not navigate the canals.
An admirable feature of Entoan cities is the absence of avoidable
noises, haste and confusion. Always the people work in harmony, each
respecting the rights of their neighbors, and all intent upon doing
their duty, thus honoring their calling and themselves. Back of their
harmonious relations with each other is the intelligent force of a
Spiritually evolved people, expressing itself in elevated thoughts and
aims, and in the beautiful in art, architecture, industry and thrift,
which ever are the concomitants of properly adjusted social relations
and of an intelligent sense of duty. The Entoans consider idleness so
utterly at variance with right conduct as to be disgraceful and not at
all permissible, save in cases of disability. Although they never have
heard that Satan finds mischief for idle hands to do, they have learned
that idleness is the begetter of all manner of social corruption, so,
sternly it is frowned out of Ento's code of ethics. What is known
on our planet as the social evil, which, indeed, is a condition of
undevelopment on a level with mere animalism, long, long ago, through
their ever increasing Spirituality and consequent refinement, was,
by the Entoans, outgrown. Even by persons least observant of social
niceties, strictest chastity is practiced. Yes, Ento's religion demands
chaste conduct; but, aside from that, the Entoans have evolved beyond
mere animalism. Idleness is a vestige of barbarism, and inevitably it
begets vicious tendencies and vicious abuses of natural functions;
hence it is all important that the law-makers of a people shall not
only recognize the importance of this fact, but that also they shall
in themselves furnish fine examples of honesty, industry, chastity and
temperate living, which, alas, generally they do not. Our acquaintance
with the peoples of various Planets affords us wide opportunities for
observation of their modes of thought and habits, and wherever we have
found degradation of the sacred function of procreation, we have found
a corresponding lack of Spirituality, and of all ideals constituting
the basis of true civilization, which invariably is the reflection of
the degree of Spirituality of peoples who never are truly civilized
until they recognize that the human body is a temple for the indwelling
of the holy Spirit, the God-man.

Now we must turn our attention elsewhere. It will not, I think, be
amiss to devote a short time to an investigation of yonder mercantile
establishment, so that you may compare it with those of--well, of your
city of St. Louis. You perceive that the structure is seven stories in
height, and its frontage is quite two hundred feet, its depth about
the same. Enter without hesitation. You are not yet quite accustomed
to the fact of your invisibility. Including the interiors the entire
structure is of stone and various metals, rendering it fireproof.
Those elevators, swiftly carrying patrons to the various floors, also
are entirely of metal. Yes, the lightweight metal metszû.

These plant spaces surrounding the fountains are quite attractive,
and the fountains themselves are exquisite in design and execution.
I imagine that they are intended to serve the double purposes of
ornamentation and of cooling the heated atmosphere. Observe this
one. In the centre of the basin, on an ornate pedestal, is poised
the graceful form of a lovely, smiling girl, holding in her arms and
outreaching hands a mass of blown rodels and buds, whose long, slender
stems and frilled leaves seem to float on the water. From the hearts of
the full blown flowers jets of crystal water are thrown nearly to the
lofty ceiling, thence falling in silvery spray over the upturned face
of the girl and her armful of rodel blooms. The rim of the marble basin
is a composition of rodel blooms and foliage, as perfect of execution
as is the marble form of the girl or the lifelike blooms she holds in
her arms. Here is another basin in which is a great white marble vase
filled with growing aquatic plants and grasses. Around its rim, at
intervals, are sculptured water fowls from whose bills fine jets of
water are thrown upward, falling downward into the vase and basin like
a gentle shower of rain.

There are four fountains, and the basin of the next one is shaped
like a shallow fluted shell, in which is a group of semi-human,
semi-fishlike creatures of a mythical character. Oh, yes, the Entoans,
like all other peoples, have their myths. Genessano may enlighten us as
to the meaning of these nondescript creatures, whose present occupation
is throwing a bewildering number of tiny streams of water in such a
fashion as to partly conceal their lovely faces and fishlike forms.

Genessano--It is a very ancient story, and reckoned something more than
a myth, that once in a remote time a mother and her three children
fled from one who sought to destroy her and them. Being closely
pursued, she cried to the Gods for succor, and with her children
sprang into Indolois[a:]. The Deific Ones, compassionating her and
her children, metamorphosed her and them in such a manner that easily
they eluded their pursuer, who, in his fury, still sought for them,
but the avenging Gods raised such a tempestuous storm that quickly he
and his followers were destroyed. I recall that during my childhood,
when storms swept over Indolois[a:]'s bosom and the moaning winds
sounded like wails of distress, it was a common saying, "Ah, Rinahdo,
the cruel one, pursues Noyn[a:] a Vonn[a:] and her children," and our
mother would shelter in her loving arms her two timorous boys. This
group commemorating the legend is, of course, purely fanciful, and
the smiling mother and her laughing children are very unlike what my
childish fancy used to conjure into something terrifying. This fourth
fountain also illustrates a mythical legend, but it is not so regarded
by my people.

In the centre of this beautiful flower rimmed basin is a mass of large
leaves of a heart shaped growth. Up-springing from them is a long and
strong stem, bearing two great, many petalled flowers, from whose
hearts are rising with outspread wings, two softly plumaged birds, each
one carrying in its beak a bud just bursting into bloom. Our Sacred
Writings declare that out of Himself Andûman[a:] created and caused to
come forth from the buds the infant progenitors of Ento's children.
That at His command the Gods so assiduously cared for the infants, that
with miraculous quickness they grew to maturity, and in time their
offspring peopled Ento. Since most ancient times this myth has been
perpetuated in sculpture, painting and in religious ceremonies.

De L'Ester--This story of the origin of the Ento human is no more
absurd or illogical than are legends of the same nature of peoples of
other planets, who cling to senseless superstitions because they are
yet too immature to perceive the truth.

Now, Gentol[a:], you will speak of whatever may interest you.

Gentola--Where everything is interesting it is difficult to choose,
but certainly this great structure is worthy of notice. The roof is
composed of four great domes, filled in with plates of glass, so
transparent as to not obstruct the light, which falls through shades so
adjusted as to permit the sunlight to fall only on the groups of plants
and fountains. To me the whole interior, including the displays of the
various wares, appears very admirable. As we pass from one department
to another I scarcely can realize that we are not in some similar
establishment on Earth. Here are textile goods whose coloring, weave,
designs and quality equal, if they do not surpass, any fabrics I ever
have seen. After all you have said to me relating to the universality
of substance, the homogeneity of the mind of man and of the natural
and inevitable results of certain universal laws, perhaps I should not
express surprise to find here silks, satins, velvets and other fabrics
very like those of our own Planet. Here, too, are woolens of a great
variety of weaves and colorings, but I do not see any black goods of
any kind.

Genessano--To the Entoans black suggests darkness, for which they
entertain a positive aversion, and darkness suggests death, the ever
present terror of their lives. Black, the symbol of death, is never
worn or used in any avoidable manner. You may not have observed that
in the homes of the people lights ever are shining. Light being the
symbol of life, on every home altar a light burns perpetually.

Gentola--As I have been on Ento but twice during the night I had not
noticed the custom. A dread of darkness may to some appear rather
childish, but I can sympathize with the Entoans, for I have an intense
dislike for darkness. In the absence of light, I cannot locate myself.
I feel as though I were drifting through illimitable space, and the
sensation is excessively disagreeable. De L'Ester, can you explain this
mental condition?

De L'Ester--Not now. I merely will say that you lack what phrenologists
term locality, which will account for the fact that always you are
getting lost.

Gentola--That is true. At present I am lost in admiration of the very
attractive garments worn by Ento men and women. I know that I never
again will desire to wear the close fitting, ungraceful clothing I
always have worn. See that stately woman whose inner-robe outlines her
superb form, yet is modesty itself, and the over garment, loose, but
extremely graceful of cut, has such an air of distinction that it seems
to me any change would detract from its beauty. Oh, yes, indeed, I
greatly admire the manner in which the Ento women wear their abundant
waved or curled hair. The fillet is far prettier than any millinery
creation.

Dear me, what exquisite laces. As delicate as gossamer and of such
lovely designs. I profoundly admire fine laces, and am a fair judge
of their qualities, especially handmade laces, and these in texture,
designs and workmanship are as fine and beautiful as any I ever have
seen. Here, too, is a display of embroidery, which is surpassingly
lovely. I perceive that in their production gold, silver and silk
threads in a great variety of colors are combined harmoniously
and most artistically, and here are bands in which the flowers are
simulated by minute stones closely imitating the natural blooms. Yes,
frequently I have observed robes of both men and women bordered and
trimmed with such embroidery, and--no, it does not make the men appear
effeminate, quite the contrary. I cannot attempt a detailed description
of this adjoining department, devoted to an endless array of articles
for the toilet. Should I do so, certainly my Earth friends would laugh
at such an exhibition of my vivid imagination. Quite as certainly I
would not find fault with their incredulity. I, however, will say that
I find here combs, brushes, manicure implements, perfumes, soaps and an
endless array of articles whose uses I only can guess at. Could some of
our Earth folk walk into this establishment, which they would term a
department store, they, like myself, would find themselves amazed, not
so much by the strangeness, as by the familiar appearance of a thousand
and more articles.

De L'Ester--Do not forget that in the universe there is but _One Mind_
which _must_ everywhere express itself harmoniously, and you will cease
to marvel at many things.

Ah, George is experimenting and Genessano looks on with curious
interest. _Mon ami_, what are you attempting?

George--I am trying to find out if any of these salespeople are
Sensitives. Ah, my gentle sir, as you look about you seeking to learn
who has spoken to you, your dreamy eyes are opening wide with surprise.
Genessano, through Gentol[a:], address him. I fancy that he does not
understand English.

Gentola--Emano, r[a:]ûdoss[a:] illûm[a:] voi hû[a:]. Voiha istan
finostû tsoin[a:].

George--He grows alarmed, but stands in an attitude of intense
attention.

Gentola--Oûna ûfan yoidas ēmano. Info oovistû.

George--Now he is thoroughly alarmed and rushes away, exclaiming,
"Zēmos, Zēmos, dēlûsa ilmo evantos." His comrades and the people stare
and question as to the cause of his alarm, and two young men have gone
after him, evidently thinking him attacked with sudden illness. Very
certainly Ento possesses many Sensitives, and when the Spirit Worlds
shall have succeeded in changing the positive conditions surrounding
them they will become amenable to Spirit Control. What did Genessano
prompt you to say to the youth? In effect you remarked, "Friend, the
weather is fine." Then you asked, "Do you hear what I say?" Then you
added, "Be not alarmed. Info oovistû." Evidently he did not heed your
advice, and certainly he does not desire further acquaintance with you,
for his cried to Zēmos, a god, to protect him. The experiment being
concluded, I shall not further interrupt you.

De L'Ester--Of course it is not practicable for you to give a detailed
description of the contents of this establishment or of the structure
itself, which is a fine example of its kind, but when the time
shall have arrived for you to compile for publication our somewhat
imperfect manuscript, under my control you will arrange it, and then
you will recall all that you have seen, heard or experienced during
your journeys to Ento, and it may be worth while to describe to some
competent architect the style, including interior arrangements, of
this and of other structures you have observed. Being within the
equatorial belt, you may imagine that artificial heat is not required;
but, in this latitude at times the temperature falls so low as to be
uncomfortably cool; hence this electrical appliance for heating.

Our clairaudient friend, wearing an abashed and nervous air, is
returning. Be at peace, gentle souled one, for at present we will not
further disturb you.

Gentol[a:], you gaze longingly at those lovely laces. I wish it might
be possible for you to bear with you to Earth such a pretty memento
of your visit to Endoin[a:][a:] Tylû. George, what is next on the
programme?

George--Gentol[a:], in this city there is a library which save for
one in Dao, equals any other of Ento, and now we will afford you and
Bernard a view of it.

Gentola--I have meant to ask you to show me a library, but always the
time at our disposal is so fully occupied.

De L'Ester--Come, then, for the hours are flying and we cannot much
longer hold you. Allow me to assist you. This large edifice contains
treasures in books and various objects of value, but I do not greatly
admire its style of architecture, still it is a grandly imposing
structure and well adapted to its purposes. Those fine statues over the
main portico are representations of certain of Ento's authors, and you
will observe that those columns supporting the portico and them are in
style nearly as purely Doric as any you may find on our Planet. They
offer another illustration of the universality of form ideals. The main
entrance, though severely plain, is very imposing. We will enter it
and view the interior. You perceive that the roof is a series of four
domes through which the interior is lighted, ventilation being secured
through a scientific mechanism which thoroughly serves its purpose.
Also you perceive that five galleries encircle the interior, and that
the walls are fitted with glass inclosed shelves, which are filled
with books, largely bound in a material similar to papier-mache, which
its manufacturers know how to render flexible, and indestructible by
insects. Others are bound in leather of a very fine quality. No, cloth
bindings are not at all used, the Entoans being of the opinion that
books worth preserving are worthy of meritorious covers.

On this table is a large open book. Examine the leaves, and you
will see that they are of an excellent quality of paper, resembling
parchment. Its texture is very close, and it is almost as thin as
tissue paper, yet it is quite opaque. As Zenest[a:] is absent, you,
Genessano, will tell us something concerning the language of this book.

Genessano--Gentol[a:], you have been informed that on Ento one language
universally is spoken. True, there are other languages and dialects
which, on occasions, are both spoken and written, but practically
Avûnass[a:] is the language of Ento. By Spirits of your and other
planetary Spirit Spheres I have been informed that they find it a
singularly elegant and easily learned language. The alphabetical
letters are not complex, and during many centuries Ento's scholars
have made a study of simplifying the language. Did you understand
Avûnass[a:] you would perceive that through terminal letters and
accentuation a limited range of words serves for a wide range of
expression. No, this book is not Avûnass[a:], but V[a:][a:]mû, the
language of a southern race, of a period preceding the establishment
of Ento's religion. You perceive that the letters or rather the
characters, are quite unlike those of the Avûnass[a:] alphabet. Our
friend, Poole, is studying Avûnass[a:], and should you so desire, he
may draw the alphabet for you. Yes, I am his Instructor and find him an
apt pupil.

Our father, who, during his mortal existence, was a learned man, owned
a volume of this rare work, and through him Inidor[a:] and I became
a little acquainted with the V[a:][a:]mû language and the contents
of this book, which treats of the sciences of eighty Ento centuries
ago. As the lesser is contained in the greater, so the accumulated
knowledge of one era contains the germs which in after times unfold
their potencies. Thus the sciences as understood in the days of Dylos
R[a:]ûmo, the author of this book, were the germs of achievements of
the past and present, which you have learned are in many directions of
a high degree of excellence.

I am told that your word paper signifies the same as our word
billos[a:], which largely is the product of a fibrous plant known as
ekētos, which blooms prettily, producing large seed pods containing a
white, silken fibre, which is utilized, not alone in the manufacture
of billos[a:] but also for the production of textile fabrics, some of
which you recently have been admiring. Does this scene impress you
agreeably?

Gentola--Certainly; this is a large and beautifully arranged library,
and what numbers of people are coming, going, or entering the adjoining
room. A reading room? Yes, I should like to look into it. Why, it is
quite crowded with men and women, all intently perusing books, papers
and publications which wear a very familiar appearance; so familiar
indeed as to nearly make me doubt the evidence of my own eyes. De
L'Ester, please ask Genessano if the Entoans possess a literature
corresponding with what we term romances.

Genessano--Indeed, yes, and it constitutes a considerable portion of
Ento's literature. One story, which was based upon actual occurrences,
Inidor[a:] and I used to read with profound emotion, and when this
mission shall have culminated, and you may find leisure and inclination
to hear it, I will relate what De L'Ester may translate into your
language, and you may name it "A Romance of Ento."

Gentola--I am sure that I shall be even more pleased to hear it than
you can be in relating it.

George--Yonder is another clairaudient Sensitive, the youth robed in
blue, who apparently is seeking for some special book.

De L'Ester--Yes, and he also is somewhat clairvoyant. Gentol[a:], he
may be able to perceive or to hear you. Stand near him and follow my
dictation.

Gentola--Voian ēlos toy[a:] ēmano?

Entoan--Efon ist[a:] voian----Ah, Andûman[a:] kētoivan froy[a:]----

De L'Ester--Come away, come away, Gentol[a:], the man is scared out
of his wits, and has fallen in a swoon. What a commotion. Employees
and visitors hasten to his assistance, expressing much concern and
surprise. What a pity that he is such a nervous and timid person. Ah,
he is reviving and looking about him in an apprehensive manner, and
every one is plying him with questions. Genessano, what is he saying?
He speaks in such an excited and rapid manner that I cannot follow him.

Genessano--He says: "I was seeking for a copy of Brohûû Lûitszen,
when I thought some one inquired as to what I searched for. I was
about to reply, 'I am searching for Brohûû Lûitszen,' when I felt
impelled to turn my gaze in the direction of the voice, and I call
the Gods to witness that I thought I saw a strange woman, unlike any
I ever have beheld. It was not that her appearance was forbidding,
but there was in her face or form or expression that which I cannot
explain or describe, and in an instant I was so overawed that I lost
consciousness. I am ashamed of my weakness for, of course, it was a
freak of my imagination." They ask him how the woman was clothed, and
he replies that she was very singularly clothed, but that really he
cannot describe her garments. He also says that he and his auditors
have heard the strange stories relating to Prince Dano and some of his
friends, and he prays the Gods that he may not find himself similarly
afflicted. Now he says, "I feel myself quite restored, and am convinced
that the seizure was due to an overtaxed brain, for lately I have been
too studious and must desist from such imprudence." Although the youth
assumes a careless air, it is very apparent that he is ill at ease,
and his fellow employees and visitors to the library express concern
over what has occurred. From their conversation it is evident that the
experiences of Dano, Lēta, Favēon and other Sensitives have gained wide
publicity, and from their peculiar nature are exciting attention and
greater unrest in the minds of Ento's sorrowful peoples. A favorable
omen, friends, a favorable omen of the swiftly coming dawn of the
new religion, and as the day draws near I scarcely can restrain my
impatience.

De L'Ester--As little can we, but the hours are swiftly flying and well
may our hopes rise high, for surely, surely the light is penetrating
the Spiritual consciousness of many of Ento's children.

Gentol[a:], we cannot attempt even a limited description of the vast
collection of books, manuscripts and many curious objects. You must
content yourself through storing up memories of many things which in
coming years you may recall with pleasure to yourself and possibly to
others.

Gentola--I wish that I might retain memories of all that I experience
during these journeys to Ento, but always when I try to recall scenes
and the appearance of peoples and places it is like attempting to
revive illy remembered dreams. Now I gaze on this great library, on
these magnificently beautiful marbles, bronzes and many lovely and
interesting objects and I know that when I shall have returned to Earth
it all will appear as "the baseless fabric of a vision."

De L'Ester--You cannot retain memories of your Ento experiences
because your subconscious Self or Ego is too deeply submerged to be
in conscious rapport with your animal or Soul Self, which receives
negative imprints, which I promise you shall in time be developed into
memory pictures as vivid as are these realities. From the inception
of our Mission we have known that in your normal state you would not
remember your Ento experiences; hence the necessity of an automatic
record of them. Yes, I assure you that our expectation of your
efficiency in this undertaking has been more than fulfilled and we
promise you that the future shall not disappoint you. You yet are only
on the verge of surprising experiences; soon your Spirit senses will be
greatly quickened and then your work will be made plain to you. Ento is
but one of the Planets of space which, with us, you may visit, should
you so elect, but of this we will speak later on.

Friends, we yet have an hour at our disposal; how shall we best apply
it?

Genessano--I suggest that as Gentol[a:] and Bernard have seen but
little of Ento home life they shall be afforded a view of the interior
of some residence.

De L'Ester--A good suggestion, Genessano, and we will ask you to select
the residence.

Genessano--Then we will visit yonder massive and spacious dwelling
just beyond the sun-crowned column. Observe that its architecture is
not modern, neither is it of a very remote period. It may have been
erected two centuries ago of our time. Its massive stone foundation and
stone walls carried to the height of three stories show no evidences
of disintegration, and around the doors and windows the finely
executed sculpture appears as perfectly preserved as though chiselled
recently. About the handsome structure the spacious lawn is abloom
with a variety of flowering shrubs and plants and doubtless we will
find the interior of the home equally as attractive. We will enter
and ascertain. This wide, central hallway and the fine staircases are
of Ento's rose tinted woods, and the mosaic floor, rugs, tapestries,
statuary and decorative features are in every way admirable.
Gentol[a:], I have not yet experienced the pleasure of viewing the
cities and homes of your Planet, but ere long I may be afforded the
opportunity of comparing them with the cities and homes of Ento.

De L'Ester--It may add to the sum of your information, but it will
not add to your happiness to view some features of Earth's cities and
homes. Some of these friends and I have viewed the best and the worst
of them, and I assure you that the contrast between the sumptuous homes
of the rich and the squalid homes of the poor is very saddening.

On our Planet this residence with its beautiful appointments would be
considered exceptionally luxurious, on Ento such homes are the rule
not the exception. We will enter the apartment on the left, and you,
Gentol[a:], will describe it.

Gentola--We are in a very spacious room, through whose large alcoved
windows one obtains a fine view of the lawn with its great beds of
blooming plants and a lovely fountain throwing jets of sparkling water
high into the air. The room is panelled in rose colored woods which
rise to the ceiling and curve to its centre, meeting under a great
cluster of carved foliage and rodel blooms. In the hearts of the
rodels, which are of exaggerated size, are crystal bulbs, and I wish I
might understand Ento's system of electric lighting, which is so unlike
that of Earth. The floor is a mosaic of a very delicate rose tinted
field, with shaded sprays of rose colored flowers scattered over it,
and the wide border is of shades of rose colored foliage, grasses and
flowers. The effect is delicate, very unique, and I think extremely
pretty. In the centre of the apartment is a fountain, whose large basin
is of white marble, veined with palest rose. It is in the form of a
full blown rodel, and from its heart, tiny jets of water are thrown
upward, striking a peculiar arrangement of crystal cups, producing
soft musical sounds similar to the notes of a music box. All about the
apartment are handsome divans, chairs and tables, on the latter are
books, papers and other reading matter. There are swings and hammocks,
and in the further one reclines a young girl with flowing dusky hair,
olive-hued skin, lovely features, dark large, luminous eyes, full
scarlet lips, through which her teeth gleam like pearls, and a form
of perfect proportions. To me the eyes of the Entoans are their most
noticeable feature. They are so large, so luminous, but always I see in
them a sort of brooding expression as though in their depths lies some
sorrowful memory.

Surely, yonder youthful looking woman near the window is not the mother
of all those children, four of whom are swimming or playing in the
basin of the fountain; three are swinging, and the two smaller ones are
playing at her feet. Near her, reclining on a pretty wicker lounge,
a fine looking man of apparently middle age reads aloud from a book
which seems to greatly interest them, and now an aged man and woman,
whom the children hail with delight, are entering the room, and the
man and woman hasten forward, and as they lead them to seats, they
affectionately welcome them and speak to them in gentle, solicitous
tones. Now quite a youthful man and woman approach, and the two younger
children scramble to their feet, and hasten to the arms outstretched
to receive them. The man swings the older child to his shoulder, and
the woman takes up the younger one who is little more than a baby, and
turns to salute a beautiful, but sad faced young woman, who quietly and
alone enters the room where all with much tenderness of manner greet
her, and an attendant quickly robes the children playing in the basin
of the fountain, who hasten to her and fondly cluster about her. Allow
me to be silent, while Genessano shall explain the relationship of
these persons.

Genessano--From their conversation I learn that the woman who entered
alone recently has been widowed, and that she is the mother of the four
children grouped about her. Her robe is not so much a badge of mourning
as it is an indication of her widowhood. Only widows wear this peculiar
shade of hinifro (yellow). The young girl in the hammock, the widow and
the father of the other five children are the son and daughters of the
middle aged couple, and the aged pair are the father and mother of the
middle aged man, and all reside in this spacious home, of which this
living room is a feature common to Ento.

De L'Ester--Another feature is about to be added to the already
attractive scene, for here are a number of attendants bearing trays
laden with delicacies and fruits, to be served for the family luncheon.
The hour has expired, and after a hasty survey of other apartments
of the residence, we must bid adieu to it and to Endoinas. At a low
altitude we still will follow the course of the river, which from this
point flows in a southwestward direction, and soon we will arrive at
Hom-arû, (City of Palms), a city situated very near the line of the
equator. It is on the west bank of the river which forms a boundary
between the provinces of Vohûak[a:] and H[a:]mûyen, where we will meet
a Messenger from D[a:]o, who will inform us of the precise condition
of Vallo[a:]. The purport of the message will determine our movements
of the near future. George, pause for a moment that Gentol[a:] and
Bernard may again view this city of bridges. Is not it quite attractive?

Gentola--It is more than attractive, it is a view so impressively
beautiful that one is not likely to forget it. You, who have seen
the great cities of Earth, those aggregations of magnificence and
squalor, will understand how my son and I are impressed and surprised
by the beauty, thrift and cleanliness of the cities and towns of Ento.
As I gaze in all directions the scene impresses me with a sense of
unreality, much as though I were beholding the creation of a mirage.
The humid, hazy atmosphere lends a sort of indistinctness to the far
reaches of the country, where various kinds of water-craft are passing
along canals and the larger Waterways; while below us the streets and
bridges are alive with the movement of people and vehicles, and, De
L'Ester, I observe several animals running about the streets or lying
on porches; what are they?

De L'Ester--Do not you remember Fenēto, in Giant's dwelling? Well,
those animals are Fenēto's kindred, and a naturalist would inform us
that they belong to the feline family, which they do. No, on Ento there
are no animals even similar to our wolf or its kindred. Indeed, on
Ento, nearly all savage life forms have disappeared, and, in time, such
forms will disappear from our planet. It is a fact that on all planets
evolved to the Spiritualized man period, in proportion as humanity
advances, the coarser life forms recede; for it is a law of nature
that, as the Spiritual atmosphere of Planets increases in quality and
quantity, through lack of proper vital sustenance, coarser life forms
perish. Were the lion, tiger, bear and other savage animals of our
Planet left unmolested, of necessity, in time, they would cease to
exist. The activities of generation demand specific conditions, and
Ento no longer offers conditions favorable to the generation of savage
life forms. Yes, domesticity of certain animals enables them to for a
time ward off the day of their doom, but it is only delayed. Have you
observed those lofty Light Towers?

Gentola--Yes, and when at night they are ablaze, the scene must be
beautiful. Some time, like you, I may be free to go where I will. Then
I may come to Ento to view all the wonders we now have not time to even
glance at. You all are most patient with my dear son and me, and I
think that you know that we appreciate all your goodness to us.

De L'Ester--Progress, spiritually, comes only to those _who stand and
serve_. You partly comprehend our present service of love, but you do
not at all comprehend your service of a coming time, which to a greater
degree will make us your debtors, even as we now are. Now we will
continue our journey.

Bernard--Mother, dear, rest your hand on my shoulder. No, it does not
hinder me, and it is so pleasant to feel your touch.

Gentola--You dear boy, I shall be glad to do so.

Bernard--What do you imagine the folks at home would think could they
see you and me with this large Band of Spirits passing through the air?

Gentola--Dear me, I cannot imagine what they would think, but I suspect
that they would think us in danger of an awful fall. De L'Ester, at
what altitude are we?

De L'Ester--About one English mile above the surface of Ento, and we
are moving rather slowly so that you may obtain a good view of the
river and its shipping, of the irrigated country and its many towns,
villages and fine suburban estates. The town we are nearing offers a
rather pretty view. Through the arrival and departure of those great
vessels its commodious shipping basin presents quite an animated
appearance. Being a distributing centre it possesses a handsome Air
Transport Station which adds to its importance.

It is near high noon and the chime of yonder sun-crowned temple dome
is softly pealing, and men, women and children hasten to the midday
service. Were we not so pressed for time we might witness it, but we
must pass on. Gentol[a:], direct your gaze toward those low-lying,
grayish clouds, for soon, in that direction, you will behold the light
towers and golden domes of Hom-arû Tylû, where Sylvian, the messenger
from Dao, will meet us. She is a relative of the sick girl, Vallo[a:],
being an aunt on the maternal side. She and the Spirit mother of
Vallo[a:], are in constant attendance, sustaining and strengthening
her so as to as far as possible prolong her mortal existence. Why do
they desire to prolong her mortal existence? For the reason that she is
one of the principal instruments through whom is to come to Ento the
priceless knowledge of a continuity of existence. Then each added day
of her mortal experience more fully unfolds her Spirit senses, thus
better fitting her not only for our purpose but for her entrance into
Ento's Spirit World.

Including the human, the stages of animal existences find
correspondences in the vegetable kingdom. First, the germination of
the sown seed, followed by growth and the unfolding of the infolded
bud into the full blown flower; then the ripening of the seed and the
harvesting. Humans who pass from mortal existence ere the culmination
of corresponding stages of growth and maturity, lack, so to say,
_ripeness_, and upon entering the Spirit World they are at such a
disadvantage that they find it necessary to again return into mortal
environments where, through association with mortals, they may acquire
growth and experience. The spirit friends of Vallo[a:], understanding
this Law, will, for as long as may be possible, hold her in her
physical body.

The low-lying clouds have drifted away, and yonder amid a sea of
verdure is Hom-arû Tylû (city of Palms), where, in a certain park,
our friend, Sylvian, will meet us. It is now beneath us, and we will
descend to the Palm fountain. Is not this a peculiar conceit?

Gentola--Very, and as pretty as it is peculiar. Instead of the usual
human, animal or fanciful composition, is this great metallic palmlike
tree. Bernard, see how from that central cluster of upright leaves the
water is thrown into the air from whence in silvery spray it falls
upon the luxuriant foliage, from which, in a copious shower, it rains
into the basin. Really, I think it almost the prettiest of the many
fountains I have seen on Ento. In form and coloring both tree and
foliage are true to nature. I wonder how the color effects are produced?

De L'Ester--Genessano says that the coloring is effected through a
process of enamelling which resists corrosion. He also says----Ah,
Sylvian approaches.

Sylvian--Efon fiestēmos, ēmanos. (I greet you kindly, friends.)

Genessano--Onos t[a:] fiestēmos[a:][a:], Sylvian. (We as kindly greet
you, Sylvian.)

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], I shall serve as interpreter between Sylvian,
yourself and Bernard, who yet but slightly understands the Ento
language. Eman[a:] Sylvian, this is Gentol[a:], of whom you have heard,
and this is her son, Bernard, who recently passed from the mortal to
our side of life.

Sylvian--Only as a matter of courtesy need I be presented to one whose
name to me is as a household word. Gentol[a:], as I look into your eyes
my heart goes out to you in fonder greeting than my lips can utter, for
I recall cherished memories of long ago, memories which happily you
cannot now recall, but which, at times, like evanescent mist wreaths
drift athwart your mental vision. De L'Ester's warning glance deters
me else I might grow too reminiscent, which, at this time, would be
unwise. Gentol[a:], I cannot express my joy, my gratitude, that across
the vast space between Earth and Ento an incarnated spirit has been
brought to deliver to Ento's sorrowful children a Message of hope; a
Message which shall lift out of an abyss of darkness into effulgent
light a people who now with heavy hearts and downcast thoughts ever
walk in the shadow of a great fear; for ever, as they courageously
smile and strive to forget, they are conscious of the approach of the
dread horror death. Gentol[a:], see you not how my people in whom the
love element is so evolved as to dominate all other emotions, count all
things valueless when compared with the intense affection they bear
for their nearest and dearest ones? To them death is the synonym of
despair, for when their dear ones pass into the Silence only despair
and darkness of mind remain. But our hopes are high for the success
of the Mission; for at last through the ceaseless efforts of Spirits
of many Spirit Worlds the inner consciousness of the Entoans is being
so aroused that in their despair, blindly they are reaching out for
relief. More wonderful still, my kinsman, Omanos Fûnh[a:], Osy Hûn,
listens with rapt attention as his child Vallo[a:] relates her wondrous
experiences, which he no longer regards as the vagaries of a diseased
brain, but begs her to repeat again and again the story of her beatific
visions. Vallo[a:] stands upon the threshold of our Spirit Realms, and
her Inner senses are so unfolded that she sees and holds converse with
her mother, with me and with other Spirits who minister to her. To her
father and others about her she conveys messages from her mother, from
me and from other Spirits. To her father she relates incidents known
only to himself, and she whispers to him of private affairs, and he
marvels at her knowledge and eagerly questions as to the source of her
information. So rapidly are his Spiritual Senses unfolding that at any
moment they may burst into bloom; then the old, hopeless beliefs will
pass into oblivion.

Prince Dano, my young kinsman, who is Vallo[a:]'s betrothed, scarcely
quits her presence, and his heart is heavy with grief, that his beloved
one is so near the conclusion of her mortal existence; but with a
strength born of the new faith, he cheers and consoles her. Constantly
his cry is, "Courage, my Vallo[a:], my own, for thou art not going
into the dread, endless Silence, but into a gloriously beautiful world
of living, loving ones. I, who for a time must remain on Ento, will
ceaselessly proclaim the joyful tidings of continuous existence, and
the swiftly fleeting years will pass, and then I shall come to thee,
my beloved, mine own forevermore." Spiritually, he sees and hears with
phenomenal clearness, and to all about him he earnestly proclaims his
absolute faith in the declarations of the strange woman Gentol[a:], and
implicitly he relies upon your declarations and promises.

His father, Basto Andûlēs[a:], who was in despair over what he
considered the lost mind of his son, now cherishes Dano's words as
though they are the very strength of his life, and Ontellēn[a:], Dano's
gentle mother, smiles or weeps as she listens to her son's glowing
portrayal of the life that is to be. Thus, Gentol[a:], you perceive
that the seed you have sown has germinated and gives promise of a
harvest of joy inexpressible.

The hour draws very near when we no longer will be able to hold in
her physical form our precious Vallo[a:]. When that hour shall arrive
we well know that Spirit forces from many Spirit Realms will with
you dear and devoted friends unite in a supreme effort to reveal to
Omanos Fûnh[a:] and others irrefutable knowledge of the continuity of
life, and, Gentol[a:], that which more than all else will hasten the
acceptance of the new religion will be the promise and proof of escape
from ever impending annihilation, from which Priests and people shrink
with ever increasing horror. Unquestioningly the people have been
obliged to accept the ancient faith, whose exponents, the Priesthood,
have interpreted to fit their own ideas and ends; but, ceaselessly,
evolution proceeds, and despite most unfavoring conditions the peoples
of Ento now are prepared for the ushering in of a brighter day than
ever has dawned upon their consciousness; and, like many others, I
scarcely can await the culmination of this momentous event.

Yes, Ento possesses many Sensitives, but hitherto, to a greater degree
than now, the aural atmosphere has been so positive as generally to
prevent their approach by wholly freed Spirits. Being yet physically
embodied, your Spirit body is of a less sublimated character than
are those of wholly freed and advanced spirits who are visible only
to certain Priests and Priestesses of inner sanctuaries, whose lives
are most ascetic and in a sense Spiritualized. When, through the
influence of the new religion, the hopeless mental state of the people
shall yield to joyful expectation, the aural atmosphere gradually
will grow penetrable, and Sensitives whom now we cannot approach will
develop into Mediums through whom Spirits will communicate to mortals
the glorious truth that their present existence is but a momentary
experience of unending life. De L'Ester informs me that now you fully
understand the aims of those conducting and assisting in this Mission,
which, as you may know, is not an unusual one, for all revelations to
mortals are the results of Spirit activities, and all Saviors are
Missionaries Re-embodied for a fixed purpose, which, alas, is not
always accomplished.

Vallo[a:] being near the time of her release from her physical body
these friends and I have arranged for constant communication between
them and the watchers at D[a:]o. Thus, until summoned thither, they may
without further anxious thought, devote every possible moment to your
instruction concerning Ento.

With you, Bernard, who stand so silently observant, ere long I shall
make it my affair to become acquainted, and with you, Gentol[a:], I
rejoice to renew our friendship of a time when we were co-workers in
an undertaking similar to this Mission. When you return to the Spirit
side you will comprehend what now I must leave unexplained. Let these
embraces assure you and this dear boy that as of yore I am your loving
friend, Sylvian Ravvect[a:]. And now, ēmanos, Info st[a:]-tiv[a:]
Zēnos[a:][a:] oovistû. (To the care of the Angelic ones, until we again
meet.)

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], it is arranged that constantly Sylvian shall
be informed as to our movements, and as constantly she will keep us in
touch with affairs at D[a:]o, for in a few days we will be summoned
there to share with others the responsibilities of a most momentous
occasion. In the meantime we must improve the swiftly fleeting hours.
To-day we have held you with us overlong, and now must return you to
your home, over which the shadows of twilight are falling.

Bernard--Mother, dear, do not you think Sylvian very gracious and
beautiful? Really, I felt quite abashed when she kissed and embraced me.

George--Bernard, your modesty is very commendable. Evidently Sylvian
discriminates between men and boys, as she kissed and embraced no one
but you and your mother.

Bernard--All right, my British kinsman, for as long as Sylvian may
discriminate in that manner I shall be content to remain a boy. But,
mother, you have not answered my question.

Gentola--Sylvian is indeed both gracious and beautiful. The rich olive
of her complexion is to my taste as much to be admired as are the
roses and lilies of fair skinned beauties. On first coming to Ento the
stature of the people impressed me rather unpleasantly; indeed, when I
met Inidor[a:] and Geness[a:]no I imagined them specimens of a race of
giants, and was surprised when I learned that they were of the average
height of Ento's Oriental and most other races. Sylvian's height is, I
should say, quite seven feet, but she is so symmetrically formed that
she appears a grandly beautiful woman. Our friends tell me----

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], positively you must defer further conversation,
and I shall take it upon myself to see you safely landed on Earth.
Bernard, as your mother is quite exhausted, George and I will bear her
home, where ere now she should have arrived.

Gentola--Good-bye, dear son, good-bye until to-morrow.

De L'Ester--Yes, in interstellar space there are countless magnetic
currents, each varying from others in their ever onward inconceivable
velocity, in never varying directions. This current on which, or rather
in which, we are speeding to Earth is not one in which previously
you have journeyed, but which has speedily borne us within Earth's
atmosphere, and--again you are safe at home, where loving ones will
guard you until we meet to-morrow.

Adieu.




CHAPTER XVI.

CONCERNING THE ESKIMOS.


De L'Ester--Madame, we offer you our warmest greetings, and are highly
gratified to perceive that a night of profound sleep has quite restored
your exhausted vitality. We have felt somewhat solicitous as to the
result of yesterday's prolonged stay on Ento, and are delighted that
you have not suffered through our imprudence.

Gentola--I retired early and fell asleep immediately. This morning I
feel quite restored, and am ready for our starward journey.

De L'Ester--Then at once we will depart for Ento, where in the City of
Palms, nearby the palm tree fountain, our friends will meet us. For a
reason we shall remain there for perhaps an hour, and Von Humboldt will
speak to you in relation to a question you recently asked.

Gentola--Another question to which you kindly may reply, is, do Spirits
released from the physical body find their perceptions greatly enlarged?

De L'Ester--Yes, if sufficiently unfolded to realize that they
are on the Spirit side, and, alas, myriads of Spirits are not so
unfolded. Spirits progressed to an advanced plane of Being, are so
in harmony with the Infinite Mind, that they know all relating to
that plane, hence, in a sense, are partakers of that mind. But we
near Ento, and--yes, yonder swiftly revolving, tiny moons, Entol[a:]
and Emantol[a:] are interesting objects, the more so as they are a
terrible menace to Ento. Why? For the reason that some time, aye,
at any time, one and the other will rush onto and rend the bosom of
the mother who gave them birth. At another time you will learn more
concerning those frisky satellites. Yonder near the fountain, our
friends are observing our arrival, and Inez and Bernard are coming to
meet us. Hail, hail, bright ones.

Bernard--Mother, dear, it makes me so happy to be by your side.

Gentola--And I, dear son, cannot express my joy that once again your
strong arms embrace me. Yes, from afar we saw you and this sweet sister
Inez approaching.

De L'Ester--Friends, we greet you all, and hope for favorable word from
D[a:]o.

Inez--Within a half hour I have returned from a visit to Vallo[a:].
Save that her vital energy gradually decreases, and her Spirit vision
grows clearer the situation is unchanged.

De L'Ester--Then while we await--I should say that we shall remain here
for an hour, and you, Von Humboldt, kindly will occupy the time by
replying to Gentol[a:]'s question of yesterday.

Von Humboldt--Madame, in replying to your question, relating to a
remark of mine, concerning a race of comparatively diminutive Entoans,
I shall include other of your unanswered questions. The poles of
Planets inclined as are those of Ento and Earth receive comparatively
a small amount of solar heat, hence, the crust surrounding the poles
of either newly formed Planet, cooled and thickened at an earlier
period than did areas nearer their equators. In time the areas known
to us as the north and south temperate zones of either Planet became
fitted for the germination and habitations of earliest life-forms,
which as you are aware first appeared in the tepid waters of the new
worlds. Man, being a warm blooded animal, in early ages on either
Planet, his natural habitat was in their warmer divisions, which
in the fullness of time became suited for the entertainment of the
evolved, Spiritualized human, who through succeeding exigencies of
existence, has learned to adjust himself to manifold conditions which
may apply to the race under consideration who, since a remote time,
have occupied localities extending from the southern limit of Ento's
south temperate zone, to near the south pole. Owing to the rigor
of the climate, and their occupation of mining, their habitations,
like those of all Ento polar peoples, are subterranean and very
comfortable and attractive abodes they are. Climatic conditions
somewhat incline this race to an indulgence in flesh food, which with
the products of all lands, Air Transports abundantly supply them. The
summers of Ento's arctic and antarctic circles being, what may be
termed, phenomenally mild, in the spring the released waters of the
polar regions teem with myriad life forms upon which the diminutive
D[a:]hov[a:]s and their polar neighbors largely subsist. In those
antarctic localities are vast deposits of precious and other minerals,
and of various gems, all of which find disposition in the marts of the
Ento world. Notwithstanding their inhospitable climatic surroundings,
the D[a:]hov[a:]s number some millions of educated, refined persons,
whose occupation in no way interferes with their social standing. The
fair-skinned, blond-haired, blue-eyed persons whom frequently you have
observed were D[a:]hov[a:]s, who are greatly inclined to travel, the
facilities of Air Transportation encouraging them in their desire for
change of scene. Their average height is about six feet, and they are
a handsome featured and finely proportioned race. The average height
of other fair-skinned Ento races is about six feet ten inches, which
is quite one foot less than that of the dark-hued Orientals, of whom
our friends, Inidor[a:] and Genessano are examples. Yes, it appears
singular that, though genial climes invite them elsewhere, humans
submit themselves to such inhospitable environments; but, in their
affairs force of circumstances and an inclination for certain pursuits
or gains are forceful potencies. The natural tendency of the genus homo
is away from, not toward, inclement regions, but through upheavals or
subsidences of portions of planets, or perhaps through the fortunes of
wars, surviving peoples, in opposition to tendencies and desires, may
be compelled to submit to the unavoidable.

You have expressed surprise over the absence of social distinctions
among the Entoans, who consider labor of whatever kind as elevating.
Very properly they regard idleness as a species of crime against the
common weal, and only when incapacitated, do either men or women cease
to labor either with head or hands. They understand that all well
balanced minds require a certain amount of active occupation, and that
idleness induces pernicious conduct. One of their aphorisms is, to
labor righteously is to emulate the example of the ever active Deific
Ones, and I quite agree with them. If instead of the yearly expenditure
of millions of money for the maintenance of armies of men engaged in
murdering each other, and for the erection and support of prisons,
reformatories, almshouses and the like, Earth's several governments
would, as does the government of Ento, oblige every able-bodied man and
woman to engage in some useful occupation, how quickly would poverty,
degradation and discontent disappear and the wealth now worse than
wasted would produce great and beneficent public utilities, would
erect and maintain majestic institutions for the free education of
all peoples, would supply elevating amusements for the masses, and
also would construct and maintain public baths, gymnasiums, excellent
roadways, in short, all the admirable features of the civilization of
Ento, which yet is but a promise of a higher, grander civilization of a
coming time.

No, we have not found any planet overpopulated. When sufficiently
evolved, humans elevate the offices of paternity and maternity above
the merely animal plane; then children are not inconsiderately
begotten. You may not have observed that, in Ento families, seldom are
there more than four children; generally there are no more than two.

Yes, certainly, a period will arrive when Earth's peoples will have
advanced far beyond their present uncivilized condition. Really
civilized peoples do not murder each other, do not in any manner
wilfully injure each other. Though one person's opinions may differ
from those of another, civilized peoples do not, for that reason,
fly at each other's throats. Everywhere civilized peoples do as they
wish others to do unto them. So you may perceive that even Earth's
most advanced peoples have not wholly emerged from barbarism; no, not
even those who pompously profess to follow the precepts of Earth's
Divinest Teacher, the meek and lowly Nazarene, have arrived at a clear
perception of what constitutes Christian or other civilization, else
they, too, would be so meek and lowly as to shrink from attempting
to force upon others their very crude beliefs and superstitious
observances. Yes, like all freed spirits, I have found occasions to
change my views, and to endeavor to outgrow my errors.

Unlooked for occurrences having brought about changes in our programme,
for the present we must forego the pleasure of showing you and Bernard
certain interesting portions of Ento's South Temperate and Antarctic
regions; but we anticipate that this slight mention of some of the
inhabitants of Antarctica may stimulate in you a desire for future
exploration in their direction. I yet have some moments I may devote to
you.

Gentola--Then will you inform me as to the origin of the Eskimos and
other polar races of our planet? Are they direct descendants of a
primitive ancestry.

Von Humboldt--Neither the Eskimos or other polar peoples are _direct_
descendants of primitive man. Of course, all peoples, indirectly, are
descendants of early races, whose low, retreating foreheads, misshapen
forms and features offered slight promise of evolvement into the
shapely humans of to-day. Though the Eskimo is somewhat uncouth of
form and feature, compared with primitive man he is a God. Are you
aware that when primitive men first essayed to walk erect they used
as a means of support and for offense and defense, clubs, which to
this day are perpetuated in the staff or walking stick? As the feat of
walking erect is accomplished through a series of threatened falls and
accomplished recoveries, primitive men do not in a day learn to walk
unaided, and from the period when through infoldment of the Divine
Spark man becomes a conscious, living soul, until unaided he walks
erect, time may be reckoned by ages. Yes, in a sense, all humans are
descendants of primitive races, but so far removed from their primitive
ancestry, that the fact is unrealizable. No, madame, in no sense is
the human related to the anthropoidal races. Through environment
and survival of the fittest, all life forms continuously evolve and
re-evolve into higher expression, but man alone is capable of becoming
Spiritualized. Constantly the positive law of evolution impels all
life forms onward and upward toward higher planes of existence; it is
quite as true that the little less forceful negative law of degeneracy
is a perpetual obstacle and menace to human advancement. By some of
Earth's advanced thinkers these opposing laws are recognized, filling
their minds with disquiet and apprehension for those who, besotted by
the love of power and luxury, are approaching the line of demarcation
between progress and degeneracy.

Madame, the Eskimos and other peoples of Earth's frigid regions are
descendants of races once of vast numbers, who, in an early age,
inhabited _the then_ temperate northern and southern climes; but
Earth's crust cooling, thickening and radiating an ever lessening
degree of internal heat, its great fiery heart could not perpetually
vivify its extremities, and at the poles gradually ice and snow
accumulated, the preponderant accumulation being at the North Pole.
Slowly, but surely, human and animal races were impelled toward the
equator, multiplying prodigiously, and warring upon each other with
ferocity indescribable. Your scientists have not yet declared the
certain existence of preglacial man, thus my assertion that Earth has
experienced two glacial horrors, and that previous to the last one the
genus homo was distributed over nearly all portions of the inhabitable
globe is not likely to be received as a conclusive statement, which
however is a correct one. It also is true that the survivors of the
catastrophe were as mariners cast upon unknown shores, for they
and other life forms experienced such a redistribution that your
ethnologists and naturalists are unable to solve some problems which,
on passing to the Spirit side, will be made plain to them. The remote
progenitors of the Eskimos and other peoples of the frigid north and
south were survivors of the awful calamity which swept out of physical
existence entire races of humans and many species of animal and
vegetable life. Gradually, through isolation and extreme privations,
the descendants of those remote ancestors experienced nearly arrested
mental and physical development, and until comparatively a recent
period, they were as lost members of the human family. Through
inherited qualities and long usage they are so inured to their wretched
condition that to a degree they do not realize its discomforts; but
steadily advancing agencies are approaching their lands, and at a not
very remote period their _present_ inhabitants will have disappeared,
and for the same reason that Ento's polar regions are, I may say, well
populated, ere long Earth's polar regions will sustain a large number
of inhabitants.

Gentola--Sir, I thank you for your replies to my not very coherent
questions. You are aware that I have not been permitted to acquire
such knowledge as would have unfitted my skeptical mind for the work
in which we are engaged, but certainly I do not doubt the correctness
of your statements. If the hour has not quite expired I should like to
ask----

Von Humboldt--The hour has expired, and a pleasant surprise for you is
at hand.

Gentola--Truly, sir, this is a pleasant surprise, and with my heart in
my hand I greet you. It has been a long time since you bade us adieu.

Ha-Moufi--Gentol[a:] ēman[a:], though absent in Spirit not so have I
been in thought. And you, dear friends, how gladly I exchange with you
loving embraces and words of kindliest greeting. You are aware that
your movements and events relating to the Mission are known in our
and other Spirit Worlds, and anxious hearts and eager eyes hope and
watch for the success of the near culmination of the struggle between
Spiritual and material forces. I have longed to be with you that I
might share with you the preparation for and the anticipation of the
approaching Spiritual enlightenment of my people. Scarcely have I been
able to restrain my impatience, and only that my duties as a teacher
have fully occupied my time, ere now I would have been with you. Now I
rejoice to say that I shall be with you until the culmination of the
Mission. But where is Zenest[a:] H[a:]o? I had thought to find him with
you.

De L'Ester--I am pleased to say that soon he will join us, and also
I desire to assure you that in again having you with us, our delight
quite equals your own. Continually we have missed your genial presence
and engaging conversation; so indeed you are more than welcome. Ere now
Zenest[a:] and Aaron Poole should have arrived; doubtless they soon
will appear. You have been informed that in the person of a gentle
girl Re-embodied on this Planet Inidor[a:] has found his other Self.
Frequently Genessano visits them and gives favorable reports of their
harmonious relations. When we shall be summoned to D[a:]o Inidor[a:],
too, will join us.

What can so delay Zenest[a:] and Poole? Even as I speak of our wingless
Angels they are approaching, and as usual are as radiant and joyous as
two Seraphs. Ah, you tardy ones, you have completely upset our plans.
Through your and Ha-Moufi's simultaneous arrival we had thought to
overwhelm Gentol[a:].

Poole--Should we offer the whys and wherefores of our late arrival you
would not find yourselves edified. So I shall only say that it was
unavoidable. Gentol[a:], I am delighted to learn that your interest
in these journeys from Earth to Ento and still more in our Mission
of loving endeavor increases and also I am delighted to perceive
that your Psychic Senses are unfolding and that your vital energy
is not yet greatly lessened, all of which rejoices all of us. From
your dearest ones in our Spirit World I bear to you fondest greetings
and measureless love, which, with my own, I express in this embrace.
But tell me, my sister, have you at any time regretted having given
yourself to this grand Mission?

Gentola--Indeed no. Not for a moment have I regretted that I have
been chosen as an instrument through whom loving Spirits may bring
to a sorrowful people the priceless knowledge of the continuity of
existence. It is true that such constant association with Spirits
who have outgrown the frailties common to the physical plane has not
enhanced my enjoyment of mortal existence, in which I find myself so
painfully sensitive that I shrink from much that previous to this
experience, scarcely, if at all, disturbed me. Still I do not regret
having given myself to this service, for through it I have learned that
I am my brothers' keeper, and that from this duty neither I or any
one can, if they would, escape. Having learned this lesson, I cannot,
if I would, escape knowledge of the injustice, cruelty, ignorance and
degradation prevailing on our Sorrowful Star, and at thought of it my
Soul grows faint. You assure me that through evolution Earth's immature
peoples will, as have the Entoans, become elevated in their ideas of
right, and I do not doubt it, but in the meantime one must lament the
miseries of to-day. Nearly all of Earth's peoples believe more or
less in a continuity of existence, in Heaven, Hell or in some unknown
condition of rewards and punishments, yet neither that or any other
belief prevents them from persecuting and even killing each other. How
then is it that possessing neither a belief or a hope of continued
existence the Entoans are so far advanced in all that constitutes
a high standard of ethics, and is it thought that a knowledge of
continuous existence will render them a more just or moral people?

De L'Ester--Observation of the peoples of various Planets, including
Earth and Ento, leads us to the conclusion that religious beliefs
exert but a very limited influence upon the inner life and conduct of
either individuals or peoples, such limited influence being of a reflex
character. Certainly Spiritual ideals are the outgrowth of evolution of
individuals, and in a tardier degree of peoples, and are the natural
sequences of the unfoldment of the infolded Soul. Morality is not a
grace of some mental process, but a Principle inherent in the Soul of
man. It is the objective consciousness of subjective righteousness,
and when the Soul and the Ego are in harmonious relation each with the
other a high moral standard is the result. Spiritual ideals enunciated
by such exalted men as Buddha, Jesus, Confucius and others, were, and
yet are, in advance of the masses who do not comprehend them, and by
some who dimly catch their meaning they serve as ignes fatui with which
they mislead the minds of the ignorant. Here and there are those whose
Souls are irradiated by the light of the Divine Spirit. These do not
kill, or counsel murder of their brethren, neither do they steal, or
lie, or indulge in the baser traits of the unevolved human, and in time
all of Earth's children will so evolve that gladly they will practice
Ento's golden rule, "I will do unto my neighbor as I would have my
neighbor do unto me."

No, simply a knowledge of the continuity of existence will not make
the Entoans juster or more moral, but it will bring to them happiness
immeasurable. They, as it were, now exist within a circle outside of
which is nothing. No anticipated renewal of loving ties, no reunion
with parents, with children, with consorts or friends. Naught for the
dead but perpetual Silence; naught for the living but hopeless longing
for the beloved dead, forever lost to sight, to touch, to all but
undying memories and to measureless sorrow.

Yes, ancient Ento spirits have informed us that long antecedent to the
establishment of their religious system Ento's various races held
various religious beliefs and violent religious differences were of
common occurrence. Like the peoples of our own and other planets they
created Gods on a level with their evolvement, and loyally fought for
their supremacy, but at the time of the establishment of the national
religion this chaotic condition was regulated. The creeds of the
various sects with their attendant legends, as far as practicable were
harmonized and formulated, and thus the Sacred Writings, the Ento
Confession of Faith, became the Sacred Law from which there was no
appeal. These Sacred Writings contain many admirable lessons, but so
inwrought with cruel Commandments, puerile conceptions and chimerical
legends, that during later centuries the evolved intelligence of
priests and peoples gradually has brought about a tacit disuse of rites
and ceremonials once strictly observed. The worst feature of these
Sacred Writings is the doctrine of utter annihilation of the Life
Principle, inducing in the minds of the people the hopeless attitude
of one ever walking in the shadows of death and despair, but having
outgrown some of the worst features of their religion the Entoans now
are prepared for still larger liberty of thought, and soon they will
be released from the bondage of ecclesiastical tyranny. Of course,
there are priestly zealots, who as far as they may dare, will oppose
the introduction of a new religion, but so overwhelming and universal
is the desire for relief from their ever present despair that as
thirsty travellers in a barren land eagerly the people will drink of
the life giving waters of hope and joy held to their lips by hands of
their dear ones whom they had consigned to the Silence. Gentol[a:],
you little realize the joy that will fill your Soul when you shall
behold the smileless faces of the gentle Entoans irradiated through the
consciousness that like a worn garment the dread past has fallen away
from them, and that from glorious Spirit Realms radiant Angels have
proclaimed for them life, life, life forevermore, is the heritage of
all of Andûman[a:]'s children of Ento, and of countless worlds in space.

Nay, Gentol[a:], not another question, for inevitably soon we will be
called to D[a:]o, so we must improve the hours remaining to us. There
are features of this city that would interest you and Bernard but we
must defer the pleasure to a more opportune time. I now may say to you
that the approaching climax of our Mission will not at all end it, and
although it will not be necessary that you shall continuously accompany
us, emergencies are likely to arise in which your services will be
of vital importance. At such times we may take advantage of your
presence on the Planet to observe much that now we cannot even glance
at. In pursuance of our plans we will survey other irrigated regions
and adjacent waste lands, thus you and Bernard will acquire a general
knowledge of a large portion of Ento.

Gentola--Do not make too much of my now seeing this or that. I am not
over curious and can wait for times that may be more propitious for
observing whatever may be instructive or interesting.

De L'Ester--It is my opinion that curiosity is not strictly a feminine
trait. As for you, you are incurious to a fault. You would have been an
admirable Eve.

Gentola--I am not so sure of that, but certainly I never would have
looked at, much less have listened to such a monstrosity as a talking
serpent.

George--Gentol[a:], Bernard is resolved to share with me the pleasure
of assisting you. Dear boy, you grow so strong that I suspect you soon
will oust me altogether.

Bernard--I wish I were strong enough to assist you unaided, and,
mother, dear, soon I shall be.

De L'Ester--If you two boys have arrived at a decision as to who shall
assist our traveller, we will rise a little higher so as to gain a
more comprehensive view of this large and very beautiful city, which
is one of the greatest manufacturing centres of Ento. Below us now is
an extensive shipyard where are built and launched into that extensive
Basin many of Ento's largest vessels; thence they find their ways
through nearly all the navigable waters of the planet. Toward the
southeast you may observe a series of large buildings. In them are
constructed Air Transports and various motor vehicles.

As you have seen many rich silken stuffs it may interest you to learn
that this city is the principal centre of Ento's silk industry. Those
wide spreading groves, to which at times we have called your attention,
afford sustenance for the myriads of cocoon producing worms, which,
structurally, are exactly like the silkworm of our Planet. Zenest[a:]
informs us that since very ancient times the silk industry has for the
most part been in the hands of certain peoples, and as an inheritance
is transmitted from generation to generation of the same families who
have become experts in all pertaining to it. Dyeing processes are
similar to some in use on Earth, though Ento chemists also produce
exquisite dyes from atmospheric substances as yet unknown to chemists
of our Planet, but during the coming century in this direction they
will make surprising discoveries.

On the further bank of the river, embowered amid great palmlike trees
and other greenery is a group of imposing buildings, their white
walls and domed summits presenting a very picturesque and handsome
appearance. George, we will approach them more nearly. Gentol[a:],
in those commodious structures are housed all the homeless infirm
and homeless aged persons of this province, and truly in the fullest
sense possible it is a home, for the care of the inmates is regarded
as a Sacred trust, and they receive every attention that love and a
high sense of duty can suggest. You have been told that the Entoans
regard life as the most precious of all possessions, and that it may
be prolonged to the utmost is their chiefest desire. Those who live
to an unusual age are regarded as being specially favored by the God
Phra (death), and they receive tenderest care and marked consideration.
This and like beneficent institutions are known as Roûv[a:] nû Vastimo
Odalliss[a:][a:]. Translated into your language this would mean home
for the fortunate. Zenest[a:] says that my translation is not quite
correct. I should have said favored, not fortunate, ones.

Yes, I am aware that on our Planet, particularly among so termed
civilized peoples, there is small sympathy for such unfortunates as
fill insane asylums. In such institutions we often witness fiendish
cruelties perpetrated by semi-savage attendants upon helpless
unfortunates. Cruelty in all its manifestations is the unerring
indication of savagery, hence individuals or peoples who entertain low
views as to their duties toward the aged, the helpless and unfortunate
are still in an unevolved state and of necessity upon entering the
Spirit World will find themselves on a low plane of Being. As there is
no escape from the consequences of one's acts, the fate of undutiful
children, of unfaithful friends, of cruel and selfish guardians of
the poor and helpless is not an enviable one, for on the Spirit side,
to their lasting regret they must learn the full meaning of _personal
atonement_.

In every province are Roûv[a:] nû Vastimo Odalliss[a:][a:], and nowhere
on Ento is one man, woman or child homeless or without ample care and
kindliest protection.

What a glorious day this is. The atmosphere is vibrant with life giving
forces and how grand it is to be conscious of one's existence and of
the ever unfolding capabilities inherent in the ego. At thought of it
my exultation is beyond expression.

Gentol[a:], is not the view wonderfully fine? The engineering skill
which has so perfected the vast Irrigating and Waterways System in
itself is marvellous, all the more so when one considers the peculiar
difficulties encountered and surmounted. See that huge vessel coming
so swiftly from the northeast. Consider the enormous energy of the
motive power impelling it through the quiet Waterway at a rate of speed
unattained by the swiftest ocean steamers of our Planet.

Gentola--Certainly such results of applied electricity and of vibratory
force are amazing, and while observing vessels great and small rushing
along at what to me appears dangerous speed, continually I anticipate
accidents, which thus far have not occurred. Transports, too, traverse
the air apparently as secure as birds on wing, and great trains of
Tuzamos, at a speed that to me is appalling, come and go without
exciting more than passing attention.

De L'Ester--Naturally these features must impress you, but at this time
I cannot more than repeat that the speed and movements of all vessels
and other conveyances are carefully regulated, and that the Entoans
regard it as a supreme duty to guard from injury themselves and others.

George, that we may afford our travellers a view of W[a:]n[a:] Vinostû
yarû (expiatory fire fountain) we will move toward the northeast.
We are nearing the phenomenal marvel from which clouds of steam are
rising and violently swirling as they are dissipated in the atmosphere.
Sunbeams falling athwart the vaporous clouds tint them with rainbow
hues, and like those of a kaleidoscope, ever the shapes are changing
into new forms of loveliness. Now we perceive a boiling, bubbling
lake, at intervals pulsing upward, upward to the rim of the massive
stone wall inclosing it, and now slowly it subsides to again and again
repeat the singular movement. Once the basin of the lake was an active
volcano, but through a seismic convulsion an underground channel was
opened between it and a large spring fed lake whose volume of water
poured into the crater, whose ever lessening diameter is little more
than a mile, but whose depth is so incredible that I hesitate to state
it. Von Humboldt, will you further inform us concerning this expression
of nature's ever surpassing handiwork?

Von Humboldt--Soon after entering the Spirit World I became acquainted
with Lief Bjornson, a learned Norwegian, who informed me that
frequently he had visited this Planet, and that with some ancient
Ento Spirits he had thoroughly explored it. Also, he informed me that
among other interesting features of Ento, near the northern boundary
of the Irrigating and Waterways System, there was a hot water lake
which periodically overflowed, occasioning engineers and laborers much
annoyance and destroying all adjacent vegetation. Later on he again
visited the locality and found the lake inclosed within a substantial
wall of masonry. Through these ancient Spirits he learned that the
convulsion which converted an active volcano into a hot water lake
occurred long previous to the centralization of Ento's Government and
the Establishment of the National Religion. My natural tendencies
augmenting my curiosity I took advantage of a recent visit to the
Planet to investigate the phenomenon. The diameter of the nearly
circular lake is, as De L'Ester has said, a little over one mile, its
depth varying with the flow and ebb of its volume of boiling water,
which at regular intervals sinks downward, downward, until to mortal
vision it becomes imperceptible. During the day the pulsating lake
is at flood, but with the decline of the Sun it ebbs downward, and
twilight falls over an abyss whose depth more than equals its diameter.
As I with my Ento friends hovered over the emptied crater, listening
to the strangely uncanny noises far down in its depths we felt no
sense of surprise that in ancient as in modern times the Entoans have
shunned the lake, believing it tenanted by offending Gods, condemned by
Andûman[a:] to dwell there as an expiation of some misdemeanor. Will
our friend Hugh Miller, who has examined the geological formation of
this locality, give to us the result of his observations?

Hugh Miller--We are aware that on Ento, as on other Planets volcanic
activities afford a vent for the surplusage of interior energies, which
ever are more or less phenomenal, but as I must confine myself to our
present subject, I only shall say that a personal examination of this
locality assured me and those accompanying me, that in a remote age
in this and the adjacent region a volcanic group existed, which as
Ento's interior heat lessened, became inactive and at length this, the
greatest of the group, alone remained intermittently active, and at the
time of the seismic convulsion this was its condition. To explain its
present phenomenal features would consume more time than we can afford,
but on some other occasion, if desirable, I may do so. I, however,
may say that the energies which have levelled the once elevated cone
of this crater have obliterated all surface traces of its lesser
neighbors, whose location only Spirit vision perceives. Where was the
spring fed lake? At no great distance northward, and its extent was
from north to south about thirty miles, from east to west quite twenty
miles.

Gentola--I am greatly interested in this peculiar scene, and in what
has been said concerning it. I cannot conceive of a more beautiful
spectacle of its kind, and I can liken those volumes of heaving,
swirling, tumultuous, iridescent vapor to nothing but an enormous
fountain of all manner of jewels, tossed hither and thither in
bewildering confusion.

George--Well said, well said, Gentol[a:]. Your simile is so well
chosen, that not even my brilliant imagination is equal to conjuring
up a fitter one. Beauteous wonder, may time touch thee so lightly that
when centuries hence we again may gaze on thee not one of thy jewels
shall be missing.

De L'Ester--Bravo, bravo, George. Now we all are convinced that the
quality of your imagination and the quantity of your modesty are
equally balanced, and altogether admirable. Our chaffing at an end we
now will move southward, then eastward. Higher, George, still higher,
so that we may obtain the widest view possible of the underlying
regions and of Fondorûveh, which soon will come under our observation.
Fondorûveh (named after its founder, Tamon Fondorûveh) contains
about two hundred thousand inhabitants and possesses some of the
largest chemical works on Ento in which are prepared great quantities
of condensed foods, the product of grains, fruits, vegetables and
atmospheric substances. That statement need not so surprise you, as
some of your scientists are of the opinion that your atmosphere holds
all the elements composing your varied food supply, and in time Earth's
chemists will learn, as the Entoans have learned, how to utilize these
elements, thus greatly simplifying domestic cares, and adding to the
general welfare of the peoples. No, the Entoans do not adulterate their
food supplies. They are not given to taking or administering poisons
under another name.

Yes, these regions present a sameness of landscape, yet once the
surface was as varied as is the larger portion of our Planet. The same
forces that have levelled the surface of Ento gradually are levelling
the great snow crowned mountain chains of Earth. The towering Alps,
the vast mystery laden Himalayas, the tremendous Sierras, to mortal
mind appear as indestructible as the globe itself, yet during every
passing moment their disintegrated particles, through the agencies of
melting snows, of rains, or of tempestuous winds are being borne to all
parts of the ever changing surface of Earth. The existence of a Planet
being of such inconceivable duration, the passing of a thousand years
is as the passage of a fleecy cloud across the sky, leaving no traces
of its vanished loveliness. Ten thousand years hence the appearance
of Earth's great mountain chains will not have perceptibly changed,
yet their disintegrated particles will have filled depressions, raised
the beds of oceans and of lakes and changed the courses of all flowing
waters, and inevitably a period will arrive when the surface of Earth
will be as monotonously level as is the surface of the lands over which
we now are passing. Ere the arrival of that distant period our globe
will have lost much of its interior heat and the temperature of the
atmosphere will have become perceptibly lowered, then our equatorial
regions having lost their torrid heat will offer the highest conditions
for the further progress of the already greatly evolved peoples and
will become Centres of Civilization of which they now have but an
indefinite conception. From these Centres will radiate the accumulated
knowledge of ages, and as do the Entoans, the peoples will understand
that though knowledge is power, it may be made to serve evil purposes,
but that wisdom, the fadeless flower of Soul culture, ever is Divinely
beneficent.

Gentol[a:], we all are conscious that our reiterated instruction may,
to you, become tiresome, but through this process you now possess
a comprehensive idea of the social conditions of the Entoans, of
their high ethical standards, of their universal prosperity, of their
advanced knowledge concerning such sciences as their religion has
permitted them to investigate, of their admirable proficiency in
the various arts, and of their exceedingly lofty conception of the
love principle which permeates their entire being, rendering them so
unselfish, so ready to serve each other, so devoted to righteous deeds,
that indeed they have entered the Kingdom of Good.

For the present we will turn our attention in another direction,
for yonder is Fondorûveh, extending eastward to the boundary line
between this province, H[a:] Mûyen and that named Effondelus[a:].
Fondorûveh is to Camariss[a:] nearly an antipodal city, for since we
left Camariss[a:], though we have afforded you a comprehensive view of
the Equatorial and the North and partly of the South Temperate zones,
we constantly have been tending eastward a distance of more than five
thousand miles, and now we are nearing the present terminus of the
Irrigating and Waterways System. We do not consider it expedient to
alight in Fondorûveh, but we will pass over it slowly so that you and
our lad may perceive its extent, and most noticeable architectural and
other features. Like those of most Ento cities its principal streets
are provided with Waterways, on which we perceive numerous small
passenger or ware laden boats passing to and fro, and, as is usual,
on either side of the Waterways are wide, well paved streets for the
accommodation of pedestrians and motor vehicles. Yes, the scene is
animated and attractive and we regret that our time is too limited for
the present to more than glance over the quite modern city. It now is
high noon, and should we enter yonder beautiful Temple we would behold
a multitude of worshippers engaged in adoration of Andûman[a:], the
Supreme One. Yes, we have been in it and in all other fine structures
of Ento.

I have mentioned that Fondorûveh is quite a modern city, but deep down
under its foundation are the ruins of what in ancient times was a more
extensive, populous and affluent Fondorûveh. Centuries antecedent to
the inauguration of the Irrigating and Waterways System, the increasing
aridity of this region obliged the rural, and in time the urban
population to emigrate elsewhere, and finally the ancient Fondorûveh
was abandoned and gradually felt into ruinous decay, and in time the
annual floods and tempestuous winds buried its crumbling structures
under masses of débris or shifting sands. From the inception of the
great work the system has progressed without cessation and nearly half
a century ago its beneficent arms bore to this then desert region
abounding life expressions and prosperous conditions. This locality
offering special advantages enterprising persons conceived the idea
of using the site of the ancient buried city as a foundation for
the new Fondorûveh, which is in evidence in all the glory of modern
architecture and modern appliances. Could the ancient ruins exchange
sentiments, what a shaking of heads and raising of eyebrows would
ensue. Almost, one can fancy them sighing over the glories of the
past, the degeneracy of the present, and the uncertain future of the
presumptuous young upstart so serenely sitting on the ruins of its
betters.

Now we will move on. Almost suddenly the scenery is changing. The
country on our right and left grows a little more broken and away
southward are some low hills, the vestiges of former mountainous
elevations, curving in an eastward course until they are lost in the
distance. The entire region wears an appearance of newness, and its
many pretty towns, villages and country estates dotting its irrigated
and now fertile fields renders it more picturesque and pleasing than
the exceedingly level lands we recently have observed. A few more years
will bring to greater maturity much that is in an incomplete state, and
trees and shrubs and glowing blooms will make of this recently desert
country a veritable paradise, populated by a happy and prosperous
people.

Before reaching the eastern terminus of the System I will inform you
that the Waterway to our left, having reached a certain locality
its further progress was stayed by two peculiar barriers which have
occasioned a prodigious outlay of time, energy and means. For a time
engineers thought them nearly impregnable, but chemistry coming to
their aid with explosives of tremendous energy, the work of demolition
began, and so successfully has it proceeded that ere long through
both barriers the Kemin[a:] Lois[a:]vaon (central waterway) will find
passageway eastward. Now we will stay our flight and you will tell us
what you see.

Gentola--I see quite an extensive oval lake inclosed by a great wall
whose inner surface is so smooth as to present a peculiar appearance.
At its southern extremity is a mountainous mass, and from there the
height of the wall decreases until at its northern limit it is only
slightly above the level of the water, which is as unruffled as the
face of a mirror. On both the western and eastern sides of the lake
many men are engaged in drilling and blasting wide passageways through
the walls and the work appears to be nearing completion. Also I see
trains of tramway cars bearing away the débris, which does not resemble
ordinary stone. Nearby is quite a village of wooden structures and
tents, which I presume are occupied by laborers and others engaged in
the destruction of the wall. On the Irrigating Canals small boats are
coming or going as silently as though steersmen and passengers may be
deaf and dumb. These Entoans are such silent folk that they impress me
with a sense of sadness. An Air Transport is coming from toward the
east, and--see, see, its passengers are throwing flowers down to the
workmen and are calling, "Loh[a:]û, loh[a:]û, ēmanos." What a strange,
strange scene. I wish some of our Earth folk might witness it, for
should I tell of it I fear that no one would credit my story.

De L'Ester--Be not disturbed; fulfill the Mission for whose
accomplishment you returned into mortal existence, and leave to coming
years and enlightened minds a justification of what you and we know to
be a simple statement of facts. Yes, the material composing the wall of
the lake is somewhat peculiar. During some early age of the Planet one
of its satellites, unable to resist the attractive force of its parent,
with tremendous impetus and in a state of high incandescence, rushed
on to its surface, striking it at a low angle and plowing deeply into
its bosom. In its furious progress it distributed its molten matter in
the form of a deep oval basin, until its energy, and largely its volume
being spent, its career ended in the deposition of the mountainous mass
you have observed. Yes, the constituents of all Celestial bodies are
the same, and when suddenly reduced from a state of high incandescence
to a condition of solidity a sort of vitrefaction results, and that is
what occurred to Ento's satellite when in such hot haste it returned to
the bosom of its parent.

Your conjecture is correct, for soon the passageway through both walls
will be completed, and ere long vessels will be crossing to the further
side of the lake beyond which the system steadily is progressing.

Gentola--I should like to witness the opening of the Waterway. I
imagine that it will be a fine spectacle to see great vessels rushing
through the wide gateway into the lake.

De L'Ester--Without doubt it will be a stirring occasion, but it will
not occur previous to the culmination of our Mission. However we
promise you that, conditions being propitious, in a body we will come
to escort you hither to witness the entrance of the first great vessel
into the placid water of Etzoin[a:] Lois[a:] (placid water). We now
will proceed to view the vitreous mass at its southern extremity, which
will remain a perpetual evidence of a not unusual disaster. Planets
in their earlier formative processes throw off into space masses of
matter of greater or lesser magnitude. When the projective energy is
not forceful enough to hurl them sufficiently beyond the attractive
energy of the planet, quickly they are drawn back, and within its body,
otherwise they become small globes, and through specific conditions and
activities for an indefinite length of time they serve as satellites.
In this instance the indications are that the disaster occurred while
yet the crust of Ento was comparatively thin, and certainly previous to
the appearance of organized life forms, consequently no serious results
could have ensued. What the dimensions of the satellite were we cannot
certainly say, but from a careful estimate we conclude that its bulk
was about equal to that of Ementol[a:]. We do not consider it desirable
to at this time enter into details, but I may say that the basin of the
lake is little less than seventeen miles long and a little over eleven
miles wide.

Gentola--You say that the disaster which resulted in the formation of
the basin and this great vitreous mass is not an unusual one; if then
it might be possible for Entol[a:] and Ementol[a:] to some time suffer
a like disaster, would they in their flight through space and at the
moment of impact with the Planet be in a molten condition?

De L'Ester--Your question is very apropos, and Bruno shall have the
pleasure of replying to it.

Bruno--Thanks for your consideration. Gentol[a:], you may remember that
once on our way to Ento we, in compliance with your desire, alighted on
Entol[a:]. You then learned that ages ago the swiftly revolving moon
became a cold body and that neither it or its sister satellite had
ever sustained organic life forms. Your supposition as to a possible
contingency is, I regret to say, a fact so inevitable that it is not an
agreeable one to contemplate. As planets age they grow more magnetic
and a time will arrive when Ento's attractive force will draw to its
bosom one after the other its two satellites in a molten state. At what
period these catastrophes may occur no one can certainly determine, but
they will occur.

Activities of the universe may be likened to "the mills of the
Gods." Slowly but surely, with absolute accuracy, they each to all
others adjust themselves, thus no displacement of substance ever
creates a vacuum. Thus it occurs that the activities concerned in the
certain displacement and destruction of Entol[a:] and Ementol[a:]
are so precise, so minute, so incalculably tardy that the period of
culmination of the energy which will force them from their orbits is
not cognizable save by the Infinite Mind, but when the momentous period
shall arrive the inner satellite will plunge onto Ento's surface with
necessarily disastrous consequences, much depending upon the locality
of its impact. No, it will not destroy the Planet, but it will jar it
to its very centre. Ementol[a:], the outer satellite, being the smaller
one, possibly, nay probably, may first suffer extinction, but of course
that is a matter of conjecture. Have I made my reply intelligible?

Gentola--Quite so, but I rather regret having asked the question to
which you so satisfactorily have replied. Why? Well, I like to regard
God as all knowing, all powerful, and wholly beneficent. Possessing
such attributes, naturally one asks, why does He permit such disasters
to occur? Spirits freed from the environments of the physical plane,
with senses quickened to a degree that mortals cannot comprehend,
may adjust themselves to occurrences and conditions which to me are
deplorable and terrifying, for I confess that I shrink aghast from a
contemplation of some of the effects of what science terms natural law,
back of which it would seem there must be a Lawmaker who arbitrarily
adjusts all things, both good and evil. Tell me, friends, have you
become so reconciled to the apparently unequal relation between the
creator and the created, that unreservedly you can say, "Whatever is
is right?" For instance, should Entol[a:] and Ementol[a:], through
the activity of natural Law, be forced from their orbits and onto the
planet, with such attendant horrors as appalls one to think of, would
you then say, "Whatever is is right?" Cognizant as you are of the
cataclysms, earthquakes, destructive storms, wars and other frightful
events occurring on Ento, on Earth and on other planets, can you
candidly say, "Whatever is is right?"

De L'Ester--You are too deeply moved. I pray you to tranquillize
yourself, else we cannot hold you, and you may suffer injury.
Believe me, believe us, when, as now, we declare that in our Spirit
consciousness only a recognition of good is possible. Conscious mortal
mind is unable to perceive beyond the plane of mortal being; only the
subconscious or Spirit Self rises to the height of real perception.
Although now you are partly freed from physical influences, you yet
are held on the plane of mortal being, and cannot comprehend that
which Spiritually you but dimly perceive. Although Spiritually you
realize that the Infinite All Pervading One is wholly good, your
mortal consciousness is so dominant that, like all mortals, you yet
are seeking the _shadows_ of physical demonstrations and are slow
to comprehend that the activities of the Universe are harmonious
realities, working through intelligent means, toward intelligent ends,
and that ever the ends are Good, for Evil, per se, does not exist.
Along all lines progress, like the fabled phoenix, rises from the ashes
of consumed ignorant conceptions concerning Spirits, and out of seeming
evils positive good emerges. Only conscious mortal mind fears death
and disaster. Like an armed warrior it stands at the entrance of the
citadel of mortal existence, challenging all invaders. It is the Human
Soul arrayed against intangible, supposable foes, who ofttimes are
unrecognized friends.

To freed spirits, aware of their indestructibility, and of their
inherent tendency toward ever ascending planes of progression, the ever
changing conditions of substance are of but slight moment. Only through
their loving sympathy for their suffering or terrified brethren of the
physical plane do they experience special regret over the occurrence
of physical disasters. So assured are we that out of apparent evil
only good, or what is the same, higher conditions must result, that in
all sincerity, unitedly we declare that not only do we believe, but we
realize, that whatever is is right.

We perceive that you do not wholly agree with our conclusions, but
time will not end to-morrow, and you may change your mind. Also we
perceive that your natural love of life inclines you to cling to
mortal conditions, and that is well, for your experiences yet lack
completeness. But be assured that when the change termed death shall
come to you you will be undismayed, and in our Spirit World, with
serenity you will regard the dreamlike memories of your past terrors
and dread anticipations. With unquestioning trust you then will realize
that the Infinite Intelligent Energy is only good.

As from the apex of this mountainous mass we gaze across the expanse
of the lake in whose quiet depths are mirrored the azure sky and snowy
clouds, it is difficult to realize that in a bygone age suddenly the
surface of the Planet was rent asunder and in the rift a molten moon
molded itself into a convex basin, in whose rim and bottom, during
cooling and contraction great crevices opened through which annual
floods have poured and perennial springs have welled up from their
depths, thus affording an unfailing supply of clear, cold, delicious
water. No, the eastern wall of the lake will not be wholly pierced
until the System shall be prepared to receive the outflowing water, and
that will be later than the culmination of our Mission. To the Entoans
this lake ever has been a mystery. Were they learned in astronomy they
of course would understand its origin.

From its eastern wall onward around the planet to the western shore of
Indolois[a:], the lands of this Torrid zone generally are so arid as to
be altogether infertile. At intervals there are limited oases where,
through natural or other means, the soil is sufficiently moist to admit
of cultivation. The inhabitants, through air transportation, enjoy
communication and association with other peoples.

In our progress eastward we will cross several low mountain ranges, a
number of lakes and some inconsiderable streams flowing from the north
and losing themselves in the oases of which I have spoken, and soon
we will near a rather extensive lake on whose northeastern shore is a
city of about three hundred thousand inhabitants. Its name Roûv[a:]
(favored) probably was chosen because it is favored by an abundant
water supply. But I shall not further anticipate what presently you
will have the pleasure of observing.

This seems an opportune time to inform you that this morning, previous
to our coming for you, we visited D[a:]o, finding all things relating
to our Mission indicating a successful issue. Vallo[a:], pallid as a
white lily, is as a bird poised for flight, her senses so marvellously
quickened that she perceives and converses with the radiant ones
surrounding her. Dano, too, unfolds surprisingly, and eagerly,
anxiously awaits the fulfillment of your promise to be with him in his
hour of supremest trial. Through grief over the certainty that his
idolized child nears the end of her young life, Omanos Fûnh[a:] is
wellnigh prostrated. Only through the dawning hope of again finding his
adored daughter, the wife of his youth, and other dear ones, is his
despair a little lessened, and bravely he smiles into the troubled eyes
and wan, lovely face that soon will wear the reposeful smile of the
dead.

Now, friends, we must attend to material affairs. The region over which
we are passing is a reminder of an American desert, minus a fauna
and flora, of which there is no indication, but when the beneficent
system shall have watered its parched soil all that will be changed.
Gentol[a:], you perceive that away northward and southward there are
irrigated tracts, made possible through immense reservoirs which
the annual floods fill to repletion, and which with the addition of
occasional showers, suffices to moisten the thirsty lands. Also there
are deep wells which supply water for domestic and other purposes.
Certainly the general Government spares neither expense or labor for
the protection of those engaged in the conflict with such adverse
forces. Yes, doubtless, in time, the System will reclaim Ento's entire
waste lands, and again the equatorial regions will become the most
fertile and populous portions of the planet.

For the reason that the waste over which we have passed offers little
to either instruct or interest you or our dear lad, Bernard, we have
journeyed rather hurriedly. For the scientist, deep under its surface
there are treasures untold. Histories of races so ancient that neither
record or legend hints of who or what has been buried there. No trump
of Angel ever will awaken to animation the ashes of peoples who ages
ago lived and loved upon the highlands and amid the verdant vales of
the long since levelled lands, but as no atom of the universe can go
astray or cease to be, somewhere those ancient ones yet are living,
loving and filling their allotted places among the countless myriads of
the children of the Infinite Father, Mother God.

Before us, gleaming in the sunlight, is Hûnd[a:]ffon (name of
Andûman[a:]'s cup bearer) and lining its northwestern shore and gracing
its slightly rising background is Roûv[a:] Tylû, one of Ento's ancient
cities. We will alight on yonder lofty Temple dome, near the centre of
the city.

George--Although previously I have passed this way, I have not
looked through this antiquated city, so with your approval, friends,
Genessano, Bernard and I will make a hurried exploration of its
highways and byways.

De L'Ester--Your pleasure is ours, and you, Zenest[a:], who are so
well versed in the histories of Ento's ancient and modern cities, will
kindly relate whatever you may know of Roûv[a:].

Zenesta Hao--With somewhat of pleasure and somewhat of sadness I shall
comply with your request. It may surprise you to learn that this city
was the home of my parents and also my home during a portion of my
last Re-embodiment. You who understand the Law know that in referring
to my parents I mean those through whom I last was reborn into mortal
existence, and who were a newly wedded pair, wealthy, cultivated and
possessed of virtues of an exalted nature. See you yonder stately
dwelling nearby whose portals a fountain throws into the air its
silvery spray? In that dwelling the Angels of the Visitation found for
me suitable environments for my rebirth, and when I grew self-conscious
I found myself cradled on the bosom and gazing into the eyes of the
loveliest and gentlest of women. As an infant thinks, so thought I of
a wonderful past existence, but I looked into my mother's lovelit eyes
and I forgot, I forgot. Soon for me was naught but a blessed present,
the present of my mother's caresses, the present when from her fair
breasts I drew into my life a part of her life, and the days passed,
and as other children unfold, so did I until three birth anniversaries
had marked the passing years of my mortal existence, then an awful
shadow began to creep over our threshold. My lovely, gentle mother,
who, from the time of my birth, had not been strong, rapidly grew
weaker, and my father, in an agony of grief and terror scarcely left
her side. As memory recalls that sorrowful time, I see the look of fear
and despair in my mother's eyes, and I hear her pathetic appeals to
the physicians, to my father, to save her life, to hold her fast, lest
death might tear her from her husband, from her child, but the shadow
crept nearer, ever nearer, and child as I was, her prayers for succor,
and my father's moans and sobbing cries to Andûman[a:], to Phr[a:], to
the Gods to save the dear life so surely ebbing away, filled me with
terror indescribable.

At the last my father sought to keep me away from the closing scene
of my mother's life, but with the depth and tenacity of a mother's
love she held me close within one arm and with the other she drew my
father's face to hers, and her breathing grew fainter, fainter, and
after a little ceased and there was Silence, and the dear arms relaxed
their caress, the throbbing heart-beats were stilled, and in affright
I raised my head from my mother's breast to look into her pallid face
on which the calm of death was resting. In terror I reached out my
arms, crying, "Father! father!" No answer came to my cries, but a
moment later alarmed attendants hurried into the apartment and lifted
me from my dead mother's breast. As they bore me away some one raised
my father's head, and on his face, too, was the calm of death, and from
his lips a crimson stream fell upon my mother's white robe.

Pardon me, friends, I had not meant to sadden you, or to wet my own
eyes with infrequent tears over the memories of a bygone time.

After the untimely death of my parents I was cared for by my father's
brother until, as a pupil, I was placed in the Galarēs[a:] of
Camariss[a:], which, I may say, thereafter was my home until I joined
my dear ones in our Spirit Realms. Your sympathetic expressions assure
me that I have not too greatly presumed in offering this recital of
my earliest days, recalled through viewing remembered scenes of my
childhood and of later years.

Now I will hasten to acquaint you with a condensed history of this
really ancient city. Fourteen Ento centuries ago Roûv[a:] was a
rich and very populous city, situated on ground so elevated as to
afford an extended view of the expanse of Hûndaffon and somewhat of
the lands beyond its further shore. A reliable historian of that
period says: "From some very ancient writings in my possession I have
learned that in remote times the region north of Roûv[a:] was broken
by mountainous elevations and vales through which tumultuous streams
found their way into Lois[a:] Hûndaffon, which in the spring season
overflowed its banks to the great detriment of contiguous low lying
lands." The historian to whom I have alluded was Lotis Oovan Issillo,
whose Writings are considered standards of excellence. Of the ancient
Writings of which he makes mention no trace remains, but through
ancient Ento Spirits we know that their statements were correct. During
the passing centuries unfavoring conditions have greatly changed
Roûv[a:], which retains but slight traces of its ancient greatness.
Still it is an attractive and quite prosperous city.

Hûndaffon is about thirty English miles long and quite twenty miles
wide. Through continuous dredging its depth of about two hundred feet
is maintained, and largely it furnishes irrigation for certain low
south lands, and affords carriage for various craft plying between
Roûv[a:] and villages along its shores. Toward the northwest we
perceive a very considerable river pouring its sparkling waters into
the lake, the fine bridge spanning it affording communication between
the two divisions of the city. This river, which now is the only stream
of importance flowing into Hûndaffon, is known as Somû-ikaton (Blessing
River). It rises in the far north, and truly it is appropriately named,
for its life giving water supplies ample irrigation for the lands
lying along its length, from which agricultural and other communities
derive sustenance. Along its shores are towns and villages in which
are excellent schools, libraries, temples and other features for the
advancement and enjoyment of highly cultivated communities. From
Lois[a:] Hûndaffon northward the river has been deepened and widened,
culminating at its head in an immense reservoir, which we have learned
is to be increased to twice its present dimensions. The river, too, is
to be further deepened and widened, that it may afford carriage for
vessels of large tonnage. During the efficient Administration of Omanos
Fûnh[a:] many extensive reservoirs have been constructed and flowing
streams deepened and widened, the growing needs of the people demanding
the exercise of all possible means favoring their natural, therefore
just, requirements. You are aware that Ento's entire Public Works
are owned and maintained by the General Government, thus abuses of
privileges, consequently of peoples, are avoided, and so energetically
is the construction of the Waterways and Irrigating System being
executed that ere long Ento will experience a degree of prosperity
greater than at any time during the history of the Planet. Then, too,
knowledge of the coming new religion will usher in universal happiness
where now is universal sadness.

You express surprise at the stupendous excavations that have been
and now are being made on Ento. Generally one ceases to wonder at an
accomplished fact, so I perhaps cannot quite appreciate your state
of mind, my last rebirth having occurred long after such excavations
had become a common feature of Ento. Many centuries previous to the
inception of the System, through the agencies of scientific appliances,
excavations of Ento's light, porous soil were easily accomplished. To
render them watertight was the greatest embarrassment, but through the
formation of a conglomerate cement for linings of reservoirs, canals
and the like science arranged that difficulty. The great Waterways
also are lined with a combination of cement and stone, the exceeding
porosity of the soil requiring it.

I now will conclude my reminiscences associated with Roûv[a:]. During
my youth and later years at intervals I returned to my old home to
attend to such interests as I had inherited from my parents, but at
length age and infirmity disinclining me for further journeyings, in a
manner agreeable to my sense of justice I disposed of my possessions
and as I then thought bade a last farewell to Roûv[a:]. Since then it
appears to have but slightly changed, yet I doubt not ere long it shall
find itself within the hospitable embrace of the System, it will so
rejuvenate itself as to again become one of the foremost cities of Ento.

De L'Ester--For having afforded us an interesting half hour we are
your debtors. Certainly it is a surprise to learn that in this city
your last rebirth occurred, and that in yonder stately Kinos draped
residence your earliest Ento experiences came to you. Since we all at
one time or another have tasted of the sweets of joy and the bitterness
of sorrow, we know how to sympathize with the joys and sorrows of
others, and what sorrow is so pathetic as that of a young child Soul,
whose tender feet are essaying their first steps upon the rugged
pathway of mortal existence. No, Gentol[a:], repeated embodiments
do not inure the mortal expression of the Ego to the sorrows and
vicissitudes of the physical plane, but through such experiences the
Ego evolves into loftier, grander states of Being. Does the Ego and
its mortal expression mutually experience joy and sorrow? Aye, truly,
but the ego _knows_, while the objective expression or Soul only
sees through a glass darkly. Only the fully freed Ego is capable of
comprehending this occult statement, so patiently you will await its
solution.

Here are our explorers. Have you found aught of interest?

George--We only have glanced here and there, but can assure you that
we might linger here for a day and then leave this hoary Roûv[a:] with
regret. It is so quaint, so enchanting, that I propose that some time
when you and my sister may feel so inclined we will again bring you to
Roûv[a:], that together we all may view its many objects of interest.
You will be delighted to come? Then that matter is settled, and
Bernard will relate an incident of our half hour ramble that may amuse
you.

Bernard--Mother, dear, you should have seen how George startled a young
Priest who stood in the doorway of a Temple talking to an elderly,
dignified personage. As we approached them the priest said: "Yes,
yes, we are hearing of strange proceedings in many places, but more
particularly in the Palace of our Supreme Ruler, where the Princess
Vallo[a:] is thought to be dying. May the pitiful gods prolong her
days. Think of it, sir, think of it, it is openly said that Prince
Dano, as also the Princess Vallo[a:], declare by the Gods that they
both see and converse with those who long have been in the Silence,
and whose ashes attest to their nothingness. Your pardon, sir, but
truly it is so very absurd that I cannot forbear smiling when I think
of what Prince Dano has given utterance to. Why, he goes so far as to
assert that not only has he talked with the dead, but with a woman
who says she belongs to a World somewhere in space. I cannot at this
moment recall the name of this World, and have not learned where it is
supposed to be located, but he declares that she not only spoke to him,
but touched him, yes, sir, really touched him. Of course this is the
merest hallucination, for persons of healthful minds never are subject
to such vagaries. It is true that in past times on momentous occasions
the Gods have, and do now, speak to our High Priests, and with the Most
High Priest of the Inner Temple Zim, but with the people, never. Fancy
yourself, sir, indulging in such wild imaginings as that the dead,
or a being from an unimaginable World have spoken to you, or what is
quite as impossible, touched----" Just then George touched him on the
extended right hand, and with a start instantly he stopped talking, and
for a moment looked at his hand, then glanced about him with such a
perplexed expression that the man with whom he was speaking regarded
him with some surprise, and an inquiry as to what had disquieted him.
Recovering himself, he attempted to explain that he had experienced a
peculiar sensation, but he got no further, for George gave him such a
palpable touch on his left hand, then on his face, that he cried out
in terror: "Save me, Andûman[a:], save me, save me," and fled through
the temple and out at a rear door, leaving the dignified personage in a
state of bewilderment. Mother, it was such a droll performance that I
shall laugh whenever I think of it. Oh, no, I did not understand what
the Priest said; George translated it for me.

De L'Ester--George, if your exploit is not altogether commendable,
at least it is amusing, and certainly you have given the priest who
evidently is a Sensitive, a novel experience, which may serve as a
stepping stone toward his later enlightenment. I fancy that he will not
relate his strange experience to his Superiors, who already are greatly
agitated over the weird reports with which the air is vibrant, and
which soon will be so augmented as to overwhelm both priests and people.

Roûv[a:], we now must say to you Info Oovistû. The hours are swiftly
passing and at any moment we may be called upon to turn our faces
toward D[a:]o. No, we do not consider Vallo[a:]'s departure imminent,
but in her devitalized state it soon may occur, and we must hold
ourselves in readiness for our part in the closing scene of the
momentous occasion.

George, we will rise to a greater height, so that Gentol[a:]'s vision
may command extensive views of the countries over which we shall pass.
It is not likely that we shall alight more than twice between Roûv[a:]
and the western shore of Indolois[a:].

Ah, Gentol[a:], you have grown weary. In our eagerness to afford
you views of many things we forget that you are not like ourselves,
tireless. George will escort Bernard to his bright home, so make your
adieus to him and our friends, and then I shall bear you swiftly to
your home, where ere now you should have arrived.

In no more than five minutes we have crossed the space between Ento
and Earth. Yes, a speedy passage, but when again you shall be a freed
Spirit, you will journey with the quickness of thought.

I pray you to retire early and rest; rest until to-morrow, when we will
come for you.

Adieu.




CHAPTER XVII.

CULMINATION OF THE MISSION.


De L'Ester--Good morning, madame. We are delighted to find you in
such a favorable mental and physical state. Yes, Dr. Merthel, White
Cloud and your humble servant gave you a treatment last night, and we
were somewhat amused at your idea that suddenly your room had grown
very warm. Hereafter, when you shall perceive white, vaporish clouds
drifting or falling over your closed eyelids, you may feel assured
that White Cloud is paying you a visit fraught with beneficence. Yes,
when properly administered, invariably Magnetization produces in the
recipient a sense of warmth and increased vigor. But your son, with
our Band, awaits us at a point near Roûv[a:], and we must hasten
our departure. George, allow me to assist madame. We regret that we
find it necessary to still further change our original programme,
which included views of the extreme northern and southern portions
of the Planet. Events are so shaping themselves that until after the
culmination of our Mission and your recovery from the effects of the
ordeal to which presently we must subject you, we must defer this
feature of our purposes. Be not disturbed; rest assured that we will
see to it that you shall not be tried beyond endurance.

Gentola--I am not in the least alarmed, but when I think of a cessation
of continuous association with my dear lad and you, my dear friends,
like a shadow a sense of sadness and loneliness steals over me, and I
shrink from the coming----

De L'Ester--No more; say no more; your every thought is apparent to
us, and this emotion endangers your safety. We, better than you have
been able to count the cost of this to you strange and engrossing
experience. All along we have known that to a degree it would unfit
you for the common avocations of your mortal existence, and for this
reason, for the time being, we have induced in your mind a state of
forgetfulness, but when the proper time shall arrive you will be made
to recall all that has occurred during the pursuance of our Mission,
and you will recall it without pain or regret, and as the years of your
mortal existence shall pass, we will be with you, not as now, but in a
manner that will add to your interest in the affairs of your daily life.

Ah, our friends have not awaited our arrival, but are coming to meet
us. Loh[a:]û; loh[a:]û; Onos isson ē tw[a:], ēmanos. (Hail, hail; we
welcome you, friends.) Bernard, you find your mother in a sad mood, and
you will comfort her, and you, Robert, will improvise a song in which
we may join; thus we may restore our disturbed harmony.

Robert--

  _From a faraway shore come the notes of a song,
    Its music in waves of sweet melody falling,
  Are drifting, are drifting the bright way along,
    From the homes where our dear ones are calling, are calling._

  Refrain.

  _We are waiting for you, we are watching for you,
    As your boat drifts along toward our fair, shining shore,
  And when Earth's troubled scenes shall recede from your view,
    We will greet you where sorrow shall come nevermore._

  _Our souls thrill with joy, as the glad notes come swelling
    From the lips of our loved ones, so fond and so true,
  Hear you not the sweet message their voices are telling,
    We are waiting, yes, waiting, and watching for you._

  Refrain.

  _We are waiting for you, we are watching for you,
    As your boat drifts along toward our fair, shining shore,
  And when Earth's troubled scenes shall recede from your view,
    We will greet you where sorrow shall come nevermore._

De L'Ester--Ah, now you are smiling; the shadows have flown, and you
are serene. Thus may it ever be until the shadowy veil falling between
the seeming and real World shall be lifted and you shall join the
loving, joyous Band who are ever waiting and watching for you.

Now we will journey eastward. In all directions the lands are somewhat
broken by low plateaus, the vestiges of mountain ranges or of spurs of
mountain ranges, and at intervals we catch views of existing mountains
of no great altitude. The lands lying between the plateaus, although
not thoroughly irrigated, are more or less fertile, and northward and
southward are scantily timbered lands and inconsiderable streams,
both of which are rare features of Ento's equatorial natural scenery.
Speaking of irrigation reminds me of something that I have desired
to mention. Through telescopic observations, one of Earth's foremost
astronomers is inclined to believe that the Entoans (Marsians) have
resorted to irrigation. To him and to another illumined scientific
man, who, I am proud to say, is my countryman, you will convey this
message: "Gentlemen, to your vision your telescopes convey faint, and
generally misleading gleams of what may be facts, but in the instance
mentioned, I assure you that the surmise is entirely correct, and
inevitably a period will arrive when Earth, like Ento, will require the
same treatment." Indeed, it is not too much to say that already the
inception of the period has arrived, and as the centuries pass it will
grow more and more apparent, and were Earth's peoples as wise as some
time they will be, they would value the ounce of prevention beyond the
pound of cure.

Flammarion, my countryman, I greet you, not as one greets a stranger,
but as one co-worker greets another. Ofttimes, son of our beloved
France, while you have striven to learn the secrets of our glowing
Central Sun, or to read the hither side of the inscrutable face of
Earth's shining satellite, or when through the hours of quiet nights
you have sought to wrest from illimitable starry spaces the meaning of
the Universe, I, with others interested in your life work, have been
by your side, striving to assist your aspiring Soul, and be assured
that when you again shall come into the realm of causes, you will find
the reward of your loving, patient labor, of your aspiring, exalted
endeavor.

And you, son of a land whose deeds of good and of ill have been sung
by lips more tuneful than are mine, with kindest thoughts I and those
with me greet you. When, with questioning eyes and reverent Soul,
you too, have gazed into the immeasurable distances, in whose depths
countless Worlds, peopled and unpeopled, move in stately order toward
their allotted destiny, not I alone, or this grand Spirit, Giordano
Bruno, whose ashes attested to the steadfastness of his integrity and
hallow the soil of Italy with the sacredness of martyrdom for truth's
sake, but others yet more exalted, have held vigil with you, when you
have been alone with the night, with the World Invisible to mortal
ken, and with the all pervading, Infinite Intelligent Energy, known
by many names. May success crown your ceaseless endeavors to discern,
not to obscure, Truth, is the earnest desire of your co-worker, Carl
De L'Ester, and of those with me, who, like yourself, are workers for
Love's sake.

Now, Gentol[a:], direct your gaze far, far toward the northeast. Yes,
that is the right direction. Do you perceive anything peculiar?

Gentola--Afar I see a body of water so extensive that my vision does
not reach the farther shore. A silvery vapor partly obscures the view,
but as we draw nearer I see the water sparkling in the sunlight, and
over its slightly disturbed surface vessels great and small are passing
in all directions. As we approach still nearer I perceive that from its
eastern shore gradually the ground rises to quite an elevated plateau,
and through the mist, which really is a gentle shower of rain, upon
which the sun is shining, I seem to perceive tints of all the colors
of a rainbow. I should have said hints rather than tints, for they
are mere suggestions of color. The shower has ceased, and--dear me, a
great city covers the slope and extends away across the plateau. What a
strangely peculiar scene. Is it real, or is it a mirage?

De L'Ester--We will go nearer, and you shall decide. A little lower,
George. Now look and describe the view.

Gentola--As before, I see a great expanse of water, which, as far as
my vision reaches, is inclosed by a wall so broad that the top of
it is a roadway on which people are walking and motor vehicles are
passing to and fro. The top of the wall is quite above the level of
the water, and on the farther side are massive buildings which appear
to be warehouses and manufactories. The first street away from the
water is very wide, beautifully paved and appears to be devoted to
business purposes. The second street is parallel with the first,
and from it the city is terraced upward to the level of the plateau.
All the streets cross at right angles, and they are so wide, so well
paved and kept that it is a pleasure to look at them. On the crest of
the plateau illuminating columns, domes, turrets and lofty structures
of various kinds are outlined against the now cloudless sky. Tramway
cars and motor vehicles swiftly climb the ascending streets to the
wide, level ways of the city. In all directions air Transports, like
huge birds, are passing through the quiet air. On the streets are many
people, walking or riding in tramway cars or in motor vehicles, and on
the outgoing or incoming vessels are many passengers. Altogether the
scene is very animated. The city itself is indescribably and peculiarly
beautiful. From its front upward and throughout its extent there is a
sort of diffusion of color resembling the tints of a fading rainbow.
Now a passing cloud partly obscures the sun, and the tints deepen into
positive color. The effect is charming but bewildering, and to me so
inexplicable that I shall feel obliged if some one will inform me
concerning it.

De L'Ester--Phoemadon, the body of water bathing the feet of the
far famed Bendolû iffon, which in your language would mean rainbow
hued, is little less extensive than is Indolois[a:]. By the Entoans
it is regarded as an inland sea, but it is so slightly saline as to
serve the city for all domestic and other purposes. Properly it is a
lake, its depth varying with the season, for during the spring, when
melting polar and snows of more temperate climes flow over the face
of the Planet, yonder great seawall scarcely restrains its increased
volume. The plateau upon which Bendolû-iffon is built is a remnant
of a mountain which in a bygone age reared its lofty peaks along the
entire length of Phoemadon, then curving in a northwesterly direction
lost itself very near the North Pole. Zenest[a:], _mon ami_, in all
that relates to your Planet you are better informed than am I. Will you
kindly devote some moments to our enlightenment?

Zenesta Hao--Always your pleasure is mine. Bendolû-iffon is one of the
oldest cities of Ento. Through a study of historical works, personal
investigation, and an acquaintance with ancient Ento Spirits, I
have learned that its origin dates back to a period anterior to the
establishment of the Government under one Supreme Ruler. Previous to
this period the various countries of Ento were ruled by might, each
ruler with his people occupying either an offensive or defensive
attitude. Naturally the results of such a condition were inharmonious,
yet strangely enough out of such inharmony Bendolû-iffon came into
existence. Notwithstanding its apparent newness it is not built upon
the ruins of an ancient city. Not at all. Despite its age, it never
has been in a ruinous state, its inhabitants ever having considered it
a Sacred obligation to maintain it at its best. Although it is built
upon rock, everywhere are towering trees, shrubbery, climbing vines and
a wealth of blooming plants. Chiefly through extensive excavations,
filled with soil, this has been brought about; indeed largely the
surface soil of lawns and gardens has been borrowed from elsewhere.
From Phoemadon the city receives a plenteous water supply, and the
climate of this region being all that can be desired, vegetation grows
luxuriantly. Were we less pressed for time, you, Gentol[a:], and your
son would find much of interest in the really wonderful system of water
supply of this rainbow hued city. No, no other city of Ento exhibits
this peculiar color effect, and the story of its origin may serve to
interest you. Unlike many historical and legendary narratives the story
is absolutely true, the proofs of its integrity being indisputably
evident.

During a period antecedent to the establishment of the National
Government, Azokēon, King of R[a:]ûhû, was at enmity with Mēdos,
King of Tsirma, and out of the angry impulses of the two Sovereigns
grew bitter strife and warfare. Again and again, fierce relentless
battles were fought, and in both armies so many were slain that at
length both sovereigns grew alarmed lest complete extinction of their
subjects might result, or, that what was more to be feared, other
rulers perceiving their exhausted state, might take advantage of it to
subjugate them, even as they sought to subjugate each other. Finally
mutual adversity brought about a mutual desire for reconciliation, and
that they might amicably adjust their real, or fancied grievances, a
conference was agreed upon, and at a specified time the Sovereigns with
their armies met on the crest of this plateau, across which was the
boundary line between their two kingdoms.

The morning of the day set apart for the conference was fine and clear,
the radiance from Andûman[a:]'s abode bathing the home of His children
as in a sea of light. With an exchange of courteous greetings the
conference was opened, but as it proceeded, each Sovereign inclining
toward his own interests, demanded more than either one was willing
to concede to the other, and ere long their hostile minds threatened
the conference with a disastrous conclusion. Suddenly ominous clouds
swiftly climbed up from the western horizon, and a strange stillness,
like that preceding the dread approach of Phra (Death) hushed all
things into frightened silence. Over land and sea fell a ghastly
shadow, deep as twilight, and in terrified dismay, Sovereigns and
soldiery gazed into each other's eyes. Swiftly the tumultuous, inky
clouds rushed across the sky, and fitful gusts of wind stirred all
things into motion. Blinding lightning set the lurid air ablaze,
and thunder so terrific, that it shook the foundations of Ento,
attested to the anger of the incensed Deities. Then an unprecedented
storm, in all its fury, burst upon the two armies, and so fierce was
the lightning that many were stricken dead. Blinding torrents of
rain fell from the dark, angry clouds, and mad gusts of wind swept
across the rocky plateau, hurling confused masses of camp equipage
and soldiery down the slope and into the surging waves of Phoemadon.
Above the rushing, roaring fury of the tempest, arose the shrieks,
groans and prayers of the terror stricken, unsheltered men who were
powerless against the terrific onslaught of the elements, and the
two sovereigns being equally endangered, were overwhelmed with awe
and despair, recognizing that their iniquities had brought upon them
and their inoffensive people the just vengeance of Andûman[a:] and
the Deific ones. In their dire extremity they implored the Divine
Messengers to entreat Andûman[a:] to stay His wrath lest Phra should
utterly destroy them and their armies. Azokēon, the Sovereign of
R[a:]ûhû, being a man of high courage, fine character and very devout,
with hands upraised toward Andûman[a:]'s obscured abode, cried aloud,
"Creator and Preserver, and at Thy Will, Destroyer of the work of Thy
hands, Sovereign of Sovereigns, God of all Gods, and Father of Thy
righteous and unrighteous children, I beseech Thee to listen to Thy
humbly repentant Son, who in taking vengeance into mine own hands
have impiously offended Thee. Destroy me, oh destroy me utterly, but
spare Thy unoffending children, who at my command and that of Mēdos,
have striven to slay each other. For shame, that we have forgotten
that we are brothers, we cover our faces and implore Thy mercy." Then,
as in trembling expectancy, he awaited the dread touch of Phra's icy
fingers, Mēdos clasped him about his knees, crying in piteous tones,
"Andûman[a:], I, too, have grievously sinned against Thee. Destroy me
too, if it may please Thee, for it is I, not my people, who foolishly
have forgotten Thy Commandments. It is Azokēon and I who have forgotten
that Ento and Ento's children are Thine, and that all men are our
brothers. For him and for myself I implore Thy mercy, and Thy pardon,
and henceforth, as we may do unto others, so do Thou unto us;" and
Azokēon's Raû, Raû, Raû, was as fervent as his own. While they prayed
the awful tempest raged, and the face of nature was as a distorted
mask, then as suddenly as the tempest had burst upon the assembled
armies, so suddenly came a lull in its activities, and presently the
fierce turmoil subsided into comparative quiet, and slowly from his
shining abode, Andûman[a:] drew away the dark cloud drapery, and a
glorious effulgence irradiated the woful scene of the prostrate and
stricken armies. At the same moment the archway to the entrance of
Astranol[a:] became visible to the eyes of the adoring Sovereigns
and their soldiery. Stooping, Azokēon raised Mēdos to his feet, and
as with extended arms and uplifted faces, they reverently gazed upon
the gloriously beautiful archway, Azokēon's trembling lips brokenly
murmured, "To Thee, Thou Supreme One, Who art All seeing, All knowing,
and to Thy Messengers the Deific ones, to whom the thoughts and deeds
of men are known, we, Azokēon and Mēdos, vow that as through Thy
pitying love for Thy erring children, Thou hast not utterly destroyed
us and our people, but hast shown to us the glorious archway, the
sign that Thy displeasure is turned away from us, we, on this spot,
will build cities which shall be a memorial of Thy mercy to us, and a
perpetual reminder that henceforth we and our people, side by side,
shall dwell in peace and unity;" and with fervor Mēdos responded, "As
Azokēon hath said, so may it be, and should I fail in the performance
of this vow, may the Gods visit upon me and mine swift and certain
destruction."

Thus through the dread visitation of an unparalleled tempest, those
two conscience stricken and humbled Sovereigns arrived at an amicable
adjustment of their several differences, and thereafter they not only
sustained toward each other harmonious relations, but remembering their
mutual vow to Andûman[a:] and His Messengers, at once they set about
its fulfillment. We now will move to a more central position over the
city.

Beneath us now is a stupendous Column, whose dimensions exceed those
of the loftiest Light Towers of Ento, its coloring being quite as
peculiar as that of the edifices of the city. From base to capital,
the stones of which it is composed represent all the colors of the
rainbow, but so delicate are the tones that they are more pearly
suggestions of, than positive colors. When at nightfall those two
great arches on its apex are aglow with iridescent lights, the effect
is enchantingly beautiful. I have mentioned that the conference was
held on the boundary line separating the two kingdoms, and on the spot
where they had learned their Wisdom Lesson, Azokēon and Mēdos reared
the Memorial Column, which to this day is one of the noted objects of
Ento. Do I believe that Andûman[a:] inflicted the tempest upon them for
the special purpose of affording them much needed lessons of humility
and mutual forbearance? Certainly not, but I do believe that every
mortal experience is fraught with beneficence for those wise enough to
comprehend the plainly expressed Laws of The Infinite One, who is the
embodiment of unerring, unchanging law.

The wide avenue in which the column stands was the line of division
between the two kingdoms, and peace having been declared, Azokēon
and Mēdos, in fulfillment of their vow, began the erection of the
two cities which should be so closely adjoined as to present the
appearance of one city, and which ever should be known as Bendolû-iffon
Tylûs[a:][a:] (rainbow hued cities).

In this region, as in others of Ento, there are quarries of most
beautiful marbles and stones, and in numerous caverns there are great
deposits of what to the Entoans is known as Ingloit[a:], possessing a
range of exquisite colorings. These varied materials were and still
are used in the construction of Bendolû-iffon. Some persons might
question the taste of Azokēon and Mēdos in building iridescent cities,
but to them the accomplishment in a marked manner of their vow to
Andûman[a:] and the gods was the all important matter. In pursuance of
this object they issued a joint decree that thenceforth and forever all
persons erecting structures in Bendolû-iffon Tylûs[a:][a:] must build
in harmony with the coloring of the Memorial Column, and thus far the
decree has been observed. On the base of the column is inscribed the
story of the war, of the storm, of the vow of Azokēon and Mēdos, of
the appearing of the sign of peace, of the reconciliation of the two
Sovereigns, and of the decree which should perpetually be observed lest
Andûman[a:] might avenge himself for the infidelity of his children of
Bendolû-iffon Tylûs[a:][a:].

At that time the religion of the Entoans included much that was
deplorably irrational and superstitious, but you who have come to
understand that the Spiritual or real man and the natural or animal
man sustain toward each other a most complex relation, are aware that
superstition is wholly of the lower or physical plane of Being. As the
Dual man creature evolves into finer conditions the Ego, the Spiritual
Self, is better able to manifest its higher attributes, thus, though
the Entoans still observe the superstitious beliefs of their religion,
Spiritually they have outgrown them, and at a fitting opportunity
gladly they will discard them and quickly they will manifest that
despite ancient usages, Priestly influences, fear of the Deific Ones
and a lack of knowledge concerning the continuity of existence, they
are a Spiritualized people. Yes, superstitions become involved in the
mentality of humans, forming what may be termed hereditary tendencies
or traits. Fear being a most forceful trait of the Entoans, no one has
dared, or perhaps cared, to act in opposition to the Decree chiselled
in yonder majestic Column, and not until the new religion shall have
dispelled old superstitious beliefs will the Entoans venture upon
freedom of thought and conduct which we trust will not lead to the
effacement of the unique beauty of Bendolû-iffon Tylûs[a:][a:], which
long has been known as Bendolû-iffon, for when the Government became
Centralized, kingdoms went out of fashion and the two cities became one.

De L'Ester--We are pleased that you and Bernard are as charmed as
ourselves with this matchlessly lovely iridescent city, and we,
too, will hope that a lessening belief in imaginary Gods and other
superstitions may not lead to a modernizing of its unique features.
Yes, Earth contains marbles and stones presenting the same colorings,
but they are not likely to serve architectural purposes, at least not
to the extent of building of them an entire city. We cannot now devote
further time to Bendolû-iffon, but our future is all before us, so we
only will say to it au revoir, for ere long we will return and you,
Gentol[a:], and this interested lad will be with us.

Now we will journey toward Yoitan-dylû (tempest tossed), which lies
directly eastward. It is a long, narrow, very salt sea, and it is
the most tempestuous water of the Planet. Once it was a great body
of water, but gradually during passing centuries it has so decreased
in extent and depth as to have become one of Ento's smaller salt
seas. A little higher, George. Now glance backward. Is not the scene
wonderfully beautiful? Over the receding city and over the ruffled
surface of Phoemadon a luminous, opalescent veil has fallen and the
scene is vanishing, vanishing, and now--it is gone.

In a certain locality on the northern shore of Yoitan-dylû we will
find our friend Sylvian, who will inform us of affairs at D[a:]o. Yes,
we were there this morning and perceived that the hour of Vallo[a:]'s
departure is very nigh. Why do not we go there at once? For the reason
that it would not be well to subject you to the powerful influences
concentrating there. Were you physically strong we might venture to do
so; as it is, your vitality must be conserved for a special occasion.

Inland about four English miles from Yoitan-dylû are the noted ruins of
an ancient city whose principal features are several immense statues.
Very ancient Ento Spirits say that the now arid regions surrounding
the ruins of a great city were in their time sufficiently productive
for the sustenance of a large agricultural population, but for many
centuries they have not been inhabitable. The name of the city was
Ten[a:]v[a:]h, and once the waves of Yoitan-dylû tumultuously rushed
to its very feet, and to it at stated times, from all over the
Planet, came multitudes of people to offer and to witness sacrifices
to Andûman[a:] and the lesser Deities. When we shall have reached
the ruins Zenest[a:] will tell us something concerning them. Yes,
the underlying lands present the same desolate appearance as others
that we have traversed. Here and there springs of pure water well up,
supplemented by deep borings which furnish a limited water supply,
rendering somewhat productive small areas of land, which afford a
precarious subsistence for small communities of frugal and industrious
people, but were it not that the general Government keeps over these
isolated peoples a paternal supervision they would not be able to
sustain themselves. A special air Transport service holds them in touch
with other portions of the Planet, bearing to them such commodities as
they require, in turn carrying away the surplusage of their several
industries. As it is the fixed policy of the General Government to
carry the Irrigating and Waterways System around the Planet, in time
these fertile localities will become a part of the System. No, it
will not be very long before this will occur, for by far the heaviest
portion of the stupendous work already is accomplished. Owing to the
many rocky formations existing between Camariss[a:] and Etzoin[a:]
Lois[a:] the undertaking thus far has been very arduous, the remaining
work will be far easier of accomplishment. Indolois[a:], Etzoin[a:],
Phoemadon, Yoitan-dylû and other bodies of water lying within the
area of the system will obviate the necessity of excavations for the
Waterways. Through hydraulic and mechanical engineering all bodies of
salt water are kept within their own bounds, only fresh water being
permitted to flow in the Waterways and Irrigating Canals.

Slowly, George, and we will descend a little. Gentol[a:], what do you
now see?

Gentola--Upon an immense oblong platform, which is quite elevated above
the level of the sandy plain, I see one, two, three, four, five, six,
seven enormously large statues. On the raised centre of the platform
is a statue very much larger than the others. Its proportions are
indeed gigantic, and its form and features are so finely modelled, so
majestically beautiful that it seems incredible that mortals could
have fashioned it. Above the forehead of this colossal statue is a
golden Sun, its rays set close with jewels which gleam and scintillate
as though endued with life. In its extended right hand is a great
cluster of golden rodels, and in the less extended, partly closed left
hand is what appears to be a large golden egg. The other statues are
very beautiful; three are male and three are female figures, at whose
feet are altars in the form of great oblong basins. Why is it that the
platform, the altars and the statues are so perfectly preserved and
only fragmentary ruins of the great city remain?

Zenesta--Before replying to your question allow me to say that the
founding of this ruined city antedated the Establishment of the
National Government and Religion, and that aside from what has been
learned through the inscriptions on the base of the platform and on
the altars to the Entoans of to-day, its history is little more than
legendary. On our side of life we possess its authentic history. That
you and Bernard may obtain a clearer view of the statues we will
descend.

Now you perceive that though the foundation of the platform is of stone
its upper portion upon which the statues stand is of a non-corrosive
metal known as Sauv[a:]. The central figure represents Andûman[a:],
the Supreme One. The three female figures on His right, and the three
male figures on His left hand, are Deific Ones of Astranol[a:]. Yes,
the coloring of the statues is very fine. Enamelling is an art in which
the Entoans excel. Observe that the statues are composed of sections so
nicely adjusted as to be nearly imperceptible. De L'Ester says that the
metal is very like what you term bronze.

As briefly as possible I will relate somewhat of the history of the
ruined city and of the temple of which this great altar and these
wonderfully fine statues were features. Yes, this that you have thought
a platform is an altar.

At a period when the equatorial regions were yet to a degree fertile
Kēhoivas Edda, the sovereign of the most powerful nation of Ento,
resolved to build on this spot a magnificent Temple and altar of
sacrifice to the Supreme One and his chiefest Messengers, and in
pursuance of this resolve he issued a proclamation, requesting all
other sovereigns to join him in this pious undertaking. At this time,
between the various races of Ento, wars were of frequent occurrence,
and Kēhoivas Edda proposed that during the building of the Temple, and
thereafter at stated periods, all wars and animosities of whatever
nature for a certain number of days should cease, that thus all of
Andûman[a:]'s children might pass to and from the temple to their own
places without fear of molestation. Calling upon Andûman[a:] and His
Messengers to bear witness to his sincerity he declared that for all
time the Temple, which should be known as Infadoihan-lûvētas (place
of sacrifice), should belong to the several nations of Ento. Kēhoivas
Edda, being the most powerful Sovereign of Ento, and his purpose a
most pious one, his proposal received universal acceptance, and very
soon from all parts of Ento came a multitude of artisans and laborers
to assist in the building of the Temple. Each nation contributing
according to its means, quickly vast treasure and material for the
undertaking accumulated and within two Ento years the great temple
reared its majestic beauty above the loftiest structures of the wide
spreading city.

During the building of the temple, and for many succeeding years,
almost universal peace prevailed, and through many centuries the
fires of those great altars consumed many, many victims of the dread
superstitions of perverted religious ideas. Could these mute statues
relate the story of the tragedies enacted upon their altars, we would
turn away in horror from their recitals of scenes upon which loving,
pitiful spirits once gazed and wept. You perceive that each statue has
its own altar upon which special sacrifices were offered. On the altar
of the statue representing Andûman[a:] the Supreme One, the fairest
and dearest of Ento's youths and maidens were sacrificed. On the
altars of His six servitors animals set apart for the sacred purpose
were burned. Other altars, no longer in existence, scarcely sufficed
to contain the profusion of precious things and of grains, fruits and
flowers offered for the purpose of securing the kind offices of the
Gods and Goddesses of Astranol[a:]. Happily all this is of a bygone
day, and even the ruins of the grandest Temple of that ancient time
have nearly disappeared. The massive walls, the towering dome, the many
huge columns, the great interior, enriched by all that treasure could
command or art could produce, all, all, long since have been scattered
abroad or buried beneath the shifting sands of this desert waste. Only
these indestructible statues, the great altar supporting them, with
here and there a broken column or a fragment of sculpture hints of the
vanished glories of Inf[a:]doih[a:]n lûvēt[a:]s and of the great city
Ten[a:]v[a:]h.

Previous to the building of the Temple, and for centuries afterward,
the Entoans scarcely realized the increasing aridity of the soil of the
equatorial countries. Thus while they gloried in and bore to the altars
of their great and beautiful Temple their most valued possessions,
the already greatly lowered mountains were growing less majestic,
elevations imperceptibly were becoming levelled, valleys were being
filled to the level of the plains, and flowing streams were being lost
or diverted from their courses. The changes of centuries are as the
long, long thoughts of the Infinite Mind. They go forward, perhaps
almost imperceptibly, but they go forward.

Thus in time the region about Ten[a:]v[a:]h grew infertile, and
gradually the population drew away to more favorable lands. The
multitudes who, during many centuries, had journeyed to the Temple to
worship and to offer sacrifices, gradually ceased their attendance. The
altar fires which, during centuries, had glowed incessantly, burned
fitfully, then died away and the Temple fell into disuse, then into
decay, its treasures serving for the enrichment of other shrines. With
disuse of the Temple, Ten[a:]v[a:]h became entirely deserted, and for
centuries past its ruins have found sepulture beneath the shifting
sands, which, ere long, through the influence of the beneficent system,
will yield up many buried pages of its history.

Now I will reply to your question. These statues are regarded with such
reverential awe that ever the Priesthood have protested against their
removal elsewhere, and the Government sees to it that at stated times
competent persons are dispatched to this lonely spot to clear away
drifting sands and to keep them and the altars in perfect repair.

From Entoans who recently have come into our Spirit Realms, we learn
that when the system shall have reached this locality, on this spot the
Government will erect another Temple. Is it too much to hope for, too
much to expect, that it will be dedicated to the One Whose chiefest
attribute is love?

De L'Ester--We will hope that it may be so. This we know, that no more
on these altars will the crime of human sacrifice be perpetrated. These
survivals of a tragic past do well to observe perpetual silence, for if
they might even whisper the story of the atrocities committed in their
names, the more enlightened, gentler Entoans of to-day would shrink
from it in horror.

Now we must be up and away. Gentol[a:], of all the scenes you
have observed, none, I think, have appeared so utterly lonely, so
pathetically forsaken as this verdureless plain and those sombre,
gigantic statues standing like silent sentinels over the buried city
and temple.

We now will follow northward the western shore of Yoitan-dylû, and
shortly we will arrive at some irrigated lands and an inconsiderable
and rather modern city named Cryst[a:] Fûyon, the name of its founder,
and it is the capital city of this province, A-Shinoh. Yes, those
green, luxuriant growths are in strong contrast to the adjoining
desert lands. No, they are not irrigated by the water of Yoitan-dylû.
You forget that it is a salt sea. To procure water for irrigation and
for the service of the city, Cryst[a:] Fûyon instituted a system of
artesian wells, which was not difficult of accomplishment, as at no
great depth, even under desert lands, there is an abundance of water.

George, for a few moments we will pause here. Yes, it is an attractive
scene. In the near distance is Yoitan-dylû, on whose foam capped waves
vessels of various kinds are tossing on their ways, and on its hither
shore is white Cryst[a:] Fûyon, with its beautiful snowy temple and
many fine structures. On its landward side the city and its pretty
suburban homes are surrounded by the luxuriant greenery of grains,
grasses, fruit-bearing and other trees, and a wealth of blooming
shrubs, vines and plants. Certainly Cryst[a:] Fûyon, the founder of
the city and of the Irrigating System which has reclaimed many miles
of arid lands, deserves high praise for his efforts. Oh, yes, for over
half an Ento century he has been on the spirit side, yet his interest
in the city and its fortunes is unabated. Ah, Sylvian and Inidor[a:]
are coming to meet us.

Inidora--Lohaû, lohaû, ēmanos.

De L'Ester--Hail, and a loving welcome for you, dear friends.

Sylvian--And for you all our hearts speak a fond greeting. No, we have
not long awaited your coming, but long enough for Inidor[a:] to relate
to my willing ears the story of his unlooked for finding of his other
self and his attempts to establish a mutual rapport, in which, happily,
to a degree, he has succeeded. What word do I bring you from D[a:]o?
It is that for the present your journeyings must cease. Vallo[a:] is
about to pass into our Spirit Realms, and in anticipation of the event
which can no longer be delayed, a vast number of our friends of many
Planetary Spirit Realms have assembled to witness and to aid in the
anticipated successful culmination of our Mission. That it will be
successful we no longer doubt. Vallo[a:] and Dano now fully realize
that life does not end with death of the body, and in a measure this
assurance assuages the sorrow of their approaching brief separation.
For Omanos Fûnh[a:] there is but one step to be taken, when gladly he,
too, will embrace the faith that will assure him of the existence of
another world, where he will find his dear ones. Unconsciously he and
many others are shrinking away from the old dread beliefs, and light
from Spirit Realms is penetrating their consciousness and inspiring
them with the hope that at last Andûman[a:] has heard their importunate
cries and is about to grant them continuous existence.

Vallo[a:] now scarcely animates her physical body, and like an
imprisoned bird she struggles for freedom, yet even as she tries
to escape, her beautiful eyes, full of love and pity, turn to
her despairing father, then upon her grief stricken lover, Dano
Andûlēs[a:], who kneels by her couch murmuring words of tenderness and
covering her cold hands with tears and kisses. His Spirit vision has
grown very clear and as in bewilderment he gazes upon the partially
freed Vallo[a:], then upon the wasted form he so long has adored, in
piteous tones he cries, "Vallo[a:], Vallo[a:], whither goest thou? I
see thee, and thou art escaping from thy body, and thou art not dead.
Oh, thou dread mystery death, take me, oh take me too, for wheresoever
my love may go, I, too, would go." Then again he cries, "Woman, woman
of another world, come to me, come to me. Thou didst promise that in
the supreme hour of trial thou wouldst come to me. Oh, come and teach
to me the meaning of death." And thus the pitiful scene repeats itself,
and the change is very near.

Gentol[a:], the time has arrived for our departure for D[a:]o, and soon
in the presence of Omanos Fûnh[a:] and those about him, you, through
the departing Vallo[a:] and her affianced, Prince Dano, will proclaim
the glad tidings that death of the physical body affords release of the
immortal Spirit. That life is unending, and that in a World unseen of
mortal eyes all surely will find their loved ones whom they had mourned
as having gone into eternal Silence.

Among those about the couch of Vallo[a:] is Ozynas Dûls[a:], the Most
High Priest of the Temple Zim, which you may know is the most sacred
of Ento's Temples. Through purity of life and most ascetic habits this
Most High Priest has to an unusual degree developed the Senses of
Clairvoyance and Clairaudience, and when he shall come to understand
their real meaning he will become a powerful force in the introduction
of the new religion. Perhaps you are aware that all humans possess
these senses, and that under favorable conditions all may exercise
them. No, the case of this Priest is not exceptional. All high Priests
are chosen for the position because of their supposed ability to hold
converse with the Deific Ones. That they hold converse with discarnated
Spirits is true, and naturally you may wonder why they and the peoples
have not learned of the continuity of existence. The reason is obvious.
Since ancient times a harsh, unyielding religious creed has held in
bondage both Priests and peoples, and lest the Gods might call them to
a fearful account for their impiety, none have dared to assail it. Such
Spirit communications as from time to time the Priests have received,
if opposed to the creed, have been dismissed as mere hallucinations,
but when in harmony with the creed they have been regarded as of Divine
origin. Without such intervention as our Mission proposes this unhappy
condition must indefinitely continue, but when, through such evidence
as the Mission will offer, Omanos Fûnh[a:] and those nearest him shall
have accepted the new faith, the way will be made clear for Priests and
peoples to follow the light which shall lead them into ways of greater
happiness than ever they have dreamed of.

Ozynas Dûls[a:], who is nearing the threshold of truth, is a
courageous, eloquent and very spiritual man. Through recent experiences
of Vallo[a:] and Dano he is so nearly convinced of the continuity
of existence that he is ready to battle against the old faith and
for the reception of the new religion, whose heralds noiselessly
but determinedly are approaching the sorrowful peoples, resolved to
dissipate the darkness which ever has enshrouded their lives.

Now look straight ahead and in a moment you will perceive the dim
outlines of the lofty domes and loftier Light and Signal Towers of
Ento's capital city. To the left of the loftiest Signal Tower which
overlooks the city is the residence of the Supreme Rulers of Ento, and
where now Spirit hosts are concentrating their forces, and where very
soon you will be the central figure of what to you and this dear youth
will be a strange drama. I much regret my inability to converse with
you directly, but I trust that our mutual friend has made my meaning
clear to you.

De L'Ester--I believe that I have correctly translated all that you
have said, and now that the momentous hour has arrived for a brief time
our Sensitive must return to her home so that she may arrange for an
unusually prolonged absence from her physical body. Within a half hour
we will meet you near or in the palace.

Info oovistû.

Gentol[a:], George and I will swiftly bear you to your home, where I
shall have something of moment to say to you. You will close your eyes,
for we shall traverse the space between Ento and Earth with utmost
speed. Ah, ah. That is well. Now unclose your eyes, for you are safe
within your quiet, darkened room, and no one but the faithful Vena is
in the house, and she is preparing to leave it, but you will request
her to remain at home, for you must not be left unattended. Now listen
attentively to what I shall say. As you have learned, but do not now
clearly remember, Vallo[a:], daughter of Omanos Fûnh[a:], Osy Hûn, is
about to pass into Ento's Spirit Realms, and that success may attend
the Mission of Love in which you and we are engaged, we must ask you to
unreservedly submit yourself to our requirements. Rest assured that we
will guard you carefully, and by all that is Divine we pledge ourselves
that you shall not be tried beyond your strength. To prevent possible
injury, we desire that you shall charge Vena to, on no account, permit
any one to enter the house during your submergement, and that will
occupy six, probably seven, hours. Say to her that she must not attend
the door bell or open the door of your room, and do so at once, for we
must hasten our return to Ento.

Gentola--I have instructed Vena to remain in the house, to allow no one
to enter it, and to leave me undisturbed until five o'clock, which will
be seven hours hence.

De L'Ester--We have heard your conversation with the girl, who is in
a state of nervous alarm lest some evil may befall you. Ask her to
lower the window shade in the adjoining room. Some rays of light are
penetrating the desired darkness of this one, and it may be well to
further reassure her, so that she may not feel impelled to disturb you.
That is well, and all things being arranged to our satisfaction we at
once will depart. Close your eyes and render yourself passive. You are
not afraid?

Gentola--Not afraid, but a little nervous. As I ever have found you
true to your word, I will trust you to the end.

De L'Ester--That you safely may do, for aside from all other
considerations we greatly desire that you shall yet a while remain on
the Earth plane, that with your approval we may make further use of
your peculiar phase of Mediumship. We have not labored all these years
to fit you for a definite purpose to now willfully permit injury of our
Instrument. You may believe, too, that in our demands upon your time
and strength for the furtherance of our Mission, we are not actuated
by selfish motives, and in time you will understand that if you have
suffered and practiced much self-denial, we, too, have sacrificed much
that we might aid in the accomplishment of what you and we regard as a
sacred duty. Now you are tranquil and we are ready for our flight to
Ento.

You now may unclose your eyes for we are nearing D[a:]o, and you may
perceive its many stately structures, whose domes and towers are
in relief against a background of cloudless azure sky. We now will
approach the Palace, which you will observe is enveloped in a shining,
mistlike aural cloud, within which a host of exalted Spirits are aiding
in the Spiritual unfoldment of Omanos Fûnh[a:] and others who, ere
long, will proclaim to the peoples of Ento the glorious truth that the
Spirit, the real Self, survives the change called death. When presently
we shall enter within the aural cloud you will clearly see what you
never--But I must not anticipate, and you will strive to regain your
usual tranquillity.

One seldom sees a more artistic structure than this massive, stately,
harmoniously designed residence of the Supreme Rulers of Ento, its
lovely surroundings affording an admirable setting for such a gem of
architecture. Indeed the entire city is an architectural dream. It
strictly is a residence city, though of necessity in it are bazaars
and marts containing all that is finest and best pertaining to art,
manufactured wares and natural products. No, it is not an extensive
city, the population not exceeding a half million, but it is the
richest city of Ento, and one of the oldest.

Now you are quieted and we will join our Band within the aural cloud.

Gentola--De L'Ester, friends, wait a moment; I believe I am frightened.
Oh, who are those wonderfully beautiful Beings? Are they Angels or are
they Spirits? Oh, I am overwhelmed by the amazing spectacle.

De L'Ester--Tranquillize yourself, I pray you, tranquillize yourself;
none but loving friends are here. Those radiant Beings are exalted
Spirits from many Spirit Worlds, and conditions are such that for the
first time during our Mission you see Spirits as _they really are_. You
are aware that the physical body is composed of grosser elements of
substance, and the Spirit body of elements more refined, the elemental
quality of the Spirit body depending upon the manner of existence of
the mortal, so you readily may conclude that those Spirits are of an
exalted plane, else they would not present such a glorified appearance,
neither would they be able to serve the purpose for which they have
assembled. Adonēon, the leader of a Band, desires to address you.

Adoneon--Trembling one from the Earth-world, the Sorrowful Star, upon
which I, too, once dwelt, I pray you to accept our gentlest, our most
loving greeting. Once we all existed in mortal forms, but having been
freed from physical expression we present to your unaccustomed gaze
an appearance which startles and occasions you some trepidation. Will
it calm your disquietude if I say that could you see yourself as we
see you, you would be as greatly amazed at your real appearance as
you are at our own. Then be at peace, for as we are, you some time
will be, and then, as now, gladly you will serve the lowliest of the
human Brotherhood. Gentol[a:], you are rightly named, for only one of
kindliest nature would risk the severance of the ties of your present
Embodiment, that thus you may aid this Mission of Loving endeavor. You
desire to learn somewhat of my earthly history. As you will, but it
must be as the merest fragment of the whole.

Rome was my birthplace, and I was the only child of persons of
distinction. From my earliest youth I revolted against the gross
licentiousness and debauchery, not only of the masses, but of those
in highest places, whose criminally bestial orgies were beyond
description, vile and demoralizing. My parents, too, shrank in horror
and disgust from a condition of society which words cannot express. So
did others, but those who dare oppose themselves against the example
of the conscienceless Emperor Nero, and his equally conscienceless
courtiers, did so at the peril of life and estate. Through his
intolerable tyranny I, with other youths of the best blood of Rome,
were driven to plot rebellion against his misrule, and when our hopes
of success were at the highest, a treacherous youth betrayed us and we
were arrested and sentenced to death in the arena. My beloved father
was shorn of his rank and possessions, and with my gentle mother, was
driven into exile, which they did not long survive. But Nero, the
insane, brutal tyrant, the ferocious, drunken beast, and the curse of
his unhappy time; Nero, who made human agony his pastime, still lived
to gleefully laugh while naked, empty handed victims were cast into
the arena to be torn limb from limb by creatures no more savage, no
more relentless than the insensate wretch who gloated over the horrible
scene. Earth has not harbored a more ignoble mortal than he who styled
himself, and indeed regarded himself, as the "Divine Cæsar."

When the hour of my agony arrived, I, with many others, one a fair
girl scarcely beyond childhood, were driven to our doom. Some, through
terror, swooned into merciful oblivion, others shrieked wildly and
pitifully, frantically strove to escape from the great beasts who
tore them into fragments, and still others instinctively fought for
life, or coweringly shrank from their hideous fate. But not I, not I.
As an enormous lion rushed like an avalanche from the opened door of
his cage, the young girl clung to me for protection. One glance at
her wide open eyes and terror stricken, lovely face, round which her
golden hair fell in curling profusion, inspired me with courage born
of pity and despair. Putting her behind me, I strode toward the lion,
my burning, unwavering gaze meeting the glowing eyes of the famished
and enraged beast, and for a moment the crouching creature hesitated,
and Nero shouted and clapped his jewelled hands. The next instant the
lion launched himself against my naked form and in another moment I was
freed and beyond the reach of the cruelest of all creatures--the _human
animal_.

After the lapse of half a thousand of your years, at my own desire,
and for a purpose, the Angels of the Visitation found me a birthplace
on the glorious planet Jupiter. Your astronomers would question this
statement. They do not take into account the fact that necessarily they
possess but a limited knowledge of the constitution and conditions of
the Planets of our Solar System, or of the Beings who may inhabit them,
and they do not recognize the more important fact that Spirit, the
Life Principle, is indestructible, and that it possesses the ability
of adjusting itself to other environments than those of Earth. From
Jupiter's Spirit Realms I, and these my comrades have come to aid in
this attempt to bring Spiritual enlightenment to the sorrowful children
of Ento. Our Band of nine Spirits will endeavor to come into harmonious
relations with Omanos Fûnh[a:]. To other Bands of Spirits from other
Planetary Spheres have been assigned special duties. Upon De L'Ester
and his Band will rest the responsibility of controlling and directing
you. As far as possible our plans have been perfected, and the supreme
moment having arrived, may the Divine, Intelligent, All Potent One
direct and aid us in our endeavor to fulfill the Law of Love.

De L'Ester--Gentol[a:], now that you have grown tranquil, we will enter
the apartment of the passing Vallo[a:]. Be attentive while I inform you
as to who some of the assembled personages are, then you will describe
the surroundings of this pitiful scene. Later, your deeper submergence
will oblige me to continue a narration of what may occur. Do you
understand?

Gentola--I do, and shall try to meet your wishes. I find myself
standing at the foot of Vallo[a:]'s couch, which is near the centre
of the very spacious apartment, whose walls and ceiling are marvels
of beauty. Upon their ivory white surfaces are sprays of exquisite
blossoms so true to nature that it seems as though one might gather
them from their delicate foliage. Rich tapestries of palest blue,
combined with snowy laces, drape the lofty windows, and fluted panels
of the same tapestry separate the flower designs on walls and ceiling,
the effect being very refined and beautiful. On opposing sides of the
apartment great mirrors are let into the walls, their frames and the
woodwork of doors and windows being in white and gold and the floor is
such an exquisitely dainty mosaic that it seems a profanation to step
on it. There are some very beautiful divans and chairs and a large,
handsome table which, with the exception of the lovely couch on which
Vallo[a:] lies, completes the furnishing of the apartment.

Through a window from which the drapery is drawn aside the light
falls upon a young girl whose angelically lovely face is framed in a
mass of curling, golden hair. It is the face of the young girl you
once showed me in a picture, but it is more mature, more expressive,
more spirituelle, than the pictured face. The soft, fleecy, white
couch clothing outlines a tall, slender form, somewhat emaciated, but
modelled most beautifully, and as she lifts her hands to push away
from her low, wide forehead her shining hair, I see that they are as
white as lilies and exceedingly shapely. On one side of the couch
sits Omanos Fûnh[a:], a majestic, very handsome, dark skinned man of
about middle age. On the other side of the couch kneels Dano, his
mournful gaze fixed upon the face of the dying girl, whose expression
is serene but very pathetic. In Dano's clasp is her left hand, which he
holds against his tremulous lips. With her right hand she fondly but
feebly caresses her father's stately head, bowed near her own, and her
large, beautiful azure hued eyes look into his despairing face, then
turn toward the sorrowful face of her affianced, and she murmurs low,
broken words of endearment for both. Dano's father, Basto Andûlēs[a:],
who, with bowed head and folded arms, stands near the head of the
couch, is a picture of woe. By Dano's side stands his mother, a very
tall, olive skinned, strikingly handsome woman, whom her son closely
resembles. On her face is an expression of great tenderness, as she
whispers fondly pitiful words to the dying girl, who gently touches
her face and smiles up at her. Suddenly, with a quivering moan and a
look of terror in her dark eyes, she draws away, but quickly recovers
herself, and again she stoops to murmur loving words to Vallo[a:] and
to Dano, upon whose dark, flowing hair her tears fall like rain. Near
Omanos Fûnh[a:] stands the Most High Priest Ozynas Dûls[a:], and what
a singularly grand looking man he is. He is taller than any Entoan I
have seen; taller even than Omanos Fûnh[a:] whom I think he resembles.
As he stands erect, silent and motionless, he looks like a draped
bronze statue. There is a peculiar expression on his quiet face, a
sort of introspective expression which suggests the thought that he is
questioning himself as to the mystery of death, whose dread shadow is
stealing over the beautiful face of Vallo[a:].

Of the host of Spirit men and women thronging this apartment, the
entire residence and the aura inclosed space about it, what can I,
what shall I say? To my unfolded vision the walls oppose no barrier,
and with inexpressible awe and wonder I gaze upon these luminous ones,
whose faces and forms possess a beauty and majesty indescribable. I can
think of no other word than Godlike that will convey my idea of their
appearance, but I--but language fails me--I--can say--no--more.

De L'Ester--Before narrating what occurred after Gentol[a:] ceased
speaking I will say that the Organization controlling this Mission
consists of seven Bands of advanced Spirits of various Planetary
Spirit Spheres, and that our Mission is not an isolated one. On all
Planets inhabited by Spiritualized humans, Spirit Missions for the
accomplishment of various purposes, constantly are being carried
forward. On Earth, at this time, more than one Mission is in progress.
Some will elevate humanity; others, under control of Spirits not of
bad intentions, but of a low plane of evolvement, hence ignorant as to
results, will debase and retard progress. I make mention of this matter
so that if perchance some may read this story of our Mission they will
understand that it is but one of many.

Having become submerged to a degree that rendered her incapable of
further speech, and the moment of Vallo[a:]'s departure being close at
hand, it became imperative that our Instrument should be illumined to
her highest capacity, so that she might deliver our message to Omanos
Fûnh[a:], to Dano, to the Most High Priest, and to others surrounding
the passing girl.

At the moment of midday Gentol[a:] was made to call softly but
distinctly, "Dano! Dano!" All heard the voice, and a look of startled
inquiry was on each face. Raising his head for a moment Dano intently
listened, then breathlessly he questioned, "Who calls me? Who calls
me?" But for a little there was no reply, and only the faint, fitful
breathing of the dying girl broke the profound stillness. Then the
seven Bands of Spirits formed in Circles, and their combined forces
were brought to hear upon Omanos Fûnh[a:], Dano, Ozynas Dûls[a:],
and upon Vallo[a:], whose vital energy for the moment was augmented.
Instantaneously Dano's Spirit Senses were so quickened that he
perceived not only Gentol[a:], but in a less perfect manner our entire
Band, upon whom he gazed curiously, evidently doubting our reality.
His interest being centered in Gentol[a:], quickly he turned toward
her, his face irradiated with surprise and joy. Inclining his head near
Vallo[a:]'s in low, trembling tones he exclaimed, "She has come, as
she promised; she has come, Vallo[a:]. Vallo[a:], my dearest one, see
you not a strange Being by the side of your father?" The yet conscious
girl smiled and murmured, "Yes--yes." Looking about him the greatly
disturbed Omanos Fûnh[a:] exclaimed, "I see no one, I see no one. Oh,
my children, our mutual sorrow confuses our senses, and we imagine
unrealities. Dano, Dano, I pray you compose yourself lest we disquiet
our dearest one." As Omanos Fûnh[a:] uttered these words an expression
of intense surprise and bewilderment stole over his face, and over the
face of Ozynas Dûls[a:], for at that moment their Spirit Senses were so
unfolded that in awed and terrified silence _they saw and heard_.

Then, at my dictation, in a voice low but audible to all, Gentol[a:]
delivered our message. "Dano, Dano," she said, "as I promised so
have I in your hour of deepest sorrow come to you. You perceive that
Vallo[a:], the Real Spiritual Vallo[a:], is well nigh freed from the
frail, beautiful form you all love so well. In a few moments she will
be released; then her golden haired mother and her Aunt Sylvian, whom
you also perceive hovering above the couch, will bear your love to
her home in the glorious Spirit World, where you and all her dear
ones ere long will rejoin her. In this hour of your greatest sorrow I
bear you a Message that henceforth will fill your life and the lives
of Ento's children with immeasurable peace and joy. Omanos Fûnh[a:],
and you, Ozynas Dûls[a:], Priest of a hopeless religion, listen that
you, too, may receive knowledge of the grandest Truth that can be
revealed to man. Through purity of life, and a noble ambition to
_serve_ rather than to rule, and recently through keenest anguish
of soul, you, Omanos Fûnh[a:], have so unfolded your Spiritual Self
that you are prepared to accept this Truth, and you, Ozynas Dûls[a:],
through lofty aspiration and exceptional ability to perceive that which
hitherto you have not understood, will proclaim the Revelation that
the physical body is but the casket in which the priceless jewel, the
Immortal Self, which is the deathless expression of the Infinite Spirit
whom you name Andûman[a:], is enshrined. Hitherto, because of the
positiveness and materialism of your religious beliefs, so dense has
been the aural atmosphere about you, that light from Ento's and other
Spirit Worlds has not penetrated your Spiritual consciousness. During
past centuries the Immortals of many Spirit Worlds have striven to
communicate with the children of Ento, that thus they might bring hope
to despairing ones who have lived, loved and sorrowed, even as you who
love this, your dearest one, now sorrow. Striving, watching, waiting,
loving, pitiful spirits, who once were mortals like yourselves, at
last have found their opportunity and have hastened to bring light
into darkness, joy for sorrow and hope for despair. They, with glad
hearts, have come to proclaim to you that life and Spirit are one and
indestructible. That, though unseen by mortal eyes, the animating
Principle, the Real Self, is Immortal, and in Realms indescribable by
human language, those who have passed from Ento and other Worlds, live,
love and enjoy, or sorrow, in accordance with the purity or impurity
of their mortal existence. They also have come to proclaim to you that
there is but One God, Who is the Infinite Spirit, Who permeates all
things. The Infinitely Intelligent Spirit, who knows all things. The
Infinite Energy, who is the Source of all things. The Dual, Unseeable,
Unknowable One, whose manifestations alone declare the Infinity of
their origin. They have come to proclaim to you that Ento is but one
of myriads of Worlds, comprising an illimitable Universe, whose every
atom is vitalized and permeated by this Infinite Spirit, who no more
lives in the shining Orb which sheds its radiant beams over the lands
and seas of Ento and over other greater Worlds far away in space than
in the petals of the rodel, or in the atoms floating in the atmosphere.
When the great flaming Star you ignorantly have thought the abode of
Andûman[a:], the Supreme One, has for a time disappeared from your
view, and the darkness of night has fallen over this portion of your
Ento World, reverently you have gazed toward the shining points in
space, aye, so far away in space, that you can form no conception of
the immensity of their distances from Ento, and you have believed
them the Lamps of the Realm of Astranol[a:]. Learn, oh children of our
common Father, Mother God, that they are Worlds, some of them of such
vast proportions that, compared with them, Ento and the Earth World,
where I dwell, are dwarfed into insignificance. Some of these worlds
are peopled by very advanced and exalted humans, others by mortals in
various stages of evolvement, and all are the children of the Infinite
One. I cannot now speak more fully of these matters, but, concerning
them, later on you shall receive further instruction.

"Dano, dear youth, let the words of our Message sink deeply into your
heart, for you are the chosen herald, who first shall proclaim the
new Faith to the children of Ento. Be courageous, be faithful, and in
accordance with the measure of your courage and your faithfulness shall
be your consciousness that ever by your side will walk your spirit
bride, your other Self, Vallo[a:]. Dano, Dano, are you strong enough,
are you courageous enough to give to your sorrowful people the Message
of the new faith?"

For a little Dano hesitated, and Vallo[a:], over whose fair
face the whiteness of death was stealing, reached toward him
a tremulous hand and faintly murmured: "Dano--my beloved--you
will--you--will--give--this truth--to--our--despairing--people,
and--and--your Vallo[a:] will--walk--with you--until--your
glorious--work--shall--be--ended."

In her dimming, azure hued eyes was an expression of immeasurable
entreaty, and, overwhelmed with emotion, gently, tenderly, Dano pressed
her cold hand to his lips, and in low, fervent tones said: "I believe
in One Supreme Being, who is beyond my finite comprehension. I believe
that beyond this sorrowful life there is another state of existence,
where all will find their beloved dead, with whom they will live and
love forever, and I promise you, oh, my dearest, that for as long
as I may live in my mortal body, I will proclaim to our peoples the
amazing, the glorious Truth that has been revealed to us. That it is a
truth I well know, for even as I gaze upon your beloved mortal form,
rising above your head I see your Real Self, radiant and lovely beyond
all beauty of mortal woman. I see, too, your mother, your wondrously
beautiful golden haired mother, and Sylvian, the lovely and gracious
woman whom in my childhood I revered as I revered the Goddesses of
Astranol[a:]. They support you in their arms, my dearest, and they
are about to bear you away from my sight. Vallo[a:]--Vallo[a:]--oh,
my beloved, open your beautiful eyes--oh, speak to one once more.
Do you hear me, Vallo[a:]? Do you hear me? Answer me if but with a
word, or a smile, so that I may know that you have heard my vow." As
though in answer to his piteous appeal Vallo[a:]'s eyelids quivered
and slowly her blue eyes unclosed and gazed into Dano's, and a faint
smile played about her parted lips. Then, with a supreme effort, her
gaze turned upon her father, who bent his head near her to catch her
whispered words, the last he would hear from the mortal lips of his
idolized child. "Father, father," she sighed, rather than said, "it is
true--promise--me--your--child--to--give--this--truth--to our--people.
Fath--er, prom--ise----" The blue eyes closed, a smile wreathed itself
about the sweet mouth, and--all was still.

We, who have observed the release of many Spirits, seldom have
witnessed a scene so pathetic, so profoundly touching. About the
spacious chamber were grouped the Seven Spirit Circles, deeply
sympathizing with the bereft ones, who for a time remained in voiceless
apathy, their overwhelming grief finding no utterance in word or
outcry. Cradled in the arms of her Spirit mother and of her Aunt
Sylvian, the Spirit Vallo[a:] laid like a smiling, sleeping infant.
By the side of the couch knelt Dano, holding in his warm clasp the
cold, lifeless hands of his love, and gazing upon her pallid face in
speechless agony. Bending over him his mother by her silent sympathy
sought to console him, her fast falling tears evincing the depth of
her own sorrow. Still by the side of Omanos Fûnh[a:] stood Gentol[a:],
and though intently listening to our Message, not once had he looked
at her, but now impelled by our concentrated desire, slowly, timidly
he turned his gaze upon her, and for the first time fully realized
the presence of a spirit. She alone of the assembled spirits being
perceptible to his but partially unfolded Clairvoyant and Clairaudient
Senses, awe stricken and trembling he sank to his knees, and in broken
accents questioned: "Who art thou? What art thou?" At my dictation she
replied:

Gentola--By some spirit friends I have been named Gentol[a:], and am
not of your people, but am of a World afar in space, which by its
peoples is known as Earth. In a manner which I now cannot explain I can
leave my living physical body, and by some wise and strong Spirits who
understand Spiritual Laws, I have been borne from Earth to your World,
that through me they might reveal to you and to your people that the
Spirit, the Real Self of humans survives death of the physical body.
For the reason that I am less etherealized than wholly freed Spirits,
you, Dano, and you, Ozynas Dûls[a:], perceive me, and were your
superior Senses more fully unfolded, you would behold Sēlon[a:], the
purple eyed, golden haired wife of your youth, and her sister, Sylvian,
too, who will assist in bearing to her beautiful home in your Spirit
World your angel daughter Vallo[a:]. Sēlon[a:] and Sylvian implore you
to remember Vallo[a:]'s last words, and if in your consciousness the
new Faith may find a steadfast abiding place you will gladden the
hearts of your beloved and loving ones by openly declaring it. Remember
that though you are not conscious of their presence, often they are
near you, reading your every thought, and that your joy is their joy,
and that in their hearts your griefs find quick response. Ever your
gentle, loving wife guards and guides you in your ways. Ever, as you
walk to and fro, silently her foot-falls keep pace with yours, and when
the hour of your release from your mortal body shall arrive she and
Vallo[a:] will be with you, and in a World whose skies are ever radiant
with a light unknown to mortals, over whose brightest days shadows ever
are falling, you will be reunited with those whom you have mourned as
having gone into perpetual Silence. In this Spirit World the flowers
are fadeless, the balmy air is vibrant with Divinest harmonies and joys
such as mortals cannot conceive of await all whose exalted lives have
prepared them for lofty states of Being. The Guiding Spirits who have
brought me here say that ere long I shall come again to offer to you a
fuller knowledge of the Truth we are striving to reveal to you, a Truth
which shall dispel your fear of death, which is but a transition to a
higher state of existence, and shall bring to you and to your people
consolation and peace inexpressible.

De L'Ester--Ere Gentol[a:] ceased speaking, through grief and amazement
Omanos Fûnh[a:] was so overwhelmed that had not Ozynas Dûls[a:]'s
strong arms sustained him he would have fallen prone. Swaying like a
drunken man, he extended his trembling hands toward Gentol[a:], crying:
"Thou sayest thou art from another World, a World afar in space. Thou
sayest that my child Vallo[a:] still lives, and that her mother and
Sylvian are here to bear her away to a World invisible to me. Where is
this invisible World of living ones, and do my dear ones indeed dwell
there? And when the breath of my life shall cease shall I, too, surely
continue to exist, and with them abide forever? And truly are there in
space other Worlds, where men and women live, love and die as do we
of Ento? The thought is too stupendous. I cannot realize it. Speak, I
entreat you, ere my senses totter to their destruction."

Quickly our Forces combined to quiet his somewhat frenzied state, and
again Gentol[a:] was made to address him and those about him.

Gentola--I, who am but the Instrument for Spirits more exalted than
myself, can only say that which they dictate to me. When daylight has
merged into twilight, and twilight has deepened into darkness, myriads
of shining points dot the vast expanse of the night sky, and you
have been taught that these shining points are the Lamps illumining
the abode of your Gods and Goddesses, whom you have regarded as the
Messengers of Andûman[a:] the Supreme One. Among those shining points
is one gleaming with a soft, silvery radiance, which your Priests have
named Inglos ēvecto Fryd[a:], which, I am told, would in my language
mean Fryd[a:]'s lamp or light. Truly this silvery point is the Earth
world where I dwell. Like all the Worlds in space it is spherical in
form and nearly twice the size of Ento, which it closely resembles,
and, like your world, its surface is composed of divisions of land and
water, and its products of all kinds are very similar to those of Ento.
Our learned ones believe that it is a younger World than this, as much
of its land surface is quite rugged, and there are mountains so lofty
that their peaks pierce the clouds. Its hills, too, are still elevated,
and its valleys deeply depressed, whereas time has nearly levelled
the surface of Ento, necessitating your vast System of Irrigation,
which on the Earth World only in isolated instances is required. We
consider your civilization more advanced than is ours, which indicates
your greater maturity, and in the arts and most of the sciences your
attainments equal or surpass those of our people, who generally aspire
to acquire wisdom and a knowledge of all that may advance their best
interests. Like the Entoans we have trials and sorrows for our loved
ones also pass to the World of Spirits, and we miss their presence, as
you will miss Vallo[a:]'s, but our knowledge of continuous existence
enables us to endure what cannot be avoided, and we well know that when
we too shall pass to our Spirit World we will find all our dear ones
who have preceded us.

Among our learned ones are those who have constructed instruments very
like those through which from the summits of your great Watch Towers
you gaze across the surface of Ento. Through these Instruments, known
as Telescopes, men and women versed in the science of astronomy are
enabled to observe and study the Worlds in space just as the learned
ones of Ento may do when an acceptance of the new Faith shall free them
from their superstitious fears of the Gods and Goddesses who do not
exist, the only God being the Supreme One, who is a God of Love, and
not a vengeful destroyer of his children.

Like Ento, our Earth World also has divisions of day and night, which
in their duration very nearly correspond with your own, and the Sun,
the same glorious Orb that blesses Ento with light and heat, shines
on our World as well. During a certain period of our year, which is a
little more than half the length of yours, when darkness falls and the
sky is unclouded, afar we behold a beautiful ruddy Star, known to us as
the planet Mars, and of all the Worlds in space none so attracts our
attention as this Star, which truly is this, your Ento World. Those who
have brought me here desire me to say that certain instruction they
now would gladly offer for your consideration must for the present be
withheld, but that when a more propitious hour shall arrive, through me
they will reveal to you much that will add to the happiness and well
being of yourself and peoples.

To your question relating to the locality of the World of living
ones I must reply briefly. About all Worlds sufficiently matured to
afford sustenance and habitation for various life forms and for the
children of the Incomprehensible, Infinite Intelligent Energy you name
Andûman[a:], there are a Series of Spirit Realms which envelop material
Worlds as the husk of the Plûym[a:] envelops its crimson fruit. These
Realms are suited to the requirements of their inhabitants, who are
Spirits, who through death of the physical body have been released,
and as men, women and children live a more real life than do mortals.
In these Realms all progress toward higher attainments and greater
perfection, and when fitted for the change they pass from lower to
higher realms and greater joys. In Ento's Spirit Realms your real
Self will find all whom you have loved but not lost, for they live
and love you, and in the grandly beautiful home prepared for you they
await your coming. Be patient, then, and from time to time all that is
for your good will be revealed to you. Now, as never before, Spirits
of the higher Realms can penetrate the aura surrounding the peoples
of Ento, and to you three illumined ones will be revealed that which
will inspire and unfold your inner consciousness, so that with clearer
vision you will perceive the Immortals who ever are about you and all
who yet abide in the mortal form. At this moment this apartment is
thronged with Immortals, who are here to assist in your unfoldment and
that of Dano and Ozynas Dûls[a:], who better than yourself comprehends
this, to you, strange occurrence. Gladly these exalted Spirits will
aid you in your search after Truth, which is wholly Divine and which
alone can assist humanity in its ever onward progress. There, Omanos
Fûnh[a:], lies the inanimate form of your beloved daughter, and Dano's
affianced wife, the form which for a brief time was the dwelling place
of the Spirit Vallo[a:], who now in the arms of her mother and Sylvian
is about to be borne to their and her home in your Spirit World. What
Message shall they convey to other dear ones who await their coming?

De L'Ester--While Gentol[a:] was speaking, Omanos Fûnh[a:], Dano,
Ozyras Dûls[a:] and Dano's parents, who heard her quite audible voice,
stood like so many statues, every sense absorbed in the intense desire
to catch her every word, and when silence followed speech they looked
into each others' faces with an expression of awed inquiry, but no one
uttered a sound. Some moments elapsed, then Omanos Fûnh[a:] slowly
turned toward the couch and silently gazed upon the pallid face framed
in a wealth of golden, curling tresses, then within his trembling palms
he folded Vallo[a:]'s small, cold, stiffening hands, covering them with
kisses and wetting them with his tears, then tenderly he laid them over
her bosom and turned away from the couch. Standing erect, with uplifted
eyes and hands, and with an expression of deep emotion on his dark,
handsome face, in impassioned tones his voice broke the stillness.

Omanos Funha--Oh thou Infinite and Supreme One, whose ignorant but
adoring children we are, as our fathers and mothers have worshipped
so have Thy children of a later time worshipped Thee. When light and
heat have brooded over Ento, causing all living things to fructify and
yield sustenance to Thy children and the creatures of Thy Creation, we
have said, "Praise be unto Andûman[a:], the Supreme One, who, from His
shining abode, smiles upon us His children, and with such offerings as
we have conceived acceptable we have sought to manifest our gratitude
for Thy beneficence. Yet ever as we have rendered homage unto Thee our
hearts have been heavy through fear and despair. Ever the noiseless,
dusky wings of the dread Messenger Phra have so overshadowed our lives
that now that Thou callest to us we are too blind to see our way to
Thee, too deaf to clearly hear Thy voice, but since it is Thy Will that
now we shall receive the light of the grandest, most priceless Truth
that Thou canst vouchsafe to us, Thou Wilt lift the shadows from our
eyes and humbly, adoringly, we will strive to find our ways to Thy
glorious presence. The brightest, most precious jewel of the crown of
my life this day hath gone from me, and I am desolate, but it is Thy
Will and I murmur not, for through this Thy Messenger Thou sayest that
after the body ceases to live, in an invisible but fairer World than
Ento the Real Selves of Thy children consciously continue to exist, and
after what Thou hast made us to see and to hear, I, Omanos Fûnh[a:],
doubt it not. Then praise be unto Thee, that through Thy love for
Thine own, after the breath of our lives shall cease we shall find our
beloved ones, and with them ceaselessly adore Thee for this Thy most
precious gift to Thy undeserving but loving children. Raû, raû, raû."

De L'Ester--All in attendance, spirits and mortals, fervently
responded, "Raû, raû, raû." After a brief pause he turned to the Most
High Priest and said: "Your Sacredness, Ozynas Dûls[a:], long hast
thou administered the rites of the old faith; what sayest thou of this
new Revelation from Andûman[a:], the Supreme One to whom be adoration
forever, that He hath heard our fervent petitions and hath granted to
us and to our sorrowful peoples a knowledge that though our bodies
shall die we shall continue to exist. So long hast thou been my close
friend that thou wilt bear with my rapture, which alas is tinged with
deepest sorrow," and he stooped and kissed Vallo[a:]'s smiling lips
and folded hands. Silently, attentively, Ozynas Dûls[a:] listened to
Omanos Fûnh[a:]'s words, then with a certain tenderness of manner he
replied: "Thou art the Supreme Ruler of Ento, and thou art a wise,
just, loving and learned man, and even as the chalices of the snowy
rodel turn their perfumed hearts toward Diafon ēvoih[a:] (the sun) so
do the hearts of the people turn toward thee for counsel and sympathy.
Thou knowest why the people sorrow, and thou knowest that even at their
feasts joy is a rare guest. It hath pleased Andûman[a:] to withhold
from His children of past times this wondrous Revelation that life is
continuous and that in Realms invisible to mortal vision the children
of His Love shall abide forever. It is not for us to question His Will
or His Wisdom. It is for us to listen and to obey, so I pray that thou
wilt not withhold from the children of Ento the glad Revelation which
hath been vouchsafed to us in this the hour of our deepest sorrow.

"It may greatly surprise thee to learn that many Priests and
Priestesses of the Temples see and hear as thou now seest and hearest,
but the meaning of it hath not been understood, and fear of Andûman[a:]
and the Deific Ones hath caused them to keep silent and to cling to
old traditions. So convinced am I that the Truth is being Revealed
to us that with thy approval I, Ozynas Dûls[a:], gladly will aid
in proclaiming the glorious, the wondrous words of Andûman[a:]'s
Revelation to His children."

While Ozynas Dûls[a:] spoke, Dano knelt by the side of the couch,
steadfastly gazing upon the lovely face which soon would be naught but
ashes, but toward the close of Ozynas Dûls[a:]'s speech he arose and
in deep entrancement stood motionless. Aided by our combined Forces,
Zenest[a:] H[a:]o was enabled to control his Senses and through him to
address Omanos Fûnh[a:], Dano's parents and Ozynas Dûls[a:].

Zenesta Hao--I, who through the lips of this entranced youth will
attempt to address you, may be remembered as Zenest[a:] H[a:]o, long
a Professor of languages in the renowned Galarēs[a:] of Camariss[a:].
During my mortal existence I, like all the peoples of Ento, was
ignorant of the fact that death of the mortal body releases the
Immortal Spirit, which is the real Self of man, or, to state the fact
more clearly, when the real Self, the Immortal Spirit, finds the
mortal body no longer suited to its requirements, it releases itself
and under the higher, better conditions of the Spirit World, continues
its progress onward, onward forever. Not until I was released from my
worn and aged body did I learn the glorious truth that I was Immortal.
In the sorrowful belief that death was the end of all, I fell asleep.
I awakened to find about me my dearest ones who had come to bear
me to their and my home in the World of the Immortals. Oh, the joy
that filled my enraptured Being when I became fully conscious that
continuous existence, progress and happiness inexpressible was the
reward of a life devoted to virtuous conduct and loving service for
others, and that for those who had not lived in accordance with their
highest ideals there was endless time and opportunity for the amending
of the mistakes and wrongs of mortal life, and for progress as endless
as eternity.

Dear friends, were your Spirit vision fully unfolded, in this chamber
you would behold forms and faces of Spirits who are revered and
famous in the history of Ento. Here are Genessano Allis Immo Rû, and
his little less famous spouse, the Lady Camariss[a:], and their two
sons Inidor[a:] and Genessano, who offer to you all their kindliest
greetings and an assurance of their immeasurable joy that at last the
light of a great Truth is about to irradiate the sorrowful lives of the
peoples of their ever beloved Ento. Here, too, is H[a:]-Moûfi Adassi
whose name ever is on the lips of all students of nature. He also
greets you all and joins with all the Invisibles present in expressions
of love and sympathy for you in this your hour of mingled joy and
sadness.

Omanos Fûnh[a:], thou art favored beyond all men who ever have lived
on Ento, for even in the hour of thy deepest anguish a joy hath come
to thee, which henceforth shall fill thy days with blessedness and
peace. Then hasten, oh, hasten to crown the days of the children of
Ento with unlooked for gladness. Give to them the assurance that the
old, hopeless faith is no more. That Andûman[a:], the Supreme One, hath
revealed to His ever sorrowful children the highest expression of His
love for them, and that henceforth death shall be known as the Angel
who guards the portal between mortal and Immortal Life.

Basto Andûlēs[a:], I salute thee and thy gracious spouse, and it is my
pleasant duty to convey to her beloved parents a most tender and most
loving greeting from one who in her early youth passed to the World
of Spirits. I speak for thy ceaselessly mourned daughter Ont[a:], who
joins her entreaties with ours that you earnestly shall assist in the
introduction and acceptance of the new Faith, which for you and Ento's
peoples shall change the face of all things, and she entreats you and
her mother to encourage her brother Dano, whose clear seeing vision and
understanding of Spiritual things, fits him for a Teacher who shall
proclaim to the peoples the glorious Truth which is being Revealed
to you chosen ones. Since entering our Spirit World I have learned
that during the passing centuries advanced Spirits with but slight
success, persistently have endeavored to penetrate the consciousness
of Ento's peoples, but ever the gross materialism of their religion,
which is founded upon the legends and crude conceptions of undeveloped,
ignorant, primitive peoples, has opposed an impenetrable barrier
to their approach. Baffled and wearied through perpetual failures,
finally Bands of strong, determined Spirits of our and other Spirit
Worlds resolved to attempt to fit this Earth woman, whom we have named
Gentol[a:], to serve as a means of communication between Spirits
and certain Sensitives of Ento. Being yet embodied in flesh she is
less Spiritualized than ourselves, whose Spirit bodies like that of
Vallo[a:], are of such inconceivably refined substances as to be
imperceptible to most mortals. To Omanos Fûnh[a:], to Ozynas Dûls[a:],
and to thy son Dano, whose Spiritual Senses to a degree are unfolded,
she is perceptible, and later on they and thee and thy spouse Ellit[a:]
will unfold the ability to perceive wholly released spirits.

Of necessity this Revelation from the World of Spirits is so
fragmentary as to be confusing to minds accustomed to other beliefs,
but from time to time Omanos Fûnh[a:], Ozynas Dûls[a:] and this thy
son Dano shall receive distinct instruction pertaining not only to
the new Faith, but to other affairs of moment. When Dano shall have
awakened we desire that he shall be informed as to what I have said,
then, through Gentol[a:], will be given to you all some parting words,
and may the Spirit of All Spirits, the Infinite One, whom Entoans name
Andûman[a:], ever be present in your thoughts, for from this Divine
and inexhaustible Source cometh all that is beneficent. And now, dear
friends, I must say Info oovistû.

De L'Ester--During Zenest[a:] H[a:]o's address Omanos Fûnh[a:] and
Ozynas Dûls[a:] gazed upon Dano in amazement and alarm, and his parents
who stood near the apparently sleeping youth in awed silence listened
to the strange speech issuing from his lips, but no one ventured to
speak to him or to touch him. When Zenest[a:] H[a:]o spoke of Genessano
Allis Immo and his wife and sons and of HaMoûfi Adassi and Ont[a:]
Andûlēs[a:], surprise tinged with terror sat on every face, and in
speechless, questioning wonder they looked into each others' eyes.

When he delivered Ont[a:]'s greeting and Message, a great trembling
seized Basto Andûlēsa, who scarcely could sustain his own form and
that of his weeping wife, who, through violent emotion, swooned
into unconsciousness. Gentol[a:], in her now partially conscious
state, realized what was occurring, and to our momentary dismay, her
sympathies became so active that only through our instantly united
efforts were we enabled to prevent her release from her greatly
devitalized physical body. Restoratives quickly revived Dano's mother,
who was gently entreated to withdraw from the chamber, but she refused
to do so, and sat sobbing and murmuring: "She lives--she--lives,
our--Ont[a:], our precious--Ont[a:], our--roina blossom lives, and
some--time we shall find--her. Oh, the joy--of it, the joy--and
wonder--of it. Andûman[a:], we adore Thee that Thou hast taken--pity
upon Thy sorrowful--children; that Thou hast shown us--that we
shall--find our beloved child, our--Ont[a:]." And thus as a loving
mother would she, between smiles and tears continued her gentle, loving
crooning. Now there was a quivering of the eyelids, a slight start,
and Dano, in a bewildered manner looked about him and in a hushed
tone eagerly questioned: "What has occurred? Have I been asleep and
dreaming? Have I said aught to disturb you, that you regard me so
strangely?" At our desire Gentol[a:] drew near him and at my dictation
again spoke to him audibly.

Gentola--Dano, dear youth, even as the dew silently falls into the
perfumed hearts of night's snowy blooms so early into your heart
entered Vallo[a:]. In the flower of her beautiful womanhood she has
gone from you and from those dear to her, but she has not gone into
Silence and nothingness, but into a higher state of existence, where,
after your work shall be done, you, too, will go and with her forever
will glorify the Infinite Spirit of all that is. That I may comfort
you I will reveal to you the wondrous fact that all existences in
their nature are dual, the Male and Female Principles constituting the
Duality, and truly Vallo[a:] is your other Self, and for all time you
two are one and inseparable. Until you shall release yourself from your
physical body, as your guiding Star ever she will be near you, and when
you shall fall into your last slumber ere long you will awaken to meet
the enraptured gaze of Vallo[a:]'s azure eyes.

Dano, our Mission to Ento is only in its inception, but now I must
return to Earth, where other duties await my attention, but you
will not be left unaided, for now that the way has been made plain,
Vallo[a:], her mother, Sylvian, your sister Ont[a:] and other Spirits
will be able to communicate with you three illumined ones, and very
soon other Sensitives will become unfolded, through whom Spirits can
convey instruction to the people, and I am informed that when you may
need me I shall be brought to you, so be courageous, be faithful to the
duties our Mission has imposed upon you, and all will be well with you
and with the children of Ento, before whom you will stand as a Priest
of the New Religion.

The moment has arrived in which, for the present, we must say Info
oovistû, and may a sense of the joys awaiting you all in the glorified
existence of Ento's Spirit Realms illumine your lives and console and
sustain your sorely grieved hearts until in the hour of your release
from your physical bodies you shall hear the glad cry, "Loh[a:]û,
loh[a:]û, vraimēon mēnois[a:]." (Hail, hail, dearly beloved.)

De L'Ester--At this moment a ray of the setting Sun stole through the
slightly parted window drapery, falling upon Dano, who, with uplifted
face and outreaching hands, entreatingly whispered: "You will come
again, oh, you will come again?" and Gentol[a:] was made to reply: "I
will, I surely will," and Dano sank to his knees beside the couch. It
stole athwart the white, calm, lovely face of Vallo[a:], and for a
little it lingered in the silken mesh of her golden hair, glorifying
the majesty and mystery of the change called death. It crowned Dano's
flowing blue black hair as with a halo and it stole across the stilled
form of the dead girl and rested upon two faces one would not be likely
to forget--the faces of the stately Supreme Ruler of Ento, Omanos
Fûnh[a:], and that of the Most High Priest of the Most Sacred Temple
Zim, Ozynas Dûls[a:], than whom no handsomer or gracious gentlemen
exist on Ento. As, side by side they stood, the fading sun ray revealed
in the face of the bereaved father an expression of infinite sadness,
a little lighted by the dawning of a priceless hope. In the eyes of
Ozynas Dûls[a:] was the expression of one whose Inner Vision has
penetrated the Veil falling between the hither and the thither sides of
existence. A moment longer and the sun ray disappeared, a passing cloud
obscured its afterglow, and in the spacious apartment were shadows and
silence. Then, through the activity of Forces ever at our command,
slowly with a soft, silvery radiance we so illumined the chamber that
the strange glory of it overwhelmed Omanos Fûnh[a:], Dano, and his
parents, but Ozynas Dûls[a:], who, in the Inner Sanctuary of the most
Sacred Temple Zim, had beheld Spirit Illumination, murmured: "Tymonas,
Tymonas, thou hast said to me that thou art not a God, but a man,
like other men, and I understood thee not, but now with an humble and
grateful heart I recognize that thou art an exalted Spirit man, and
that thou hast been infinitely patient with me as with other Priests
who have served in the Temple Zim, and now I Vow that henceforth I
will be as faithful to the new Revelation as ever in my ignorance I
have been faithful to the superstitions which soon will be of a dead
past," and through the stillness an audible whisper ran: "Well done,
thou good and faithful servant; though thou hast not understood,
sincerely thou hast worshipped the Most High," and tremblingly Ozynas
Dûls[a:] recognized that Tymonas, the Spirit of the Inner Sanctuary,
had spoken.

At the height of the radiance musical notes, soft as zephyrs whispering
to flowers, filled the chamber with vibrant melody, and the minds and
hearts of those about the couch with emotions indescribable. Gradually
the melodious tones died into silence, and the silvery glow faded into
the gray of deepest twilight, whose shadows, like dark hued drapery,
fell over the snowy couch and stilled form of the dead girl and over
the awed but enraptured faces of the living. Then the tremulous,
hushed, adoring tones of Omanos Fûnh[a:]'s voice broke the stillness.

Omanos Funha--Supreme, all Wise, loving and most merciful One, Whom in
our blindness we have not rightly perceived, in Thine own time and way
Thou hast more clearly revealed Thyself and the marvel of Thy glory to
us, Thy humbly adoring children. So dulled by erroneous beliefs are
our Senses that as little children we reach our hands toward Thee,
and I doubt not that Thou wilt guide our ways. Since to us hath been
revealed the amazing, the glorious Truth that the Real Self of Man does
not die, and that our dear ones who have gone from our sight can, in
some not yet understood manner, hold converse with us, and that they
will instruct us as to how we may attain greater knowledge concerning
this life and the life to come, we cannot find words to express our
gratitude to Thee or to those of Thy Spirit children whose love hath
prompted them to serve us, who are so unworthy of Thy pity, or their
immeasurable goodness to us. We know not how to repay Thy Infinite
beneficence or their goodness, but I, Omanos Fûnh[a:], am inexpressibly
grateful to Thee and to Thy Messengers, and with all the ability with
which Thou hast endowed me, henceforth I will proclaim to the children
of Ento that Life is continuous, that endless progression is a Law of
the Infinitely Supreme One, and that there is one God, and none other.

De L'Ester--Through the silence and the shadows fervently the lips of
Immortals and Mortals responded, "Raû, raû, raû," and then the living
were left with the beautiful dead body, whose released inmate swiftly
was borne to her Celestial home, and through the measureless spaces
from joyous Spirit Bands rang out the glad Pæan, "Glory to the Infinite
Spirit in Whom we live and move and have our Being. Glory be to Thee
through whom success has crowned our Mission to Ento. Glory and highest
praise be unto our Father and Mother God, forever and forever."

  _September 16th, 1894._




APPENDIX.

INTERVIEW WITH MEMBERS OF THE EVON-THIA, JANUARY 10TH, 1895.


De L'Ester--Yes, madame, again we are here to greet you, but our
visit must be brief, as neither you or we can afford to overtax your
returning vital energy. Nearly four months of Earth's fleeting days
have elapsed since your Spirit gaze rested upon the dead form of the
mortal Vallo[a:] and upon the living form of the Spirit maiden as in
the arms of her equally youthful mother and of her Aunt Sylvian she
was borne from the darkening chamber and the presence of her stricken
father and of her weeping lover, whose tearful eyes beheld her
departure. That during this lapse of time we have maintained over you
a careful watchfulness you may feel assured, and you cannot so much
regret as do we, that at the culmination of our Mission we felt obliged
to tax to the utmost your depleted vitality, and we rejoice that under
the constant ministrations of loving friends, you are recovering your
usual strength. We are aware that your peculiar experiences of the
past two years are as slightly remembered dreams, yet to a degree you
are curious as to what recently has been transpiring on Ento. Shall I
inform you as to the progress of the new Faith?

Gentola--It will greatly please me if you will do so, for I feel more
than curious to learn how it may be affecting the people.

De L'Ester--I am sure that it will gratify you to learn that Dano's
parents are converts to the new Faith, and that their hitherto sombre
faces are irradiated with the joyous expectation of Immortality, not
only for themselves but for all of Andûman[a:]'s children. Through Dano
Andûlēs[a:] they receive cheering Messages from their daughter Ont[a:]
and other dear ones whose words they value as jewels beyond price, and
the passing days do not suffice for their continuous adoration of the
goodness of Andûman[a:], Who has heard and granted the desire of the
hearts of His children.

Dano has renounced his claim to the Supreme Rulership of the Planet and
has declared himself a Priest of the new Revelation, which he devotedly
offers to the despairing multitudes, who eagerly listen to his eloquent
presentation of its wonderful declarations. All over the Planet the
minds of the people are profoundly stirred, and some are filled with
consternation, dreading they know not what. Though still clinging
to the old beliefs, others timidly reach toward the new Faith which
promises that for which ever they have prayed, and still others are in
a state of dumb amazement, not daring to voice either hope or fear. Of
course, largely, the Priesthood stand aghast at the threatened downfall
of the Time-Honored Religion, which ever has made them the dominant
power of Ento. They declare that Dano's utterances are the result of
mere hallucinations, and that the experiences of Omanos Fûnh[a:], of
which he speaks openly, are outgrowths of grief over the death of
Vallo[a:]. On the other hand, an ever increasing number of Priests and
Priestesses are listening to the Most High Priest Ozynas Dûls[a:],
and joyfully professing their belief in the new Revelation, which he
boldly declares to the multitudes who daily crowd the great Temple
Zim. To them he relates his experiences with Tymonas in the inner
Sanctuary, and with amazement, not unmixed with terror, they ponder
over his strange revelations. He has gone so far as to prohibit animal
sacrifices and offerings to the Deific Ones, whom he pronounces myths,
Andûman[a:] being the One and only God, Whom fervently he adores.

How fares Omanos Fûnh[a:]? One moment he cries to Andûman[a:] to
restore to him his lost Vallo[a:], to grant to him one glimpse of her
beautiful and beloved form and face, one tone of her voice, that was
the sweetest music of his desolated life. Anon, he entreats Dano to
comfort him with a Message from the dear ones who are veiled from his
sight, and at times his Clairvoyant and Clairaudient Senses become
so quickened that he communes with them. Then his soul is so filled
with ecstatic fervor that to all about him he proclaims that truly
life is continuous, that the dead do communicate with the living, and
they, with beating hearts and breathless attention, listen to his
rapt utterances. As time passes he grows into a clearer perception
and realization of the Truth, and soon his feet will stand upon firm
ground; then confidently and authoritatively he will offer to the
people that which shall be to them as the very bread of life.

Dano, whose Clairvoyant and Clairaudient Senses are unfolding in a
surprising manner, holds continuous communication with Vallo[a:]
and other freed Spirits, who are instructing him, and his faith has
grown into actual knowledge. Thus he no longer doubts or questions
the reality of his own experiences, and of course, this state of mind
renders him very receptive to exalted Influences from the Spirit side
of life. In his zeal to offer to the people the wondrous truths which
have been revealed to him and to others he addresses them in Temples
and elsewhere. Recently we listened to the youthful disciple, as, with
glowing face, luminous eyes, and form trembling from emotion, he
spoke to a large assemblage of people in a Temple of D[a:]o. Firstly
he addressed himself to the people, then, as one who speaks because
he must, in tones that filled the vast edifice, he cried, "Oh, ye
Priests, ye blind leaders of the blind, open your eyes that you may
see, your ears that you may hear the glorious truth, which, through
His appointed Messenger, Andûman[a:] hath revealed to His despairing
children. Long have the peoples of Ento listened to the manifestations
of the ignorance of bygone centuries, and now that light hath entered
the darkened chambers of our minds, you would build yet higher walls
of superstitious reverence for what hath been misnamed religion, which
ever hath stood between us and the light. Ever you have walked in the
shadows of a hopeless faith, and your mummeries have so dulled the
senses of the people that, as from birth to death they grope their
ways, bewildered they sink into the darkness of hopeless despair. Then
awake, oh, awake, ye sleeping guides of the people, for a new day hath
dawned for the children of Ento, a day whose effulgence shall fill all
hearts with gladness inexpressible."

"Since most ancient times it hath been taught that the home of
Andûman[a:], the Supreme One, is in radiant Diafon ēvoih[a:], which
sheds life giving beams on land and on sea. Now, concerning this matter
I will tell you an amazing truth. Those exalted ones with whom I am
permitted to hold converse, some of whom once were men and women of
Ento, but who now dwell in Realms so glorious that mortal eyes cannot
endure their radiance, declare that Andûman[a:] is Spirit, and is
everywhere, formless, unseeable, unthinkable, even by those who have
attained to the highest wisdom. Also they declare that Ento is but one
of innumerable Worlds peopled with beings like ourselves, and that
the shining points in the night sky, which we, in our ignorance, have
regarded as the lamps lighting Astranol[a:], are Worlds, many of them
vaster far then Ento, and that the dreaded Gods and Goddesses are the
myths of ancient ignorance, perpetuated by a sincere but unenlightened
Priesthood."

This and much more he teaches, and both Priests and people, in doubt,
fear and perplexity question as to which may be true, the old,
hopeless, cheerless faith, or the new promise of joys immeasurable. But
the leaven is leavening the masses, and ere long Priests and people
will embrace the Truth.

You are aware that through electrical and vibratory forces between all
portions of the Planet communication is instantaneous, thus quickly
to nearby and remotest places the utterances of Ozynas Dûls[a:] and
of Dano are heralded, and you cannot imagine the effect, which is
beyond our fondest expectations, and it is but the beginning of what
necessarily must result, for now that the positiveness of the Spiritual
atmosphere is penetrable, hosts of Spirits from various Realms will
see to it that the darkness which long has enshrouded the lives of the
Entoans shall flee away, and then the effulgence of the grandest Truth
that mortals can know will forever abide with them.

Gentola--You who more easily read my thoughts than I can express them
will understand that what you have related fills my heart with joy.
Even at greater cost to myself I would not for a moment hesitate to
undertake a like Mission. But, friends, may not I soon again go with
you to Ento?

De L'Ester--Yes, soon, but not until you shall have grown a little
stronger. Then we will make good a promise made to you, but which you
do not now remember. That you may more quickly regain your strength we
advise that you shall go outdoors every day, so that your feet may come
in contact with the earth, thus you will rid yourself of devitalized
magnetism, and at the same time you will accumulate energized
magnetism, which you greatly need. It would delight us to prolong our
visit, but we must consider the urgent necessity for your speedy return
to health. With kindest, truest regard, we must say adieu.




OPENING OF THE WATERWAY INTO ETZOINA LOISA.


 _January 19th, 1895._

De L'Ester--Good-morning, madame. As we promised, so have we come
in a body to escort you to Ento, and we have joined in your earnest
invocation to Divine Influences to guard and guide you in the ways
of truth, and to Inidor[a:]'s fervent response, "Evoih[a:][a:], ino
ēvost[a:]n, tsû felistan, r[a:]û, r[a:]û, r[a:]û," we also have
responded, for we, too, desire the guardianship and guidance of exalted
spirits, whose angelic ministrations assist all aspiring souls. This
morning we find you difficult of control. You appear timorous and
disturbed. Cannot you trust yourself to our care, who never have
failed you? Compose yourself, pray, and passively yield yourself to
our protection, but first instruct your watchful Vena to not allow you
to be disturbed for two or more hours. That is well arranged, and now
close your eyes and be at rest.

George, we are ready for our journey, and you, comrades, will lead
the way. You no longer are afraid, and is not this motion and the
views grand, glorious and exhilarating? Truly, it is well that your
experiences while with us are as half remembered dreams, _otherwise
they would unfit you for the routine of mortal existence_. You now
understand that this journey to Ento is the fulfillment of our promise
to afford you the pleasure of witnessing the opening of the great
Central Waterway into Etzoin[a:] Lois[a:]. Yes, the further wall of
the Lois[a:] has been pierced, but the continuation of the System is
not yet in readiness for either navigation or irrigation. Yes, we will
proceed directly to Etzoin[a:] Lois[a:], else we may miss some features
of the pageant. Now that we are nearing the lake we will descend to
such an altitude as will afford you a view of the entire spectacle. At
times we lose sight of the fact that your vision is not so far reaching
as our own. A little lower, George. Now is every object clear to your
vision?

Gentola--Quite so.

De L'Ester--Then for the present we will remain where we are, and we
have arrived none too early, for, coming from every direction are air
Transports laden to repletion with eagerly curious Entoans, and from
north, south and west small water craft laden with men, women and
children are hastening along the canals leading to the lake, where
already a multitude of people have assembled. Look westward, madame,
and attempt a description of the scene presenting itself.

Gentola--As far as my vision reaches I see the sparkling water of the
great Waterway, and of the intersecting canals. Scarcely four months
have elapsed since we visited this region and at that time you informed
me that only recently had the barren lands come under the influence of
irrigation. In this brief interval nature has accomplished a miracle in
so quickly converting what then was little more than waste lands into
fertile fields, covered with luxuriant verdure and blooming plants,
and it is quite as amazing to observe the many villages and structures
of various kinds which have been erected since we were here. It seems
incredible that such vast improvements should have been accomplished
in such a brief time. Some of the peoples of our Planet are very
enterprising, but I question their ability to successfully compete
with the quiet, persistent, industrious Entoans, whose very superior
mechanical appliances greatly facilitate their undertakings, but even
then the results are surprising.

Dear me, what a wonderfully strange scene. Those air Transports hover
over the lake like great birds, and the rising and falling tones of
their whirring climbers are really musical. I wish I were clever
enough to understand how they are constructed and controlled in their
movements, and how--oh, De L'Ester, George, Bernard, see, see, yonder
in the west is a fleet of large vessels and numerous smaller ones
coming toward Etzoin[a:]. How swiftly the great vessels are advancing,
leaving in their wake tumultuous billows of snowy foam. The foremost
vessel is quite covered with rodels, and there are ropes of rodels,
wreaths of rodels, banners of rodels, and around the entire deck is a
fringe of rodels trailing their creamy beauty quite to the surface of
the foaming water. Surely it has taken all the rodels on the planet
to so bedeck the great vessel. All the large vessels are similarly
decorated, each one with a single variety of flower, and how very
beautiful they all appear. Now I hear strains of music, and on the
decks of the vessels I perceive many people, and as the fleet draws
nearer, nearer, I perceive on the rodel-decked vessel a group of
persons whom I seem to remember. Yes, surely, one is the Supreme Ruler,
Omanos Fûnh[a:], and by his side is Basto Andûlēs[a:] and other stately
looking officials, accompanied by a number of lovely women, one of
whom is Madame Ontellena Andûlēs[a:], by whose side are the Most High
Priest Ozynas Dûls[a:], and Dano, in Priestly garb. Ah, how vividly
the closing scene of our Mission returns to my memory, but I must not
now think of that. On Dano's youthful, handsome face is an expression
of exaltation and of peace passing the understanding of those who know
not that the individual conscious existence of Spirit has neither
beginning or ending, and it fills my heart with gladness to know that
into the lives of the once despairing Entoans has entered the joy of
the new Revelation. De L'Ester, really I cannot convey a correct idea
of this marvellous scene, so I pray you to permit me to desist from
attempting the impossible.

De L'Ester--As you will, madame, but I am of the opinion that my
attempt will be quite as unsuccessful as your own. However, as no
one is expected to describe the indescribable, our failures may be
excusable.

Below us is the quiet lake, mirroring in its unruffled water the nearly
cloudless azure sky and the slowly moving air Transports laden with
people who evidently are enjoying the unusual scene. On either side of
the entrance to the lake large numbers of people are massed, and as
you perceive perfect order and decorum are observed. Indeed, among the
Entoans, disorder is considered not only impolite, but indecent, as
really it is.

The group occupying the foreground on this side of the entrance to
the lake is composed of those who have conducted the stupendous
undertaking, which has demanded infinite patience, endurance,
versatility and engineering skill of the highest degree of excellence,
yet not alone to engineering skill is due the credit of this
achievement, for chemistry, too, has been a powerful factor in the
destruction of the nearly impregnable vitrified wall of the lake. But
the moment for the grand entry has arrived, so attention all.

As he advances toward the prow of the vessel what an imposing figure
Omanos Fûnh[a:] presents. His tall, fine form, clothed in crimson and
gold, his long, curling, raven hued hair, bound back from his serene
brow by a richly gemmed gold fillet, his large, dark, expressive eyes,
like two veiled lamps, lighting up his bronze hued face, his handsome
features expressing kindliest emotions, all contribute to render
him a very striking and attractive man. Now, to stirring music, the
rodel-decked flag ship moves toward the entrance to the lake, followed
by the flower clad fleet of seventeen huge vessels. From a hundred
or more air Transports showers of rodels and other blooms rain down
upon them and the air is rent with the enthusiastic acclamation of
the people in the Transports and of the multitudes below. It quickens
one's pulsations, this wave of human emotion, but see now the flag ship
pauses at the entrance of the passageway through the wall of the lake
and the Most High Priest advances to Omanos Fûnh[a:]'s side, bearing
in his hands a great tray of rodel blooms. We will descend a little
so that you may more closely observe the Ceremony of the union of the
Waterway with the lake.

Omanos Funha--Even as these fragrant rodel blooms open their golden
hearts to the radiant beams of Diafon ēvoih[a:], so we, oh Andûman[a:],
open our hearts to Thee that thus we may receive Thy love, which is the
light and life of Thy children and of all living things. Through the
knowledge which Thou hast imparted to Thy chosen ones they have brought
to a successful conclusion this gigantic undertaking which through Thy
beneficence, shall be a perpetual blessing to the peoples of Ento, to
whom, oh Thou Supreme One, it hath pleased Thee to reveal that truly we
are the children of Thy love, and that through endless time we shall
continue to live and to praise Thee for all Thy goodness to us. R[a:]û,
r[a:]û, r[a:]û.

De L'Ester--Through an atmospheric system of communication every word
uttered by Omanos Fûnh[a:] has been made known not only to the vast
assemblage in the air and below us, who reverently have joined in the
invocation and fervent amen, amen, amen, but to the peoples of the
entire Planet.

Omanos Funha--These rodel blooms, which no longer shall serve as
emblems of death but of life and its joyous occasions, I now cast upon
the lips of this great Waterway as, for the first time, they kiss the
sparkling water of Etzoin[a:] Lois[a:].

De L'Ester--Amid profound silence the barrier separating the Waterway
and the lake is quickly removed and Omanos Fûnh[a:] casts the rodels in
front of the slowly moving vessel. Now an immense banner of rodels is
run up to the apex of the flagstaff and a grand volume of musical notes
fills the air with sweetest melody. Now the great vessel, followed
by the fleet, moves swiftly through the ample passage, while from
overhead as well as from below cheers upon cheers rend the air and
from the Transports, which keep pace with the fleet, showers of blooms
in glowing beauty rain down upon the heads of the people crowding the
upper decks, and now the flag ship has plunged onto the lake as though
purposing to pass straight across to the further side, but no, it turns
to the right, leading the fleet in a triumphal procession around the
lake. May I ask for an expression of your impression of the spectacle?

Gentola--Truly, it is both magnificent and to me, very wonderful,
and I shall not forget, dear friends, that to your kindness I owe my
thanks for the pleasure of witnessing it. Yes, I feel assured that if I
shall attempt to tell my friends of this strange experience they will
conclude that my imagination has been running wild, or that I have been
dreaming, and as I gaze upon the flower-decked fleet so noiselessly,
so swiftly, passing around the lake, upon the air Transports hovering
above them and mirroring themselves in the now gently undulating water,
upon the multitude of people, in boats and motor vehicles, or swarming
on the broad rim of the lake, really I am at a loss to realize the
situation, and shall not find fault with any one who may question,
either my sanity or my veracity.

De L'Ester--We who understand the relation between what some of your
wise ones term the conscious and subconscious self, but which we
recognize as the intelligent, human animal Soul, and Ego, or Spirit
Self, readily comprehend your difficulty of realization when applied
to matters outside the plane of your earthly existence, and until
you become a fully freed Spirit you cannot escape certain physical
conditions. But come, friends, we will pay Omanos Fûnh[a:] and Dano a
brief visit. At this moment they are the central figures of a group of
personages intent upon viewing the eastern exit of Etzoin[a:] into the
continuation of the System, which ere long will be in readiness not
only for navigation but also for the irrigation of the wide stretches
of arid lands extending eastward. Now the flag ship, followed by the
fleet, continues its course around the lake, whose rim presents a
living front of enthusiastic people, whose unceasing acclamations
express their satisfaction over the completion of a most difficult and
seriously necessary enterprise.

George, we will alight, taking a position quite apart from the group
surrounding Omanos Fûnh[a:], and you, Bruno, will attempt to impress
Dano to move in our direction. Well done, well done. Our young Priest
is so very sensitive that, with a startled, listening air, he turns
his head, thinking that some one has addressed him, and now slowly
and apparently aimlessly he draws away from the group and toward us.
Gentol[a:], touch him lightly on his lips, and he will understand that
it is the signal of your presence. Ah, he is so startled that he covers
his eyes with his hands, murmuring, "Can it be, can it be? Oh, art thou
here, thou whose name is Gentol[a:]?" In a moment he will perceive you,
then you will follow my dictation.

Gentola--Yes, Dano, I am here, and joyfully greet you as a Priest of
the new Revelation which has come to you and to your people, and I and
those who are with me rejoice with you that the old dread faith surely
is yielding to a belief in the glorious Truth of the continuity of
life, and that all men and women are their own Saviors. We rejoice,
too that we perceive that already this knowledge is illumining the
minds of many, and be assured that even as the vertical beams of Diafon
ēvoih[a:] irradiate this beautiful scene, so, ere long, knowledge of
the Truth will irradiate the lives of your people, who will learn that
the dwelling Place of the Supreme One is the limitless Universe, yet
that He is ever present in the hearts of those who seek to know Him Who
is the Father, Mother God, the Dual One, in whom we all exist.

Nay, it is not an illusion--the forms you dimly perceive, are the
Spirit friends who have borne me across the vast space between Earth
and Ento, and through me they extend to you a loving greeting. Your
joy that light from Spirit Realms is dispelling Ento's long night of
despair, finds in them fullest response, and an earnest assurance
that they and countless Spirits of Ento's and other Spirit Worlds
unceasingly will aid you and those who like yourself are teaching the
Gospel of the new Revelation. And now, Dano, for these friends and
myself I must say Info oovistû.

Dano--I pray you, stay one moment. Will you come again, will you surely
come to instruct my ignorance, to strengthen me in the new Faith, which
is so glorious, so overwhelming, that did not my Vallo[a:], by her
sweet presence and counsel sustain me, I indeed might faint by the way.

Gentola--These spirit friends say that many times I shall come to
you, that through me they may afford you such Wisdom Lessons as they
and Spirits of your and other Spirit Worlds have learned. They and I
entreat you to be courageous and steadfast. Trust to the guidance of
Vallo[a:] and of other dear ones who ever are near you, and all will be
well with you. Again Info oovistû.

De L'Ester--Omanos Fûnh[a:] and those about him are curiously observing
Dano, who now arouses as from a profound reverie. As quietly he returns
to his friends on his fine, youthful face is an expression of smiling
exaltation, and in the splendor of his dark, luminous eyes is the
reflected radiance of Realms unseen of mortal vision.

The Ceremonial we have so slightly sketched is drawn to a close and
now you must take a last view of the great flower-decked vessels, so
swiftly pursuing their way westward. Of the air Transports, like huge
birds winging their ways through the quiet atmosphere, of the numerous
small water craft, gliding off through the canals, of the many motor
vehicles, which rapidly bear away many of the dispersing assemblage, of
the placid water of Etzoin[a:], in which the rays of the glowing sun
sparkle like gleams of fire, and of the face of the verdure-clad lands
which well may typify the Resurrection of Death into Life.

Ento, thou redeemed one, in our gladness we cry, Hail, hail, thou
who art one of the blest among the System of Worlds, ever pursuing
their unvarying, ceaseless journeys around our Sun, which is but one
of countless Suns, _encircling the one Central Sun_, whose immensity
and glory is beyond all conceptions of Angels or Archangels, whose
vivifying energy controls the heart-beats of the Universe, whose
intelligent, tireless, ceaseless activity is that which is known of
by many names, to us is known as God, the Infinite One, _whom only
in accordance with the degree of our spiritual unfoldment can we
apprehend_.

Now we must return you to Earth, else we may not return you at all,
and the time has not yet arrived for such a desirable consummation
of your present life work. Make your adieus to our friends, and,
to your wistful eyed son, for George and I will see that you shall
safely arrive in your quiet home, where Vena impatiently and somewhat
anxiously awaits you.

Now unclose your eyes, for you and your soul again are united and Vena
breathes a sigh of relief as she sees you move and hears you call,
"Vena, please bring me a glass of water," and we may say the same for
ourselves, for indeed we have held you over long for your safety, but
obey our instructions and soon you will recover your usual condition.

Yes, soon again we will make our presence known to you. Until then,
adieu.

[Illustration]




GLOSSARY.


  A.

  Andûman[a:]--Supreme One. Creator of all things.

  Acclinum--Zoölogical collection.

  Acrocustēno ingol[a:]vion--Amphibious flesh eater.

  Angoss[a:]--Hornless animal. Hornless.

  Astranol[a:]--Realm of Deific ones.

  A-Mûist[a:]--Manlike Anthropoid.

  Andom[a:]h--Primary school.

  Azēon--God of Love.

  Alist[a:]--Mountain. Very lofty, etc.

  Alzoytas--Sacred bird of Astranol[a:], whose wings over-shadow the
  Death Realm.

  Ayon mûy[a:]--Good bye, or may the Gods protect you.

  Anadillo Pylo--Scaly armored amphibian.

  Anadillo akēdon--Scaly armored reptile.


  B.

  Bomûz himmû--Manlike tree climber.

  Birrsch--Trowser.

  Birrsch[a:]--Trowsers.

  Bomûz--Man.

  Brillo--Froglike creature.

  Bendolû--Rainbow.

  Bendolû iffon--Rainbow hued.

  Bûd[a:]s--Tremulous.

  Bûdas lot[a:]--A gigantic tree, whose palmlike foliage trembles
  incessantly.


  C.

  Camariss[a:]--Capitol of Province of Ondû.

  Comin[a:] d[a:][a:]--Class rooms.

  Callo--Wharf landing.

  Cryfimo--Great Ocean.

  Cryfimanû--Small Ocean. Sea.

  Cēhylû--Rushing. Tumultuous.

  Chif[a:]--An eel-like fish.

  Chim[a:] Lois[a:]--Mirror Lake.


  D.

  Di[a:]fon ēvoih[a:]--Sun, the dwelling place of Andûman[a:].

  D[a:]o--Capitol of Ento.

  Di[a:]--Life. Life Essence, or Principle, animating the body.

  D[a:][a:]--Room.

  Dylû--Tossed. Shaken.

  Diaf[a:] avin[a:]--Many hued. Iridescent.


  E.

  Efon--Personal pronoun, I.

  Esploin[a:]--Globe. Sphere.

  Eyamo Yanos--The Infinite, Intelligent energy.

  Endoin[a:]--Bridge. Endoinaa. Bridges.

  Ento--Chosen. Set apart.

  Elipso--Year. Elips[a:][a:]. Years.

  Emano--Friend, masculine gender. S gives the plural.

  Eman[a:]--Friend. Feminine gender. A gives the plural.

  Etzoin[a:]--Placid, quiet, still.

  Etzoin[a:] Loisa--Placid Lake, or water.

  Enor[a:]--Strange. Remarkable, wonderful.

  Etz[a:]--Sweet pulpy fruit, resembling an orange.

  Entol[a:], and Ementol[a:]--Moons of Ento.


  F.

  Fenēta--Catlike animal.

  Fav[a:] [a:] croidas--Burial place, or place for urned ashes of the dead.

  Frilvodii--Species of Anthropoid, known as housekeepers.

  Fûnaveh--Intersection.

  Fûnaveh Ritz[a:]--Town of the Intersection.

  Fondorûveh--City, named after its founder, Tamon Fondorûveh.


  G.

  Gentolano--Prince. Son of Supreme Ruler, or heir apparent.

  Gentolan[a:]--Princess. Daughter of Supreme Ruler.

  Gentol[a:]--Lady. Friend. Gentle one, and other gracious meanings.

  Gentolissim[a:]--Queen, or Supreme Lady. Applied to the wife of the
  Supreme Ruler.

  Gentolēn[a:]--Darling, dear one. Also little one, when applied to
  children, or pets.

  Gûfon--Bitter.

  Gandûlan[a:]--Serpent. Gandûlanos, serpents.

  Gowhy[a:]--Hibernating animal, resembling a bear.

  Gariffo Tsûvon--Bird of the cloud God, Tsûvon.

  Gûlnoyas--Egg shaped.


  H.

  Himmû--Tree climber. A species of anthropoid.

  Hinifro enor[a:]--Yellow wonder.

  Hinor imados--Irrigating canal.

  Hinor tzow[a:]--Canal for transportation.

  Hinifro--Yellow.

  Hom arû--A palmlike tree.

  Hûndaffon--Andûman[a:]'s cup bearer.


  I.

  Indolois[a:]--Tranquil water.

  Istoir[a:]--Small temple.

  Info st[a:] tiv[a:] Zēnos[a:][a:] oovistû--To the care of the Gods,
  until we meet.

  Inf[a:]doihan lûvētas--Place, or temple of sacrifice.

  Info oovistû--Until we meet again, farewell.

  Ilsoimen--Morning.

  Ilofen mûen[a:]--Amusement garden.

  Istoir[a:] lēm[a:]h--Temple of urned ashes, of the dead, for private
  uses.


  K.

  Kenēto Souvan[a:]llo--Gigantic flesh eaters.

  Kenēto alist[a:]--Mountain range, 200 miles long, 6,000 feet above
  sea level.

  Kenēto--Gigantic, enormous, very large.

  Kûltymo Tylû--Elevated city.

  Kynos--Vine.

  Kyn nûynao--An anthropoid of a peculiar species.

  Kyn--A tree resembling an oak tree.

  Kymos--Majesty, or majestic.

  Kēmin[a:]--Central.


  L.

  Loit[a:]--Harplike musical instrument.

  Lenivo--Upper garment for men. A sort of tunic.

  Luitzen--History. Record.

  Loûv[a:]h--God of Agriculture.

  Lot[a:]--Tree of any species.

  Lûmēnas--Botanical garden.

  Lois[a:]--Water, lake, pool, etc.

  Lois[a:] yanû--Water gem, or jewel.

  Lois[a:] mican[a:]--Vining water lily.

  Lois[a:]-Gentolissim[a:]--Water Queen.

  Lois[a:] Gentolan[a:]--Water Princess.

  Litzen--Sweet.

  Lois[a:] a lûtyenos--Lake of rushes.

  Lois[a:] infûen--Water drinker.

  Loisav[=a]on--Waterway.

  Lafon Thēodoss[a:]--A noted Ento painter.

  Loh[a:]û vr[=a]imēon--Hail, dearly beloved.


  M.

  Moûentos ho[a:] falados--Valley of desolation.

  Mican[a:]--Lily, corresponding with Earth's lily family.

  Mist[a:]--Snow.

  Metsû--Light weight, non-corrosive, non-conducting metal.


  O.

  Onos--Personal pronoun, we.

  Oir[a:]h--Thanks. Praise. The word is used in several similar senses, and
  is pronounced, W[a:]hr[a:]h. It bears the same meaning as Amen, or
  be it so.

  Oina mist[a:]--Snow flower.

  Oonamos[a:] tûl[a:]--Burr berry.

  Oifen tsû--Endless time.

  Oond[a:] lotas--Tree, and fruit, similar to our orange.

  Omanos Fûnh[a:]--Present Supreme Ruler of Ento.

  Osy Hûn--Supreme Ruler.

  Oonamos[a:]--Burr.

  Oond[a:]--Divine. Godlike.

  Ozynas Dûls[a:]--Present Most High Priest of the Most Sacred Temple Zim.


  P.

  Pētûs[a:]--Pearl.

  Pfettos--Shoe. Pfetta shoes.

  Plimos--Plant.

  Phr[a:]--God, or messenger of death.


  Q.

  Qu[a:]n[a:]--Eclipse. When Andûman[a:] frowns.

  Quend--A region in the North Temperate Zone.


  R.

  Ryzo elips[a:][a:]--Century.

  Rinvoh--Aquarium.

  Rimoh--An animal resembling an antelope.

  Rodel--The national flower of Ento. Resembles our lotus.

  Ruvacc[a:]--Trumpet.

  Rē[a:]--Life essence, or principle.

  Rûh[a:]--Governor.

  Roûv[a:] nû Odaliss[a:]--Homes for the favored ones.

  Roûv[a:]--Favored.

  R[a:]û--Same meaning as oir[a:]h. (Pronounced R[a:]hoo.)

  Ruvacca plimos--Trumpet flower, or plant.

  Ritza--Town.


  S.

  Syffondû--Museum.

  Samman[a:]h--Collegiate school.

  Soitzen--Tramway. A gives the plural, as soitzena.

  Somû Ikaton--Blessing giver.

  Soiv[a:]--Park. Soiv[a:][a:], parks.

  Sēlon[a:] Vallo[a:]--Wife of Omanos Fûnh[a:], and mother of Sēlon[a:]
  Vallo[a:] Fûnh[a:].

  Sauv[a:]--A non-corrosive metal.

  Sylvian--Sister of Sēlona Vallo[a:], wife of Omanos Fûnh[a:].


  T.

  Tsûf[=a]len--Teachers of divine mysteries.

  Tûla--Berry.

  Tsûvon--Bird.

  Thon eyam[a:] Yanos--Infinite, intelligent energy.

  Tylû--City. Tylûs[a:][a:], cities.

  Testo--Death, the killer.


  U.

  Ufan--Personal pronoun, you.


  V.

  Varû testo--Death fire.

  Varû--Fire.

  Vybo--Gold. Also it signifies glittering, shining, brilliant, and
  sparkling.

  Voss[a:]--Leaf. Climber. Vossal[a:][a:], climbers. The use of
  the word determines its significance.

  Voch[a:]--An animal resembling a cow, but much larger.

  Voûhoid[a:]--Resembles a pipe organ.


  W.

  Wan[a:] vinostû yarû--Expiatory fire fountain.


  Y.

  Yanû--Gem, or jewel.

  Yento--A place of punishment for disobedient gods and goddesses.

  Yoidas hû[a:]--Bow shaped, or bent.

  Yoihod[a:]--Priest. S gives the plural.

  Yoitan--Tempest. Storm. Tornado.

  Yoitan[a:]--Severe storm.

  Yoitano--Tornado. The suffixes a, or o, determining the degree of
  the disturbance.

  Yoihodas[=a]--Priestess. Yoihodass[a:][a:], priestesses.


  Z.

  Zenno--God.

  Zenn[a:]--Goddess.

  Zēon--A horselike animal.

  Zindo--God of rain and snow.

  Zētos--World, applied to Ento.

  Zim--The most Sacred Temple of Ento.

  Zēnosa[a:]--The deific ones.


NUMBERS.

 Fon--1.

 Itû--2.

 Mēos--3.

 Len--4.

 Vodû--5.

 Mûen--6.

 Ofen--7.

 Zû--8.

 Tēvon--9.

 Rûy[a:]--10.

 Yodis--11.

 Fonitû--12.

 Rûy[a:]--10.

 It[a:]--20.

 Mēos[a:]--30.

 Lēn[a:]--40.

 Vod[a:]--50.

 Mûen[a:]--60.

 Ofēn[a:]--70.

 Zû[a:]--80.

 Tēvon[a:]--90.

 Ryzo--100.


COLORS.

 White--Vil.

 Red--Ilo.

 Yellow--Hinifro.

 Green--Mostu.

 Blue--Grel.

 Purple--Apru.

 Violet--Lub[a:].

 Brown--Ikro.

 Black--Gilnas.

 Orange--Drufi.


PERSONAL PRONOUNS.

 Efon--I.

 Onos--We.

 Ufan--You.

 Nofan--Thou.

 Noifan--Thee.

 Neffan--Thy.

 Tofan--He.

 Toifan--She.

 Ista--It.

 Tsya--They.

 Esto. Ye.

 V[a:]hû[a:]--Day.

 Vahua[a:]--Days.

 Voina--Night.

 Voinaa--Nights.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Journeys to the Planet Mars or Our
Mission to Ento, by Sara Weiss

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 61253 ***
