The Project Gutenberg eBook of The mirrors of Tuzun Thune, by Robert
E. Howard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The mirrors of Tuzun Thune

Author: Robert E. Howard

Illustrator: DOAK

Release Date: May 29, 2023 [eBook #70879]

Language: English

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRRORS OF TUZUN
THUNE ***





                      THE MIRRORS of TUZUN THUNE

                           ROBERT E. HOWARD

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                      Weird Tales September 1929.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


                "A wild, weird clime that lieth sublime
                 Out of Space, out of Time."
                                                 --Poe.


There comes, even to kings, the time of great weariness. Then the gold
of the throne is brass, the silk of the palace becomes drab. The gems
in the diadem and upon the fingers of the women sparkle drearily like
the ice of the white seas; the speech of men is as the empty rattle of
a jester's bell and the feel comes of things unreal; even the sun is
copper in the sky and the breath of the green ocean is no longer fresh.

Kull sat upon the throne of Valusia and the hour of weariness was upon
him. They moved before him in an endless, meaningless panorama, men,
women, priests, events and shadows of events; things seen and things
to be attained. But like shadows they came and went, leaving no trace
upon his consciousness, save that of a great mental fatigue. Yet Kull
was not tired. There was a longing in him for things beyond himself
and beyond the Valusian court. An unrest stirred in him and strange,
luminous dreams roamed his soul. At his bidding there came to him Brule
the Spear-slayer, warrior of Pictland, from the islands beyond the West.

"Lord king, you are tired of the life of the court. Come with me upon
my galley and let us roam the tides for a space."

"Nay." Kull rested his chin moodily upon his mighty hand. "I am weary
beyond all these things. The cities hold no lure for me--and the
borders are quiet. I hear no more the sea-songs I heard when I lay as
a boy on the booming crags of Atlantis, and the night was alive with
blazing stars. No more do the green woodlands beckon me as of old.
There is a strangeness upon me and a longing beyond life's longings.
Go!"

Brule went forth in a doubtful mood, leaving the king brooding upon his
throne. Then to Kull stole a girl of the court and whispered:

"Great king, seek Tuzun Thune, the wizard. The secrets of life and
death are his, and the stars in the sky and the lands beneath the seas."

Kull looked at the girl. Fine gold was her hair and her violet eyes
were slanted strangely; she was beautiful, but her beauty meant little
to Kull.

"Tuzun Thune," he repeated. "Who is he?"

"A wizard of the Elder Race. He lives here, in Valusia, by the Lake of
Visions in the House of a Thousand Mirrors. All things are known to
him, lord king; he speaks with the dead and holds converse with the
demons of the Lost Lands."

Kull arose.

"I will seek out this mummer; but no word of my going, do you hear?"

"I am your slave, my lord." And she sank to her knees meekly, but the
smile of her scarlet mouth was cunning behind Kull's back and the gleam
of her narrow eyes was crafty.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kull came to the house of Tuzun Thune, beside the Lake of Visions. Wide
and blue stretched the waters of the lake and many a fine palace rose
upon its banks; many swan-winged pleasure boats drifted lazily upon its
hazy surface and evermore there came the sound of soft music.

Tall and spacious, but unpretentious, rose the House of a Thousand
Mirrors. The great doors stood open and Kull ascended the broad stair
and entered, unannounced. There in a great chamber, whose walls were of
mirrors, he came upon Tuzun Thune, the wizard. The man was ancient as
the hills of Zalgara; like wrinkled leather was his skin, but his cold
gray eyes were like sparks of sword steel.

"Kull of Valusia, my house is yours," said he, bowing with old-time
courtliness and motioning Kull to a throne-like chair.

"You are a wizard, I have heard," said Kull bluntly, resting his chin
upon his hand and fixing his somber eyes upon the man's face. "Can you
do wonders?"

The wizard stretched forth his hand; his fingers opened and closed like
a bird's claws.

"Is that not a wonder--that this blind flesh obeys the thoughts of my
mind? I walk, I breathe, I speak--are they all not wonders?"

Kull meditated awhile, then spoke. "Can you summon up demons?"

"Aye. I can summon up a demon more savage than any in ghostland--by
smiting you in the face."

Kull started, then nodded. "But the dead, can you talk to the dead?"

"I talk with the dead always--as I am talking now. Death begins with
birth and each man begins to die when he is born; even now you are
dead, King Kull, because you were born."

"But you, you are older than men become; do wizards never die?"

"Men die when their time comes. No later, no sooner. Mine has not come."

Kull turned these answers over in his mind.

"Then it would seem that the greatest wizard of Valusia is no more than
an ordinary man, and I have been duped in coming here."

Tuzun Thune shook his head. "Men are but men, and the greatest men are
they who soonest learn the simpler things. Nay, look into my mirrors,
Kull."

The ceiling was a great many mirrors, and the walls were mirrors,
perfectly jointed, yet many mirrors of many sizes and shapes.

"Mirrors are the world, Kull," droned the wizard. "Gaze into my mirrors
and be wise."

Kull chose one at random and looked into it intently. The mirrors upon
the opposite wall were reflected there, reflecting others, so that he
seemed to be gazing down a long, luminous corridor, formed by mirror
behind mirror; and far down this corridor moved a tiny figure. Kull
looked long ere he saw that the figure was the reflection of himself.
He gazed and a queer feeling of pettiness came over him; it seemed that
that tiny figure was the true Kull, representing the real proportions
of himself. So he moved away and stood before another.

"Look closely, Kull. That is the mirror of the past," he heard the
wizard say.

Gray fogs obscured the vision, great billows of mist, ever heaving
and changing like the ghost of a great river; through these fogs Kull
caught swift fleeting visions of horror and strangeness; beasts and men
moved there and shapes neither men nor beasts; great exotic blossoms
glowed through the grayness; tall tropic trees towered high over
reeking swamps, where reptilian monsters wallowed and bellowed; the sky
was ghastly with flying dragons and the restless seas rocked and roared
and beat endlessly along the muddy beaches. Man was not, yet man was
the dream of the gods and strange were the nightmare forms that glided
through the noisome jungles. Battle and onslaught were there, and
frightful love. Death was there, for Life and Death go hand in hand.
Across the slimy beaches of the world sounded the bellowing of the
monsters, and incredible shapes loomed through the steaming curtain of
the incessant rain.

"This is of the future."

Kull looked in silence.

"See you--what?"

"A strange world," said Kull heavily. "The Seven Empires are crumbled
to dust and are forgotten. The restless green waves roar for many a
fathom above the eternal hills of Atlantis; the mountains of Lemuria of
the West are the islands of an unknown sea. Strange savages roam the
elder lands and new lands flung strangely from the deeps, defiling the
elder shrines. Valusia is vanished and all the nations of today; they
of tomorrow are strangers. They know us not."

"Time strides onward," said Tuzun Thune calmly. "We live today; what
care we for tomorrow--or yesterday? The Wheel turns and nations rise
and fall; the world changes, and times return to savagery to rise again
through the long ages. Ere Atlantis was, Valusia was, and ere Valusia
was, the Elder Nations were. Aye, we, too, trampled the shoulders of
lost tribes in our advance. You, who have come from the green sea hills
of Atlantis to seize the ancient crown of Valusia, you think my tribe
is old, we who held these lands ere the Valusians came out of the East,
in the days before there were men in the sea lands. But men were here
when the Elder Tribes rode out of the waste lands, and men before men,
tribe before tribe. The nations pass and are forgotten, for that is the
destiny of man."

"Yes," said Kull. "Yet is it not a pity that the beauty and glory of
men should fade like smoke on a summer sea?"

"For what reason, since that is their destiny? I brood not over the
lost glories of my race, nor do I labor for races to come. Live now,
Kull, live now. The dead are dead; the unborn are not. What matters
men's forgetfulness of you when you have forgotten yourself in the
silent worlds of death? Gaze in my mirrors and be wise."

Kull chose another mirror and gazed into it.

"That is the mirror of the deepest magic; what see ye, Kull?"

"Naught but myself."

"Look closely, Kull; is it in truth you?"

Kull stared into the great mirror, and the image that was his
reflection returned his gaze.

"I come before this mirror," mused Kull, chin on fist, "and I bring
this man to life. This is beyond my understanding, since first I saw
him in the still waters of the lakes of Atlantis, till I saw him
again in the gold-rimmed mirrors of Valusia. He is I, a shadow of
myself, part of myself--I can bring him into being or slay him at my
will; yet"--he halted, strange thoughts whispering through the vast
dim recesses of his mind like shadowy bats flying through a great
cavern--"yet where is he when I stand not in front of a mirror? May it
be in man's power thus lightly to form and destroy a shadow of life
and existence? How do I know that when I step back from the mirror he
vanishes into the void of Naught?

"Nay, by Valka, am I the man or is he? Which of us is the ghost of
the other? Mayhap these mirrors are but windows through which we look
into another world. Does he think the same of me? Am I no more than a
shadow, a reflection of himself--to him, as he to me? And if I am the
ghost, what sort of a world lives upon the other side of this mirror?
What armies ride there and what kings rule? This world is all I know.
Knowing naught of any other, how can I judge? Surely there are green
hills there and booming seas and wide plains where men ride to battle.
Tell me, wizard who are wiser than most men, tell me, are there worlds
beyond our worlds?"

"A man has eyes, let him see," answered the wizard. "Who would see must
first believe."

       *       *       *       *       *

The hours drifted by and Kull still sat before the mirrors of Tuzun
Thune, gazing into that which depicted himself. Sometimes it seemed
that he gazed upon hard shallowness; at other times gigantic depths
seemed to loom before him. Like the surface of the sea was the mirror
of Tuzun Thune; hard as the sea in the sun's slanting beams, in
the darkness of the stars, when no eye can pierce her deeps; vast
and mystic as the sea when the sun smites her in such way that the
watcher's breath is caught at the glimpse of tremendous abysses. So was
the mirror in which Kull gazed.

At last the king rose with a sigh and took his departure still
wondering. And Kull came again to the House of a Thousand Mirrors;
day after day he came and sat for hours before the mirror. The eyes
looked out at him, identical with his, yet Kull seemed to sense a
difference--a reality that was not of him. Hour upon hour he would
stare with strange intensity into the mirror; hour after hour the image
gave back his gaze.

The business of the palace and of the council went neglected. The
people murmured; Kull's stallion stamped restlessly in his stable and
Kull's warriors diced and argued aimlessly with one another. Kull
heeded not. At times he seemed on the point of discovering some vast,
unthinkable secret. He no longer thought of the image in the mirror as
a shadow of himself; the thing, to him, was an entity, similar in outer
appearance, yet basically as far from Kull himself as the poles are
far apart. The image, it seemed to Kull, had an individuality apart
from Kull's; he was no more dependent on Kull than Kull was dependent
on him. And day by day Kull doubted in which world he really lived; was
he the shadow, summoned at will by the other? Did he instead of the
other live in a world of delusion, the shadow of the real world?

Kull began to wish that he might enter the personality beyond the
mirror for a space, to see what might be seen; yet should he manage
to go beyond that door could he ever return? Would he find a world
identical with the one in which he moved? A world, of which his was but
a ghostly reflection? Which was reality and which illusion?

At times Kull halted to wonder how such thoughts and dreams had come
to enter his mind and at times he wondered if they came of his own
volition or--here his thoughts would become mazed. His meditations were
his own; no man ruled his thoughts and he would summon them at his
pleasure; yet could he? Were they not as bats, coming and going, not at
his pleasure but at the bidding or ruling of--of whom? The gods? The
Women who wove the webs of Fate? Kull could come to no conclusion, for
at each mental step he became more and more bewildered in a hazy gray
fog of illusory assertions and refutations. This much he knew: that
strange visions entered his mind, like bats flying unbidden from the
whispering void of non-existence; never had he thought these thoughts,
but now they ruled his mind, sleeping and waking, so that he seemed
to walk in a daze at times; and his sleep was fraught with strange,
monstrous dreams.

"Tell me, wizard," he said, sitting before the mirror, eyes fixed
intently upon his image, "how can I pass yon door? For of a truth, I
am not sure that that is the real world and this the shadow; at least,
that which I see must exist in some form."

"See and believe," droned the wizard. "Man must believe to accomplish.
Form is shadow, substance is illusion, materiality is dream; man is
because he believes he is; what is man but a dream of the gods? Yet man
can be that which he wishes to be; form and substance, they are but
shadows. The mind, the ego, the essence of the god-dream--that is real,
that is immortal. See and believe, if you would accomplish, Kull."

The king did not fully understand; he never fully understood the
enigmatical utterances of the wizard, yet they struck somewhere in
his being a dim responsive chord. So day after day he sat before the
mirrors of Tuzun Thune. Ever the wizard lurked behind him like a shadow.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then came a day when Kull seemed to catch glimpses of strange lands;
there flitted across his consciousness dim thoughts and recognitions.
Day by day he had seemed to lose touch with the world; all things had
seemed each succeeding day more ghostly and unreal; only the man in the
mirror seemed like reality. Now Kull seemed to be close to the doors
of some mightier worlds; giant vistas gleamed fleetingly; the fogs of
unreality thinned; "form is shadow, substance is illusion; they are but
shadows" sounded as if from some far country of his consciousness. He
remembered the wizard's words and it seemed to him that now he almost
understood--form and substance, could not he change himself at will, if
he knew the master key that opened this door? What worlds within what
worlds awaited the bold explorer?

The man in the mirror seemed smiling at him--closer, closer--a fog
enwrapped all and the reflection dimmed suddenly--Kull knew a sensation
of fading, of change, of merging----

"Kull!" the yell split the silence into a million vibratory fragments!

[Illustration: "Kull!" The yell split the silence into a million
vibratory fragments.]

Mountains crashed and worlds tottered as Kull, hurled back by that
frantic shout, made a superhuman effort, how or why he did not know.

A crash, and Kull stood in the room of Tuzun Thune before a shattered
mirror, mazed and half blind with bewilderment. There before him lay
the body of Tuzun Thune, whose time had come at last, and above him
stood Brule the Spear-slayer, sword dripping red and eyes wide with a
kind of horror.

"Valka!" swore the warrior. "Kull, it was time I came!"

"Aye, yet what happened?" The king groped for words.

"Ask this traitress," answered the Spear-slayer, indicating a girl who
crouched in terror before the king; Kull saw that it was she who first
sent him to Tuzun Thune. "As I came in I saw you fading into yon mirror
as smoke fades into the sky, by Valka! Had I not seen I would not have
believed--you had almost vanished when my shout brought you back."

"Aye," muttered Kull, "I had almost gone beyond the door that time."

"This fiend wrought most craftily," said Brule. "Kull, do you not now
see how he spun and flung over you a web of magic? Kaanuub of Blaal
plotted with this wizard to do away with you, and this wench, a girl of
Elder Race, put the thought in your mind so that you would come here.
Kananu of the council learned of the plot today; I know not what you
saw in that mirror, but with it Tuzun Thune enthralled your soul and
almost by his witchery he changed your body to mist----"

"Aye," Kull was still mazed. "But being a wizard, having knowledge of
all the ages and despising gold, glory and position, what could Kaanuub
offer Tuzun Thune that would make of him a foul traitor?"

"Gold, power and position," grunted Brule. "The sooner you learn that
men are men whether wizard, king or thrall, the better you will rule,
Kull. Now what of her?"

"Naught, Brule," as the girl whimpered and groveled at Kull's feet.
"She was but a tool. Rise, child, and go your ways; none shall harm
you."

Alone with Brule, Kull looked for the last time on the mirrors of Tuzun
Thune.

"Mayhap he plotted and conjured, Brule; nay, I doubt you not, yet--was
it his witchery that was changing me to thin mist, or had I stumbled on
a secret? Had you not brought me back, had I faded in dissolution or
had I found worlds beyond this?"

Brule stole a glance at the mirrors, and twitched his shoulders as if
he shuddered. "Aye. Tuzun Thune stored the wisdom of all the hells
here. Let us begone, Kull, ere they bewitch me, too."

"Let us go, then," answered Kull, and side by side they went forth from
the House of a Thousand Mirrors--where, mayhap, are prisoned the souls
of men.

       *       *       *       *       *

None look now in the mirrors of Tuzun Thune. The pleasure boats shun
the shore where stands the wizard's house and no one goes in the
house or to the room where Tuzun Thune's dried and withered carcass
lies before the mirrors of illusion. The place is shunned as a place
accursed, and though it stands for a thousand years to come, no
footsteps shall echo there. Yet Kull upon his throne meditates often
upon the strange wisdom and untold secrets hidden there and wonders....

For there are worlds beyond worlds, as Kull knows, and whether the
wizard bewitched him by words or by mesmerism, vistas did open to the
king's gaze beyond that strange door, and Kull is less sure of reality
since he gazed into the mirrors of Tuzun Thune.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRRORS OF TUZUN
THUNE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
