The Project Gutenberg eBook of Kings of the night
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Kings of the night

Author: Robert E. Howard

Illustrator: Hugh Rankin
        C. C. Senf

Release date: January 1, 2026 [eBook #77604]

Language: English

Original publication: Indianapolis, IN: Popular Fiction Publishing Company, 1930

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan & the online Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at https://www.pgdpcanada.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KINGS OF THE NIGHT ***




                          Kings of the Night

                          BY ROBERT E. HOWARD

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                      Weird Tales November 1930.]


    The Cæsar lolled on his ivory throne--
        His iron legions came
    To break a king in a land unknown,
        And a race without a name.

              --_The Song of Bran_


The dagger flashed downward. A sharp cry broke in a gasp. The form on
the rough altar twitched convulsively and lay still. The jagged flint
edge sawed at the crimsoned breast, and thin bony fingers, ghastly
dyed, tore out the still twitching heart. Under matted white brows,
sharp eyes gleamed with a ferocious intensity.

Besides the slayer, four men stood about the crude pile of stones that
formed the altar of the God of Shadows. One was of medium height,
lithely built, scantily clad, whose black hair was confined by a narrow
iron band in the center of which gleamed a single red jewel. Of the
others, two were dark like the first. But where he was lithe, they were
stocky and misshapen, with knotted limbs, and tangled hair falling
over sloping brows. His face denoted intelligence and implacable will;
theirs merely a beast-like ferocity. The fourth man had little in
common with the rest. Nearly a head taller, though his hair was black
as theirs, his skin was comparatively light and he was gray-eyed. He
eyed the proceedings with little favor.

And, in truth, Cormac of Connacht was little at ease. The Druids of
his own isle of Erin had strange dark rites of worship, but nothing
like this. Dark trees shut in this grim scene, lit by a single torch.
Through the branches moaned an eery night-wind. Cormac was alone
among men of a strange race and he had just seen the heart of a man
ripped from his still pulsing body. Now the ancient priest, who looked
scarcely human, was glaring at the throbbing thing. Cormac shuddered,
glancing at him who wore the jewel. Did Bran Mak Morn, king of the
Picts, believe that this white-bearded old butcher could foretell
events by scanning a bleeding human heart? The dark eyes of the king
were inscrutable. There were strange depths to the man that Cormac
could not fathom, nor any other man.

"The portents are good!" exclaimed the priest wildly, speaking more
to the two chieftains than to Bran. "Here from the pulsing heart of a
captive Roman I read--defeat for the arms of Rome! Triumph for the sons
of the heather!"

The two savages murmured beneath their breath, their fierce eyes
smoldering.

"Go and prepare your clans for battle," said the king, and they
lumbered away with the ape-like gait assumed by such stunted giants.
Paying no more heed to the priest who was examining the ghastly
ruin on the altar, Bran beckoned to Cormac. The Gael followed him
with alacrity. Once out of that grim grove, under the starlight, he
breathed more freely. They stood on an eminence, looking out over long
swelling undulations of gently waving heather. Near at hand a few
fires twinkled, their fewness giving scant evidence of the hordes of
tribesmen who lay close by. Beyond these were more fires and beyond
these still more, which last marked the camp of Cormac's own men,
hard-riding, hard-fighting Gaels, who were of that band which was just
beginning to get a foothold on the western coast of Caledonia--the
nucleus of what was later to become the kingdom of Dalriadia. To the
left of these, other fires gleamed.

And far away to the south were more fires--mere pinpoints of light. But
even at that distance the Pictish king and his Celtic ally could see
that these fires were laid out in regular order.

"The fires of the legions," muttered Bran. "The fires that have lit a
path around the world. The men who light those fires have trampled the
races under their iron heels. And now--we of the heather have our backs
at the wall. What will fall on the morrow?"

"Victory for us, says the priest," answered Cormac.

Bran made an impatient gesture. "Moonlight on the ocean. Wind in the
fir tops. Do you think that I put faith in such mummery? Or that I
enjoyed the butchery of a captive legionary? I must hearten my people;
it was for Gron and Bocah that I let old Gonar read the portents. The
warriors will fight better."

"And Gonar?"

Bran laughed. "Gonar is too old to believe--anything. He was high
priest of the Shadows a score of years before I was born. He claims
direct descent from that Gonar who was a wizard in the days of Brule,
the Spear-slayer who was the first of my line. No man knows how old he
is--sometimes I think he is the original Gonar himself!"

"At least," said a mocking voice, and Cormac started as a dim shape
appeared at his side, "at least I have learned that in order to keep
the faith and trust of the people, a wise man must appear to be a fool.
I know secrets that would blast even your brain, Bran, should I speak
them. But in order that the people may believe in me, I must descend to
such things as they think proper magic--and prance and yell and rattle
snakeskins, and dabble about in human blood and chicken livers."

Cormac looked at the ancient with new interest. The semi-madness of
his appearance had vanished. He was no longer the charlatan, the
spell-mumbling shaman. The starlight lent him a dignity which seemed
to increase his very height, so that he stood like a white-bearded
patriarch.

"Bran, your doubt lies there." The lean arm pointed to the fourth ring
of fires.

"Aye," the king nodded gloomily. "Cormac--you know as well as I.
Tomorrow's battle hinges upon that circle of fires. With the chariots
of the Britons and your own Western horsemen, our success would be
certain, but--surely the devil himself is in the heart of every
Northman! You know how I trapped that band--how they swore to fight for
me against Rome! And now that their chief, Rognar, is dead, they swear
that they will be led only by a king of their own race! Else they will
break their vow and go over to the Romans. Without them we are doomed,
for we can not change our former plan."

"Take heart, Bran," said Gonar. "Touch the jewel in your iron crown.
Mayhap it will bring you aid."

Bran laughed bitterly. "Now you talk as the people think. I am no fool
to twist with empty words. What of the gem? It is a strange one, truth,
and has brought me luck ere now. But I need now, no jewels, but the
allegiance of three hundred fickle Northmen who are the only warriors
among us who may stand the charge of the legions on foot."

"But the jewel, Bran, the jewel!" persisted Gonar.

"Well, the jewel!" cried Bran impatiently. "It is older than this
world. It was old when Atlantis and Lemuria sank into the sea. It was
given to Brule, the Spear-slayer, first of my line, by the Atlantean
Kull, king of Valusia, in the days when the world was young. But shall
that profit us now?"

"Who knows?" asked the wizard obliquely. "Time and space exist not.
There was no past, and there shall be no future. NOW is all. All
things that ever were, are, or ever will be, transpire _now_. Man is
forever at the center of what we call time and space. I have gone into
yesterday and tomorrow and both were as real as today--which is like
the dreams of ghosts! But let me sleep and talk with Gonar. Mayhap he
shall aid us."

"What means he?" asked Cormac, with a slight twitching of his
shoulders, as the priest strode away in the shadows.

"He has ever said that the first Gonar comes to him in his dreams and
talks with him," answered Bran. "I have seen him perform deeds that
seemed beyond human ken. I know not. I am but an unknown king with an
iron crown, trying to lift a race of savages out of the slime into
which they have sunk. Let us look to the camps."

       *       *       *       *       *

As they walked Cormac wondered. By what strange freak of fate had such
a man risen among this race of savages, survivors of a darker, grimmer
age? Surely he was an atavism, an original type of the days when the
Picts ruled all Europe, before their primitive empire fell before the
bronze swords of the Gauls. Cormac knew how Bran, rising by his own
efforts from the negligent position of the son of a Wolf clan chief,
had to an extent united the tribes of the heather and now claimed
kingship over all Caledon. But his rule was loose and much remained
before the Pictish clans would forget their feuds and present a solid
front to foreign foes. On the battle of the morrow, the first pitched
battle between the Picts under their king and the Romans, hinged the
future of the rising Pictish kingdom.

Bran and his ally walked through the Pictish camp where the swart
warriors lay sprawled about their small fires, sleeping or gnawing
half-cooked food. Cormac was impressed by their silence. A thousand
men camped here, yet the only sounds were occasional low guttural
intonations. The silence of the Stone Age rested in the souls of these
men.

They were all short--most of them crooked of limb. Giant dwarfs; Bran
Mak Morn was a tall man among them. Only the older men were bearded
and they scantily, but their black hair fell about their eyes so that
they peered fiercely from under the tangle. They were barefoot and clad
scantily in wolf-skins. Their arms consisted in short barbed swords of
iron, heavy black bows, arrows tipped with flint, iron and copper, and
stone-headed mallets. Defensive armor they had none, save for a crude
shield of hide-covered wood; many had worked bits of metal into their
tangled manes as a slight protection against sword-cuts. Some few, sons
of long lines of chiefs, were smooth-limbed and lithe like Bran, but in
the eyes of all gleamed the unquenchable savagery of the primeval.

These men are fully savages, thought Cormac, worse than the Gauls,
Britons and Germans. Can the old legends be true--that they reigned in
a day when strange cities rose where now the sea rolls? And that they
survived the flood that washed those gleaming empires under, sinking
again into that savagery from which they once had risen?

Close to the encampment of the tribesmen were the fires of a group of
Britons--members of fierce tribes who lived south of the Roman Wall but
who dwelt in the hills and forests to the west and defied the power of
Rome. Powerfully built men they were, with blazing blue eyes and shocks
of tousled yellow hair, such men as had thronged the Ceanntish beaches
when Cæsar brought the Eagles into the Isles. These men, like the
Picts, wore no armor, and were clad scantily in coarse-worked cloth and
deerskin sandals. They bore small round bucklers of hard wood, braced
with bronze, to be worn on the left arm, and long heavy bronze swords
with blunt points. Some had bows, though the Britons were indifferent
archers. Their bows were shorter than the Picts' and effective only at
close range. But ranged close by their fires were the weapons that had
made the name Briton a word of terror to Pict, Roman and Norse raider
alike. Within the circle of firelight stood fifty bronze chariots with
long cruel blades curving out from the sides. One of these blades
could dismember half a dozen men at once. Tethered close by under the
vigilant eyes of their guards grazed the chariot horses--big, rangy
steeds, swift and powerful.

"Would that we had more of them!" mused Bran. "With a thousand chariots
and my bowmen I could drive the legions into the sea."

"The free British tribes must eventually fall before Rome," said
Cormac. "It would seem they would rush to join you in your war."

Bran made a helpless gesture. "The fickleness of the Celt. They can
not forget old feuds. Our ancient men have told us how they would not
even unite against Cæsar when the Romans first came. They will not make
head against a common foe together. These men came to me because of
some dispute with their chief, but I can not depend on them when they
are not actually fighting."

Cormac nodded. "I know; Cæsar conquered Gaul by playing one tribe
against another. My own people shift and change with the waxing
and waning of the tides. But of all Celts, the Cymry are the most
changeable, the least stable. Not many centuries ago my own Gaelic
ancestors wrested Erin from the Cymric Danaans, because though they
outnumbered us, they opposed us as separate tribes, rather than as a
nation."

"And so these Cymric Britons face Rome," said Bran. "These will aid us
on the morrow. Further I can not say. But how shall I expect loyalty
from alien tribes, who am not sure of my own people? Thousands lurk in
the hills, holding aloof. I am king in name only. Let me win tomorrow
and they will flock to my standard; if I lose, they will scatter like
birds before a cold wind."

       *       *       *       *       *

A chorus of rough welcome greeted the two leaders as they entered the
camp of Cormac's Gaels. Five hundred in number they were, tall rangy
men, black-haired and gray-eyed mainly, with the bearing of men who
lived by war alone. While there was nothing like close discipline
among them, there was an air of more system and practical order than
existed in the lines of the Picts and Britons. These men were of the
last Celtic race to invade the Isles and their barbaric civilization
was of much higher order than that of their Cymric kin. The ancestors
of the Gaels had learned the arts of war on the vast plains of Scythia
and at the courts of the Pharaohs where they had fought as mercenaries
of Egypt, and much of what they learned they brought into Ireland with
them. Excelling in metal work, they were armed, not with clumsy bronze
swords, but with high-grade weapons of iron.

They were clad in well-woven kilts and leathern sandals. Each wore a
light shirt of chain mail and a vizorless helmet, but this was all
of their defensive armor. Celts, Gaelic or Brythonic, were prone to
judge a man's valor by the amount of armor he wore. The Britons who
faced Cæsar deemed the Romans cowards because they cased themselves in
metal, and many centuries later the Irish clans thought the same of the
mail-clad Norman knights of Strongbow.

Cormac's warriors were horsemen. They neither knew nor esteemed
the use of the bow. They bore the inevitable round, metal-braced
buckler, dirks, long straight swords and light single-handed axes.
Their tethered horses grazed not far away--big-boned animals, not so
ponderous as those raised by the Britons, but swifter.

Bran's eyes lighted as the two strode through the camp. "These men are
keen-beaked birds of war! See how they whet their axes and jest of the
morrow! Would that the raiders in yon camp were as staunch as your men,
Cormac! Then would I greet the legions with a laugh when they come up
from the south tomorrow."

They were entering the circle of the Northmen fires. Three hundred men
sat about gambling, whetting their weapons and drinking deep of the
heather ale furnished them by their Pictish allies. These gazed upon
Bran and Cormac with no great friendliness. It was striking to note
the difference between them and the Picts and Celts--the difference
in their cold eyes, their strong moody faces, their very bearing.
Here was ferocity, and savagery, but not of the wild, upbursting fury
of the Celt. Here was fierceness backed by grim determination and
stolid stubbornness. The charge of the British clans was terrible,
overwhelming. But they had no patience; let them be balked of immediate
victory and they were likely to lose heart and scatter or fall to
bickering among themselves. There was the patience of the cold blue
North in these seafarers--a lasting determination that would keep them
stedfast to the bitter end, once their face was set toward a definite
goal.

As to personal stature, they were giants; massive yet rangy. That they
did not share the ideas of the Celts regarding armor was shown by the
fact that they were clad in heavy scale-mail shirts that reached below
mid-thigh, heavy horned helmets and hardened hide leggings, reinforced,
as were their shoes, with plates of iron. Their shields were huge
oval affairs of hard wood, hide and brass. As to weapons, they had
long iron-headed spears, heavy iron axes, and daggers. Some had long
wide-bladed swords.

Cormac scarcely felt at ease with the cold magnetic eyes of these
flaxen-haired men fixed upon him. He and they were hereditary foes,
even though they did chance to be fighting on the same side at
present--but were they?

A man came forward, a tall gaunt warrior on whose scarred, wolfish face
the flickering firelight reflected deep shadows. With his wolfskin
mantle flung carelessly about his wide shoulders, and the great horns
on his helmet adding to his height, he stood there in the swaying
shadows, like some half-human thing, a brooding shape of the dark
barbarism that was soon to engulf the world.

"Well, Wulfhere," said the Pictish king, "you have drunk the mead of
council and have spoken about the fires--what is your decision?"

The Northman's eyes flashed in the gloom. "Give us a king of our own
race to follow if you wish us to fight for you."

Bran flung out his hands. "Ask me to drag down the stars to gem your
helmets! Will not your comrades follow you?"

"Not against the legions," answered Wulfhere sullenly. "A king led us
on the viking path--a king must lead us against the Romans. And Rognar
is dead."

"I am a king," said Bran. "Will you fight for me if I stand at the tip
of your fight wedge?"

"A king of our own race," said Wulfhere doggedly. "We are all picked
men of the North. We fight for none but a king, and a king must lead
us--against the legions."

Cormac sensed a subtle threat in this repeated phrase.

"Here is a prince of Erin," said Bran. "Will you fight for the
Westerner?"

"We fight under no Celt, West or East," growled the viking, and a low
rumble of approval rose from the onlookers. "It is enough to fight by
their side."

The hot Gaelic blood rose in Cormac's brain and he pushed past Bran,
his hand on his sword. "How mean you that, pirate?"

Before Wulfhere could reply Bran interposed: "Have done! Will you fools
throw away the battle before it is fought, by your madness? What of
your oath, Wulfhere?"

"We swore it under Rognar; when he died from a Roman arrow we were
absolved of it. We will follow only a king--against the legions."

"But your comrades will follow you--against the heather people!"
snapped Bran.

"Aye," the Northman's eyes met his brazenly. "Send us a king or we join
the Romans tomorrow."

Bran snarled. In his rage he dominated the scene, dwarfing the huge men
who towered over him.

"Traitors! Liars! I hold your lives in my hand! Aye, draw your swords
if you will--Cormac, keep your blade in its sheath. These wolves will
not bite a king! Wulfhere--I spared your lives when I could have taken
them.

"You came to raid the countries of the South, sweeping down from the
northern sea in your galleys. You ravaged the coasts and the smoke
of burning villages hung like a cloud over the shores of Caledon. I
trapped you all when you were pillaging and burning--with the blood of
my people on your hands. I burned your long ships and ambushed you when
you followed. With thrice your number of bowmen who burned for your
lives hidden in the heathered hills about you, I spared you when we
could have shot you down like trapped wolves. Because I spared you, you
swore to come and fight for me."

"And shall we die because the Picts fight Rome?" rumbled a bearded
raider.

"Your lives are forfeit to me; you came to ravage the South. I did not
promise to send you all back to your homes in the North unharmed and
loaded with loot. Your vow was to fight one battle against Rome under
my standard. Then I will aid your survivors to build ships and you may
go where you will, with a goodly share of the plunder we take from
the legions. Rognar had kept his oath. But Rognar died in a skirmish
with Roman scouts and now you, Wulfhere the Dissension-breeder, you
stir up your comrades to dishonor themselves by that which a Northman
hates--the breaking of the sworn word."

"We break no oath," snarled the viking, and the king sensed the basic
Germanic stubbornness, far harder to combat than the fickleness of the
fiery Celts. "Give us a king, neither Pict, Gael nor Briton, and we
will die for you. If not--then we will fight tomorrow for the greatest
of all kings--the emperor of Rome!"

       *       *       *       *       *

For a moment Cormac thought that the Pictish king, in his black rage,
would draw and strike the Northman dead. The concentrated fury that
blazed in Bran's dark eyes caused Wulfhere to recoil and drop a hand to
his belt.

"Fool!" said Mak Morn in a low voice that vibrated with passion. "I
could sweep you from the earth before the Romans are near enough to
hear your death howls. Choose--fight for me on the morrow--or die
tonight under a black cloud of arrows, a red storm of swords, a dark
wave of chariots!"

At the mention of the chariots, the only arm of war that had ever
broken the Norse shield-wall, Wulfhere changed expression, but he held
his ground.

"War be it," he said doggedly. "Or a king to lead us!"

The Northmen responded with a short deep roar and a clash of swords
on shields. Bran, eyes blazing, was about to speak again when a white
shape glided silently into the ring of firelight.

"Soft words, soft words," said old Gonar tranquilly. "King, say no
more. Wulfhere, you and your fellows will fight for us if you have a
king to lead you?"

"We have sworn."

"Then be at ease," quoth the wizard; "for ere battle joins on the
morrow I will send you such a king as no man on earth has followed for
a hundred thousand years! A king neither Pict, Gael nor Briton, but
one to whom the emperor of Rome is as but a village headman!"

While they stood undecided, Gonar took the arms of Cormac and Bran.
"Come. And you, Northmen, remember your vow, and my promise which I
have never broken. Sleep now, nor think to steal away in the darkness
to the Roman camp, for if you escaped our shafts you would not escape
either my curse or the suspicions of the legionaries."

So the three walked away and Cormac, looking back, saw Wulfhere
standing by the fire, fingering his golden beard, with a look of
puzzled anger on his lean evil face.

       *       *       *       *       *

The three walked silently through the waving heather under the far-away
stars while the weird night-wind whispered ghostly secrets about them.

"Ages ago," said the wizard suddenly, "in the days when the world was
young, great lands rose where now the ocean roars. On these lands
thronged mighty nations and kingdoms. Greatest of all these was
Valusia--Land of Enchantment. Rome is as a village compared to the
splendor of the cities of Valusia. And the greatest king was Kull, who
came from the land of Atlantis to wrest the crown of Valusia from a
degenerate dynasty. The Picts who dwelt in the isles which now form the
mountain peaks of a strange land upon the Western Ocean, were allies of
Valusia, and the greatest of all the Pictish war-chiefs was Brule the
Spear-slayer, first of the line men call Mak Morn.

"Kull gave to Brule the jewel which you now wear in your iron crown,
oh king, after a strange battle in a dim land, and down the long ages
it has come to us, ever a sign of the Mak Morn, a symbol of former
greatness. When at last the sea rose and swallowed Valusia, Atlantis
and Lemuria, only the Picts survived and they were scattered and few.
Yet they began again the slow climb upward, and though many of the arts
of civilization were lost in the great flood, yet they progressed.
The art of metal-working was lost, so they excelled in the working of
flint. And they ruled all the new lands flung up by the sea and now
called Europe, until down from the north came younger tribes who had
scarce risen from the ape when Valusia reigned in her glory, and who,
dwelling in the icy lands about the Pole, knew naught of the lost
splendor of the Seven Empires and little of the flood that had swept
away half a world.

"And still they have come--Aryans, Celts, Germans, swarming down from
the great cradle of their race which lies near the Pole. So again was
the growth of the Pictish nation checked and the race hurled into
savagery. Erased from the earth, on the fringe of the world with our
backs to the wall we fight. Here in Caledon is the last stand of a once
mighty race. And we change. Our people have mixed with the savages of
an elder age which we drove into the North when we came into the Isles,
and now, save for their chieftains, such as thou, Bran, a Pict is
strange and abhorrent to look upon."

"True, true," said the king impatiently, "but what has that to do----"

"Kull, king of Valusia," said the wizard imperturbably, "was a
barbarian in his age as thou art in thine, though he ruled a mighty
empire by the weight of his sword. Gonar, friend of Brule, your first
ancestor, has been dead a hundred thousand years as we reckon time. Yet
I talked with him a scant hour agone."

"You talked with his ghost----"

"Or he with mine? Did I go back a hundred thousand years, or did he
come forward? If he came to me out of the past, it is not I who talked
with a dead man, but he who talked with a man unborn. Past, present
and future are one to a wise man. I talked to Gonar while he was alive;
likewise was I alive. In a timeless, spaceless land we met and he told
me many things."

The land was growing light with the birth of dawn. The heather waved
and bent in long rows before the dawn wind as bowing in worship of the
rising sun.

"The jewel in your crown is a magnet that draws down the eons," said
Gonar. "The sun is rising--and who comes out of the sunrise?"

Cormac and the king started. The sun was just lifting a red orb above
the eastern hills. And full in the glow, etched boldly against the
golden rim, a man suddenly appeared. They had not seen him come.
Against the golden birth of day he loomed colossal; a gigantic god from
the dawn of creation. Now as he strode toward them the waking hosts saw
him and sent up a sudden shout of wonder.

"Who--or what is it?" exclaimed Bran.

"Let us go to meet him, Bran," answered the wizard. "He is the king
Gonar has sent to save the people of Brule."




                                   2

    "I have reached these lands but newly
    From an ultimate dim Thule;
      From a wild weird clime that lieth sublime
      Out of Space--out of Time."

                        --Poe.


The army fell silent as Bran, Cormac and Gonar went toward the stranger
who approached in long swinging strides. As they neared him the
illusion of monstrous size vanished, but they saw he was a man of great
stature. At first Cormac thought him to be a Northman but a second
glance told him that nowhere before had he seen such a man. He was
built such like the vikings, at once massive and lithe--tigerish. But
his features were not as theirs, and his square-cut, lion-like mane of
hair was as black as Bran's own. Under heavy brows glittered eyes gray
as steel and cold as ice. His bronzed face, strong and inscrutable, was
clean-shaven, and the broad forehead betokened a high intelligence,
just as the firm jaw and thin lips showed willpower and courage.
But more than all, the bearing of him, the unconscious lion-like
stateliness, marked him as a natural king, a ruler of men.

Sandals of curious make were on his feet and he wore a pliant coat of
strangely meshed mail which came almost to his knees. A broad belt with
a great golden buckle encircled his waist, supporting a long straight
sword in a heavy leather scabbard. His hair was confined by a wide,
heavy golden band about his head.

Such was the man who paused before the silent group. He seemed slightly
puzzled, slightly amused. Recognition flickered in his eyes. He spoke
in a strange archaic Pictish which Cormac scarcely understood. His
voice was deep and resonant.

"Ha, Brule, Gonar did not tell me I would dream of you!"

For the first time in his life Cormac saw the Pictish king completely
thrown off his balance. He gaped, speechless. The stranger continued:

"And wearing the gem I gave you, in a circlet on your head! Last night
you wore it in a ring on your finger."

"Last night?" gasped Bran.

"Last night or a hundred thousand years ago--all one!" murmured Gonar
in evident enjoyment of the situation.

"I am not Brule," said Bran. "Are you mad to thus speak of a man dead a
hundred thousand years? He was first of my line."

The stranger laughed unexpectedly. "Well, now I know I am dreaming!
This will be a tale to tell Brule when I waken on the morrow! That I
went into the future and saw men claiming descent from the Spear-slayer
who is, as yet, not even married. No, you are not Brule, I see now,
though you have his eyes and his bearing. But he is taller and broader
in the shoulders. Yet you have his jewel--oh, well--anything can happen
in a dream, so I will not quarrel with you. For a time I thought I had
been transported to some other land in my sleep, and was in reality
awake in a strange country, for this is the clearest dream I ever
dreamed. Who are you?"

"I am Bran Mak Morn, king of the Caledonian Picts. And this ancient is
Gonar, a wizard, of the line of Gonar. And this warrior is Cormac na
Connacht, a prince of the isle of Erin."

The stranger slowly shook his lion-like head. "These words sound
strangely to me, save Gonar--and that one is not Gonar, though he too
is old. What land is this?"

"Caledon, or Alba, as the Gaels call it."

"And who are those squat ape-like warriors who watch us yonder, all
agape?"

"They are the Picts who own my rule."

"How strangely distorted folk are in dreams!" muttered the stranger.
"And who are those shock-headed men about the chariots?"

"They are Britons--Cymry from south of the Wall."

"What Wall?"

"The Wall built by Rome to keep the people of the heather out of
Britain."

"Britain?" the tone was curious. "I never heard of that land--and what
is Rome?"

"What!" cried Bran. "You never heard of Rome, the empire that rules the
world?"

"No empire rules the world," answered the other haughtily. "The
mightiest kingdom on earth is that wherein I reign."

"And who are you?"

"Kull of Atlantis, king of Valusia!"

Cormac felt a coldness trickle down his spine. The cold gray eyes were
unswerving--but this was incredible--monstrous--unnatural.

"Valusia!" cried Bran. "Why, man, the sea waves have rolled above the
spires of Valusia for untold centuries!"

Kull laughed outright. "What a mad nightmare this is! When Gonar put on
me the spell of deep sleep last night--or this night!--in the secret
room of the inner palace, he told me I would dream strange things, but
this is more fantastic than I reckoned. And the strangest thing is, I
know I am dreaming!"

Gonar interposed as Bran would have spoken. "Question not the acts of
the gods," muttered the wizard. "You are king because in the past you
have seen and seized opportunities. The gods or the first Gonar have
sent you this man. Let me deal with him."

Bran nodded, and while the silent army gaped in speechless wonder, just
within ear-shot, Gonar spoke: "Oh great king, you dream, but is not all
life a dream? How reckon you but that your former life is but a dream
from which you have just awakened? Now we dream-folk have our wars and
our peace, and just now a great host comes up from the south to destroy
the people of Brule. Will you aid us?"

Kull grinned with pure zest. "Aye! I have fought battles in dreams
ere now, have slain and been slain and was amazed when I woke from my
visions. And at times, as now, dreaming I have known I dreamed. See, I
pinch myself and feel it, but I know I dream for I have felt the pain
of fierce wounds, in dreams. Yes, people of my dream, I will fight for
you against the other dream-folk. Where are they?"

"And that you enjoy the dream more," said the wizard subtly, "forget
that it is a dream and pretend that by the magic of the first Gonar,
and the quality of the jewel you gave Brule, that now gleams on the
crown of the Morni, you have in truth been transported forward into
another, wilder age where the people of Brule fight for their life
against a stronger foe."

For a moment the man who called himself king of Valusia seemed
startled; a strange look of doubt, almost of fear, clouded his eyes.
Then he laughed.

"Good! Lead on, wizard."

But now Bran took charge. He had recovered himself and was at ease.
Whether he thought, like Cormac, that this was all a gigantic hoax
arranged by Gonar, he showed no sign.

"King Kull, see you those men yonder who lean on their long-shafted
axes as they gaze upon you?"

"The tall men with the golden hair and beards?"

"Aye--our success in the coming battle hinges on them. They swear to go
over to the enemy if we give them not a king to lead them--their own
having been slain. Will you lead them to battle?"

Kull's eyes glowed with appreciation. "They are men such as my own Red
Slayers, my picked regiment. I will lead them."

"Come then."

       *       *       *       *       *

The small group made their way down the slope, through throngs of
warriors who pushed forward eagerly to get a better view of the
stranger, then pressed back as he approached. An undercurrent of tense
whispering ran through the horde.

The Northmen stood apart in a compact group. Their cold eyes took in
Kull and he gave back their stares, taking in every detail of their
appearance.

"Wulfhere," said Bran, "we have brought you a king. I hold you to your
oath."

"Let him speak to us," said the viking harshly.

"He can not speak your tongue," answered Bran, knowing that the
Northmen knew nothing of the legends of his race. "He is a great king
of the South----"

"He comes out of the past," broke in the wizard calmly. "He was the
greatest of all kings, long ago."

"A dead man!" The vikings moved uneasily and the rest of the horde
pressed forward, drinking in every word. But Wulfhere scowled: "Shall a
ghost lead living men? You bring us a man you say is dead. We will not
follow a corpse."

"Wulfhere," said Bran in still passion, "you are a liar and a traitor.
You set us this task, thinking it impossible. You yearn to fight under
the Eagles of Rome. We have brought you a king neither Pict, Gael nor
Briton and you deny your vow!"

"Let him fight me, then!" howled Wulfhere in uncontrollable wrath,
swinging his ax about his head in a glittering arc. "If your dead man
overcomes me--then my people will follow you. If I overcome him, you
shall let us depart in peace to the camp of the legions!"

"Good!" said the wizard. "Do you agree, wolves of the North?"

A fierce yell and a brandishing of swords was the answer. Bran turned
to Kull, who had stood silent, understanding nothing of what was said.
But the Atlantean's eyes gleamed. Cormac felt that those cold eyes had
looked on too many such scenes not to understand something of what had
passed.

"This warrior says you must fight him for the leadership," said Bran,
and Kull, eyes glittering with growing battle-joy, nodded: "I guessed
as much. Give us space."

"A shield and a helmet!" shouted Bran, but Kull shook his head.

"I need none," he growled. "Back and give us room to swing our steel!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Men pressed back on each side, forming a solid ring about the two men,
who now approached each other warily. Kull had drawn his sword and the
great blade shimmered like a live thing in his hand. Wulfhere, scarred
by a hundred savage fights, flung aside his wolfskin mantle and came in
cautiously, fierce eyes peering over the top of his out-thrust shield,
ax half lifted in his right hand.

Suddenly when the warriors were still many feet apart Kull sprang.
His attack brought a gasp from men used to deeds of prowess; for like
a leaping tiger he shot through the air and his sword crashed on the
quickly lifted shield. Sparks flew and Wulfhere's ax hacked in, but
Kull was under its sweep and as it swished viciously above his head he
thrust upward and sprang out again, cat-like. His motions had been too
quick for the eye to follow. The upper edge of Wulfhere's shield showed
a deep cut, and there was a long rent in his mail shirt where Kull's
sword had barely missed the flesh beneath.

Cormac, trembling with the terrible thrill of the fight, wondered at
this sword that could thus slice through scale-mail. And the blow that
gashed the shield should have shattered the blade. Yet not a notch
showed in the Valusian steel! Surely this blade was forged by another
people in another age!

Now the two giants leaped again to the attack and like double strokes
of lightning their weapons crashed. Wulfhere's shield fell from his arm
in two pieces as the Atlantean's sword sheared clear through it, and
Kull staggered as the Northman's ax, driven with all the force of his
great body, descended on the golden circlet about his head. That blow
should have sheared through the gold like butter to split the skull
beneath, but the ax rebounded, showing a great notch in the edge. The
next instant the Northman was overwhelmed by a whirlwind of steel--a
storm of strokes delivered with such swiftness and power that he was
borne back as on the crest of a wave, unable to launch an attack of
his own. With all his tried skill he sought to parry the singing steel
with his ax. But he could only avert his doom for a few seconds; could
only for an instant turn the whistling blade that hewed off bits of his
mail, so close fell the blows. One of the horns flew from his helmet;
then the ax-head itself fell away, and the same blow that severed
the handle, bit through the viking's helmet into the scalp beneath.
Wulfhere was dashed to his knees, a trickle of blood starting down his
face.

Kull checked his second stroke, and tossing his sword to Cormac, faced
the dazed Northman weaponless. The Atlantean's eyes were blazing with
ferocious joy and he roared something in a strange tongue. Wulfhere
gathered his legs under him and bounded up, snarling like a wolf, a
dagger flashing into his hand. The watching horde gave tongue in a yell
that ripped the skies as the two bodies clashed. Kull's clutching hand
missed the Northman's wrist but the desperately lunging dagger snapped
on the Atlantean's mail, and dropping the useless hilt, Wulfhere locked
his arms about his foe in a bear-like grip that would have crushed the
ribs of a lesser man. Kull grinned tigerishly and returned the grapple,
and for a moment the two swayed on their feet. Slowly the black-haired
warrior bent his foe backward until it seemed his spine would snap.
With a howl that had nothing of the human in it, Wulfhere clawed
frantically at Kull's face, trying to tear out his eyes, then turned
his head and snapped his fang-like teeth into the Atlantean's arm. A
yell went up as a trickle of blood started: "He bleeds! He bleeds! He
is no ghost, after all, but a mortal man!"

Angered, Kull shifted his grip, shoving the frothing Wulfhere away from
him, and smote him terrifically under the ear with his right hand. The
viking landed on his back a dozen feet away. Then, howling like a wild
man, he leaped up with a stone in his hand and flung it. Only Kull's
incredible quickness saved his face; as it was, the rough edge of the
missile tore his cheek and inflamed him to madness. With a lion-like
roar he bounded upon his foe, enveloped him in an irresistible blast
of sheer fury, whirled him high above his head as if he were a child
and cast him a dozen feet away. Wulfhere pitched on his head and lay
still--broken and dead.

Dazed silence reigned for an instant; then from the Gaels went up a
thundering roar, and the Britons and Picts took it up, howling like
wolves, until the echoes of the shouts and the clangor of sword on
shield reached the ears of the marching legionaries, miles to the south.

"Men of the gray North," shouted Bran, "will you hold by your oath
_now_?"

The fierce souls of the Northmen were in their eyes as their spokesman
answered. Primitive, superstitious, steeped in tribal lore of fighting
gods and mythical heroes, they did not doubt that the black-haired
fighting man was some supernatural being sent by the fierce gods of
battle.

"Aye! Such a man as this we have never seen! Dead man, ghost or devil,
we will follow him, whether the trail lead to Rome or Valhalla!"

Kull understood the meaning, if not the words. Taking his sword from
Cormac with a word of thanks, he turned to the waiting Northmen and
silently held the blade toward them high above his head, in both
hands, before he returned it to its scabbard. Without understanding,
they appreciated the action. Blood-stained and disheveled, he was an
impressive picture of stately, magnificent barbarism.

"Come," said Bran, touching the Atlantean's arm; "a host is marching on
us and we have much to do. There is scant time to arrange our forces
before they will be upon us. Come to the top of yonder slope."

There the Pict pointed. They were looking down into a valley which ran
north and south, widening from a narrow gorge in the north until it
debouched upon a plain to the south. The whole valley was less than a
mile in length.

"Up this valley will our foes come," said the Pict, "because they have
wagons loaded with supplies and on all sides of this vale the ground is
too rough for such travel. Here we plan an ambush."

"I would have thought you would have had your men lying in wait long
before now," said Kull. "What of the scouts the enemy is sure to send
out?"

"The savages I lead would never have waited in ambush so long," said
Bran with a couch of bitterness. "I could not post them until I
was sure of the Northmen. Even so I had not dared to post them ere
now--even yet they may take panic from the drifting of a cloud or the
blowing of a leaf, and scatter like birds before a cold wind. King
Kull--the fate of the Pictish nation is at stake. I am called king of
the Picts, but my rule as yet is but a hollow mockery. The hills are
full of wild clans who refuse to fight for me. Of the thousand bowmen
now at my command, more than half are of my own clan.

"Some eighteen hundred Romans are marching against us. It is not a real
invasion, but much hinges upon it. It is the beginning of an attempt to
extend their boundaries. They plan to build a fortress a day's march
to the north of this valley. If they do, they will build other forts,
drawing bands of steel about the heart of the free people. If I win
this battle and wipe out this army, I will win a double victory. Then
the tribes will flock to me and the next invasion will meet a solid
wall of resistance. If I lose, the clans will scatter, fleeing into the
north until they can no longer flee, fighting as separate clans rather
than as one strong nation.

"I have a thousand archers, five hundred horsemen, fifty chariots with
their drivers and swordsmen--one hundred fifty men in all--and, thanks
to you, three hundred heavily armed Northern pirates. How would you
arrange your battle lines?"

"Well," said Kull, "I would have barricaded the north end of the
valley--no! That would suggest a trap. But I would block it with a
band of desperate men, like those you have given me to lead. Three
hundred could hold the gorge for a time against any number. Then, when
the enemy was engaged with these men to the narrow part of the valley,
I would have my archers shoot down into them until their ranks are
broken, from both sides of the vale. Then, having my horsemen concealed
behind one ridge and my chariots behind the other, I would charge with
both simultaneously and sweep the foe into a red ruin."

Bran's eyes glowed. "Exactly, king of Valusia. Such was my exact
plan----"

"But what of the scouts?"

"My warriors are like panthers; they hide under the noses of the
Romans. Those who ride into the valley will see only what we wish them
to see. Those who ride over the ridge will not come back to report. An
arrow is swift and silent.

"You see that the pivot of the whole thing depends on the men that
hold the gorge. They must be men who can fight on foot and resist the
charges of the heavy legionaries long enough for the trap to close.
Outside these Northmen I had no such force of men. My naked warriors
with their short swords could never stand such a charge for an instant.
Nor is the armor of the Celts made for such work; moreover, they are
not foot-fighters, and I need them elsewhere.

"So you see why I had such desperate need of the Northmen. Now will
you stand in the gorge with them and hold back the Romans until I can
spring the trap? Remember, most of you will die."

Kull smiled. "I have taken chances all my life, though Tu, chief
councillor, would say my life belongs to Valusia and I have no right to
so risk it----" His voice trailed off and a strange look flitted across
his face. "By Valka," said he, laughing uncertainly, "sometimes I
forget this is a dream! All seems so real. But it is--of course it is!
Well, then, if I die I will but awaken as I have done in times past.
Lead on, king of Caledon!"

Cormac, going to his warriors, wondered. Surely it was all a hoax;
yet--he heard the arguments of the warriors all about him as they
armed themselves and prepared to take their posts. The black-haired
king was Neid himself, the Celtic war-god; he was an antediluvian king
brought out of the past by Gonar; he was a mythical fighting man out of
Valhalla. He was no man at all but a ghost! No, he was mortal, for he
had bled. But the gods themselves bled, though they did not die. So the
controversies raged. At least, thought Cormac, if it was all a hoax
to inspire the warriors with the feeling of supernatural aid, it had
succeeded. The belief that Kull was more than a mortal man had fired
Celt, Pict and viking alike into a sort of inspired madness. And Cormac
asked himself--what did he himself believe? This man was surely one
from some far land--yet in his every look and action there was a vague
hint of a greater difference than mere distance of space--a hint of
alien Time, of misty abysses and gigantic gulfs of eons lying between
the black-haired stranger and the men with whom he walked and talked.
Clouds of bewilderment mazed Cormac's brain and he laughed in whimsical
self-mockery.




                                   3

    "And the two wild peoples of the north
      Stood fronting in the gloam,
    And heard and knew each in his mind
    A third great sound upon the wind,
    The living walls that hedge mankind,
      The walking walls of Rome."

                        --Chesterton.


The sun slanted westward. Silence lay like an invisible mist over the
valley. Cormac gathered the reins in his hand and glanced up at the
ridges on both sides. The waving heather which grew rank on those steep
slopes gave no evidence of the hundreds of savage warriors who lurked
there. Here in the narrow gorge which widened gradually southward was
the only sign of life. Between the steep walls three hundred Northmen
were massed solidly in their wedge-shaped shield-wall, blocking the
pass. At the tip, like the point of a spear, stood the man who called
himself Kull, king of Valusia. He wore no helmet, only the great,
strangely worked head-band of hard gold, but he bore on his left arm
the great shield borne by the dead Rognar; and in his right hand he
held the heavy iron mace wielded by the sea-king. The vikings eyed
him in wonder and savage admiration. They could not understand his
language, or he theirs. But no further orders were necessary. At Bran's
directions they had bunched themselves in the gorge, and their only
order was--hold the pass!

Bran Mak Morn stood just in front of Kull. So they faced each other, he
whose kingdom was yet unborn, and he whose kingdom had been lost in the
mists of Time for unguessed ages. Kings of darkness, thought Cormac,
nameless kings of the night, whose realms are gulfs and shadows.

The hand of the Pictish king went out. "King Kull, you are more than
king--you are a man. Both of us may fall within the next hour--but if
we both live, ask what you will of me."

Kull smiled, returning the firm grip. "You too are a man after my own
heart, king of the shadows. Surely you are more than a figment of my
sleeping imagination. Mayhap we will meet in waking life some day."

Bran shook his head in puzzlement, swung into the saddle and rode
away, climbing the eastern slope and vanishing over the ridge. Cormac
hesitated: "Strange man, are you in truth of flesh and blood, or are
you a ghost?"

"When we dream, we are all flesh and blood--so long as we are
dreaming," Kull answered. "This is the strangest nightmare I have ever
known--but you, who will soon fade into sheer nothingness as I awaken,
seem as real to me _now_, as Brule, or Kananu, or Tu, or Kelkor."

Cormac shook his head as Bran had done, and with a last salute, which
Kull returned with barbaric stateliness, he turned and trotted away.
At the top of the western ridge he paused. Away to the south a light
cloud of dust rose and the head of the marching column was in sight.
Already he believed he could feel the earth vibrate slightly to the
measured tread of a thousand mailed feet beating in perfect unison.
He dismounted, and one of his chieftains, Domnail, took his steed and
led it down the slope away from the valley, where trees grew thickly.
Only an occasional vague movement among them gave evidence of the five
hundred men who stood there, each at his horse's head with a ready hand
to check a chance nicker.

Oh, thought Cormac, the gods themselves made this valley for Bran's
ambush! The floor of the valley was treeless and the inner slopes were
bare save for the waist-high heather. But at the foot of each ridge on
the side facing away from the vale, where the soil long washed from
the rocky slopes had accumulated, there grew enough trees to hide five
hundred horsemen or fifty chariots.

At the northern end of the valley stood Kull and his three hundred
vikings, in open view, flanked on each side by fifty Pictish bowmen.
Hidden on the western side of the western ridge were the Gaels. Along
the top of the slopes, concealed in the tall heather, lay a hundred
Picts with their shafts on string. The rest of the Picts were hidden on
the eastern slopes beyond which lay the Britons with their chariots in
full readiness. Neither they nor the Gaels to the west could see what
went on in the vale, but signals had been arranged.

Now the long column was entering the wide mouth of the valley and their
scouts, light-armed men on swift horses, were spreading out between the
slopes. They galloped almost within bowshot of the silent host that
blocked the pass, then halted. Some whirled and raced back to the main
force, while the others deployed and cantered up the slopes, seeking to
see what lay beyond. This was the crucial moment. If they got any hint
of the ambush, all was lost. Cormac, shrinking down into the heather,
marveled at the ability of the Picts to efface themselves from view so
completely. He saw a horseman pass within three feet of where he knew a
bowman lay, yet the Roman saw nothing.

The scouts topped the ridges, gazed about; then most of them turned and
trotted back down the slopes. Cormac wondered at their desultory manner
of scouting. He had never fought Romans before, knew nothing of their
arrogant self-confidence, of their incredible shrewdness in some ways,
their incredible stupidity in others. These men were overconfident; a
feeling radiating from their officers. It had been years since a force
of Caledonians had stood before the legions. And most of these men were
but newly come to Britain; part of a legion which had been quartered in
Egypt. They despised their foes and suspected nothing.

But stay--three riders on the opposite ridge had turned and vanished
on the other side. And now one, sitting his steed at the crest of the
western ridge, not a hundred yards from where Cormac lay, looked long
and narrowly down into the mass of trees at the foot of the slope.
Cormac saw suspicion grow on his brown, hawk-like face. He half turned
as though to call to his comrades, then instead reined his steed down
the slope, leaning forward in his saddle. Cormac's heart pounded. Each
moment he expected to see the man wheel and gallop back to raise the
alarm. He resisted a mad impulse to leap up and charge the Roman on
foot. Surely the man could feel the tenseness in the air--the hundreds
of fierce eyes upon him. Now he was half-way down the slope, out of
sight of the men in the valley. And now the twang of an unseen bow
broke the painful stillness. With a strangled gasp the Roman flung his
hands high, and as the steed reared, he pitched headlong, transfixed
by a long black arrow that had flashed from the heather. A stocky dwarf
sprang out of nowhere, seemingly, and seized the bridle, quieting the
snorting horse, and leading it down the slope. At the fall of the
Roman, short crooked men rose like a sudden flight of birds from the
grass and Cormac saw the flash of a knife. Then with unreal suddenness
all had subsided. Slayers and slain were unseen and only the still
waving heather marked the grim deed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Gael looked back into the valley. The three who had ridden over
the eastern ridge had not come back and Cormac knew they never would.
Evidently the other scouts had borne word that only a small band of
warriors were ready to dispute the passage of the legionaries. Now the
head of the column was almost below him and he thrilled at the sight of
these men who were doomed, swinging along with their superb arrogance.
And the sight of their splendid armor, their hawk-like faces and
perfect discipline awed him as much as it is possible for a Gael to be
awed.

Twelve hundred men in heavy armor who marched as one so that the ground
shook to their tread! Most of them were of middle height, with powerful
chests and shoulders and bronzed faces--hard-bitten veterans of a
hundred campaigns. Cormac noted their javelins, short keen swords and
heavy shields; their gleaming armor and crested helmets, the eagles on
the standards. These were the men beneath whose tread the world had
shaken and empires crumbled! Not all were Latins; there were Romanized
Britons among them and one century or hundred was composed of huge
yellow-haired men--Gauls and Germans, who fought for Rome as fiercely
as did the native-born, and hated their wilder kinsmen more savagely.

On each side was a swarm of cavalry, outriders, and the column was
flanked by archers and slingers. A number of lumbering wagons carried
the supplies of the army. Cormac saw the commander riding in his
place--a tall man with a lean, imperious face, evident even at that
distance. Marcus Sulius--the Gael knew him by repute.

A deep-throated roar rose from the legionaries as they approached their
foes. Evidently they intended to slice their way through and continue
without a pause, for the column moved implacably on. Whom the gods
destroy they first make mad--Cormac had never heard the phrase but it
came to him that the great Sulius was a fool. Roman arrogance! Marcus
was used to lashing the cringing peoples of a decadent East; little he
guessed of the iron in these western races.

A group of cavalry detached itself and raced into the mouth of the
gorge, but it was only a gesture. With loud jeering shouts they wheeled
three spears length away and cast their javelins, which rattled
harmlessly on the overlapping shields of the silent Northmen. But
their leader dared too much; swinging in, he leaned from his saddle
and thrust at Kull's face. The great shield turned the lance and Kull
struck back as a snake strikes; the ponderous mace crushed helmet and
head like an eggshell, and the very steed went to its knees from the
shock of that terrible blow. From the Northmen went up a short fierce
roar, and the Picts beside them howled exultantly and loosed their
arrows among the retreating horsemen. First blood for the people of the
heather! The oncoming Romans shouted vengefully and quickened their
pace as the frightened horse raced by, a ghastly travesty of a man,
foot caught in the stirrup, trailing beneath the pounding hoofs.

Now the first line of the legionaries, compressed because of
the narrowness of the gorge, crashed against the solid wall of
shields--crashed and recoiled upon itself. The shield-wall had not
shaken an inch. This was the first time the Roman legions had met with
that unbreakable formation--that oldest of all Aryan battle-lines--the
ancestor of the Spartan regiment--the Theban phalanx--the Macedonian
formation--the English square.

Shield crashed on shield and the short Roman sword sought for an
opening in that iron wall. Viking spears bristling in solid ranks
above, thrust and reddened; heavy axes chopped down, shearing through
iron, flesh and bone. Cormac saw Kull, looming above the stocky
Romans in the forefront of the fray, dealing blows like thunderbolts.
A burly centurion rushed in, shield held high, stabbing upward. The
iron mace crashed terribly, shivering the sword, rending the shield
apart, shattering the helmet, crushing the skull down between the
shoulders--in a single blow.

The front line of the Romans bent like a steel bar about the wedge, as
the legionaries sought to struggle through the gorge on each side and
surround their opposers. But the pass was too narrow; crouching close
against the steep walls the Picts drove their black arrows in a hail of
death. At this range the heavy shafts tore through shield and corselet,
transfixing the armored men. The front line of battle rolled back, red
and broken, and the Northmen trod their few dead under foot to close
the gaps their fall had made. Stretched the full width of their front
lay a thin line of shattered forms--the red spray of the tide which had
broken upon them in vain.

Cormac had leaped to his feet, waving his arms. Domnail and his men
broke cover at the signal and came galloping up the slope, lining the
ridge. Cormac mounted the horse brought him and glanced impatiently
across the narrow vale. No sign of life appeared on the eastern ridge.
Where was Bran--and the Britons?

Down in the valley, the legions, angered at the unexpected opposition
of the paltry force in front of them, but not suspicious, were forming
in more compact body. The wagons which had halted were lumbering on
again and the whole column was once more in motion as if it intended
to crash through by sheer weight. With the Gaulish century in the
forefront, the legionaries were advancing again in the attack. This
time, with the full force of twelve hundred men behind, the charge
would batter down the resistance of Kull's warriors like a heavy
ram; would stamp them down, sweep over their red ruins. Cormac's
men trembled in impatience. Suddenly Marcus Sulius turned and gazed
westward, where the line of horsemen was etched against the sky. Even
at that distance Cormac saw his face pale. The Roman at last realized
the metal of the men he faced, and that he had walked into a trap.
Surely in that moment there flashed a chaotic picture through his
brain--defeat--disgrace--red ruin!

It was too late to retreat--too late to form into a defensive square
with the wagons for barricade. There was but one way possible out, and
Marcus, crafty general in spite of his recent blunder, took it. Cormac
heard his voice cut like a clarion through the din, and though he did
not understand the words, he knew that the Roman was shouting for his
men to smite that knot of Northmen like a blast--to hack their way
through and out of the trap before it could close!

Now the legionaries, aware of their desperate plight, flung themselves
headlong and terribly on their foes. The shield-wall rocked, but it
gave not an inch. The wild faces of the Gauls and the hard brown
Italian faces glared over locked shields into the blazing eyes of the
North. Shields touching, they smote and slew and died in a red storm of
slaughter, where crimsoned axes rose and fell and dripping spears broke
on notched swords.

Where in God's name was Bran with his chariots? A few minutes more
would spell the doom of every man who held that pass. Already they were
falling fast, though they locked their ranks closer and held like iron.
Those wild men of the North were dying in their tracks; and looming
among their golden heads the black lion-mane of Kull shone like a
symbol of slaughter, and his reddened mace showered a ghastly rain as
it splashed brains and blood like water.

Something snapped in Cormac's brain.

"These men will die while we wait for Bran's signal!" he shouted. "On!
Follow me into Hell, sons of Gael!"

A wild roar answered him, and loosing rein he shot down the slope with
five hundred yelling riders plunging headlong after him. And even at
that moment a storm of arrows swept the valley from either side like
a dark cloud and the terrible clamor of the Picts split the skies.
And over the eastern ridge, like a sudden burst of rolling thunder
on Judgment Day, rushed the war-chariots. Headlong down the slope
they roared, foam flying from the horses' distended nostrils, frantic
feet scarcely seeming to touch the ground, making naught of the tall
heather. In the foremost chariot, with his dark eyes blazing, crouched
Bran Mak Morn, and in all of them the naked Britons were screaming and
lashing as if possessed by demons. Behind the flying chariots came the
Picts, howling like wolves and loosing their arrows as they ran. The
heather belched them forth from all sides in a dark wave.

So much Cormac saw in chaotic glimpses during that wild ride down the
slopes. A wave of cavalry swept between him and the main line of the
column. Three long leaps ahead of his men, the Gaelic prince met the
spears of the Roman riders. The first lance turned on his buckler,
and rising in his stirrups he smote downward, cleaving his man from
shoulder to breast-bone. The next Roman flung a javelin that killed
Domnail, but at that instant Cormac's steed crashed into his, breast to
breast, and the lighter horse rolled headlong under the shock, flinging
his rider beneath the pounding hoofs.

Then the whole blast of the Gaelic charge smote the Roman cavalry,
shattering it, crashing and rolling it down and under. Over its red
ruins Cormac's yelling demons struck the heavy Roman infantry, and
the whole line reeled at the shock. Swords and axes flashed up and
down and the force of their rush carried them deep into the massed
ranks. Here, checked, they swayed and strove. Javelins thrust, swords
flashed upward, bringing down horse and rider, and greatly outnumbered,
leaguered on every side, the Gaels had perished among their foes, but
at that instant, from the other side the crashing chariots smote the
Roman ranks. In one long line they struck almost simultaneously, and
at the moment of impact the charioteers wheeled their horses sidelong
and raced parallel down the ranks, shearing men down like the mowing
of wheat. Hundreds died on those curving blades in that moment, and
leaping from the chariots, screaming like blood-mad wildcats, the
British swordsmen flung themselves upon the spears of the legionaries,
hacking madly with their two-handed swords. Crouching, the Picts
drove their arrows pointblank and then sprang in to slash and thrust.
Maddened with the sight of victory, these wild peoples were like
wounded tigers, feeling no wounds, and dying on their feet with their
last gasp a snarl of fury.

But the battle was not over yet. Dazed, shattered, their formation
broken and nearly half their number down already, the Romans fought
back with desperate fury. Hemmed in on all sides they slashed and
smote singly, or in small clumps, fought back to back, archers,
slingers, horsemen and heavy legionaries mingled into a chaotic mass.
The confusion was complete, but not the victory. Those bottled in the
gorge still hurled themselves upon the red axes that barred their way,
while the massed and serried battle thundered behind them. From one
side Cormac's Gaels raged and slashed; from the other chariots swept
back and forth, retiring and returning like iron whirlwinds. There was
no retreat, for the Picts had flung a cordon across the way they had
come, and having cut the throats of the camp followers and possessed
themselves of the wagon, they sent their shafts in a storm of death
into the rear of the shattered column. Those long black arrows pierced
armor and bone, nailing men together. Yet the slaughter was not all
on one side. Picts died beneath the lightning thrust of javelin and
shortsword, Gaels pinned beneath their falling horses were hewed to
pieces, and chariots, cut loose from their horses, were deluged with
the blood of the charioteers.

And at the narrow head of the valley still the battle surged and
eddied. Great gods--thought Cormac, glancing between lightning-like
blows--do these men still hold the gorge? Aye! They held it! A tenth of
their original number, dying on their feet, they still held back the
frantic charges of the dwindling legionaries.

       *       *       *       *       *

Over all the field went up the roar and the clash of arms, and birds of
prey, swift-flying out of the sunset, circled above. Cormac, striving
to reach Marcus Sulius through the press, saw the Roman's horse sink
under him, and the rider rise alone in a waste of foes. He saw the
Roman sword flash thrice, dealing a death at each blow; then from the
thickest of the fray bounded a terrible figure. It was Bran Mak Morn,
stained from head to foot. He cast away his broken sword as he ran,
drawing a dirk. The Roman struck, but the Pictish king was under the
thrust, and gripping the sword-wrist, he drove the dirk again and again
through the gleaming armor.

A mighty roar went up as Marcus died, and Cormac, with a shout, rallied
the remnants of his force about him and, striking in the spurs, burst
through the shattered lines and rode full speed for the other end of
the valley.

But as he approached he saw that he was too late. As they had lived, so
had they died, those fierce sea-wolves, with their faces to the foe and
their broken weapons red in their hands. In a grim and silent band they
lay, even in death preserving some of the shield-wall formation. Among
them, in front of them and all about them lay high-heaped the bodies of
those who had sought to break them, in vain. _They had not given back a
foot!_ To the last man, they had died in their tracks. Nor were there
any left to stride over their torn shapes; those Romans who had escaped
the viking axes had been struck down by the shafts of the Picts and
swords of the Gaels from behind.

Yet this part of the battle was not over. High up on the steep western
slope Cormac saw the ending of that drama. A group of Gauls in the
armor of Rome pressed upon a single man--a black-haired giant on whose
head gleamed a golden crown. There was iron in these men, as well as
in the man who had held them to their fate. They were doomed--their
comrades were being slaughtered behind them--but before their turn came
they would at least have the life of the black-haired chief who had led
the golden-haired men of the North.

Pressing upon him from three sides they had forced him slowly back up
the steep gorge wall, and the crumpled bodies that stretched along his
retreat showed how fiercely every foot of the way had been contested.
Here on this steep it was task enough to keep one's footing alone; yet
these men at once climbed and fought. Kull's shield and the huge mace
were gone, and the great sword in his right hand was dyed crimson.
His mail, wrought with a forgotten art, now hung in shreds, and blood
streamed from a hundred wounds on limbs, head and body. But his eyes
still blazed with the battle-joy and his wearied arm still drove the
mighty blade in strokes of death.

But Cormac saw that the end would come before they could reach him.
Now at the very crest of the steep, a hedge of points menaced the
strange king's life, and even his iron strength was ebbing. Now he
split the skull of a huge warrior and the back-stroke shore through the
neck-cords of another; reeling under a very rain of swords he struck
again and his victim dropped at his feet, cleft to the breast-bone.
Then, even as a dozen swords rose above the staggering Atlantean for
the death stroke, a strange thing happened. The sun was sinking into
the western sea; all the heather swam red like an ocean of blood.
Etched in the dying sun, as he had first appeared, Kull stood, and
then, like a mist lifting, a mighty vista opened behind the reeling
king. Cormac's astounded eyes caught a fleeting gigantic glimpse of
other climes and spheres--as if mirrored in summer clouds he saw,
instead of the heather hills stretching away to the sea, a dim and
mighty land of blue mountains and gleaming quiet lakes--the golden,
purple and sapphirean spires and towering walls of a mighty city such
as the earth has not known for many a drifting age.

[Illustration: "_Etched in the dying sun stood Kull._"]

Then like the fading of a mirage it was gone, but the Gauls on the
high slope had dropped their weapons and stared like men dazed--_For
the man called Kull had vanished and there was no trace of his going!_

       *       *       *       *       *

As in a daze Cormac turned his steed and rode back across the trampled
field. His horse's hoofs splashed in lakes of blood and clanged against
the helmets of dead men. Across the valley the shout of victory was
thundering. Yet all seemed shadowy and strange. A shape was striding
across the torn corpses and Cormac was dully aware that it was Bran.
The Gael swung from his horse and fronted the king. Bran was weaponless
and gory; blood trickled from gashes on brow, breast and limb; what
armor he had worn was clean hacked away and a cut had shorn half-way
through his iron crown. But the red jewel still gleamed unblemished
like a star of slaughter.

"It is in my mind to slay you," said the Gael heavily and like a man
speaking in a daze, "for the blood of brave men is on your head. Had
you given the signal to charge sooner, some would have lived."

Bran folded his arms; his eyes were haunted. "Strike if you will; I
am sick of slaughter. It is a cold mead, this kinging it. A king must
gamble with men's lives and naked swords. The lives of all my people
were at stake; I sacrificed the Northmen--yes; and my heart is sore
within me, for they were men! But had I given the order when you would
have desired, all might have gone awry. The Romans were not yet massed
in the narrow mouth of the gorge, and might have had time and space
to form their ranks again and beat us off. I waited until the last
moment--and the rovers died. A king belongs to his people, and can not
let either his own feelings or the lives of men influence him. Now my
people are saved; but my heart is cold in my breast."

Cormac wearily dropped his sword-point to the ground.

"You are a born king of men, Bran," said the Gaelic prince.

Bran's eyes roved the field. A mist of blood hovered over all, where
the victorious barbarians were looting the dead, while those Romans who
had escaped slaughter by throwing down their swords and now stood under
guard, looked on with hot smoldering eyes.

"My kingdom--my people--are saved," said Bran wearily. "They will come
from the heather by the thousands and when Rome moves against us again,
she will meet a solid nation. But I am weary. What of Kull?"

"My eyes and brain were mazed with battle," answered Cormac. "I thought
to see him vanish like a ghost into the sunset. I will seek his body."

"Seek not for him," said Bran. "Out of the sunrise he came--into the
sunset he has gone. Out of the mists of the ages he came to us, and
back into the mists of the eons has he returned--to his own kingdom."

Cormac turned away; night was gathering. Gonar stood like a white
specter before him.

"To his own kingdom," echoed the wizard. "Time and Space are naught.
Kull has returned to his own kingdom--his own crown--his own age."

"Then he was a ghost?"

"Did you not feel the grip of his solid hand? Did you not hear his
voice--see him eat and drink, laugh and slay and bleed?"

Still Cormac stood like one in a trance.

"Then if it be possible for a man to pass from one age into one yet
unborn, or come forth from a century dead and forgotten, whichever you
will, with his flesh-and-blood body and his arms--then he is as mortal
as he was in his own day. Is Kull dead, then?"

"He died a hundred thousand years ago, as men reckon time," answered
the wizard, "but in his own age. He died not from the swords of the
Gauls of this age. Have we not heard in legends how the king of Valusia
traveled into a strange, timeless land of the misty future ages, and
there fought in a great battle? Why, so he did! A hundred thousand
years ago, or today!

"And a hundred thousand years ago--or a moment agone!--Kull, king of
Valusia, roused himself on the silken couch in his secret chamber and
laughing, spoke to the first Gonar, saying: 'Ha, wizard, I have in
truth dreamed strangely, for I went into a far clime and a far time
in my visions, and fought for the king of a strange shadow-people!'
And the great sorcerer smiled and pointed silently at the red, notched
sword, and the torn mail and the many wounds that the king carried.
And Kull, fully woken from his 'vision' and feeling the sting and the
weakness of these yet bleeding wounds, fell silent and mazed, and
all life and time and space seemed like a dream of ghosts to him,
and he wondered thereat all the rest of his life. For the wisdom of
the Eternities is denied even unto princes and Kull could no more
understand what Gonar told him than you can understand my words."

"And then Kull lived despite his many wounds," said Cormac, "and has
returned to the mists of silence and the centuries. Well--he thought us
a dream; we thought him a ghost. And sure, life is but a web spun of
ghosts and dreams and illusion, and it is in my mind that the kingdom
which has this day been born of swords and slaughter in this howling
valley is a thing no more solid than the foam of the bright sea."



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KINGS OF THE NIGHT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


