Produced by David E. Brown and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

OTHER BOOKS

BY MRS S T RORER

MRS RORER'S COOK BOOK
nearly 600 pages of the choicest recipes in every department of
cookery; bound in washable oil-cloth covers, $1.75

CANNING AND PRESERVING
paper covers, 40 cents; cloth, 75 cents

HOT WEATHER DISHES
paper covers, 40 cents; cloth, 75 cents

HOME CANDY MAKING
paper covers, 40 cents; cloth, 75 cents

TWENTY QUICK SOUPS
FIFTEEN NEW WAYS FOR OYSTERS
HOW TO USE A CHAFING DISH
COLONIAL RECIPES
SANDWICHES
DAINTIES
Each of the above six volumes is bound in a different colored linen
cloth, beautifully stamped in colors; price 25 cents each

ARNOLD AND COMPANY Publishers
PHILADELPHIA

TWENTY QUICK SOUPS

TWENTY
QUICK SOUPS

BY MRS S T RORER

PHILADELPHIA
ARNOLD AND COMPANY

Copyright 1894 by Mrs S T Rorer

Printed by
George H Buchanan and Company
Philadelphia

CONTENTS

PAGE

Cream of Asparagus 9

Cream of Corn 10

Cream of Lettuce 11

Cream of Beets 12

Tomato Soup 13

Clear Tomato with Sago 14

Brown Broth 15

Cheese Balls 16

Bisque of Clam 17

Club Clam Soup 18

Mock Oyster Soup 19

Cucumber Tapioca Soup 21

Quick Clear Soup 22

A la Royal 24

Bisque of Salmon 25

Currant Soup 26

Chocolate Soup 28

Cream of Chestnut Soup 29

Pistachio Soup 30

Ye Food for ye Gods 31

Oatmeal Soup 32

CREAM OF ASPARAGUS

Wash one bundle of asparagus, cut off the tips and throw them into a
pint of boiling water, add a teaspoonful of salt, and simmer gently for
fifteen minutes. Strain them and save the water; to this water add the
remaining part of the bundle, cut into small pieces. Cook fifteen
minutes and press through a colander. Put one quart of milk into a
double boiler; rub together two tablespoonfuls of butter and two
tablespoonfuls of flour. Add a little of the hot milk to this and work
until perfectly smooth, then stir into the milk and cook five minutes.
Heat the asparagus mixture, turn the milk quickly into it, season, add
the asparagus tips, and serve. This cannot be boiled or it will curdle.

CREAM OF CORN

Score each row of grains on six ears of corn; then, with the back of
the knife press it out carefully and throw the cobs into a kettle; cover
with a quart of water, bring to boiling point and strain. Now, add the
scraped corn to the water. Rub together two tablespoonfuls of butter and
one of flour. Stir it into this corn mixture and bring to boiling point,
then add one pint of hot milk; season and serve.

CREAM OF LETTUCE

Wash and pull apart two good-sized heads of lettuce. Throw them into a
hot saucepan, shake over the fire until the lettuce leaves simply melt.
Sprinkle over a teaspoonful of salt, then press through a sieve. Put one
quart of milk in a double boiler. Rub together two tablespoonfuls of
butter and two of flour, add it to the milk and stir until it thickens.
Chop sufficient parsley to make two tablespoonfuls and pound it in a
mortar. Put this in a bowl; mix it with the lettuce that has been
pressed through the sieve. Stir in the milk, then add a half teaspoonful
of beef extract, dissolved in a little of the hot milk; season and
serve.

CREAM OF BEETS

Take four cold, boiled beets and grate them. Dissolve a teaspoonful of
beef extract in one pint of boiling water. Add it to the beets, and when
they reach the boiling point add one pint of hot milk; stir in a
tablespoonful of butter, palatable seasoning of salt, and when it
reaches the boiling point, add tablespoonful of arrow-root dissolved in
two tablespoonfuls of cold water. Bring to boiling point again, and
serve.

TOMATO SOUP

Cut six large tomatoes into small pieces. Put them into a saucepan with
one pint of water, or stock, add tablespoonful of butter, slice of
onion, bay leaf and a sprig of parsley. Cook slowly twenty minutes and
press through a sieve sufficiently fine to remove the seeds. Return this
soup to the fire, add tablespoonful of arrow root moistened in two
tablespoonfuls of cold water, another tablespoonful of butter and a
palatable seasoning of salt and pepper, and serve with squares of
toasted bread.

CLEAR TOMATO WITH SAGO

Put one pint of stewed tomatoe into a saucepan, add slice of onions, bay
leaf and sprig of parsley. Simmer ten minutes. Cover four tablespoonfuls
of pearl sago with a pint of cold water and soak for twenty minutes.
Now, stand this over the back part of the stove until the sago is
perfectly clear, and the water almost boiling hot. Add to the tomatoes
one pint of boiling water and two tablespoonfuls of butter, then press
through a sieve. Return to the fire, add a teaspoonful of salt, half
teaspoonful of pepper and then the sago. Serve at once. This soup may be
varied by adding, instead of the pint of water to the tomatoes, a pint
of stock.

BROWN BROTH

Boil and cut into dice one young carrot, one onion and one potato. Put
two ounces of butter in the frying-pan, throw in the vegetables and stir
carefully until they are a golden brown. Then skim them out and put them
in a saucepan. Cover with one quart of boiling water, add a bay leaf and
simmer gently twenty minutes. Press through a puree sieve, return these
to the kettle, add a teaspoonful of kitchen bouquet and palatable
seasoning of salt and pepper. Serve with cheese balls.

CHEESE BALLS

Put a tablespoonful of butter and a quarter of a cup of water over the
fire to boil. Stir in quickly a quarter of a cup of flour and stir for a
minute. Take from the fire and add one well-beaten egg and two
tablespoonfuls of grated cheese. Drop this mixture into a greased baking
pan, and bake in a quick oven fifteen minutes. The paste should not be
larger than a good sized bean as you drop it on the pan. A very good way
to make them is to put this mixture in a pastry bag and press it through
a plain tube, and cut it off into small balls.

BISQUE OF CLAM

Drain fifty small clams. Bring the liquor to boiling point and skim.
Chop the clams fine, add them to the liquor and cook gently for ten
minutes. Then press through a sieve. Put one quart of milk into a double
boiler; add to it a bay leaf. Rub together two tablespoonfuls of butter
and two of flour, and stir carefully into the milk. Cook slowly until it
thickens. Now, add a teaspoonful of onion juice or grated onion, and
turn in the clam mixture. Stir carefully for a moment, season with salt
and pepper, and serve.

Remember this must not be boiled after the clam has been added to the
milk. If you have white stock in the house the soup is greatly improved
by having instead one quart of milk, one pint of milk and a pint of
stock.

CLUB CLAM SOUP

Drain fifty small clams, then chop them fine. Mix the liquor and the
clams, and add one quart of cold water, about two tablespoonfuls of
chopped ham, one large onion sliced thin, quarter of a teaspoonful of
mace and a sprig of parsley. Bring this slowly to a boiling point. Rub
together two tablespoonfuls of butter and two of flour. Stir them into
the soup carefully, add just a dash of salt and a quarter teaspoonful
of pepper. Bring to boiling point, then take from the fire and turn in
one pint of hot milk, to which you have just added the well-beaten yolks
of four eggs. Stir quickly and serve with squares of toasted bread.

MOCK OYSTER SOUP

Select about one dozen roots of salsify. Scrape them and throw at once
into cold water to prevent discoloration. Cut the salsify crosswise into
thin slices. Put them into one quart of cold water and add about two
ounces of codfish. This is best in one solid piece. Simmer gently for
thirty minutes and remove the codfish. Have ready one pint of milk
heated in a double boiler. Add it to the salsify, then stir in carefully
one tablespoonful of butter and two of flour that have been rubbed to a
smooth paste. Season with salt and pepper. Then, just as you take it
from the fire, add another teaspoonful of butter, cut into pieces, and
it is ready to serve.

CUCUMBER TAPIOCA SOUP

Boil three good-sized cucumbers, cut them into slices and cover them
with one quart of white stock. Simmer gently for twenty minutes. Then
press through a sieve. Soak two tablespoonfuls of pearl tapioca in one
pint of milk in a cold place for one hour. Stand this in a double boiler
and heat slowly until the tapioca is perfectly clear. Heat the cucumber
mixture; add a teaspoonful of salt, teaspoonful of onion juice and
quarter teaspoonful of pepper. Turn into the hot milk. Have ready in the
tureen the yolks of two eggs, well-beaten. Pour the soup over
gradually.

QUICK CLEAR SOUP

Put one pound of finely-chopped meat into one pint of cold water, beat
it for about a minute with an egg beater, and let it stand for thirty
minutes, while you prepare the flavoring. Stir one tablespoonful of beef
extract into a quart of boiling water. Add a tablespoonful of grated
onion and one bay leaf. Now bring the meat to boiling point. Strain in a
colander. Beat the white and shell of one egg with two tablespoonfuls of
cold water. Put the soup you have strained from the meat over the fire,
and when boiling add to the egg mixture, bring to boiling point and
strain through two thicknesses of cheese cloth. Then add this to the
beef extract mixture, season with teaspoonful of salt and quarter
teaspoonful of pepper, and it is ready to serve.

This may be served with two tablespoonfuls of boiled rice or boiled
macaroni, or with fresh rings of cucumbers. To prepare these rings cut a
large cucumber into slices crosswise. With a round cutter stamp them out
just as much as you can to remove the skin, and then with a smaller
cutter stamp out the seeds. Throw these rings into boiling salted water
and boil for twenty minutes; strain and put in the soup. Or this soup
may be served a la Royal.

A LA ROYAL

Beat two eggs until well mixed; add two tablespoonfuls of stock, half
teaspoonful of salt and a quarter teaspoonful of pepper. Now add two
tablespoonfuls of milk or cream, and turn into a small buttered basin or
mold. Stand this mold in a pan of boiling water and cook gently, either
in the oven or on the top of the stove, until the custard is "set." When
cold cut into blocks or into fancy shapes. Put this in the tureen and
pour over the soup.

BISQUE OF SALMON

Wash well a half cup of rice. Put it into a quart of water and boil
rapidly for thirty minutes. Then press it through a puree sieve and add
to it the salmon from a one pound can, removing first all the bones,
skin and oil. Now press this again through a sieve; add a teaspoonful of
salt, bay leaf, tablespoonful of grated onion and half teaspoonful of
pepper. Stand it over the back part of the stove until it is steaming
hot. Heat one quart of milk in a double boiler. Rub together two
tablespoonfuls of butter and two of flour. Stir this carefully into the
milk and stir until perfectly smooth and thick. Then add a level
teaspoonful of salt; turn this mixture into the other, remove the bay
leaf, bring to scald-point, and serve. If you like this soup a little
deeper color, add a few drops of cochineal. Halibut may be used in
precisely the same way, of course, keeping the soup perfectly white.

CURRANT SOUP

This soup may be made from any sort of fresh, tart fruit. It should be
served for lunch perfectly cold, in either punch or bouillon cups. Put
one pint of currants and one pint of water over the fire and bring to
scalding point. Add half cup of sugar. Press through a puree sieve,
return to the fire and add one tablespoonful of arrow-root, moistened in
two tablespoonfuls of water. Bring to boiling point until the soup is
clear, then stand away to cool. If you use wine, add two tablespoonfuls
of white wine. Cherries, cranberries and strawberries may be used in the
same way, adding more or less sugar, according to the kind of fruit, but
these soups should not be sweet. Use just enough sugar to make them
palatable.

CHOCOLATE SOUP

Put three tablespoonfuls of cocoa into a double boiler, and add
gradually one pint of boiling water. Stir for at least five minutes over
the fire. Add four tablespoonfuls of sugar, take from the fire and add a
teaspoonful of vanilla. Turn this into one pint of cracked ice, and when
the soup is cold, turn into the serving cups, and put on the surface a
tablespoonful of whipped cream, and serve.

CREAM OF CHESTNUT SOUP

Shell and blanch one pound of large chestnuts. Cover them with a quart
of boiling water; add a slice of onion, piece of celery chopped, a bay
leaf, sprig of parsley and a dash of paprica. Cover and boil thirty
minutes. Press first through a colander; then add one pint of milk;
return the whole to the fire. Rub together two tablespoonfuls of butter
and two of flour; add to the soup; cook a minute; add a palatable
seasoning of salt, and then press the whole through a puree sieve. Make
hot and serve with croutons.

PISTACHIO SOUP

Wash one quart of nice spinach. Pick each leaf from the stem and throw
into a saucepan; stand over the fire for a moment, shaking so that the
spinach will not discolor. Sprinkle over a teaspoonful of salt. As soon
as the spinach begins to wilt, drain and chop very fine, then pound it
to a paste. Put one quart of milk into a double boiler; add one
teaspoonful of almond paste unsweetened, and two ounces of pistachio
nuts chopped to a powder. Cover and cook twenty minutes. Add spinach,
one tablespoonful of butter, one of arrow-root, moistened, and press
through a puree sieve. Add a teaspoonful of salt, dash of paprica, and
serve. Nice for green lunch.

YE FOOD FOR YE GODS

Peel half pound of good, fresh mushrooms; remove the lower part of
stems. Wash the mushrooms, and chop them very fine with a silver knife.
Put them in a saucepan, with one quart of good chicken stock. Cover and
simmer gently thirty minutes; add teaspoonful of salt and simmer ten
minutes longer. Put two tablespoonfuls of butter in another saucepan,
add three tablespoonfuls of fine flour, mix and cook a minute without
browning; add a half pint of thick cream to the mushrooms, then add the
whole to the butter and flour, stir constantly until it just comes to
boiling point; add dash of white pepper and serve in bouillon cups.
Serve with whole wheat bread toasted in oven.

OATMEAL SOUP

Add one cup of cold cooked oatmeal to one quart of water; add a slice of
onion, sprig of celery top, bay leaf, teaspoonful of salt, saltspoonful
of pepper. Cover and boil slowly ten minutes; add a half teaspoonful of
beef extract, or, if you have stock, use it in place of water. Now press
through a sieve; return to the fire; when boiling, add half pint of hot
milk, and serve.

TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:

Inconsistencies in spelling and hyphenation have been retained from
the original.

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected as follows:
Page 10: earns has been changed to ears

End of Project Gutenberg's Twenty Quick Soups, by Sarah Tyson Heston Rorer