Take a Can of Salmon

[Illustration: Salmon salad]

[Illustration: Salmon]

Salmon has been nourishing the human race and delighting the human
palate since prehistoric times. Today, thanks to modern canning methods,
it is becoming known more widely than ever as a cosmopolitan food fish.
Its delicious flavor and the convenience of the easy-to-store,
easy-to-use can are two good reasons for cooking and serving salmon
frequently. But there are even better reasons. The protein in salmon is
a complete protein, in the same food group as meat and poultry, cheese
and eggs. When you serve salmon, you’re serving the kind of food that
your family needs every day.

You’ll find that most of the recipes in this booklet suggest using the
whole can of salmon, including the liquid, bones, and skin. That’s
because these are good sources of iodine and phosphorus, Vitamin A,
Vitamin D, and the B group vitamins.

From every nutritional standpoint—high protein value, strong vitamin and
mineral content, easy digestibility—salmon is a good food. It is also an
economical food ... and so easy to serve!

If overweight is a problem in your family, you’ll be glad to know that
equal portions of salmon and lamb chops contain about the same amount of
protein but, four ounces of salmon contain only 150 calories while four
ounces of lamb chops contain 450 calories.

While canned salmon is the basic ingredient of many glamorous dishes, it
is delicious if eaten just as it comes from the can, with perhaps a
sprinkling of salt and pepper, some minced onion and mayonnaise. Salmon
sandwiches made this way when you were a child were always a treat, and
they’re still favorites for school lunch boxes. And haven’t you made use
of the cool look that salmon gives to summer salads? By the way, recipes
for the salad opposite, and for the Salmon Buffet on our cover, are on
page 16.

Each recipe in this booklet has been prepared imaginatively to open your
eyes to the versatility of salmon and the excitement it brings to dinner
menus, party refreshments, and luncheon dishes. Try one today!

SALMON APPETIZERS AND DIPS
(RECIPES ON PAGE 16)

[Illustration: Salmon appetizers and dips]

The canned salmon that comes to your table was caught in the waters of
Alaska, Puget Sound or the Columbia River of the Pacific Northwest. It
is a popular food all over the United States, partly because it is so
easily adaptable to regional tastes and fits in so well with every local
culinary tradition. In this booklet we have suggested a number of
recipes of regional interest—yet all of them will fit in with your own
meal planning wherever you live. First, look at these dishes ... smart
for a luncheon or cocktail party in New York—or anywhere!

[Illustration: New York loves party food like this!]

SALMON MOUSSE

[Illustration: Salmon mousse]

ASPIC

1 tablespoon unflavored gelatine
2 tablespoons cold water
1 chicken bouillon cube
1 cup boiling water

Soften gelatine in cold water for 5 minutes. Dissolve bouillon cube in
boiling water. Add hot bouillon to gelatine and stir until dissolved.
Pour into a 1½-quart mold; chill until firm.

MOUSSE

3 cans (7¾ ounces each) salmon
½ cup mayonnaise or salad dressing
2 tablespoons chopped parsley
1 tablespoon lemon juice
1 tablespoon grated onion
1 teaspoon horse-radish
¼ teaspoon salt
Dash pepper
2 tablespoons unflavored gelatine
½ cup salmon liquid and water
1 cup whipping cream
Salad greens
1 hard-cooked egg

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Add mayonnaise, parsley, lemon juice,
onion, horse-radish, salt, and pepper. Mix well. Soften gelatine in
salmon liquid for 5 minutes. Stir over hot water until dissolved. Add to
salmon mixture and blend thoroughly; an electric mixer or blender may be
used. Whip cream; fold into salmon mixture. Place over congealed aspic;
chill until firm. Unmold on salad plate. Garnish with salad greens and
hard-cooked egg. Serves 6.

SALMON CHOWDER

[Illustration: Salmon chowder]

1 pound can salmon
1 chicken bouillon cube
1 cup boiling water
¾ cup chopped onion
½ cup chopped green pepper
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
¼ cup butter or other fat, melted
⅓ cup salmon liquid
1 pound can tomatoes
1 can (8 ounces) whole-kernel corn
1 cup sliced okra (optional)
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon thyme
Dash pepper
1 whole bay leaf

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Break salmon into large pieces. Dissolve
bouillon cube in boiling water. Cook onion, green pepper, and garlic in
butter until tender. Combine all ingredients and cook for 15 minutes or
until vegetables are tender. Remove bay leaf. Serves 6.

[Illustration: New Orleans flavor in your own kitchen]

SALMON CREPES BAYOU

[Illustration: Salmon crepes bayou]

1 pound can salmon
1 teaspoon chopped onion
3 tablespoons butter or other fat, melted
¼ cup flour
¼ teaspoon salt
Dash white pepper
Dash nutmeg
1½ cups salmon liquid and milk
2 egg yolks, beaten
2 tablespoons grated Parmesan cheese
2 tablespoons sherry
12 crepes
2 lemon slices, cut into sixths
Parsley

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Flake salmon. Cook onion in butter until
tender. Blend in flour and seasonings. Add salmon liquid gradually and
cook until thick, stirring constantly. Stir a little of the hot sauce
into egg yolk; add to remaining sauce, stirring constantly. Add cheese
and sherry and stir until blended. Mix ½ cup of the sauce with the
salmon. Blend well. Reserve remaining sauce to serve with crepes. Spread
about 2 tablespoons of salmon mixture on each crepe. Roll like a jelly
roll. Place crepes on a cooky sheet, 15 x 12 inches. Heat in a moderate
oven, 350°F., for 10 to 15 minutes. Heat the sauce.

Arrange the crepes in a circle in a chafing dish. Garnish each crepe
with lemon and parsley. Place sauce in the center of the crepes. Serves
6.

CREPES

¾ cup sifted flour
¼ teaspoon salt
2 eggs, beaten
1 cup milk

Sift dry ingredients together. Combine egg and milk. Add gradually to
flour and salt; stir only until batter is smooth. Drop 2 tablespoons of
batter onto a hot greased griddle or frying pan. Fry about 2 minutes or
until crepe is browned on the underside, turn, and fry until the bottom
is browned. Makes 12 crepes.

[Illustration: Hearty dishes from Chicago]

SALMON CURRY

[Illustration: Salmon curry]

1 pound can salmon
¼ cup chopped onion
3 tablespoons butter or other fat, melted
3 tablespoons flour
1½ teaspoons curry powder
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon ginger
Dash pepper
2 cups salmon liquid and milk
3 cups cooked rice

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Break salmon into large pieces. Cook
onion in butter until tender. Blend in flour and seasonings. Add salmon
liquid gradually and cook until thick, stirring constantly. Add salmon;
heat. Serve over rice with any of the following curry condiments. Serves
6.

Curry condiments: chopped hard-cooked egg whites; shredded toasted
coconut; chopped nuts; chopped green pepper; chopped tomatoes; fried
noodles; chopped onions; crystallized ginger; sieved hard-cooked egg
yolks.

SALMON RICE WITH KEBABS

[Illustration: Salmon rice with kebabs]

1 pound can salmon
½ cup chopped onion
2 tablespoons butter or margarine, melted
⅔ cup water
1 can (10½ ounces) condensed consommé
1 cup uncooked rice
18 mushrooms
3 green peppers
3 tomatoes
½ cup butter or margarine, melted

Drain salmon. Break salmon into large pieces. Cook onion in butter until
tender. Add water and consommé; bring to a boil. Place rice, salmon, and
consommé mixture in a well-greased, 2-quart casserole. Stir. Bake,
covered, in a moderate oven, 350°F., for 35 minutes or until rice is
tender. While rice is baking, wash mushrooms, green peppers, and
tomatoes. Cut tomatoes and green peppers into sixths. Remove stems from
mushrooms. Alternate tomatoes, mushrooms, and green peppers on 6
skewers, 7 inches each. Place on a greased broiler pan. Brush kebabs
with butter. Broil about 3 inches from source of heat for 3 minutes.
Turn carefully; brush other side with butter and broil 3 minutes longer.
Serve salmon-rice mixture on a platter with kebabs over top. Serves 6.

SALMON BROCCOLI PIE

[Illustration: Salmon broccoli pie]

1 pound can salmon
¼ cup butter or margarine
¼ cup flour
½ teaspoon thyme
¼ teaspoon pepper
2 cups salmon liquid and milk
1 can (4 ounces) chopped mushrooms, drained
1 tablespoon chopped parsley
1½ cups cooked, drained, chopped broccoli
1 cup pastry mix

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Break salmon into large pieces. Melt
butter; blend in flour and seasonings. Add salmon liquid gradually and
cook until thick and smooth, stirring constantly. Add mushrooms,
parsley, and salmon. Spread broccoli in a 9-inch pie pan. Pour salmon
mixture over broccoli. Prepare pastry mix as directed. Roll dough to
form a 10-inch circle. Place dough over salmon mixture. Double edge of
pastry over and pinch with fingers to make an upright rim. Cut top to
allow steam to escape. Bake in a hot oven, 425°F., for 20 to 25 minutes
or until brown. Serves 6.

[Illustration: Delightful dishes for Anywhere, U.S.A.!]

SALMON CASSOULET

[Illustration: Salmon]

1 pound can salmon
1 cup uncooked elbow macaroni
1 tablespoon chopped green pepper
1 small clove garlic, finely chopped
⅓ cup butter or other fat, melted
⅓ cup flour
2 teaspoons powdered mustard
¼ teaspoon pepper
2 cups salmon liquid and milk
1 cup grated cheese
1 cup cooked lima beans

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Flake salmon. Cook macaroni as directed
on the package. Drain. Cook green pepper and garlic in butter until
tender. Blend in flour and seasonings. Add salmon liquid gradually and
cook until thick, stirring constantly. Add cheese and continue cooking
until cheese melts, stirring constantly. Arrange half of the macaroni,
lima beans, salmon, and sauce in layers in a well-greased, 2-quart
casserole. Repeat layers. Bake, in a moderate oven, 350°F, for 25 to 30
minutes. Serves 6.

SALMON FLORENTINE

[Illustration: Salmon florentine]

1 pound can salmon
1 cup cooked, drained spinach
2 tablespoons butter or margarine
¼ teaspoon pepper
Dash nutmeg
2 tablespoons chopped onion
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
2 tablespoons butter or margarine, melted
3 tablespoons flour
¼ teaspoon salt
1¼ cups salmon liquid and milk
2 tablespoons sherry
¼ cup grated Parmesan cheese (optional)
3 hard-cooked eggs, sliced
Watercress

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Mash salmon. Chop spinach. Season with
butter, pepper, and nutmeg. Spread seasoned spinach in a well-greased,
round baking dish, 8 × 2 inches. Cook onion and garlic in butter until
tender. Blend in flour and salt. Add salmon liquid gradually and cook
until thick, stirring constantly. Add sherry and salmon. Blend
thoroughly. An electric mixer or blender may be used. Place over
spinach. Sprinkle with cheese. Bake in a moderate oven, 350°F., for 20
to 25 minutes. Garnish with egg slices and watercress. Serves 6.

SALMON BURGERS

[Illustration: Salmon burgers]

1 pound can salmon
½ cup chopped onion
¼ cup butter or other fat, melted
⅓ cup salmon liquid
⅓ cup dry bread crumbs
2 eggs, beaten
¼ cup chopped parsley
1 teaspoon powdered mustard
½ teaspoon salt
½ cup dry bread crumbs
6 round buttered buns
Lemon wedges

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Flake salmon. Cook onion in butter until
tender. Add salmon liquid, crumbs, egg, parsley, mustard, salt, and
salmon. Mix well. Shape into 6 cakes and roll in crumbs. Place cakes in
a heavy frying pan which contains about ⅛ inch of fat, hot but not
smoking. Fry at moderate heat. When cakes are brown on one side, turn
carefully and brown the other side. Cooking time approximately 5 to 8
minutes. Drain on absorbent paper. Place cakes in buns. Serve with lemon
wedges. Serves 6.

[Illustration: A favorite in Seattle; great as all outdoors]

SALMON CABBAGE VINAIGRETTE

[Illustration: Salmon cabbage vinaigrette]

1 pound can salmon
1 quart shredded cabbage
¼ cup chopped onion
¼ cup chopped parsley
2 hard-cooked eggs, chopped
Vinaigrette dressing
18 large cabbage leaves

Drain and flake salmon. Combine cabbage, onion, parsley, eggs, and
salmon. Add vinaigrette dressing and mix thoroughly. Serve in the center
of a cabbage rosette. Serves 6.

VINAIGRETTE DRESSING

1 teaspoon salt
Dash cayenne pepper
¼ teaspoon paprika
3 tablespoons vinegar
½ cup olive or salad oil
1 tablespoon chopped pimiento
1 tablespoon chopped sweet pickle
1 tablespoon chopped green pepper

Combine salt, cayenne pepper, and paprika. Add vinegar and oil slowly,
beating thoroughly. Add pimiento, sweet pickle, and green pepper. Serves
6.

SALMON LOUIS

[Illustration: Salmon louis]

1 pound can salmon
1 head lettuce
2 tomatoes, cut in sixths
Louis dressing
2 hard-cooked egg yolks, sieved

Drain and flake salmon. Shred lettuce and place in a shallow salad bowl.
Arrange salmon over the lettuce. Around the edge place the tomatoes.
Serve with Louis dressing and hard-cooked egg yolk. Serves 6.

LOUIS DRESSING

½ cup mayonnaise or salad dressing
2 tablespoons whipping cream
2 tablespoons chili sauce
2 tablespoons chopped green pepper
2 tablespoons chopped green onions
2 hard-cooked egg whites, chopped
1 tablespoon chopped olives
½ teaspoon lemon juice
Dash salt
Dash pepper

Combine all ingredients and chill. Serves 6.

[Illustration: Salmon salads delight smart San Francisco—try one
tonight]

SALMON SOUFFLÉ

[Illustration: Salmon soufflé]

1 can (7¾ ounces) salmon
¼ cup butter or margarine
¼ cup flour
½ teaspoon powdered mustard
¼ teaspoon salt
Dash cayenne pepper
1 cup milk
6 egg yolks, beaten
1 tablespoon chopped parsley
6 egg whites

Drain and flake salmon. Melt butter; blend in flour and seasonings. Add
milk gradually and cook until thick and smooth, stirring constantly.
Stir a little of the hot sauce into egg yolk; add to remaining sauce,
stirring constantly. Add parsley and salmon. Beat egg whites until
stiff. Fold salmon mixture into egg white. Pour into a well-greased,
2-quart casserole. Bake in a moderate oven, 350°F., for 45 minutes or
until soufflé is firm in the center. Serves 6.

SALMON SOUTHERN CORNBREAD

[Illustration: Salmon southern cornbread]

1 can (7¾ ounces) salmon
1 cup sifted flour
1 cup cornmeal
4 teaspoons baking powder
¼ cup sugar
½ teaspoon salt
1 egg, beaten
1 cup salmon liquid and milk
¼ cup butter or other fat, melted

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Flake salmon. Sift together flour,
cornmeal, baking powder, sugar, and salt. Combine egg, salmon liquid,
and butter. Add to dry ingredients and mix just enough to moisten. Stir
in salmon. Place in a well-greased baking dish, 8 × 8 × 2 inches. Bake
in a hot oven, 425°F., for 25 to 30 minutes. Serves 6.

[Illustration: Miami’s sun inspired this golden corn bread]

SALMON BUFFET
(FRONT COVER)

3 cans (7¾ ounces each) salmon
1 head endive
3 lemon slices
Capers
3 hard-cooked eggs, quartered, and deviled
1 cucumber, sliced crosswise
6 cauliflower flowerettes
6 ripe olives
1 carrot, cut into strips

Drain salmon, being careful not to break cylindrical shape. Separate and
wash endive. Arrange on a serving platter. Place the 3 salmon cylinders
in a row in the center of the platter. Garnish salmon with lemon slices
and capers. Arrange remaining ingredients around salmon. Serves 6.

SALMON SALAD
(INSIDE FRONT COVER)

1 pound can salmon
1 head leaf lettuce
1 bunch watercress
1 hard-cooked egg
Salad oil
Vinegar

Drain salmon. Break salmon into large pieces. Separate lettuce and
watercress. Wash. Line salad bowl with lettuce. Place ¾ of the salmon in
the bowl. Place watercress on top of salmon. Sprinkle with remaining
salmon. Cut hard-cooked egg almost through lengthwise into sixths. Place
in center of watercress and spread open. Serve with salad oil and
vinegar. Serves 6.

APPETIZERS AND DIPS

SALMON SOUR CREAM DIP

1 pound can salmon
½ teaspoon salt
3 drops tabasco
1 teaspoon grated onion
1 cup sour cream
1 tablespoon drained red caviar
Assorted crackers

Drain and mash salmon. Blend in salt, tabasco, and onion. Fold in sour
cream. Chill. Garnish with caviar. Serve with crackers. Makes about 1
pint of dip.

SALMON APPETIZER

1 can (7¾ ounces) salmon
1 head endive
1 teaspoon lemon juice
Dash pepper
Onion rings
Capers

Drain salmon, being careful not to break cylindrical shape. Separate and
wash endive. Arrange in a serving dish. Place the salmon cylinder in the
center of the dish. Moisten with lemon juice and sprinkle with pepper.
Garnish with onion rings and capers. Serves 6.

SALMON AVOCADO SPREAD

1 can (7¾ ounces) salmon
1 avocado
1 tablespoon lemon juice
1 tablespoon olive or salad oil
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
1½ teaspoons grated onion
½ teaspoon salt
4 drops tabasco
Crackers

Drain and flake salmon. Peel avocado and remove seed. Grate avocado
using a medium grater. Combine all ingredients. Toss lightly. Serve with
crackers. Makes about 1 pint of spread.

SALMON CURRIED EGGS

1 pound can salmon
⅔ cup mayonnaise or salad dressing
1 tablespoon chili sauce
1 teaspoon chopped pimiento
1 teaspoon chopped green pepper
1 teaspoon grated onion
¼ teaspoon curry powder
1½ dozen hard-cooked eggs
Parsley

Drain and mash salmon. Add mayonnaise, chili sauce, pimiento, green
pepper, onion, and curry powder. Blend. Chill. Cut eggs in half
lengthwise and remove yolks. Place salmon mixture in egg whites. Garnish
with parsley. Makes 36 canapes. Use egg yolks in other appetizers.

SALMON TART
(BACK COVER)

1 pound can salmon
1 cup pastry mix
½ cup chopped onion
2 tablespoons butter or margarine, melted
2 tablespoons chopped parsley
4 eggs, beaten
1½ cups salmon liquid and coffee cream
½ teaspoon salt

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Flake salmon. Prepare pastry mix as
directed. Roll and line a 9-inch pie pan. Spread salmon in pie shell.
Cook onion in butter until tender. Sprinkle parsley and onion over
salmon. Combine eggs, salmon liquid, and salt. Pour over salmon. Bake in
a moderate oven, 350°F., for 35 to 45 minutes or until pie is firm in
the center. Serves 6.

SALMON TETRAZZINI
(BACK COVER)

1 pound can salmon
2 tablespoons butter or margarine
2 tablespoons flour
½ teaspoon salt
Dash pepper
Dash nutmeg
2 cups salmon liquid and milk
1 tablespoon sherry
2 cups cooked spaghetti
1 can (4 ounces) sliced mushrooms, drained
2 tablespoons grated Parmesan cheese
2 tablespoons dry bread crumbs
Watercress

Drain salmon, reserving liquid. Break salmon into large pieces. Melt
butter; blend in flour and seasonings. Add salmon liquid gradually and
cook until thick and smooth, stirring constantly. Add sherry. Mix half
of the sauce with the spaghetti and mushrooms. Place in a well-greased,
2-quart casserole. Mix remaining sauce with salmon. Place in center of
spaghetti. Combine cheese and crumbs; sprinkle over top of salmon
mixture. Bake in a moderate oven, 350°F., for 25 to 30 minutes. Garnish
with watercress. Serves 6.

SALMON PASTA
(BACK COVER)

1 can (7¾ ounces) salmon
1 pound ricotta cheese
12 large pasta shells
3 quarts boiling water
1 tablespoon salt
3 tablespoons butter or margarine
3 tablespoons flour
½ teaspoon salt
Dash pepper
Dash nutmeg
1 cup milk
1 cup cooked, drained spinach
½ cup grated Parmesan cheese
Parsley

Drain and flake salmon. Add cheese and mix well. Cook pasta shells in
boiling salted water for 45 minutes or until tender. Drain. Rinse with
water to remove excess starch. Melt butter; blend in flour and
seasonings. Add milk gradually and cook until thick and smooth, stirring
constantly. Chop spinach. Add spinach and blend thoroughly. An electric
mixer or blender may be used. Pour sauce into a well-greased baking
dish, 8 × 8 × 2 inches. Fill pasta shells with salmon mixture and
arrange over spinach. Sprinkle with cheese. Bake in a moderate oven,
350°F., for 30 minutes. Garnish with parsley. Serves 6.

_Two 14-minute, sound, color, 16 mm. motion pictures, “Salmon—Catch to
Can” and “Take a Can of Salmon,” may be borrowed, free of charge, by
writing to the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, U. S. Department of the
Interior, Washington 25, D.C._

Circular No. 60
U.S. Department of the Interior—Fish and Wildlife Service, Bureau of
Commercial Fisheries
This publication made possible through private contribution from the
Canned Salmon Institute, Seattle, Washington, U.S.A. Photographs by
Seranne & Gaden, New York City.
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office, Washington 25, D.C. Price 25 cents

[Illustration: SALMON TETRAZZINI · SALMON TART · SALMON PASTA]

Transcriber’s Notes

—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
_underscores_.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Take a Can of Salmon, by Anonymous