[Illustration:
Mrs. Lina Meier,
Teacher of Cookery, German Cooking School,
Milwaukee, Wis.]

THE ART
OF
GERMAN COOKING AND BAKING

Revised and Enlarged Edition.

_Compiled and Published by_
Mrs. LINA MEIER,
_German Cooking Teacher._

MILWAUKEE, U.S.A.
1922.

_COPYRIGHT 1922._
_By Mrs. LINA MEIER, Milwaukee, Wis._

_PREFACE TO REVISED EDITION_

This cook book consists of about 1,250 recipes which have been
tested and prepared. It is divided into 26 Chapters, as follows:

Chapter Recipes
1 Soups 68
2 Beef 6
3 Veal 42
4 Mutton 32
5 Pork 35
6 Poultry and Game Birds 56
7 Game 25
8 Fish 61
9 Headcheese and Gelatines 12
10 Dressings or Gravies 58
11 Potatoes 26
12 Vegetables 74
13 Salads 47
14 Eggs 15
15 Omelets, Pancakes, Waffles Noodles and Pies 58
16 Jams and Sauces 23
17 Desserts 128
18 Beverages 29
19 Wheat and Rye Bread, Yeast Cakes, Baking Powder Cakes
and Tarts 111
20 Fillings and Frostings 27
21 Cookies 53
22 Confectionery 20
23 Preserves 115
24 Menu 5
Sandwiches 8
25 Cookery for Invalids 63
26 Miscellaneous 12

In giving to the public this second edition I am glad to be able to,
offer a revised and improved cook book. It has been my aim to improve
it in every way and to make it as clear, practical and helpful as
possible.

The previous material has been carefully revised and changes made in
the wording where it was believed that the language could be improved
upon to make the author’s meaning more clear and comprehensible. A
radical change has also been made in the construction and arrangement
of the pages, which I trust will be an advantage.

In recognition of the friendly attitude of the great public toward my
first book, I wish to say that the entire edition of about 5,000
copies is scattered all over the country and many assurances of
appreciation have come to me. I therefore feel encouraged to send this
new edition out upon the world, knowing that it is the same excellent
cook book, only improved and augmented, and I hope that the book will
contribute materially to the happiness and attractiveness of many
homes and help to solve many problems, especially for brides and
beginners.

Respectfully,
MRS. LINA MEIER,
Author.

Milwaukee, Wis., U. S. A.

Reliable Weights and Measures as used in this Book.

Are
equal to

Flour 1 quart or 4 teacups 1 lb.
Flour (sifted) 3 coffee cups, level 1 lb.
Flour 2 tbsps., well-rounded 1 oz.
Flour 1 teaspoonful, heaped ½ oz.
Sugar, granulated 2 measuring cups, level 1 lb.
Sugar, “A” coffee 1¾ coffee cups, level 1 lb.
Sugar, powdered 2½ coffee cups, level 1 lb.
Sugar, powdered 2 tbsps., well-rounded 1 oz.
Sugar, best Brown 2 coffee cups, level 1 lb.
Sugar, granulated, “A” or brown 1 tbsp., well-heaped 1 oz.
Butter, soft 2 full cups, well-pressed 1 lb.
Butter, soft 3 tbsp., well-rounded 2 ozs.
Butter, soft Piece size of an egg 1 oz.
Lard 2 cups 1 lb.
Eggs 10 but if quite large 9 l lb.
Cornstarch 3 cups 1 lb.
Indian Meal 2¾ coffee cups, level 1 qt.
Coffee, ground 4 cups 1 lb.
Chocolate, sweet 3 grated tablespoons 1 oz.
Rice 2 cups, heaped 1 lb.
Rice 2 tablespoons 1 oz.
Sago 2 cups, heaped 1 lb.
Barley 4 cups 1 lb.
Bread crumbs 1 cup, grated 2 ozs
Chopped meat 2 cups, heaped 1 lb.
Suet 1 pint 1 lb.
Nutmeg 2 cups 1 lb.
Almonds 5 medium-sized 1 oz.
Figs 2 cups 1 lb.
Dates 2 cups 1 lb.
Raisins 2 cups 1 lb
Prunes 2 cups 1 lb.
Citron 2 cups, heaped 1 lb.
1 cup 4 ozs
2 rounded tablespoons 1 oz.

CHAPTER 1.

SOUPS.

No. 1—BOUILLON.

4 lbs. ox bones
6 qts. water
⅛ of an onion
½ of a carrot
1 small piece celery
1 small piece kohlrabi
1 small piece parsley root
1 tomato, salt

Preparation: The soup bone is put over the fire in 6 qts. of cold water
after it has been washed in cold water. Soup greens and salt are added
and the whole is boiled slowly 4 hours until it is boiled down to 2 or
3 quarts. Before using pour the bouillon through a fine sieve. If you
like the bouillon very strong and of a good color add ½ teaspoonful of
beef extract.

No. 2—BOUILLON.

The soup bone and the soup greens are fried light brown with a piece of
butter or lard. Water is then added and salt. Boil 4 hours as in the
preceding recipe and strain before using.

No. 3—OXTAIL BOUILLON.

3 lbs. ox-tall
1 tbsp. butter
5 qts. cold water
Salt
Soup greens

Preparation: Cut the ox-tail into small pieces and together with the
soup greens, fry them in butter light brown. Add 5 qts. of water and
salt. Let it boil 4 or 5 hours slowly down to 2 qts. This bouillon
will be very strong and may be served in cups, and bread or
cheese sticks may be served with it.

No. 4—BOUILLON OF MEAT EXTRACT.

Soup greens
1 tbsp. butter or lard
1 tsp. extract of meat
Salt, 1 qt. water

Preparation: Stew the soup greens in butter or lard a little while,
then add water and salt and boil slowly for 20 minutes. Add the meat
extract and strain. The yolk of one egg may be stirred into it.

No. 5—BOUILLON OF BEEF.

3 lbs. of beef
1 lb. of soup bone
Salt
4 qts. water
Soup greens

Preparation: Soup bone, soup greens, and salt and water are put over the
fire to boil one hour, then the beef is added and the whole is boiled
slowly for another 2 or 2½ hours. Strain after boiling. This soup is
very strong. Boiled in this way the meat is tender and nourishing.

No. 6—BOUILLON.

Made of Roast Bones or Meat Remnants.

2 lbs. of roast bones
Soup greens
Salt
2 qts. water

Preparation: Chop the bones and put over the fire with soup greens,
salt and water; boil 2 hours, then strain. If the bouillon is not
strong enough, add a little meat extract.

No. 7—DUMPLINGS FOR BOUILLON.

Marrow Dumpling Soup.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 tbsps. of melted beef marrow
2 eggs
¾ pt. grated rolls
½ tsp. chopped parsley
1 pinch nutmeg
1 tbsp. cold water
½ tsp. salt

Preparation: Boil or cook the marrow until it is melted, strain it
through a fine sieve. Put 3 tablespoonfuls into a dish and let it cool
off. Then beat it to foam and add the yolks of the eggs, salt,
parsley, nutmeg, the grated rolls and water. Finally beat the whites
of 2 eggs to stiff froth and stir into the mass.

Form small dumplings, let bouillon come to a boil, put the dumplings
in and boil slowly ¼ hour.

It is best to try one dumpling first; in case it does not hold
together, add some more grated roll.

The soup must be served at once. A little chopped parsley put into it
is a pleasing and palatable addition.

No. 8—BUTTER-DUMPLING SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 tbsps. of butter, 2 eggs
¾ pt. grated rolls
¼ tsp. of salt
½ tsp. parsley
1 pinch nutmeg
1 tbsp. of cold water

Preparation of butter-dumplings is the same as the marrow dumplings
in No. 7.

The butter is beaten to a cream at once and less salt is added,
because the butter is already salted.

No. 9—LIVER-DUMPLING SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of chopped calf’s liver
1 tsp. butter
A little grated onion
1 tsp. finely chopped parsley
5 tbsps. grated rolls
2 eggs
1 tsp. salt, (scant)
1 pinch nutmeg

Preparation: The butter is stirred and liver, yolk of eggs, salt,
parsley, onion, nutmeg and roll crumbs added. The whites of eggs are
beaten to a froth and stirred into the mass, then small dumplings are
formed. When the bouillon comes to a boil, put the dumplings in and
boil ¼ hour.

The soup should be served at once.

No. 10—MEAT-DUMPLING SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of finely chopped veal or poultry
2 eggs
¼ pt. grated rolls
1 tsp. of butter
½ tsp. finely chopped parsley
1 tsp. salt
1 pinch nutmeg

Preparation: The butter is stirred, then meat, yolk of eggs, parsley,
salt, nutmeg added and well mixed. The whites of eggs beaten to a
froth and added to the mass. Small dumplings are formed and when
bouillon boils, let the dumplings boil in it 10 minutes. A little
parsley may be put into the soup, which must be served at once.

No. 11—SPONGE-DUMPLING SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 eggs
¼ tsp. of salt
½ pt. milk or bouillon

Preparation: Eggs and milk or bouillon are well stirred or beaten,
salt is added and the mass boiled in double boiler for 20 minutes. If
you have no double boiler put your soup into a small pot and place
this into a larger one with boiling water.

The bouillon is put into the soup tureen and the dumplings are cut with
a teaspoon and put into the bouillon. A little finely chopped parsley
is added.

No. 12—FARINA-DUMPLING SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ pt. milk
4 tbsps. fine farina
1 egg
1 tsp. of butter
¼ tsp. of salt
1 pinch of nutmeg

Preparation: The milk is brought to a boil, stir in the farina and
butter and salt, then boil 2 or 3 minutes, stirring constantly until
the mass loosens from the pot. Take from the stove, stir into it the
yolk of egg. Beat the white of the egg to a froth and add to the mass.
When it is cool make small dumplings, or you may also cut into sponges
with teaspoon. Let the bouillon boil 5 minutes with the dumplings.
Some chopped parsley in the soup is very good.

No. 13—STIRRED SPONGE DUMPLINGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 tbsps. of butter
6 tbsps. of flour
2 tbsps. of milk
¼ tsp. of salt
½ tsp. finely chopped parsley
1 pinch of nutmeg
2 eggs

Preparation: The butter is beaten to a cream, add yolks of 2 eggs,
salt, parsley, nutmeg, flour and milk.

The whites of 2 eggs are beaten to a froth and stirred in. When the
bouillon boils cut out small sponges with teaspoon and boil 5 minutes.

If the dumplings are too soft, add some more flour. The soup must be
served at once.

No. 14—CURDLE SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¾ pt. milk
2–3 eggs
3 tbsps. of flour
½ tsp. of salt
1 pinch of nutmeg
1 tsp. of finely chopped parsley

Preparation: The milk, eggs, flour, salt and nutmeg are well mixed.

When the bouillon boils the mass is slowly poured into it and boiled 5
minutes. The soup must be stirred constantly while boiling, lest it
should burn. When served the parsley is added.

No. 15—MARROW STRIPS FOR SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

⅛ lb. beef marrow, 2 rolls
⅛ lb. butter, (scant)
1 pinch of salt
1 pinch of white pepper

Preparation: The rolls are cut into equal strips and baked light brown
in the butter. They are then placed on a platter. Soak the marrow in
water, cut into layers and place on the hot bread. Sprinkle with salt
and pepper and place the pan or platter into a hot oven. Leave it in
the oven until the marrow is transparent and serve with the bouillon.

No. 16—BREAD STICKS FOR BOUILLON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ pt. warm milk
½ cake yeast
1 tbsp. of milk
1 pinch of salt

Preparation: The warm milk and flour is beaten to a thin dough. The
yeast is dissolved in a tablespoonful of warm milk and added to the
dough. The whole is placed near a warm stove for rising which requires
about ½ hour.

When this is done, work the dough with flour thick enough to roll out
in ½ inch layer. Cut this dough into narrow strips 4 inches long and
set aside for rising again, then bake them in a tin until, of a yellow
color. Serve them fresh and warm with a strong bouillon.

No. 17—CHEESE STICKS FOR BOUILLON.

Quantity for 12 Persons.

⅛ lb. Swiss cheese
⅛ lb. Parmesan cheese
¼ lb. butter
¼ lb. flour
1 pinch salt
1 pinch paprika (red pepper)

Preparation: The butter is beaten to foam, the cheese is grated fine
and added, also salt and paprika. Then the flour is kneaded into it to
make a smooth dough and rolled out to ½ inch thickness. Cut in ½ inch
strips and 5 inches long. Now bake in a medium hot oven to a light
yellow color. If too dark the sticks will taste bitter.

They are served fresh and warm with strong bouillon.

No. 18—CHEESE PASTRY.

Quantity for 12—15 Persons.

¼ lb. flour
¼ lb. (scant) Parmesan cheese
⅛ lb. fresh, good butter
6 tbsps. thick, sour cream
1 pinch salt
1 pinch sugar
A little nutmeg
A little paprika (red pepper)

Preparation: The butter is beaten to a cream, and the finely grated
cheese added. The cream, sugar, salt, nutmeg, paprika and flour added,
made into a fine paste and rolled out into ½ inch thickness. Cut out
with a small glass and bake in a medium hot oven to a light yellow
color.

Remarks: It is better to put the paste on ice for a while and then
roll it out. They are served hot with bouillon; or this pastry, as
also the cheese sticks in No. 17 may be served as dessert instead of
bread, butter and cheese.

No. 19—FLOUR DUMPLINGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 cup of flour
1½ cups of boiling water
1 tbsp. of butter
1 tsp. of salt, 1 egg

Preparation: The flour and salt are mixed and the boiling water, in
which the butter is melted, poured on and the mass stirred briskly,
after which the egg is mixed in.

The bouillon should be boiling, and the dumplings are formed or cut
out with a teaspoon, put into the bouillon, and boiled 8 minutes.

Remarks: These dumplings may be made large, boiled in salt water 10
minutes and served with stewed fruit.

No. 20—RICE SOUP WITH BOUILLON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ cup of rice
3 qts. of bouillon
2 cups of cold water

Preparation: The rice is washed and put on with 2 cups of cold water
to boil 5 minutes; then pour off the water. Now add 3 qts. bouillon
and cook slowly for 1 hour.

No. 21—BOUILLON RICE SOUP WITH TOMATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ cup rice
2 cups water
½ qt. canned tomatoes or 1½ lbs. fresh tomatoes.
3 qts. bouillon

Preparation: After the bouillon boils as in No. 1, add instead of one
tomato the quantity mentioned in this recipe. Proceed as in No. 20,
strain the bouillon and boil the rice in it for 1 hour.

No. 22—RICE SOUP WITH MILK.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 cup of rice
3 cups of water
2 qts. of milk
½ tsp. of salt

Preparation: The rice is washed in water, and boiled for 5 minutes.
Pour off the water and gradually add milk. It takes the rice about 1½
to 2 hours to get soft. Serve with sugar and cinnamon or cooked prunes.

In the summer time rice is palatable and refreshing, served cold with
milk.

No. 23—COLD RICE SOUP WITH APPLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¾ cup of rice
2 qts. water
2 lbs. sweet-sour apples
½ lemon
¼ tsp. of salt
½ cup sugar

Preparation: The rice is washed and boiled in 2 cups of water for 5
minutes, then this water is poured off and 2 qts. added to boil 1
hour. In the meantime peel the apples and remove the core, cut them up
in ⅛ths and put into rice, also cut up the ½ lemon in slices and add
to the soup. Boil all this 20 minutes after adding salt and sugar as
stated above.

If the soup is too thick, add some more water. It can be served warm,
but it tastes better when cold.

Remarks: You can improve the soup by adding ½ pt. of white wine and
more sugar.

No. 24—BARLEY SOUP WITH BOUILLON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¾ cup of pearl barley
2 cups of water
3 qts. bouillon
Some finely cut asparagus

Preparations: The barley is washed in cold water and then brought to
boiling in cold water. The water is poured off and the bouillon poured
on and with this it is boiled slowly for 1½ hours. During the last ¾
of an hour the asparagus is put in and boiled until soft. If you wish,
you may leave out the asparagus.

If the soup looks too white you may add some meat extract or stir into
it the yolk of one egg.

No. 25—BARLEY GRUEL SOUP WITH BOUILLON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 cup of pearl barley
1 tbsp. of butter
Some pieces of asparagus if you like
3 qts. strong bouillon

Preparation: The barley is washed and boiling water poured on and off
twice. Heat the butter and cook the barley in it for a while. Then the
bouillon is poured on and the soup is boiled slowly for 2½ hours. Now
the soup is strained through a fine hair sieve and heated again.

If you wish some asparagus in it, which gives it a nice flavor, cook
the asparagus pieces separately in bouillon until soft and add it to
the soup, or stir the yolk of one egg into the soup.

This soup is very good for sick persons, but for this purpose the
asparagus is left out.

No. 26—BARLEY GRUEL SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 cup of pearl barley
1 tbsp. of butter
3 qts. of water
Salt according to taste
1 pinch of nutmeg
2 tsps. of chopped parsley

Preparation: The barley is washed and put over the fire in some cold
water. Let it get hot and pour off the water. Put the barley into the
butter and let it steep a while, then add more water and boil for one
hour. Add salt and nutmeg and at last add the parsley. You can also
add a piece of fresh butter.

No. 27—SWEET BARLEY GRUEL SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

This soup is the same as No. 26 with the exception of parsley and
nutmeg which are left out. ½ cup of sugar and some cinnamon are added.
The soup is then strained through a fine hair sieve and the yolk of one
egg is stirred into it.

No. 28—SAGO SOUP WITH BOUILLON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 cup of sago
3 qts. of bouillon
1 qt. of water

Preparation: The sago is soaked for 1 hour in cold water. Pour off the
water and add boiling hot bouillon, and in this the sago is left to
boil until it is transparent.

No. 29—SAGO SOUP WITH RED WINE OR RASPBERRY JUICE.

Quantity for 2 Persons.

¼ cup of sago
3 cups of water
½ cup of sugar
2 slices of lemon
1½ cups red wine or raspberry juice

Preparation: The sago is soaked in cold water for one hour. This water
is then poured off and 3 cups of fresh water added in which the sago
is boiled until soft and transparent. Add the quantity of red wine or
juice, sugar and lemon and let it boil 5 minutes longer. Remove the
lemon slices.

Serve this soup with zwieback or with small slices of toast.

No. 30—FARINA SOUP WITH BOUILLON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¾ cup of farina
2 qts. of bouillon

Preparation: Let the already strained bouillon boil, then pour the
farina into it slowly while stirring it, and leave it to boil 10
minutes.

No. 31—GREEN CORN SOUP WITH BOUILLON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ cups of green corn
1 tbsp. of butter
3 qts. of bouillon
1 or 2 yolks of eggs
1 milk roll cut into small cubes
½ tbsp. of butter

Preparation: The green corn is steeped in the tablespoonful of butter,
then the bouillon is added and this boiled slowly for 2 hours. This is
then strained through a hair sieve and the yolk of one egg stirred in.

The milk roll is cut into cubes and fried in the ½ tablespoonful of
butter until light yellow. When serving the soup put these bread cubes
into it or serve them with the soup.

No. 32—OATMEAL SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 cups of oatmeal
2 tbsps. of butter
Some salt
½ tsp. of meat extract
2½ qts. of water

Preparation: The oatmeal is put on with the water and salt and boiled
slowly for ½ hour, then the soup is strained or pressed through a
hair sieve. Now add butter and meat extract and let this all come to a
boil. If the soup is too thick add some more boiling water.

Remarks: Instead of water you may also take milk and leave out the
meat extract. You may add some sugar. Small pieces of rolls fried in
butter are good with this soup. It is very good for invalids.

No. 33—BEAN SOUP WITH BOUILLON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 cup of nice white beans
½ lb. of ham bones
3 qts. of good bouillon

Preparation: The beans are soaked in water for some hours, pour off
the water, put on fresh water and bring to boil. After boiling for 10
minutes, pour off this water and boil again. Now pour it off for the
last time, add the bouillon and boil the beans in this until soft. The
ham bone is boiled in the bouillon. It requires 3 hours to cook this
soup.

No. 34—BEAN-PUREE SOUP WITH CRAB OR LOBSTER BUTTER.

Quantity for 4 Persons.

¾ cup of white beans
1½ qts. of water
1 tbsp. of butter
1 tbsp. of crab or lobster butter
1½ qts. of bouillon
Some white pepper
3 tbsps. of cream

Preparation: The beans are soaked, drained and boiled until soft in 1½
qts. of water. When they are soft the water must be all boiled down.
Strain the beans through a fine sieve. This puree or mass is stewed in
the butter and the crab or lobster butter and then the bouillon is
added, also the white pepper. The cream is put into the soup dish and
the soup is poured over it.

Begin preparation of this soup about 3 hours before time to serve.

No. 35—PEA SOUP WITH BOUILLON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ cups of peas
3 qts. of bouillon
½ tbsp. of butter
½ lb. ham or bones
1 roll

Preparation: The peas are prepared just like the beans in No. 33, then
they are boiled until soft in bouillon for 3 hours. The soup is then
strained. If it is ham that is being boiled in the bouillon, cut same
into small pieces and put them into the strained peas.

Cut the roll into small cubes, fry them in butter until light yellow
and serve with the soup.

No. 36—LENTIL SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 cups of lentils
3 qts. of bouillon
½ tbsp. of butter
1 tbsp. of flour
1 lb. of Wiener sausage

Preparation: The lentils are soaked in water for one hour, then this
water is poured off and the lentils brought to boil in cold water.
They must boil for 10 minutes. This water is again poured off and the
bouillon added; in this the lentils are boiled until soft which
requires 2½ to 3 hours. When the lentils are done, the butter is
heated and the flour stirred into it; this is then poured into the
soup. Ten minutes before serving put the Wieners into the soup, let
come to a boil and then merely steep. The Wieners are served with the
soup.

Remarks: Put very little salt into the soup, because the Wieners are
already seasoned.

No. 37—FRESH VEGETABLE SOUP WITH BOUILLON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 small carrots
2 small kohlrabis
¼ head of celery
¼ head of cauliflower
30 pods of shelled peas
6 asparagus stalks
2 potatoes if you like
½ tbsp. of butter
1 tbsp. of flour
3 qts. bouillon

Preparation: The butter is heated and flour put into it to stew, then
the bouillon is added; all vegetables and potatoes cut into smalls
pieces, and put into the boiling bouillon and cooked for one hour
until soft. If you cannot get all of these vegetables you may put less
of it into the soup. Instead you may put small meat dumplings of veal
or chicken into it. These dumplings are prepared as in recipe No. 10.

No. 38—ASPARAGUS SOUP WITH BOUILLON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of asparagus
3 qts. of bouillon
1 tbsp. of butter
2½ tbsps. of flour

Preparation: The butter is heated and the flour stewed in it, then the
bouillon is added and let come to a boil. The asparagus is peeled, cut
into small pieces, 1½ inches long, and boiled in the bouillon for ¾ of
an hour.

If the asparagus is tender it will be done after ½ hour cooking.

No. 39—CAULIFLOWER SOUP WITH BOUILLON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 head of cauliflower
3 qts. bouillon
1 tbsp. of butter
2½ tbsps. of flour

Preparation: The preparation of this soup is the same as
No. 38. The cauliflower is broken into small roses and boiled
in the prepared bouillon about 20 minutes.

No. 40—SORREL SOUP WITH BOUILLON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of sorrel
½ lb. lettuce leaves
¼ lb. butter
3 tbsps. of flour
2½ qts. bouillon
5 tbsps. of cream
Some sugar
1 pinch of pepper
1 roll cut into small cubes
½ tbsp. of butter
2 yolks of eggs

Preparation: The sorrel and lettuce leaves are put into boiling water
for a minute and placed in a sieve to drain. It is then put into ¼ lb.
of butter and stewed for 10 minutes. After this the mass is pressed
through a sieve and stirred with the yolks of eggs and cream. The
bouillon should be prepared and heated beforehand; the butter should
be heated and the flour stirred in, and to this the bouillon is
gradually added. The cubes of roll are fried light yellow in the ½
tablespoonful of butter. When the puree is done it is poured into the
boiling bouillon and sugar and pepper put in to suit taste. The fried
roll cubes are served with the soup.

No. 41—CELERY SOUP WITH MILK.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 small bundles of fresh celery or 1½ head of celery
2 tbsps. of butter
3 tbsps. of flour
1½–2 qts. of milk and ½ qt. cream
1–2 yolks of eggs
1 pinch of pepper
1 pinch of salt

Preparation: The celery is cut into small pieces, and boiled in water
until soft, then strained through a hair sieve. The butter is heated
with the flour in it and the milk is now added. The boiled and
strained celery is added, let come to a boil, stirring constantly. Add
enough salt and pepper to suit your taste, stir in the yolks and serve
at once. If you leave the soup standing it will get thick.

No. 42—TOMATO SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. canned tomatoes, or 4 lbs. of fresh tomatoes
1 qt. of water
1 tbsp. of butter
½ tsp. of sliced onions
1 pinch of pepper
Salt, some sugar
2 tbsps. of flour
1 roll cut into cubes
½ tbsp. of butter
1 tsp. of chopped parsley

Preparation: The tomatoes are boiled in water for a few minutes. If
you have taken fresh tomatoes let them cook ½ hour in 1¼ qts. of
water. Butter and finely cut onions are steeped so that the onions
remain light yellow, add the flour and cook a little more. Butter,
flour and onions are now put into the boiling tomatoes, and boiled
with them. Then the mass is strained, sugar, salt, pepper added, the
whole heated, the chopped parsley put in, and the soup served. The
roll cubes are fried light yellow and put into the soup or if you wish
you can serve them with the soup.

No. 43—TOMATO SOUP WITH MILK.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. canned tomatoes or 4 lbs. fresh tomatoes
1 qt. of milk
½ tbsp. of butter
1 pinch of salt
1 pinch of sugar
1 pinch of pepper
1 tsp. of baking soda

Preparation. The can of tomatoes is heated, the fresh tomatoes must be
boiled until soft in ½ qt. of water, then pressed through a fine sieve.

The milk and butter are brought to boil in a double boiler and the
tomatoes are put into it. Salt, pepper and sugar put in, then the soda
stirred in and the soup served at once.

No. 44—MOCK-TURTLE SOUP.

Quantity for 8 Persons.

½ calf’s head without the brains
1 calf’s tongue or 2 feet
⅛ lb. of raw ham, (scant)
1 carrot
1 piece of parsley root
½ of a celery root
2 small onions
⅛ qt. red wine
Salt and pepper
⅛ lb. of butter
⅛ lb. of flour
1⁄16 qt. of Madeira wine
4 eggs
2½ qts. of water

Preparation: The finely cut ham, soup greens and onions are fried and
the calf’s head and tongue or chopped feet are then put in and the
quantity of water added. The feet must be scalded before using.

The whole is cooked until tender and salt and pepper added. Then it is
strained. The skin of the calf’s head is cut into small pieces (also
the tongue and feet) a little salt is strewn over the meat and the red
wine poured over it.

Butter and flour are browned and the bouillon, from which the fat has
been removed is poured on, also the Madeira wine.

The soup is now slowly boiled for one hour. The scum and fat must be
taken off.

Now the meat with the red wine are put in.

The eggs are boiled hard and the whole yolks put into the soup. You
can also cut the yolks in halves and put one-half into each soup dish.

It requires 3 hours to cook this soup.

No. 45—POTATO SOUP WITH BOUILLON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of raw or unboiled peeled potatoes
2 qts. bouillon of ox bones (soup-bones) or bouillon of rabbitroast
bones, or bouillon of poultryroast bones
1 roll cut into small cubes
½ tbsp. of butter

Preparation: The potatoes are pared, cut into small pieces and cooked
until soft in the bouillon, then pressed through a sieve. If you wish
you may leave the pieces of potatoes whole.

The roll cubes are toasted light yellow and put into the soup or
served with it.

Remarks: Potato soup of rabbitroast bones or fowl bones is very good.
If there is some meat left on these bones, cut it in small pieces and
put it into the soup.

No. 46—POTATO SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of raw potatoes
2 qts. of water
1½ tbsps. of fresh butter
Salt
1 roll cut into cubes
½ tbsp. of butter
½ tsp. of meat extract

Preparation: The potatoes are pared, cut into small pieces, and cooked
until soft in the 2 qts. of water, then pressed through a sieve and
cooked again. Salt, butter, meat extract are now added.

The roll cubes are fried light yellow in the ½ tablespoonful of butter
and put into the soup before serving.

No. 47—WHITE WINE SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. light white wine
1 qt. water
1 stick of cinnamon
2 cloves
2 tsps. of lemon sugar or 4 slices of lemon
¼ lb. of sugar
3 tbsps. of corn starch or flour
1 pinch of salt
3 eggs

Preparation: The water with the spices is boiled for 2 minutes before
the wine is added and let come to a boil again. The yolks of the 3
eggs are stirred with flour and a little water and then stirred into
the soup. Let it come to a boil once more, stirring constantly. Then
it is taken from the stove. The whites of the eggs are beaten to a
stiff froth and put into the soup when served.

Cloves, lemon slices, and cinnamon are taken out. Zwieback or toasted
slices of rolls are served with this soup.

No. 48—RED WINE SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. light red wine
1 qt. of water
1 small piece of lemon peel
3 cloves
1 stick of cinnamon
¼ lb. of sugar
3 tbsps. of cornstarch or common flour

Preparation: Boil the water, sugar and spices for 10 minutes. The
flour mixed with some water is stirred in and let come to a boil,
stirring constantly.

Heat the red wine and put it into the soup but do not boil any longer.
Serve at once. Serve zwieback or small soup macaroons with it.

No. 49—BEER SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ qts. of beer
½ qt. water
1 stick of cinnamon
2 cloves
1 pinch of salt
3 tbsps. of flour or cornstarch
3 slices of lemon or lemon sugar
3 eggs
¼ lb. sugar

Preparation: Water, beer, sugar and spices are brought to a boil. The
flour and yolks of eggs are mixed with water and stirred into the soup
and brought to a boil again. The whites of eggs are beaten to a stiff
froth and put into the soup when served.

Zwieback or toasted slices of rolls are served with the soup.

No. 50—APPLE SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of apples
2 qts. of water
¼ lb. of sugar
1 stick of cinnamon
2 tbsps. of cornstarch
⅛ lb. of currants
Juice of ½ lemon and a small piece of rind

Preparation: The apples with their peelings on are cut into pieces and
the core removed, and then boiled in the water with the spices until
soft. The flour is mixed with a little water and put into the apples
while boiling. Then the whole is strained or pressed through a sieve.
Now the washed currants are added and a cup of red wine or white
wine and cooked again.

Remarks: All fruit soups may be prepared this way, i.e., plum, cherry,
apricots, strawberries, raspberries, currants, grapes, gooseberries or
rhubarb soups are made this way but some need more sugar than others,
or the wine is left out.

Dried fruit may also be used.

No. 51—RYE BREAD SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of rye bread
2 qts. of water
Salt
1 tumbler full of white wine
Some sugar, about 1 tbsp.
1 tbsp. of fresh butter
½ cup of currants

Preparation: The rye bread which may be stale is put on with 2 qts. of
cold water and boiled a little, then pressed through a hair sieve.

If it should be too thick, leave out some bread. It is then boiled
with the salt, sugar, currants and butter for a little while. The
white wine is poured into the soup dish and the soup added to it while
boiling hot.

No. 52—FLOUR SOUP, (WHEAT).

Quantity for 6 Persons.

⅛ lb. of butter
⅛ lb. of flour
½ qt. of water
1 pinch of salt
1½ qts. of milk

Preparation: The butter is browned, flour stirred in, milk, water and
salt added. The soup must be boiled 20 minutes, constantly stirring
it. You may stir into it the yolk of one egg.

No. 53—RYE FLOUR SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

⅛ lb. of rye flour
2 tbsps. of butter
½ qt. of water
1 qt. of milk
1 pinch of salt
2 yolks of eggs

Preparation: The rye flour is stirred into the cold water, butter and
salt added and cooked for 20 minutes while stirring constantly. Add
the milk and boil again; then stir in the yolks.

No. 54—MILK SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 qts. of milk
1 small stick of cinnamon
1 tbsp. of lemon sugar
⅛ lb. of sugar
1 pinch of salt
⅛ lb. cornstarch

Preparation: 1½ qts. milk, sugar, spices and salt, let come to a boil.
The flour is mixed with ½ qt. of milk and stirred into the boiling
milk, then boiled for ¼ hour. Stir in one egg yolk, then serve.

No. 55—CHOCOLATE SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 qts. of milk
½ lb. of sweet chocolate or ⅛ lb. of cocoa
1 tbsp. of lemon sugar
¼ lb. of sugar
1 small stick of cinnamon
1 pinch of salt
⅛ lb. of cornstarch

Preparation: Prepare the chocolate soup just the same as the milk soup
No. 54. Grate the chocolate and stir it into the flour or cornstarch
and milk. If it gets too thick add more milk.

No. 56—FISH SOUP WITH FISH DUMPLINGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of pickerel or other fish
1½ qts. of water
½ of an onion, salt
⅛ lb. of flour
⅛ lb. of butter
1 qt. of bouillon
8 oysters
15 shrimps or crabs
⅛ qt. white wine
2 tbsps. of butter
2 yolks of eggs
12 small fish dumplings

Preparation: The fish is scaled, drawn and washed. The meat is cut
from the bones, the liver and gall removed. The bones are chopped up
and with water, onions, salt and spices slowly stewed for a fish
bouillon.

Melt ⅛ lb. butter, stir in the flour, simmer to a light yellow, pour
the fish bouillon in, let it simmer slowly for ¾ of an hour.

The crawfish or crabs are boiled in the meantime. The meat is taken
out of the shells. The oysters and the fish liver, which is cut into
pieces, are heated in the white wine, but not boiled. The meat of the
pickerel is also cut into small pieces and stewed in 2 tablespoonfuls
of butter until tender.

The fish dumplings are also cooked 10 minutes in the white wine. When
done, put the dumplings into the soup tureen. All the meat, liver,
crabs and oysters are put into the soup tureen, the gravy is strained
and the yolks of 2 eggs stirred in and then poured into the tureen.
Salt to taste. It is a very fine soup.

The fish dumplings are made the same way as the meat dumplings in No.
10, only instead of meat take fish, and take half the quantities given
in No. 10. Leave out the nutmeg.

No. 57—CRAWFISH OR CRAB SOUP WITH MARROW DUMPLINGS OR LIVER DUMPLINGS.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

24 small crabs
¼ lb. of butter
2½ qts. of bouillon
1 pinch of white pepper

Preparation: The crabs are washed carefully and thrown into boiling
salt water, but taken out again immediately. Mash the crab meat and
stew it ¼ of an hour in the ¼ lb. of butter. After this stir in the
bouillon, cover and cook slowly 1 hour.

Marrow dumplings or liver dumplings are cooked in the soup which has
been strained. The marrow dumplings are prepared as directed in No. 7
and the liver dumplings as in No. 9. Take the same quantities. Serve
at once when the dumplings are done.

No. 58—OYSTER SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. oysters
1 qt. milk
1 pinch of salt
1 pinch of pepper
2 tbsps. of fresh butter

Preparation: The milk is boiled and butter, salt, and pepper added.
The oysters with their juice are put into the boiling milk; stir
constantly while doing this, let come to boiling, stirring
continually; then serve at once. Serve crackers with the soup.

No. 59—CHICKEN BOUILLON TO DRINK.

Quantity for 4 Persons.

1 chicken
1 egg
1½ qts. of water
Some salt

Preparation: The chicken is cleaned well and all fat removed. The
meat is removed from the bones and chopped fine, the bones cracked or
split, the egg is stirred in and with water and salt put into a
covered pot and cooked slowly for 3 hours. Strain through a sieve and
serve. This soup is very good for invalids and convalescents.

No. 60—PIGEON BOUILLON TO DRINK.

Quantity for 3 Persons.

2 pigeons
1 egg
1¼ qts. of water
Some salt

Preparation: The pigeons are cleaned well and washed. The meat is
removed from the bones and chopped fine, the bones split or cracked
and the egg stirred in. Put on the fire with the water and salt and
cook in a covered pot for 3 hours. Strain and serve. This soup is also
good for sick people.

No. 61—PIGEON SOUP.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

2 old pigeons
2 lbs. of soup bone, or better
1 lb. of beef
Some soup greens
3 qts. of water
Scarcely ¼ lb. of fine barley
2 tbsps. of butter
2 yolks of eggs
4 asparagus stalks

Preparation: The pigeons are cleaned well and the breast and clubs or
legs cut off and left whole. The other meat is chopped, also the beef,
and all is boiled until soft in the quantity of water with salt and
soup greens. In the meantime the barley is soaked. Drain well and stew
the barley in butter for a little while, then gradually pour on the
strained bouillon.

Peel the asparagus and cut it into inch lengths and add to the barley
and bouillon. Boil for 1 hour. The meat from the breast and legs is
cut fine and put into the soup when served. If you have used beef for
the soup you may make hash or salad of it.

No. 62—CHICKEN SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 chicken
2½ qts. of water
Some soup greens
Salt
6 asparagus stalks, a few pieces of cauliflower
¼ cup of good rice, good measure
¼ tsp. of meat extract

Preparation: The chicken is cleaned well, washed and cooked until soft
with soup greens, salt and water which requires 1½ hours. If it is an
old chicken it will require 2 to 3 hours. The rice is washed and put
on with some cold water to get partly done. When the water is all
boiled down add the strained bouillon.

The asparagus and cauliflower are cleaned and cut into small pieces
and cooked until soft with the rice in the bouillon. When the soup is
done the meat extract is added.

The chicken breast is cut into small pieces and put into the soup. You
can also carve the whole chicken and serve it with the soup.

No. 63—PARTRIDGE SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 old partridges
4 potatoes cut in cubes
2 carrots cut in pieces
3 tbsps. of flour
2 tbsps. of butter
Salt
2 qts. of water
1½ tbsps. of butter

Preparation: The partridges are cleaned well and fried in the 2
tablespoonfuls of butter to a light brown. The flour is browned in the
1½ tablespoonfuls of butter and the water added, also potatoes,
carrots and salt and the fried partridges; all of this is boiled until
tender in a covered pot. This will require 2 to 2½ hours. The
partridge breast is cut in pieces and served in the soup.

The remaining partridge meat may be utilized in hash or dumplings.

No. 64—WILD GAME OR POULTRY SOUP.

Quantity for 4–6 Persons.

You can make soups from all kinds of wild or tame birds. Follow
directions given for chicken, pigeon or partridge soup. If the soup is
made of bones and remnants and not rich enough you may add meat extract.

No. 65—RED WINE SOUP WITH SAGO.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¾ bottle of red wine
1 qt. of water
¼ lb. of sago
1 stick of cinnamon
¼ lb. of sugar
2 slices of lemon
½ cup raisins

Preparation: The sago and raisins are boiled until soft in the water.
Then the red wine is added, also cinnamon, sugar and lemon slices, and
the soup is brought to boil again. Zwieback or toasted rolls are
served with it.

No. 66—TOMATO SOUP WITH SMALL MEAT OR POTATO DUMPLINGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. can of tomatoes
1 qt of water
1½ tbsps. of butter
2 heaping tbsps. of flour
¼ tbsp. of sliced onions
Salt to suit taste
1 pinch of pepper
1 tbsp. of sugar

Meat Dumplings.

¼ lb. beef
¼ lb. pork
1 egg
Salt and pepper to suit taste
1 tbsp. of butter

Potato Dumplings.

½ cup grated potatoes
½ egg
2 tbsps. of flour
Salt and pepper to suit taste

Preparation: Tomatoes are cooked in the water for 10 minutes. The
butter is melted and the onions put in and stewed a little, then the
flour is stirred in and the whole is put into the soup. Salt, pepper
and sugar are added and after a few minutes boiling the whole is
strained.

The meat dumplings contain beef, pork, 1 egg, butter, salt and pepper,
which is all mixed and small dumplings are formed.

The potato dumplings are made of mashed or grated boiled potatoes
which are mixed with 1 egg, flour, salt and pepper. Small dumplings
are formed and rolled in flour.

The tomato soup must be boiling when the dumplings are put in, and
boil 10 minutes. Serve the soup at once with the dumplings in it.

A teaspoonful of finely chopped parsley may be put in the soup.

No. 67—BUTTERMILK SOUP OR SOUR MILK SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ qts. of buttermilk or sour milk
½ qt. sweet milk
¼ lb. of sago
1 small stick of cinnamon
3 slices of lemon
1 pinch of salt
1 cup of sugar

Preparation: Buttermilk and sweet milk are brought to a boil with the
sago. Cinnamon and lemon added. Cook slowly for one hour, stirring
frequently. Add salt and a little sugar. The soup may be served hot or
cold.

No. 68—OYSTER PLANT SOUP.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 bundles of oyster plants
2½ tbsps. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to suit your taste
2 yolks of eggs
1½ qts. of milk

Preparation: The oyster plants are scraped and cut into small pieces.
Put the clean oyster plants immediately into water mixed with vinegar
and flour so that they will not get black.

When they are well cleaned they are stewed with the butter and a
little water until tender; then stir in the flour and cook a few
minutes. Then the milk is gradually added while stirring the soup
constantly. Now the soup is left to cook a little, stirring
occasionally and then salt and pepper are added.

At last the yolks of 2 eggs are stirred in.

CHAPTER 2.

BEEF.

[Illustration: Numbered cuts on a beef cow]

1. Beef Round
2. Rump
3. Sirloin
4. Loin and Porterhouse with Fillet
5–6. Rib Roast
6. Chuck of Beef
7. Neck
8. Round Shoulder
9. Beef Flank
10. Beef Brisket
11. Head
12. Shank
13. Tail

Preparation of All Kinds of Beef Dishes. Boiled, Roasted and Salted
Beef. How Remnants of Beef May be Utilized.

The best quality of beef has a nice red color and white suet. The meat
of young cows is more pale and tender.

Old cows have dark, brownish red meat and yellow suet.

Young beef makes a good roast, but a poor bouillon.

Old beef makes a tough roast, but a good bouillon.

The best Pieces for Roasting.

The fillet, roast beef, and the inner part of the forerib.

The best Pieces for braising or Pot Roast.

The rump, the sirloin, the fillet, roast beef, (well hung), also the
chuck and round shoulder, (well hung).

The best Pieces for Bouillon.

The meat from the round, the rump, the chuck, in fact all lean meat
and bones.

Meat for Salting and Pickling.

The meat from the round, also from the brisket, but without bones.

Best Pieces for Boiling.

The rump, the brisket and chuck.

No. 1—ROAST BEEF.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

6 lbs. of roast beef
2–3 tbsps. of butter
½ of an onion, to suit taste
½ cup of water
1 cup of water for gravy
¾ tbsp. of flour
Salt, pepper

Preparation: The roast beef is salted and peppered, put into a
roasting pan with the quantity of water given and roasted in the oven.
After ½ hour’s roasting add 2 to 3 tablespoonfuls of butter and let it
roast for another hour, basting frequently. In 1½ hours the roast beef
is rare inside and in 2 hours it is well done.

If the roast is small, it will require 15 minutes less per pound, and
if larger 15 minutes longer for roasting. When the roast is done, put
it on a platter and make the gravy.

Take ¾ tablespoonful of flour, put it into the pan, stir it well and
let it boil 3 minutes, then pour in the 1 cup of water, boil a few
minutes, strain and serve.

Remarks: Be careful that the butter does not turn too dark during the
roasting. Should this be the case add a little water, so that the
gravy may not taste bitter.

No. 2—MEAT PUDDING.

How to Utilize Roast Beef.

Roast Beef With Rice Covering.

Quantity for 4–6 Persons.

1¼ lbs. left over roast beef
½ cup of rice
2 tbsps. of grated Swiss or Parmesan cheese
½ tbsp. of flour
¼ tsp. chopped onions
2 tbsps. of butter
2 tbsps. of grated rolls
½ cup of left over gravy
½ qt. of bouillon or water
2 yolks of eggs

Preparation: The roast meat is chopped, but not too fine, and stewed
in a pan with the butter and onions. The gravy is mixed with flour,
salt and pepper and poured on the meat which is left to cook a few
minutes until the gravy gets thick.

The rice is cooked until soft and thick in the water or bouillon, the
grated cheese is put in and at last the yolks of 2 eggs. Taste the
rice for salt. Butter a pudding mold and strew in some grated rolls,
now put in one layer of rice and one layer of meat and so on until all
the meat and rice are in. Close the mold well and set in a steamer
over a kettle of boiling water and steam for 2 hours.

After the pudding is done, turn it out and pour over it a Dutch gravy
or serve the gravy separately with it.

No. 3—BEEF FILLET ROAST.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

4–6 lbs. of fillet
¼ lb. of butter
Salt and pepper
½ cup sweet or sour cream
½ cup of water
For larding take ⅛ lb. of bacon
½ tbsp. of flour

Preparation: The fillet roast is freed from fat and skin. The bacon is
cut in narrow strips and the fillet larded with it.

The butter is put into the frying pan and heated and then the fillet
browned in it on both sides and sprinkled with salt and pepper. It is
roasted in the oven for ¾ of an hour, basting frequently with the
gravy or water; the cream is put on 1 spoonful at a time. The roast
must be of a nice pink color. It is placed on a platter.

The gravy: The given quantity of flour is put into the pan and
browned, the water poured over and cooked for a few minutes; then
strain and serve.

You can also put champignons into the gravy, which makes it richer.

No. 4—BEEF FILLET BEEFSTEAK.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of fillet
¼ lb. of butter
Salt and pepper
¼ cup of water

Preparation: Cut the 2½ lbs. of fillet into 6 pieces, trim off the fat
and skin and pound slightly. They are then formed into round
beefsteaks and sprinkled with salt and pepper.

The butter is put into a frying pan and heated and the steaks quickly
browned on both sides, which requires about 5 minutes. Fry for 5
minutes more, basting and turning occasionally. The steaks are then
taken out and put on a platter. The water poured into the butter and
boiled a little while; this gravy is put over the steak. Beefsteak is
fried in an open frying pan on the top of the stove.

No. 5—BEEF FILLET STEAKS WITH CHAMPIGNONS AND FRIED GOOSE LIVER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of fillet
¼ lb. of butter
Salt and pepper
¼ cup of water
½ lb. goose liver
½ lb. champignons
½ tbsp. of butter
¼ tsp. of flour
2 tbsps. of sweet cream
⅛ tsp. of meat extract
⅛ lb. of butter with it

Preparation: The fillet is prepared just the same as in No. 4, and
also fried the same way. The goose liver is salted and peppered and
sprinkled with flour, then fried light yellow in ⅛ lb. of butter; add
1 tablespoonful of water, cover the pan and stew ¼ hour longer.

The water having been drained off the champignons, add ½ tablespoonful
of butter, ¼ teaspoonful of flour and a little salt and then cook a
little. The cream and meat extract are added and simmered a while
longer.

The ready fried beefsteaks are put on a hot platter. The goose liver is
cut into as many pieces as there are steaks, and one piece put in the
center of each steak. The prepared champignons are placed around each
piece of goose liver on top of each steak.

The gravy is put on the platter too. You can garnish the platter with
scallops of puff paste. This dish is nice between courses.

No. 6—BROILED STEAK OF ROAST BEEF.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of roast beef
Salt, pepper
¼ lb. of butter (scant)

Preparation: The roast beef is cut into 1½ inch thick slices and
pounded well. A broiler is put on the open medium hot fire and the
slices laid on to broil for 20 minutes, turning frequently. Put them
on a hot platter, sprinkle with pepper and salt, cut the butter into
small pieces and place them on the hot meat. Serve at once.

No. 7—STEAK FROM THE BEEF ROUND.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3–4 lbs. round steak
¼ lb. of butter
Salt, pepper
¼ cup of water
1 onion

Preparation: The meat is cut into slices ¾ inch thick and pounded
slightly.

The butter is heated; the onion is sliced and fried till light yellow
in the butter, then taken out and the meat put into this hot onion
butter after it has been salted and peppered. Fry for 5 to 8 minutes
to a light brown, turning it once or twice.

The meat is put on a hot platter and the onions on top. A little water
is put into the pan with butter and boiled a little. This gravy is
poured over the meat. Serve at once.

Remarks: If you do not like onions, omit them.

No. 8—CHOPPED GERMAN STEAK OR HAMBURG STEAK.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. chopped steak
1 tbsp. of butter
2–3 eggs
Salt, pepper
1 tsp. of grated onion
⅙ lb. of butter

Preparation: The lean meat from the round is chopped fine or ground
fine by putting it twice or three times through the grinder, then
salted, peppered and mixed with the eggs, a tablespoonful of butter
and onion if you like. If you do not like onions, omit them.

After mixing well, scant ¼ lb. dumplings are formed and flattened to
1½ inches in thickness. The butter or lard heated, the steaks put in
and fried about 10 minutes, turning and basting frequently.

Serve the steaks on a hot platter, and for gravy pour a little water
into the frying pan with the butter, let come to a boil, and pour over
the steaks.

Remarks: You may serve mustard gravy with this steak by adding 2
teaspoonfuls of mustard to the steak butter and 1 teaspoonful of flour
and bouillon or water, boiled for 2 minutes and strained.

No. 9 RAW BEEFSTEAK A LA TARTARE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of chopped meat
Salt, some pepper
6 yolks of eggs
2 tsps. of chopped onions
2 pepper-pickles
2 salt pickles
⅛ lb. sardines
1½ tbsps. of capers

Preparation: The beef which must be very fresh and free from sinews,
is chopped or ground twice in the grinder. Mix with salt and pepper
and form into 6 equal 1¼ inch thick steaks. With a knife, score or
mark squares on the surface. Make a depression in the middle of each
steak and put into this carefully one raw yolk of egg. Garnish each
steak with a small heap of onions, chopped small pieces of pickles,
sardines from which the bones have been removed. Capers and mustard
mixed with oil and vinegar may be served with it. The steaks must be
served fresh.

No. 10—FILLET BEEFSTEAK FOR BREAKFAST.

Quantity for 2 Persons.

1 lb. of fillet meat
⅛ lb. of butter
½ onion
Some salt
1 pinch of pepper
6 tbsps. of gravy
4 potatoes peeled

Preparation: The pan which must have a cover is buttered. The potatoes
and onions are cut into cubes, salted and peppered and put into the pan.

The pounded meat, cut into slices is browned on both sides in 1
tablespoonful of butter from the ⅛ lb. This must be done quickly in
about one minute. The browned meat is then put on the raw potatoes.
The gravy is poured into the beefsteak butter, or if you have no
gravy, take water and boil it for one minute with a little meat
extract, pour it over the potatoes and meat, cover well, and cook it 5
minutes over a hot fire; then set it aside and cook it slowly for 20
minutes more. Serve it at once in the covered pan. The pan must be
small for such a small portion.

Remarks: Instead of potatoes and onions you can take fresh or canned
champignons, morels or mushrooms. This dish is good for sick persons
if you omit the onions and mushrooms and take potatoes only.

No. 11—BEEF POT ROAST.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of meat
1 piece of fat bacon
Salt
6 pepper-corns
1 bay-leaf
1 clove
2 tbsps. of suet
3 tbsps. of flour
1 tbsp. of red wine or Madeira
½ of an onion

Preparation: The meat—from rump, chuck or sirloin—is pounded. The
bacon cut in small thick pieces is stuck into the meat, heat the suet,
add onions and brown meat slightly on both sides. When this is done it
is placed on a platter. Flour is browned in the suet to which water
and the spices are added, and cooked. The browned meat is put into the
gravy, which should cover it. Cover the pot well. The best thing for a
pot roast is an iron pot. Put the covered roast into the moderately
hot oven for 2½ to 3 hours, basting frequently. One-half hour before
done, pour the wine over it. When done, take the roast out and prepare
the gravy. Take off all fat; if too thick add more water and strain.

No. 12—BRAISED BEEF SLICES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 slices of meat, 3 lbs.
Salt, pepper
⅛ lb. of butter
½ qt. of bouillon
10 small peeled onions
3 carrots cut into cubes
1½ tbsps. of flour
1½ tbsps. of vinegar

Preparation: The meat slices are salted, pounded, browned in hot
butter and put into a pot. The carrots and onions are added and the
bouillon is poured over. Cook slowly until tender.

The meat, carrots and onions are taken out with a big skimmer. The
flour is browned in the butter in which the meat was first browned,
the gravy of the meat added and the vinegar; boil and strain. The
onions and carrots are arranged around the roast slices and a few
tablespoonfuls of the gravy put on the meat. You can also add for
garnishing some nice cuts of boiled potatoes or small potato dumplings.

No. 13—ROASTED RIB PIECE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs.—2 ribs
Some fine spices, salt
¾ qts. good vinegar
⅛ lb. of butter
2 kohlrabis cut in cubes
¼ celery root cut in cubes
½ parsley root cut in cubes
2 onions, cut up small
3 carrots cut in cubes

Preparation: The bones and tendons are taken out, the meat is then
rubbed with salt and the spices and put into vinegar for ½ hour. The
vegetables, which have been cut into small pieces, are stewed in the
given quantity of butter until soft. Add salt, and a little water from
time to time to prevent the vegetables from becoming brown. The meat
is fried in a pan with butter or lard for ½ hour, turning
occasionally. One-half of this fried meat is put into a flat pan, the
stewed vegetables are put on top and the other half of the meat is
placed on top of this and the whole is thus baked ¾ hour in a medium
hot oven. From time to time drop on a little butter.

When serving, be careful to place the roast on the platter without
dropping some of the vegetables. The gravy may be served with it.

Remarks: When the roast is ready for baking you can roll it in a piece
of oiled paper and bake it in that.

No. 14—SOUR ROAST.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of meat
2 qts. of vinegar
1 onion cut in slices
10 pepper-corns
3 bay-leaves
3 cloves
Some salt
2½ tbsps. of flour
2 tbsps. of drippings
½ glass red wine
⅛ lb. of bacon

Preparation: For the sour roast take the same kind of meat as in No.
11, pound it, put it into vinegar with the spices and leave it in that
for 4 days, turning it over once in a while. After this time take it
out and lard it with bacon cut into pieces one-third inch thick and 2½
inches long. Pierce the meat with a pointed knife and insert the bacon.

Heat the lard and fry the meat light brown on both sides and place it
on a platter. Brown the flour in the lard and pour on the vinegar with
the spices, water and salt. Put in a piece of honey cake (Pfeffer
Kuchen) if on hand, and ½ tablespoonful of sugar, boil all and put the
roasted meat into this gravy. Cover the roast and bake in the oven for
2½ to 3 hours, turning and basting frequently with the gravy. One-half
hour before done, pour in the red wine.

When the roast is tender, finish the gravy. Put the roast on a
platter, take all grease off the gravy and strain it. If it is too
thick, add more water, if not sour enough, add more vinegar.

Potato dumplings or noodles are good with this roast.

No. 15—BEEF ROULADE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2–2½ lbs. of beef cut into ½ inch thick slices
¼ lb. bacon cut into thin slices
1 onion chopped fine
Salt, pepper
1½ tbsps. of flour
⅛ lb. of butter or lard
1½ cups of bouillon or water

Preparation: The best meat for this is from the round. The meat slices
are pounded and cut into squares, then sprinkled with salt and pepper,
covered with bacon and onions, rolled up and fastened with twine or
toothpicks.

Heat the butter or lard and brown the roulades in it, sprinkle flour
over and stew, adding some salt and the bouillon or water. Then stew
slowly for 1 hour in a covered pan or pot. If the roulades are small
it requires less time, if large it requires from 2 to 2½ hours. The
roulades are served with the gravy after the twine or toothpicks have
been removed.

No. 16—BEEF GULASH.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of meat
2 small onions in cubes
1 tbsp. of lard
Salt
1 pinch of paprika
1 cup of water
1 tbsp. of flour

Preparation: The onions are stewed in the lard. The meat is cut into
pieces 1½ inches thick and 1½ inches square and added to the stewed
onions, stewed 10 minutes, flour, salt and pepper added, and stewed 10
minutes longer, and then 1 cup of water poured over. In a covered pot
or pan it is now stewed for 2 to 2½ hours, stirring often. If it gets
too dry, pour on more water. Gulash must not be too juicy. A little
red wine may be added.

Remarks: From leavings of roast beef fillets or pot roast you can
prepare gulash in ½ hour. Instead of water you may use the left over
gravy.

No. 17—STEAMED BEEF-BRISKET.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

6 lbs. of beef brisket
Salt
Soup greens
1 small onion
8 pepper-corns
2 cloves
2 yolks of eggs
1½ tbsps. of Parmesan cheese, grated
2 tbsps. grated rolls
1½ tbsps. of butter
6 qts. water
1 bay-leaf

Preparation: The beef is pounded and tied into a white cloth in a good
shape. The water is heated with salt, soup greens and spices to the
boiling point, then the meat added which must boil 1 hour so little
that you hardly notice it. The pot must be well covered. If there are
bones in the meat, they should be removed and put into the stock.

When the meat is tender, take it out, cover it with fricassee gravy
which is first stirred with 2 yolks of eggs. Strew the Parmesan cheese
and roll crumbs over it and baste with some melted butter. Now set it
into the oven and bake for 20 minutes. You can garnish the roast with
fried cut potatoes or macaroni.

Cucumber salad, mixed pickles or salt- or pepper-pickles go nicely with
this meat.

Remarks: The bouillon may be boiled down and used for soup.

No. 18—BEEF CUTLETS OF ROAST BEEF.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. roast beef
Salt, pepper
¼ lb. butter

Preparation: The meat is cut into 3 slices and bones, tendons, fat and
skin removed from it. It is then pounded well. It must be 1½ inches
thick. The butter is heated, the meat fried 20 minutes, turning it
over several times. The last 5 minutes you put it off the hot fire and
let it simmer. Sprinkle with salt and pepper, then baste with the
butter. Serve on a hot platter and garnish with parsley. The remnants
may be used for gulash.

No. 19—BOILED BEEF.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of meat
Soup greens
1 lb. of bones
4–5 qts. of water
Salt

Preparation: The meat which may be from the rump, thick rib piece or
breast, is washed. The water with the bones, all soup greens and salt
is boiled for 1 hour, then put in the meat and boil slowly 2½ hours.
With this meat serve onion, mustard, horse radish or leek gravy.

Remarks: This meat may be utilized for hash, salad, meat pudding or
beef with onions and eggs.

No. 20—BEEF HASH.

1 lb. remnants of meat
¼ of an onion
1 tbsp. of butter
½ wine glass of white wine
1 cup bouillon
Salt, pepper
1 tsp. of flour

Preparation: The meat is chopped fine and may be of soup meat, roast
or steak. The onions are cut fine and stewed in butter, then the
chopped meat put in, the flour strewn over it, simmered a little while
longer, salt and pepper added and bouillon. If you take water add ¼
tablespoonful of meat extract and wine. Let it cook ¼ hour and serve.
Fresh boiled, peeled potatoes are nice to serve with it.

No. 21—HASH WITH POTATOES.

Quantity for 4–6 Persons.

1—1½ lbs. of meat (boiled or roasted beef)
¼ onion
1 tbsp. of butter
A little pepper
Salt
1 cup of bouillon or water
4 peeled, boiled potatoes

Preparation: The meat is chopped fine. The onions are cut fine and
steeped in the butter, then the meat put in and cooked 5 minutes. Salt
and pepper are added, the potatoes are also chopped fine and added and
water or bouillon poured on. The whole is cooked for ¼ of an hour,
then served.

No. 22—BEEF WITH ONIONS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. boiled beef
1 onion
2 tbsps. of butter or suet
2 tbsps. of flour
1 tbsp. of vinegar
1 pinch of pepper
Salt
½ tsp. of meat extract
½ qt. of bouillon

Preparation: The onion is cut fine and simmered in the butter or suet
until soft; then add flour, simmer until brown; pour on the bouillon,
vinegar, salt, pepper and meat extract and let come to a boil.

The meat is cut in slices and put into the gravy and heated.

No. 23—BOILED BEEF SLICES FRIED WITH EGGS AND ONIONS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. boiled beef
1 onion
2 tbsps. of butter or good drippings
6 eggs
Salt
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: Meat and onions are cut into inch thick slices. Sprinkle
with salt and pepper and fry in the butter or lard until light brown.
Put the meat and onions on a hot platter. Fry the eggs in butter,
strew salt over and lay them on each slice of meat. Be careful to keep
the yolk whole.

Potato salad is good served with this meat.

No. 24—BEEF SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of boiled beef
2 yolks of eggs
Vinegar to taste
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1½ tbsps. of oil
½ tsp. of grated onions
2 tsps. of capers
½ cup of cold bouillon
3 tbsps. of cream
½ tsp. of mustard

Preparation: The meat is cut in cubes and mixed with the egg yolks and
cream. Now vinegar, bouillon, mustard and all the other ingredients
except the oil are mixed in well. After the salad has stood for 1 to 2
hours, covered up well, the oil is stirred in. The salad is served in
mound-shape, garnished with hard-boiled eggs and pepper-pickles cut
into nice slices.

No. 25—CROQUETTES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. boiled beef
½ lb. raw or boiled chopped pork
¼ onion, grated
2 rolls soaked in water
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 tsp. of capers
Juice of ½ lemon
2½ tbsps. of butter or lard
2–3 eggs

Preparation: The meat is chopped fine or ground twice and mixed well
with all the given spices and the soaked rolls. Make oblong dumplings
of this mass, roll them in roll crumbs and fry to a light brown in the
butter or lard. For gravy serve one of sardines or prepare one of the
croquette drippings as follows: When the croquettes are done put ½
tablespoonful of flour into the drippings and let it stew a while,
then add ½ cup of bouillon or water, ½ teaspoonful of meat extract and
salt according to taste. Let it boil a while and pour the gravy over
the croquettes.

No. 26—MEAT PUDDING No. 2.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. boiled beef or roast beef
⅛ lb. bacon
2 yolks of eggs
2 whites of eggs beaten to foam
4 tbsps. of gravy
½ tsp. of grated onions
1 tsp. ground capers
1 roll soaked and the water pressed out
Salt, pepper
½ tbsp. of butter
1 tbsp. of roll crumbs
3 chopped sardines

Preparation: Meat and bacon are chopped fine and mixed well with yolks
of 2 eggs, gravy, chopped sardines, onion, salt, capers, pepper and
the roll. Add the beaten whites of eggs; put into a pudding mold which
has been buttered and strewn with roll crumbs. Set it in a steamer
over a kettle of boiling water and let it steam 1½ hours, or bake in
the oven for 1 hour.

No. 27—KÖNIGSBERGER KLOPS.

Meat Balls.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. finely chopped raw beef
¼ lb. fat pork, chopped
⅛ lb. of butter
1½ roll:—the crust cut off
1 tsp. of grated onion
3 eggs
1 pinch of pepper
Salt
The juice of ¼ of a lemon
Some flour to roll them in

Preparation: The beef and pork are mixed well with the butter; add the
roll which has been soaked and the water pressed out, and all other
things mentioned above, and mix well. Then small dumplings are made,
rolled in flour, and boiled slowly in bouillon or salt water for 15 or
20 minutes. Put them into a deep dish and pour white fricassee gravy
over them. Sauerkraut is nice with this meat. You can also fry the
Klops instead of boiling them.

No. 28—FRIED BEEF LIVER WITH BREAKFAST BACON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of liver cut into thin slices
¾ lb. of bacon cut into thin slices
Salt, pepper, flour

Preparation: The bacon must be lean and is fried light yellow, then
placed on a platter on the stove. The liver slices are salted and
peppered, dipped into flour and fried in the bacon dripping, quite
crisp. It is put on the platter with the bacon. One-half cup of water
or bouillon is poured into the lard in which the bacon and liver were
fried and left to boil. This gravy may be served separately or on the
meat. It requires only a few minutes to fry the liver.

No. 29—COW UDDER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. cow udder
1 onion
Salt
2 bay-leaves
1 clove
2 qts. of water
6 pepper-corns

Preparation: The cow udder is washed well and placed over the fire
with much cold water. As soon as it comes to a boil the water is
poured off and the 2 qts. of fresh water poured on and all the spices
named added, then boiled until soft which requires 4 or 5 hours. Then
it is cut in pieces, and these are rolled in roll crumbs and fried in
butter until light yellow. Or a nice brown gravy is made by taking 2
tablespoonfuls of butter and in it brown 2 tablespoonfuls of flour,
then add some of the bouillon, 1 tablespoonful of vinegar, ½ glass red
wine, 1 teaspoonful of sugar—all this well cooked.

Now the udder is put into this gravy, stewed a little while and
served. The gravy must not be too thick.

No. 30—CORNED BEEF.

30 lbs. of beef
2 lbs. of salt
6 tbsps. of sugar
10 qts. of water
Scant ⅛ lb. of saltpetre

Preparation: Water, saltpetre, sugar and salt are boiled until an egg
will float on the mixture. Then this mixture is poured, while hot, on
to the fresh meat. The liquid must be 1½ inches above the meat after a
stone or something heavy is placed on it. The meat may remain in this
mixture for 3 to 4 weeks and should be turned once in a while. Smaller
pieces need only 8 to 10 days.

No. 31—CORNED BEEF FOR COOKING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of pickled beef
4 qts. of water
Some soup greens

Preparation:. When the beef is very salty, soak it in water for a few
hours. Put it to boil with the 4 qts. of water and soup greens and boil
for 2½ to 3 hours slowly. Larger pieces need more time.

Cabbage goes nicely with this beef. In carving, cut against the grain.

No. 32—SMOKED CORNED BEEF.

When the meat is taken out of the brine, hang it in a cool, airy place
for one day and then smoke it.

No. 33—PICKLED BEEF TONGUE.

2 tongues
¼ lb. of salt
1 tsp. of saltpetre
1 tbsp. of sugar

Preparation: The throat end is cut off and the skin of the tongue is
cut with a sharp knife at several places. Salt, sugar and saltpetre
are heated and the tongues rubbed well with the mixture. They are then
packed into a jar and weighted with a stone. They must be turned every
day. It takes 10 to 14 days to pickle the tongues.

No. 34—SMOKED, PICKLED OR FRESH BEEF TONGUE FOR COOKING AND FRYING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

For Cooking.

1 fresh, smoked or pickled beef tongue
1 bay-leaf
6 pepper-corns
2 cloves
Some soup greens
½ onion
3 qts. of water

For Frying.

2 tbsps. of butter
1 tbsp. of flour
½ cup of bouillon or water
½ wine glass of red wine
½ tsp. of sugar
Juice of ¼ lemon

Preparation: Cut off the throat end and if the pickled tongue is too
salty, leave it in water for a few hours, the same with fresh tongue
to remove the slime or mucous. The smoked tongue is left in water over
night. After this is done the tongue is cooked until soft in the 3
qts. of water, adding bay-leaf, pepper-corns, cloves, soup greens and
onion. If it is a fresh tongue, add some salt. It requires 3 hours to
cook a tongue.

When the tongue is soft, take it out of the water and skin it. You can
serve the tongue in this manner or cold and sliced. If you wish to
serve the tongue warm and whole, it is nicer to fry it. Put it into a
low frying pan, add the given quantity of butter and fry it 10 minutes
on both sides, add 1 tablespoonful of flour and let it simmer a few
minutes. Now add the bouillon or water. With the water put in ¼
teaspoonful of meat extract, red wine, sugar, salt and lemon juice,
and then cook ¼ of an hour, basting it several times. Then serve. The
gravy must be strained.

Boiled, warm tongue is nice with vegetables. Cut the tongue into
slices and place it around the vegetables like scales.

No. 35—RAGOUT OF OX-TONGUE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

For Cooking.

1 tongue, smoked, pickled or fresh
3 qts. of water
2 cloves
6 pepper-corns
¼ onion
1 bay-leaf

Sauce.

3 tbsps. of butter
3 tbsps. of flour
½ qt. bouillon or water
½ cup Madeira or red wine
1 pt. of champignons
6 truffles
Juice of ½ lemon
1 tsp. of sugar
Salt
3 pepper-corns
1 clove
½ bay-leaf
¼ tsp. of meat extract
1 slice of lemon

Preparation: The tongue is cooked the same as in No. 34. For ragouts
the smoked tongue is preferable. When the tongue is soft, skin it and
cut it into thin slices.

Gravy: Brown the butter and flour, add the bouillon, salt, sugar,
pepper, 1 clove, ½ bay-leaf, one slice of lemon and the juice of ½
lemon, Madeira or red wine and the water from the champignons. Let it
boil for ½ hour and strain.

Peel the truffles, chop them fine and put them into the strained gravy
and if the champignons are large cut them into quarters and put them
also in the gravy and finally the slices of tongue. The gravy must not
be too spicy if it is a smoked or pickled tongue. After the ragout has
been thus prepared it may stew on the stove for ¼ hour. The gravy must
not be too thin and watery.

The ragout is placed on a platter and garnished with warm scallops of
puff paste or meat dumplings.

Meat Dumplings.

¼ lb. finely chopped veal
¼ lb. finely chopped pork
1 roll, soaked and the water pressed out
Some grated onion, salt, pepper
1 tbsp. of finely chopped champignons
1 tsp. of finely chopped truffles.
1 egg

Mix this all very well and form small dumplings, then put them into
boiling hot salt water or bouillon and cook for 10 minutes slowly, or
fry in butter light brown and place them around the tongue ragout.

The plates and the platter on which they are served must be hot.

Remarks: This is a fine dish for parties.

No. 36—CHOP SUEY.

For About 6 Persons.

½ lb. veal
½ lb. pork
1 lb. beef
2 tsps. molasses
1 large stalk celery
3 large onions
1 tbsp. lard
1 tbsp. flour

Preparation: Cut the meat in cubes; put the lard and flour in pan and
brown; add meat and put enough water on to cover it; add the molasses
and cook slowly for 1 hour.

Cut the stalk of celery in small pieces and add them to the meat. Cut
the onions fine and fry them light brown in a little butter; add to
the rest and boil slowly another half hour. Serve with plain Chinese
sauce.

CHAPTER 3.

VEAL.

[Illustration: Numbered cuts on a veal]

1. Leg.
2–3. Kidney roast and small chops.
4. Shoulder.
5. Neck.
6. Breast.
7. Head.
8. Shank Leg.
9. Four Legs.

Preparation of Veal.

Appearance of Good Veal.

It must be of a white color, a fine firm grain and have plenty of fat.

Do not buy very young veal because those calves are as a rule not
healthy. Cheap meat is never economical. Veal is quickly prepared
because it does not require long boiling. The bouillon is good for
invalids because it contains much gluten.

Best Pieces for Roast.

Leg or Loin.

The leg with the fricandeau, the fillet, loin and kidney roast.

Small Pieces for Frying.

The chump end of loin for chops, veal cutlets from rib piece, fillet.

Pieces for Pot Roast.

The breast, neck, shoulder.

Pieces for Boiling.

The thick rib piece, neck.

Pieces for Bouillon.

The calves’ feet, calf-bones, calf-tail, also lean meat.

Parts for Fricassee.

Lungs, brain, sweetbreads, breast piece.

No. 1—LEG OF VEAL.

Quantity for 8–10 Persons.

6–8 lbs. leg of veal
⅛ lb. of bacon
⅛ lb. of butter
½ cup sweet or sour cream
Salt, pepper
1½ cups of water
2 tbsps. of flour

Preparation: The meat is pounded, boiling water poured over, i.e.,
scalded, which makes the meat white; let the water run off
immediately. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and put into pan. Cut the
bacon into thin slices and put it on the meat, add the butter and
place into oven. Roast for 2 hours, basting frequently. About ½ hour
before done, put the flour into the gravy and stew 5 minutes, then add
water and put the cream on the leg in spoonfuls. When the roast is
tender, put on platter and strain the gravy which must not be too thin.

Remarks: If the roast has much stock, pour some off before adding
flour, stand cold and let it jelly. Now cut it into slices and serve
with slices of tenderloin. Veal roast may be utilized in various ways.

No. 2—WARMED UP VEAL ROAST.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. of veal roast
⅛ lb. of butter
⅛ lb. of sardines
1 tbsp. of capers
Some salt
Juice of ½ lemon
Left over gravy
For the gravy, 1 tsp. of flour

Preparation: Put the roast into an earthen dish, heat the gravy, pour
it over the roast, cover up the dish, place it into a covered pot with
boiling water, let it boil slowly for one hour and baste the roast
several times.

The gravy is usually thin, therefore add the flour and serve with the
roast; the contents of the dish must not boil, otherwise the roast
will become dry. Cut the roast into slices, place them into a buttered
mold, put the sardines, capers and bits of butter between them and
drip the lemon juice on. Cover the mold, put it into the dish with
boiling water and boil for ¾ hours. The meat is served in the mold,
the gravy heated and served with it.

No. 3—VEAL ROAST WITH POTATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of veal roast
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
¼ onion
Left over gravy
4 big, raw potatoes, peeled and cut into thin slices

Preparation: The meat is cut into small pieces, placed in 2 or 3
layers alternately with sliced potatoes into an earthenware buttered
dish so that the top layer will be potatoes. Season each layer with
salt, pepper and a little onion.

The meat gravy which may be diluted with bouillon or water is poured
over the whole until level with the potatoes; then put small pieces of
butter on top and bake in the oven for 1½ hours.

If you have no left over gravy then take 1 tablespoonful of butter,
brown it, stir in 1½ tablespoonfuls of flour, add water or bouillon, ½
teaspoonful of meat extract, 3 tablespoonfuls of cream (if on hand),
boil and pour over the potatoes and meat and bake. Serve in the
earthen dish.

No. 4—VEAL ROAST RAGOUT—BROWN.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. of veal roast
½ pt. brown gravy
1½ tsps. sugar
1¼ tbsps. vinegar, (preferably wine vinegar)
1 tbsp. butter
2 gherkins or 4 sweet-sour pickles
1½ tbsps. of small pearl onions; pickled ones preferred

Preparation: If you have no left over gravy then make a false gravy by
directions given in No. 3. Add sugar and vinegar according to taste,
cut pickles into small pieces and put into the gravy with the onions.
Cut the meat into pieces and put it into the hot gravy; it must not
boil, otherwise the meat will be tough; put another piece of butter on
top and serve.

No. 5—SHELLS FILLED WITH VEAL ROAST.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. veal roast
1½ tbsps. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
Salt, pinch of pepper
3 tbsps. of white wine
Juice of ½ lemon
½ cup of cream
1 cup of bouillon or water and ¼ tsp. meat extract
½ tbsp. of Parmesan cheese, grated
1 tbsp. of rolls, grated

Preparation: The butter is melted and flour stirred in. Stew it and
add water or bouillon (if you take water, use ¼ teaspoonful of meat
extract), cream, white wine, salt, pepper, lemon juice. The gravy must
boil. Taste it to make sure that it may not be either too salty, too
sweet, or too sour.

Chop the veal roast and put it into the gravy. The mixture should be
pretty thick; fill it into the shells, sprinkle with the Parmesan
cheese and roll crumbs and place small pieces of butter on top. Then
bake them in the oven to a light yellow color which requires 10
minutes. Serve at once.

No. 6—VEAL ROAST PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. veal roast
⅛ part of an onion chopped fine
3 tsps. of parsley, chopped fine
⅛ lb. of butter, good measure
3 eggs
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
¼ cup of sweet cream
1 roll, grated
½ pt. of tomato or sardine gravy
1 tsp. of Parmesan cheese

Preparation: The veal roast is chopped fine. Three-fourths of the
butter is creamed, and the 3 yolks stirred in, meat, salt, pepper,
Parmesan cheese, roll crumbs, cream, parsley, all well mixed. The
chopped onion is cooked in butter for a little while and then stirred
in.

The white of egg is beaten stiff and also added to the mass. A tin
pudding mold is buttered and strewn with roll crumbs, the mixture put
in, and the closed mold set in a steamer over boiling water and
steamed for one hour.

Dump the pudding on a hot platter and pour over it tomato or sardine
gravy.

No. 7—VEAL ROAST SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. veal roast
3 yolks of eggs
1 tbsp. of flour
2 tsps. of salt
Some pepper
1 tsp. of mustard
¼ qt. of milk
½ tbsp. of butter
4 mustard pickles
2 tbsps. of pearl onions
3 tbsps. of wine vinegar

Preparation: Milk, flour, yolks of eggs, salt, pepper, vinegar, and
butter are stirred to a gravy and brought to boil. It requires 10
minutes time till the gravy is thick and smooth. Veal roast and
pickles are cut into thin slices. Meat, pickles and onions are put
into layers in a dish and between each two layers a few spoonfuls of
gravy, concluding with gravy over the top.

Three hard-boiled eggs quartered and placed on or around the salad
makes it look nice.

No. 8—SADDLE OF VEAL.

Quantity for 10 Persons.

6–7 lbs. of veal saddle
Some salt
1 pinch of pepper
¼ cup of butter, or good roast drippings
¼ lb. of bacon
1 cup of cream
2½ tbsps. of flour

Preparation: The saddle of veal is well prepared by the butcher so it
will lie flat in the pan. Skin and scald the veal and lard it with
bacon, then sprinkle with salt and pepper and put into the pan. Heat
the butter, pour it over the meat and set it into a medium hot oven.
Pour a little water over once in a while so the butter does not get
too brown; the roast must be basted every 10 minutes to make it juicy.
It requires 1 or 1½ hours roasting to make it tender. One-quarter of
an hour before done put in the flour and cream. The gravy must be
strained before serving. The kidneys may be removed, cut into thin
slices, arranged around the roast with the pieces overlapping each
other like scales.

Remarks: The gravy may be prepared in various ways. Instead of cream
take ¼ cup of Madeira or red wine and cut truffles into thin slices
and put into the gravy.

Another way is to take cream and champignons and lemon juice.

The left over roast may be utilized for ragout, gulash, fricassee,
meat dumplings or in a pudding made of roast and potatoes. The bones
are split and used to make bouillon.

No. 9—ROAST VEAL LOIN WITH KIDNEY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of veal loin with the kidney
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
⅛ lb. of butter or lard
1 tbsp. of flour
¼ cup of cream
½ cup of water

Preparation: Pound the meat and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cut the
kidney off and if it is very fat, cut some of the fat off and render
it to be used for frying or cooking. The roast is then put on and
basted with hot butter or lard; the kidney is put in with the roast.
Let it roast until well done and baste it frequently. Shortly before
it is done, add flour to the gravy and then the cream. If there should
be too little gravy, add more water and let it roast ¼ hour longer.
Baste with the gravy several times and serve. The gravy must be
strained, the kidney cut in slices and arranged around the roast for
garnishing.

No. 10—ROASTED FRICANDEAU OF VEAL.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. fricandeau or cushion of veal
1 small piece of bacon for larding
⅛ lb. of butter
½ cup of cream
1 cup of water
1 tbsp. of flour

Preparation: The fricandeau, which is a choice piece of lean meat cut
from the thickest part of the leg, is nicely trimmed, pounded and
larded with bacon. It requires 1 to 1¼ hours to roast it. Prepare it
just the same as directed in No. 9.

No. 11—STUFFED BREAST OF VEAL.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of breast of veal
⅛ lb. of butter for roasting
Salt, 1 pinch of pepper

The Filling.

½ lb. of chopped beef or veal
½ lb. of chopped pork
1½ soaked rolls
1 tbsp. of butter
¼ tsp. of grated onion
2 eggs
Salt, 1 pinch of pepper
2 tsps. of finely chopped parsley
Juice of ¼ lemon

Preparation: The meat is pounded a little, washed, an incision is made
between meat and bone and ¼ teaspoonful of salt rubbed in. The
ingredients for the filling are mixed well and put into the cavity
formed by the cut, then sewed up. The ⅛ lb. of butter is heated, the
stuffed breast put in and roasted a little; then add 2 tablespoonfuls
of flour, sprinkle with salt and pepper, let it cook 10 minutes.

Now pour in 1 cup of water, roast for 1½ hours, basting frequently.
Strain the gravy and serve.

No. 12—BREAST OF VEAL WITH BEER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

5 lbs. of breast of veal
Salt
4 pepper-corns
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
½ small onion
3 thin slices of lemon
3 tbsps. of flour
⅛ lb. of good butter, heaped
1 bottle of beer

Preparation: This breast of veal should be from the brisket end as the
meat is thicker and it does not have as much bone and skin as a piece
from the middle breast. It must be pounded and tied with a white
string into a good shape. Then it is roasted in the butter to a nice
brown color on all sides. When this is done, put the meat into another
dish. Put the flour and sliced onion into the butter, cook them brown
and add the beer; then add all the spices, put in the meat, cover, and
bake in oven slowly for 2 hours, turn over occasionally and baste with
gravy. If you do not like beer, use water. The gravy must not be too
thin; if it gets too thick, add more water or beer; strain it. Garnish
the roast with slices of lemon.

No. 13—CALF’S HEAD RAGOUT.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

1 calf’s head with brain and tongue
½ lb. of beef
½ lb. of veal
¼ lb. of raw ham
6 pepper-corns
2 bay-leaves
1 piece of tarragon
1 piece of carrot
1 piece of celery
1 piece of kohlrabi
½ of tomato
Salt
½ pt. red wine
⅛ lb. of butter
1 onion
⅛ lb. of flour
1 pinch of paprika
¼ pt. of Madeira
Juice of ¼ lemon
1 tsp. of sugar
4 hard-boiled eggs cut into ⅛ths
1 piece of parsley root

Preparation: The calf’s head is split in half, the brain and the
tongue taken out and soaked in water. Take the skin off the calf’s
head, brush the skin in water until it is white, then boil it with the
tongue until tender. Put in the split head bones, all the soup greens,
salt, pepper-corns, bay-leaf, tarragon and boil for 2 hours. The
bouillon must be boiled down to 1½ or 2 qts.

When the skin is done, cut it into squares. The tongue is skinned and
cut into slices. Both are put into a dish and red wine, salt and
pepper added.

Beef, veal, ham and onion are cut into pieces and fried brown in ⅛ lb.
of butter. Add ⅛ lb. of flour, cook a little and add the calf’s head
bouillon and Madeira and cook slowly for 2 hours. The gravy must be
strained, the fat taken off and then seasoned. Put into it the pieces
of skin and tongue, some lemon juice and sugar. Serve the ragout on a
hot platter. Fry the brains to a light yellow, cut it in pieces and
garnish the ragout with them; also with scallops of pastry and the
⅛ths of eggs. It is a fine side dish.

No. 14—CALF’S TONGUE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 calves’ tongues
Salt
2 qts. of water
6 pepper-corns
1 bay-leaf
2 cloves
1 slice of lemon
¼ onion

The Gravy.

½ cup of sour cream
⅛ lb. of butter
3 tbsps. of flour
2 tbsps. of lemon juice
2 tbsps. of capers
¼ tsp. of sugar
2 yolks of eggs
Salt, 1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The tongues must be fresh and washed well, cooked until
tender in 2 qts. of water with all the given ingredients, then skinned
and cut into slices.

The Gravy: Butter is heated, flour stirred in, bouillon added and
cooked well with lemon juice, cream, sugar and capers.

The slices of tongue are put in the gravy and heated, the yolks of
eggs stirred in and then served. The gravy must not be too thin. The
slices of tongue may be salted, dipped into yolks of eggs and roll
crumbs and fried in butter.

No. 15—CALF’S BRAINS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 calves’ brains
Some salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 egg
½ cup of grated rolls
1 qt. of water

Preparation: The brains are soaked in water. One quart of water is
brought to boil, the brains put in and boiled for 5 minutes, then
taken out and the small veins and skin removed, then salted and
peppered. Beat the egg well, dip the brains in and then in roll crumbs
and fry in hot butter to a golden yellow.

Remarks: When the brains have been thus prepared, drip a few drops of
lemon juice on and then bake, or, it may be served with lemon slices.

No. 16—VEAL FRICASSEE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. breast of veal (brisket)
2 qts. of water
¼ onion
4 pepper-corns
2 cloves
½ bay-leaf
Salt

Gravy.

3 tbsps. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour and bouillon
2 yolks of eggs
1 wineglassful of white wine

Preparation: The meat is cut into nice pieces and the cartilage left
on. Scald it for ½ minute and drain well. With the 2 qts. of water,
onion, salt and spices, it is boiled until tender. Boil down the
bouillon to ¾ of a quart so it is very strong. It requires 1 hour to
cook the meat done.

The Gravy.

Heat the butter, put in the flour and stew a little. Butter and flour
must remain white, stir in the veal bouillon gradually that the gravy
may become smooth. Then add the white wine and cook 1 minute, stir in
the yolks of eggs and stop cooking. The meat, which has been kept hot,
is put into the gravy and served. Rice cooked in water and bouillon is
nice served with this. Place the meat in the middle of the platter and
garnish with the rice.

No. 17—VEAL GULASH.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2¼ lbs. of veal
1 small onion
1 tbsp. of butter
1 pinch of pepper
1 tbsp. of flour
1 cup of water
Salt

Preparation: The meat is cut into 1½ inch squares. The onion is cut
into small cubes and fried slightly in the butter, the meat is then
added and stewed 10 minutes. Add the flour, salt and pepper and stew 5
minutes more. The water is then poured in and covered up. Stir it once
in a while and let it cook until done, which will require about 1½
hours. Gulash must not be too juicy.

No. 18—UNBREADED VEAL CUTLETS.

(Chops).

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. veal chops
⅛ lb. of butter
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
½ cup of cream
Juice of ¼ lemon
½ tbsp. of capers
½ tbsp. of meat extract if necessary
1 cup of water

Preparation: The cutlets are cut from the back, each one containing a
bone. It is pounded, shaped neatly and sprinkled with salt and pepper.
The butter is heated, the cutlets put in and fried brown on both
sides, then put on platter. Put into the butter the ½ tablespoonful of
flour and brown it. Should there be too much butter, take some out
before putting in the flour, then pour into the butter and flour one
cup of water, salt if necessary, lemon juice and cream. Press the
capers through a sieve and stir into the gravy. Put the cutlets into
this gravy, cover the pan and stew 10 minutes, then serve. If the
gravy is too light brown, add the ½ teaspoonful of meat extract.

Remarks: Anyone who does not like the taste of capers and lemon juice
may leave them out, also the cream. If you wish the gravy very fine,
leave off the above and add champignons and finely chopped or cut
truffles and 2 tablespoonfuls of Madeira.

No. 19—BREADED VEAL CUTLETS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of veal cutlets
1 egg
1 tbsp. of milk
Salt, pepper
Roll crumbs, or cracker crumbs
⅛ lb. of butter

Preparation: The cutlets are pounded, shaped neatly and sprinkled with
salt and pepper. The egg is mixed well with the milk; in case you have
some white of egg left over, use that with milk, dip the cutlets into
it, then into the roll or cracker crumbs and place them into the hot
butter to brown on both sides. Put the fried cutlets on a platter.

The Gravy: Put ¼ tablespoonful of flour into the hot cutlet butter and
stew, add a half cupful of water, cook a little while, pour it over
the cutlets, garnish with lemon slices and serve.

No. 20—VEAL CUTLETS AS A FINE SIDE DISH.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

3 lbs. of veal cutlets
1 lb. of sweetbreads
½ lb. of boiled calf’s tongue
1 pt. can of champignons
Salt, pepper
⅛ lb. of butter
1 tbsp. of Parmesan cheese
1 tbsp. of crab butter
1 small can of truffles

Preparation: The cutlets are pounded, salted and peppered and fried to
a light brown on both sides in ⅛ lb. of butter.

The tongue is cooked well done in water with salt, a piece of onion, 4
pepper-corns, 2 cloves, 1 bay-leaf; ¼ hour before done, put in the
sweetbreads. When both are done, skin them and chop them or cut them
into cubes.

The gravy: Put 2 tablespoonfuls of flour into the cutlet butter, stew
a little while, then add bouillon in which the tongue and sweetbreads
were cooked, add some of the champignon juice, a wine glass of red
wine, 1 tablespoonful of lemon juice, 1 teaspoonful of sugar and cook
for ¼ hour, strain and put champignons, finely chopped truffles,
sweetbreads and tongue in the sauce and heat.

Put the cutlets into an oblong or round casserole, strew with Parmesan
cheese, drip some crab butter over. The ragout is poured over them and
the whole is baked in the oven for ¼ hour and when served in the
casserole, it is a very fine dish.

No. 21—CHOPPED VEAL CUTLETS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of veal cutlets
Salt, pepper
Some flour
⅛ lb. of butter
1–2 eggs

Preparation: The cutlets are chopped and cut off the rib bone. Remove
all tendons and skin, and shape the chopped meat round and press it
against the bone. Beat the egg well. Salt and pepper the cutlets, dip
carefully into the egg and then into the flour. Now heat the butter
and fry the cutlets in it to a light brown on both sides. Handle them
carefully so they will not fall apart, then take them out and place
them on a hot platter. Put ½ cup of water into cutlet butter, salt if
necessary and cook, pour over cutlets, garnish with lemon slices and
serve.

No. 22—BREADED VEAL CHOPS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2¼ lbs. of veal
Salt, pepper
½ tbsp. of flour
1 or 2 whites of egg
1 tbsp. of milk
1 cup of roll or cracker crumbs
⅛ lb. of butter or half butter and half lard
¾ cup of water

Preparation: The meat for this must be from the loin or leg. It is cut
into ¾ inch slices, pounded, salted and peppered. Beat the white of
egg well or take egg and milk, dip the pieces of veal in and then into
the roll or cracker crumbs. Fry them brown in the hot butter or lard,
this will require 10 minutes. They must not be rare inside. For the
gravy, put ½ tablespoonful of flour into the lard or butter, brown and
add ¾ cup of water; add a little salt if necessary, cook well, then
pour it over the meat, garnish with lemon slices and serve.

No. 23—VIENNA VEAL-SCHNITZEL, (VEAL CUTLETS).

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2¼ lbs. of veal from the leg
Salt, pepper
2 eggs
Juice of ½ lemon
⅛ lb. of butter
6 eggs
Flour

Preparation: The veal is cut into six ¾ inch thick slices, pounded,
salted, peppered. Beat the eggs well, dip the meat into it and then
sprinkle with flour. Heat the butter and fry the slices to a light
brown on both sides. While they are frying, drip the lemon juice on.
When well done, put them on a hot platter. Make the gravy with ½ cup
of water poured into frying butter and salt if necessary, cook and
pour over the cutlets. The eggs are fried and placed on each cutlet
carefully so the yolk does not run out.

No. 24—VEAL CUTLET OR SCHNITZEL A LA HOLSTEIN.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2¼ lbs. of veal from the leg
2 eggs
Salt
1 pinch of paprika
⅛ lb. of butter
4 hard-boiled eggs
2 tbsps. of pickled beets, chopped
1 tbsp. of capers
1 small pickle
6 sardines
6 slices or six-eighths of a lemon
¼ tbsp. of flour
¾ cup of water
½ tsp. of meat extract
1 tbsp. of onions

Preparation: The meat is cut into six ½ inch thick slices, sprinkled
with salt and paprika and dipped into well-beaten egg. The butter is
heated and the meat fried brown on both sides, then put on a hot
platter. The ¼ tablespoonful of flour stirred into the butter and ¾
cup of water added with ½ teaspoonful of meat extract and salt, if
necessary, then boiled and poured over the meat.

The hard-boiled eggs are chopped fine, the whites separate from the
yolks. The sardines are drained and cut into halves lengthwise, then
rolled up. Now arrange your dish neatly, little heaps of beets,
onions, pickle, white and yolk of egg, lemon slices on each cutlet.
The rolled sardines in the middle of the lemon slice, heaps of the
rest around each and the capers singly in between. Should be prepared
quickly but appetizingly.

No. 25—VEAL CUTLETS IN WHITE WINE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of veal from the leg
⅛ lb. of butter
Salt, pepper
1 kohlrabi, cut into dainty pieces
½ carrot, cut into dainty pieces
½ parsley root, cut into dainty pieces
⅛ celery root, cut into dainty pieces
10 small pieces of cauliflower
½ pt. of white wine.
1 cup of water
2 tbsps. of flour.

Preparation: The meat is cut into slices ¾ inch thick, salted and
peppered, then fried light brown on both sides in the heated butter
and placed on a platter.

For the gravy stir 2 tablespoonfuls of flour into the butter and
brown, then add water and wine, the vegetables and salt. The
vegetables must be cooked very tender, then put in the veal schnitzel
or cutlets and cook slowly for 20 minutes. The whole, schnitzel,
gravy, and vegetables, is served in one dish. It makes a fine dish.
The gravy must not be thick.

No. 26—VEAL STEAK FROM THE LEG.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of veal
⅛ lb. of butter
1 pinch of white pepper
¼ cup of water
Salt

Preparation: The steak must not be cut too thick. Remove the skin from
the steak and pound it well, then fry it in the butter on medium fire
for ½ hour, turning and basting it several times. Serve it on a hot
platter and sprinkle with salt and pepper and put a little fresh
butter over the whole.

For the gravy, pour into the frying butter ¼ cup of water, cook well
and strain, then serve separately. Garnish the steak with lemon slices.

No. 27—SWEETBREADS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of sweetbreads
Salt, pepper
Roll crumbs or cracker crumbs
⅛ lb. of butter
1–2 eggs

Preparation: The sweetbreads are cooked in salt water for 10 minutes,
then taken out and skinned. It is then cut lengthwise if it is very
thick and sprinkled with salt and pepper. The egg is beaten well and
the sweetbreads dipped into that and then into the roll or cracker
crumbs. Then it is fried to a golden yellow in the butter. For the
gravy, pour a little water into the hot butter and boil, then pour
over the sweetbreads. This is a good dish with vegetables.

No. 28—SWEETBREADS IN SHELLS OR OTHER SMALL MOLDS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1¼ lbs. of sweetbreads
½ pt. of champignons, scant
3 truffles
½ wine glass of white wine
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
2 tbsps. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
Some bouillon
½ tbsp. of Parmesan cheese
½ tbsp. of roll crumbs
½ cup of cream
¼ tsp. of meat extract

Preparation: The sweetbreads are boiled in ¾ qts. of salt water until
tender, which requires ¼ hour. Take them out, skin them well and cut
them into very small pieces. Boil down the bouillon of it to 1½ cups.

The Gravy: Heat the butter and stir in the flour and stew but do not
brown it, then add the bouillon, cream, wine, lemon juice and juice of
the champignons, salt and pepper and cook until it thickens.

The champignons and truffles are chopped fine and put into the gravy
with the sweetbreads. Heat and fill into shells or other small molds,
sprinkle with a little Parmesan cheese, a few roll crumbs and a little
piece of butter and bake in oven light brown, which requires 10
minutes. This makes a fine side dish.

No. 29—PUFF PASTE PATTIES FILLED WITH SWEETBREAD RAGOUT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. fresh and very cold butter
½ lb. good flour
1 white of egg
¼ pt. of cold water
1 tbsp. of strong brandy
This makes 6 small patties

The Filling.

¾ lbs. of sweetbreads
¼ pt. of champignons
3 truffles
⅓ wine glass of white wine
Juice of ¼ lemon
1½ tbsps. of flour
1 cup bouillon
½ cup of cream
¼ tsp. of meat extract
Salt and 1 pinch of pepper
1½ tbsps. of butter

The Paste.

Preparation: The flour is made into a smooth paste with water, ½ of
the egg and brandy, then rolled out. The butter, which must be very
hard, is placed on the paste in a chunk, the paste folded around it
and then rolled out again. The board and rolling pin must be well
covered with flour. This is repeated 4 or 5 times. The last time roll
out the paste ¼ inch thick, cut out with a tumbler or cake cutter,
then cut narrow strips and fasten them to the edge of the disk by
brushing them first with the egg. Set the strips one on top of another
until the edge is 1½ inch high, put a small mold in the opening. With
a smaller tumbler, cut out the covers. Bake them both light brown or
yellow. After cooling off, carefully remove the small mold, fill the
patties with the ragout, cover with the baked covers and bake the
patties 10 minutes in medium hot oven. Serve at once.

The filling is made like the one in No. 28. For 6 patties cut out 6
bottoms and six covers and use the other paste for strips.

No. 30—CROQUETTES OF SWEETBREADS.

Quantity for 4 Persons.

1 lb. of sweetbreads
½ pt. can champignons
1½ tbsps. of lemon juice
2 yolks of eggs
2 tbsps. of white wine
Salt, pepper
1 egg
Roll crumbs for breading
2 tbsps. of butter
3 tbsps. of flour
1 cup bouillon
¼ cup champignon juice
¼ cup of cream
Good lard for baking

Preparation: The sweetbreads are boiled in salt water until almost
done, then skinned and cut into cubes.

The Gravy: Heat the butter and stir in the flour, add 1 cup of
bouillon, white wine, lemon juice, cream, champignon juice, salt and
pepper, then boil. It must be savory and thick.

The champignons are cut into small pieces and put into the gravy, also
the sweetbread cubes. Then stir in the yolks of 2 eggs. Cool it and
shape into oblong croquettes. Beat the egg well, dip in the croquettes
and then into the roll crumbs. Bake in deep lard to a golden yellow
color. If the croquettes are too soft, add more flour. If you want
them as a side dish, take only half the quantity given.

Remarks: You can make croquettes from remnants of veal and prepare
them much more simply. See No. 31.

No. 31—CROQUETTES FROM VEAL REMNANTS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of veal
Salt, pepper
1½ tbsps. of lemon juice
2 yolks of eggs
2 tbsps. of butter or drippings
3 tbsps. of flour
1 cup of bouillon or 1 cup of water mixed with ¼ tsp. of meat extract
½ cup of cream
1 egg and roll crumbs for breading
Good lard for baking

Preparation: The meat is cut very fine. The preparation is the same as
in No. 30, Sweetbread Croquettes.

No. 32—MEAT BALLS FROM VEAL REMNANTS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. of veal
2 eggs
1½ tbsp. of butter
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
1 pinch of nutmeg
1 tsp. of capers
Salt, pepper
Roll crumbs for breading

Preparation: The meat is chopped fine or ground twice and mixed well
with the eggs, salt, pepper, lemon juice, capers and nutmeg. It is
then formed into oblong shapes, dipped in roll crumbs and baked or
fried to a light brown in hot butter or lard, then placed on a platter.

For the gravy put ½ tablespoonful of flour into the butter or
drippings, steep and add ¾ cup of water or bouillon or left over
gravy. Strain and pour over the meat balls and serve. They are also
good served cold.

No. 33—VEAL HASH FROM REMNANTS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of veal
1 tsp. of chopped onions
Salt, pepper
1½ tbsps. of butter
½ tbsp. of flour
½ cup of cream
Some water if necessary
2 tbsps. of white wine

Preparation: The meat is chopped and put into hot butter with onions.
Cook and then add ½ tablespoonful of flour, salt, pepper and cream and
boil slowly for 5 minutes. If it gets too thick, add more water or
cream and the wine, if you wish. Serve on fresh wheat bread toast.
This is a fine breakfast dish.

No. 34—LIVER DUMPLINGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1¼ lbs. of calf liver
¼ lb. of bacon
3 rolls
⅛ lb. of butter, good measure
4 eggs
Salt, pepper
1 pinch of nutmeg
½ onion
3 qts. of salt water or broth for cooking
2 cups of flour

Preparation: The liver and bacon are chopped very fine or ground
twice. The rolls are grated and browned in butter. The onions are cut
fine and cooked or fried to a light yellow in ½ tablespoonful of butter.

Mix well the crumbs, onion, eggs, salt, pepper, nutmeg, flour, liver
and bacon, then cut out dumplings with a floured round wooden ladle as
large as a medium-sized potato. The salt water must boil, then put in
the dumplings and cook for 10 minutes. Put them in a dish or platter
and baste with browned butter in which some roll crumbs or onions are
fried.

Try one dumpling first and if it does not stay whole, add more flour.

Sauerkraut will go well with this dish.

No. 35—VEAL OR CALF’S LIVER WITH BREAKFAST BACON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of calf’s liver
½ lb. of bacon
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 tbsp. of flour
1 onion
1 cup of water
Flour for dipping
1 oz. of butter

Preparation: Liver is cut into ¼ inch strips and bacon in 3x4 inch
slices. The bacon is fried light yellow, then put on a platter and
kept hot. The liver is sprinkled with salt and pepper, dipped in flour
and baked to a light brown in butter or the bacon drippings. Then
placed on the same platter with the bacon and served. Stir into the
bacon drippings or butter 1 tablespoonful of flour and the sliced
onions, boil and add water or bouillon. Strain the gravy and serve.

No. 36—LARDED AND BAKED CALF’S LIVER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of calf’s liver in one whole piece
Salt, pepper
⅛ lb. of bacon for larding
¼ lb. of butter
½ pt. of cream
1 tbsp. of flour
1 carrot
1 onion
1 small piece of celery
5 pepper-corns
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
1 pt. light white wine

Preparation: The white wine, carrot, onion, celery, pepper-corns,
cloves, bay-leaf, 1 pinch of salt are covered and boiled slowly for ½
hour.

The liver is skinned, larded, salted and peppered and the cooked wine
with contents poured over. Let stand for 10 hours. After that, roast
the liver in hot butter in the oven for 30 minutes and baste
frequently. During the last 10 minutes, pour the wine in which the
liver had been lying over it and boil. Stir in 1 tablespoonful of
flour and cream and boil again. The liver is served on a hot platter.
The gravy is strained and served separately. Garnish the dish with
lemon slices and parsley.

No. 37—LARDED BRAISED CALF’S LIVER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. calf’s liver, whole
Salt, pepper
⅛ lb. of bacon for larding
1 carrot cut in pieces
1 piece of parsley root
1 onion, sliced
⅛ lb. butter
1 bay-leaf
3 cloves
6 pepper-corns
1 pinch of nutmeg blossom
½ pt. red wine or white beer, (weiss beer)
1¼ tbsps. of flour

Preparation: The liver is skinned and larded and sprinkled with salt
and pepper, fried quickly until light brown in ⅛ lb. of butter. Flour,
onion, carrot and parsley root and all the spices are added and all
fried in the liver butter a while. Then pour in the red wine or beer
and enough bouillon to cover the liver. Cover and bake in the oven 1½
hours. Serve on a hot platter and strain the gravy.

Remarks: You can fry the larded liver without wine or beer, using only
bouillon and ½ Cup of cream.

No. 38—VEAL KIDNEYS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 veal kidneys
½ lb. raw ham
⅛ lb. butter
½ onion
1 cup veal roast gravy
1 tbsp. of flour
3 tbsps. of champignons or mushrooms
1½ tbsps. of lemon juice
½ tsp. of sugar
4 tbsps. of red wine or Madeira

Preparation: The veal kidneys are fried, some fat cut off, then they
are cut in thick slices, sprinkled with salt and pepper, fried one
minute in the ⅛ lb. of butter until light brown and put on a hot
platter. The ham is sliced and fried in the same butter rapidly about
2 minutes on both sides and placed on the platter with the kidney
slices. In the same butter, fry the sliced onions, flour and the
sliced champignons. Pour in the veal gravy, Madeira or red wine, lemon
juice and sugar, boil and taste. Put in the meat slices and heat again
but do not cook; serve at once. Toasted wheat bread served with this
dish or placed around the edge of the platter is very nice.

No. 39—VEAL KIDNEY ON BREAD OR ROLLS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of veal kidneys or remnants of same
1 tbsp. of roll crumbs
1 tbsp. of capers
1 tbsp. of chopped parsley
1 yolk of egg
1 tbsp. of butter
3 rolls or wheat bread
Parmesan cheese and a little butter
1 tsp. of chopped onions

Preparation: The calf kidney must be cooked tender and chopped fine,
then mixed well with the roll crumbs, capers, parsley, onions, yolk of
egg, butter, salt and pepper. Cut the rolls or the wheat bread in
slices, cover each thickly with the mixture and sprinkle with Parmesan
cheese. Put on a few drops of melted butter and bake in a medium hot
oven for 5 minutes. Serve this dish with asparagus, cauliflower or
spinage.

If you do not like the taste of cheese, leave it out.

No. 40—VEAL OR CALF’S TRIPE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 calves’ tripes
⅛ lb. of butter
3 or 4 tbsps. of flour
Bouillon
2 yolks of eggs
Salt
8 pepper-corns
1 onion
1 bay-leaf
2 cloves
Water

Preparation: The calf’s tripe must be fresh. It is cleaned well and
scalded several times, then rubbed down with salt and left in water
for ¼ day. After that it is cut into 3 inch squares and cooked until
tender. Now add salt, pepper-corns, bay-leaf, cloves and onion. Heat
the butter and flour, take some of the bouillon when the tripe is done
and pour it into the butter to make the gravy thick and stir in 2
yolks of eggs.

Put the tripe and gravy on one platter and serve. The bouillon may
boil down to leave just enough for the gravy, making it pretty strong.

No. 41—STEWED VEAL OR CALF’S TONGUE WITH RAISINS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 calf tongues
¼ lb. washed raisins
1 slice of lemon peel
½ pt. of white wine
2½ tbsps. of butter
2½ tbsps of flour
3 qts. of water
Salt
6 pepper-corns
½ onion
1 bay-leaf
2 cloves
Juice of ½ lemon

Preparation: Soak the calf tongues in water. Cover and cook slowly in
3 qts. of water with salt, lemon peel, bay-leaf, cloves, onion and
pepper; when tender, skin and slice. Brown the butter and flour and
add the tongue bouillon, white wine, raisins and lemon juice. Cook ½
hour and season with sugar, salt or lemon juice. Put the tongues into
the gravy and heat but do not boil. The gravy must be thick. Serve.
Potato dumplings are nice with this meat.

No. 42—STUFFED VEAL CROWN ROAST.

Quantity for 8–10 Persons.

1 saddle of veal
½ lb. chopped veal
1 qt. fresh champignons or
1 pt. canned champignons
2 eggs
Salt according to taste
1 pinch of pepper
1 piece of butter
½ soaked roll
Small peeled potatoes

Preparation: The saddle of veal is freed from all fat and the
rib bones are freed from meat 2 inches from the end. The prepared
saddle of veal is tied together so it looks like a crown.

The fresh champignons are cooked until tender in butter and some
bouillon or water. Add the 2 eggs, the chopped veal, pepper, salt and
roll and mix well. This stuffing may or may not be stewed a little
with butter and then put into the crown of veal. On the small ribs
stick some potatoes so that they will not get too brown.

Roast the stuffed crown of veal 2 or 2½ hours, same as veal roast.

CHAPTER 4.

MUTTON.

[Illustration: Numbered cuts on a sheep]

1. Leg
2–3. Loin and small Ribs, or Loin Chops and Rib Chops
4–5. Shoulder and Round Shoulder
6. Neck
7. Breast
8. Head

LAMB OR MUTTON.

Boiled and roasted mutton.

How scraps of mutton may be utilized.

The best time for lambs is from beginning of December to the end of
April. Good lamb meat is hard or firm and white and the fat also.
Avoid buying soft, reddish meat of lamb or mutton. The forequarter is
the most tender part of lamb.

The wether furnishes the best meat when he is 2 to 3 years old. Up to
one year it is called lamb meat or lamb, older than that it is called
mutton. Good mutton must be juicy, red and covered with a layer of
white fat.

Best parts for roasts are leg and loin.

Best pieces for braising and stews are leg, loin and breast.

Small pieces for frying, cutlets and steaks from leg.

Best meat to make bouillon is all lean meat, the feet, scraps of
cutlets and bones.

Mutton is less nourishing than beef. It may be kept fresh in vinegar,
buttermilk or sweet milk.

Especially old mutton will be more palatable after being kept in
vinegar or milk for a while.

No. 1—LEG OF MUTTON, ENGLISH STYLE.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

6 lbs. of leg of mutton
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 tbsp. of butter
1 small bunch of peppermint
Some vinegar and sugar

Preparation: Remove some fat from the leg of mutton, wash it well,
pound it, salt and pepper it, and put into oven with ½ pint of boiling
water. Add 1 tablespoonful of butter and roast 1½ hours, basting
frequently; the roast will be quite rare inside. If you wish it well
done, roast 2 to 2¼ hours.

Wash the peppermint well and chop it very fine, stir it with vinegar
and sugar and serve with the meat. If you do not like peppermint
sauce, pour off all fat from the roast, add 1½ tablespoonfuls of
flour, brown it and pour in 1 cup of water, ¼ cup of cream and let
this boil; then season with salt, strain the gravy and serve it with
the meat.

No. 2—LEG OF MUTTON IN MILK.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

6 lbs. of leg of mutton
2–3 qts. of milk
⅛ lb. of bacon for larding
Salt, pepper
2 cloves
½ onion
½ bay-leaf
⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
½ cup of sweet or sour cream
A few drops of lemon juice
1 cup of water

Preparation: The membrane and fat are removed from the leg of mutton
and it is then well pounded and put into sweet milk for 2 or 3 days,
turning it twice every day. The milk should cover the roast. In winter
leave it in the milk for 3 days, in summer only 2. After this wash it
off, lard it, salt and pepper it, put into oven with water, the spices
and onion. After roasting it for ½ hour, add the butter, roast for 2
hours, basting frequently.

During the last ½ hour take off some fat, stir in 2 tablespoonfuls of
flour and add 1 cup of water, gradually, also the cream and a few
drops of lemon juice; now leave it in the oven a little longer. If the
gravy has boiled down too much in the last ½ hour, add some more
water. The gravy must be smooth and strained before serving with the
roast. This is a very good dish.

No. 3—LEG OF MUTTON WITH RED WINE.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

6 lbs. of leg of mutton
⅛ lb. of bacon
10 sardines
1 qt. of thin vinegar
2 small onions
3 cloves
10 pepper-corns
⅛ lb. of butter
Salt
1½ tbsps. of flour
½ pt. of red wine
½ pt. of water
1 bay-leaf

Preparation: The leg of mutton is cleared from all membrane and fat,
pounded and larded. The sardines are drained and cut lengthwise into
halves and the leg of mutton larded with them. The thus prepared leg
of mutton is covered with 1 qt. of vinegar, onion slices, cloves,
pepper-corns and bay-leaf and left in the vinegar for 24 hours,
turning it over once in a while.

After this time the leg of mutton is fried with the butter and after ½
hour the flour is stirred in, add salt and pepper, the ½ pint of water
and gradually the red wine. The roast is cooked slowly for 2 or 2½
hours and turned and basted several times until well done. The gravy
is strained and served with the roast.

Remarks: If you do not like the taste of sardines, lard with bacon only.

No. 4—ROASTED LEG OF MUTTON WITH CHAMPIGNONS.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

6 lbs. leg of mutton
⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
2 wine glasses of Madeira
½ pt. champignons
8 pepper-corns
Juice of one lemon
2 cloves
½ bay-leaf
Water or bouillon
Salt

Preparation: The leg of mutton is freed from all fat and membrane,
salted and fried in the ⅛ lb. of butter to a nice brown on both sides,
and placed on a platter. Brown the flour in the same butter, add ⅛
onion and water or bouillon, salt and spices. Put the meat back into
this gravy, it must be half way covered with it, cover it up and roast
in oven 2½ hours. Then take meat out again, strain the gravy, take off
all fat, pour the gravy back into the roaster, add Madeira and lemon
juice, place the meat into it, cover, and cook it ½ hour longer.
Finally cut up the champignons and put them into the gravy. Leg of
mutton and gravy may be served on the same platter or separately. The
gravy must be smooth, not thick.

No. 5—STUFFED ROASTED LEG OF MUTTON.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

The preparation and contents are the same as No. 4.

The bone is taken out, the cavity is filled with a stuffing as
described in No. 11, of the previous chapter, Stuffed Veal Breast, and
is cooked just the same as No. 4, of this chapter. You may omit the
champignons.

No. 6—MUTTON STEW.

Quantity for 8 Persons.

5 lbs. of leg of mutton
½ tbsp. of caraway seeds
Salt
1 large onion sliced
½ carrot
¼ parsley root
Water
A thin white cloth

Preparation: The leg of mutton must be of a good quality. It is
pounded, washed and tied into a thin white cloth; then put into
boiling water; salt, onion, carrot, parsley root, caraway seeds added
and cooked slowly for 2½ hours. The leg of mutton must be white
outside and pink inside and juicy. Garnish with parsley and serve. A
mustard or caper gravy is served with this meat.

No. 7—LARDED SADDLE OF MUTTON, MOCK VENISON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 lbs. of saddle of mutton.
⅛ lb. of butter
⅛ lb. of bacon for larding
½ pt. sweet or sour cream
A few drops of lemon juice
1 tbsp. of flour
Salt, pepper

Preparation: The ribs of the saddle of mutton are chopped off, the
outer hard membrane is trimmed off and the bones cut out. Then the
meat is pounded and larded, strewn with salt and pepper and put into
the pan with the ⅛ lb. of butter with which it is basted very often.
Water is added from time to time and cooked one hour. Now the flour is
stirred in, ½ cup of water and the cream and lemon juice added and
boiled again ½ hour. The meat must be basted very often. The gravy is
then strained and served with the meat.

No. 8—SADDLE OF MUTTON A LA ENGLISH STYLE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 lbs. of saddle of mutton
1 pt. of water
Salt, pepper, soup greens

Preparation: The saddle of mutton is pounded and skinned. The ribs are
chopped off a little, the fat is left on. Now the meat is salted and
peppered and put into the oven with 1 pint of boiling water, and
soup greens. Let it roast 1 hour, basting frequently. Then serve.

For the gravy, take 1 tablespoonful of flour, stir it into the
drippings and add ¼ cup of cream. Skim the gravy. You can also serve a
peppermint sauce as in No. 1. A Bearnaise gravy is nice too.

No. 9—MUTTON TENDERLOIN.

Quantity for 4 Persons.

2 mutton fillets
⅛ lb. of bacon
Salt, pepper
3 tbsps. of butter
½ tbsp. of flour
1 cup of water
Juice of ½ lemon
2 tbsps. of white wine
Bouillon

Preparation: The two fillets are cut from a saddle of mutton, (they
are situated below the ribs alongside of the back). Cut the fillets
lengthwise and crosswise so they make 8 pieces. Lard each piece nicely
with the bacon, salt and pepper it, put the butter into the pan and
fry quickly. Then stir in ½ tablespoonful of flour and pour in enough
bouillon or water mixed with meat extract so the fillets are almost
covered. Cover the pan and cook slowly ½ hour. Finally add the lemon
juice and wine. Strain the gravy and pour it on the fillets or serve
separately.

No. 10—STEWED RACK OF MUTTON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. rack or rib piece
½ carrot
½ parsley root
½ kohlrabi
½ onion
⅛ celery root
Salt
3 qts. of water

Preparation: The rib bones are partly chopped through and the whole
piece of meat bound with string, then boiled slowly in 3 qts. of
boiling water, salt and soup greens. When done, put on a hot platter. A
mustard or morel gravy is nice with it. The remnant of bouillon is
used to cook vegetables in or for soup.

No. 11—MUTTON STEW WITH WHITE CABBAGE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of lean mutton
1 large head of white cabbage
2 tbsps. of butter
Water
Salt

Preparation: The cabbage is cut into 12 parts and put on the fire with
boiling water, then cooked for 10 minutes. The water is then drained
off and fresh boiling water put on. The meat is washed and salted, put
in and cooked with the cabbage slowly for 2½ hours. Then it is served
on a hot platter. The cabbage must not have too much gravy. If it is
not rich enough, add more butter. Serve it with the meat and potatoes.

No. 12—MUTTON STEAK.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of mutton chops or cutlets
1 piece of butter
Salt, pepper

Preparation: The cutlets are pounded well, and the bones all trimmed
out. A pan is larded with some mutton fat and heated. The meat is put
in and fried on the stove ¼ hour, turning it over often. Serve on a
hot platter, salt and pepper, and butter. A peppermint sauce, as in
No. 1, is good with this meat.

No. 13—MUTTON CUTLETS OR CHOPS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of mutton chops
⅛ lb. of butter
Salt, pepper
½ cup of water

Preparation: The real cutlet piece is the loin with the upper ends of
the ribs. Every cutlet must have a rib and be one inch thick. They are
pounded, skinned and the fat cut off, salted and peppered. The butter
is melted in a pan and the cutlets put in and fried 3 to 5 minutes.
Then they are served on a hot platter. For gravy pour some hot water
or bouillon into the frying butter and perhaps a little more salt.
Pour the gravy over the cutlets and serve hot.

No. 14—MUTTON CUTLETS BROILED.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of mutton chops
1 piece of fresh butter
Salt, pepper

Preparation: The cutlets are pounded and placed on a broiler 5
minutes, turning them once; placed on a hot platter, seasoned with
salt and pepper, buttered and served at once.

No. 15—BROILED BREADED MUTTON CHOPS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. mutton chops
Salt, pepper
1 cup grated rolls
3 tbsps. of Parmesan cheese
⅛ lb. of butter

Preparation: Trim off the skin and fat, pound, salt and pepper the
cutlets. Heat some butter and dip each cutlet into it, then into a
mixture of roll crumbs and Parmesan cheese. Now broil to a light brown
on a broiler, which requires 5 minutes. Serve on a hot platter and
pour the rest of the melted butter over them.

Remarks: You can also fry the cutlets in a pan; then you need an
additional ⅛ lb. of butter.

No. 16—MUTTON CHOPS WITH POTATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. mutton chops
Salt, pepper
1 pt. cream or milk
⅛ grated onion
2 tbsps. of Parmesan or Swiss cheese
⅛ lb. of butter
2 lbs. boiled, chopped potatoes.
3 yolks of eggs

Preparation: There should be 12 pieces of chops; salt and pepper them
and fry them brown on both sides in butter. The boiled potatoes are
pressed through a potato masher and mixed well with the remainder of
the butter, which is creamed with the yolks of 3 eggs, salt, grated
onion, cheese, cream and the rest of the butter which is left in the
pan. Half of this mixture is placed into a casserole, the fried
cutlets are placed on top and the remainder of the mixture put on to
cover them. Then strew bread crumbs over the whole and small pieces of
butter and bake in a medium hot oven for ½ to ¾ hour. Serve in the
casserole.

No. 17—STEWED MUTTON CUTLETS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of mutton cutlets
Salt, pepper
Some bacon for larding
½ pt. of champignons
4 truffles
1 tbsp. of flour
Some bouillon or water mixed with ½ tsp. meat extract
2 tbsps. of butter
1 small wineglassful of Madeira or red wine

Preparation: The cutlets must be 2 inches thick. They are pounded and
larded with bacon strips after the skin and fat have been removed from
them, then peppered and salted and dipped in flour. Now they are
quickly fried in butter and placed on a hot platter.

For the gravy, brown the flour in the butter, add bouillon, wine,
salt, and the cutlets. Cover and stew until done. ¼ hour before they
are done, skim the fat off and add the sliced champignons and chopped
truffles. Serve the cutlets and gravy on the same hot platter. It is
best to warm the plates with such a dish.

Remarks: You can prepare the cutlets more simply by omitting the
champignons and truffles and putting 4 tomatoes into the gravy. Strain
the gravy.

No. 18—IRISH STEW.

Mutton Cutlets stewed with all kinds of vegetables and Potatoes.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of mutton chops
1 head of Savoy cabbage
5 kohlrabis
3 small onions
2 lbs. of raw potatoes
Bouillon or water
¼ lb. of butter
Salt, pepper
¼ head white cabbage

Preparation: The vegetables and potatoes are cleaned and peeled well
and cut into small pieces. In an iron kettle, which has been buttered,
the vegetables are placed in layers, then a layer of cutlets, seasoned
with salt and pepper; on this a layer of potatoes and onions; repeat
this twice, taking care that you do not season too highly with salt.
Potatoes must be the last layer. Fill up with hot bouillon or water.
Place a piece of butter on top. Stew or boil for 3 hours, well covered.

No. 19—BAKED MUTTON KIDNEYS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

10 mutton kidneys
1 piece of butter
Salt, pepper
½ tbsp. of mustard
Grated rye bread

Preparation: The kidneys are cut half way through, skinned and rubbed
with salt and pepper. Melted butter mixed with mustard is put over
them and then they are dipped in rye bread crumbs, basted with butter
and baked 15 minutes.

This dish is very nice garnished with cooked vegetables.

No. 20—MUTTON KIDNEY PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

8 raw mutton kidneys
1 small onion
Salt, white pepper
2 tbsps. of butter
Juice of 1 lemon
1 tbsp. of flour
18 champignons
½ cup of rice
Bouillon or water
1 tbsp. of butter
2 yolks of eggs
½ pt. gravy or broth from the meat

Preparation: The kidneys are sliced ½ inch thick. Butter, onions and
sliced champignons are cooked; flour, gravy, salt and pepper are
added. The sliced kidneys are put in and cooked slowly 15 minutes. Add
lemon juice.

The ½ cup of rice is boiled until soft in bouillon or water to a thick
mush, then the butter and finally the 2 yolks of eggs are stirred into
it. A pudding mold is buttered and strewn with roll crumbs, then put
in a layer of rice and a layer of meat, alternately, until all is in;
the last layer should be rice. Cover and cook in a steamer over a
kettle of boiling water for 2 hours. After it is done, dump it on a
hot platter and serve with Dutch gravy.

No. 21—MUTTON RAGOUT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of mutton, lean, without bones
1 large onion
⅛ lb. of butter
Salt, pepper
2 tbsps. of flour
¾ qt. bouillon or water
1 wineglass red wine

Preparation: The meat is cut into 1½ inch pieces. Butter stewed with
onion and the pieces of meat are put in to cook 10 minutes. Add the
flour and cook another few minutes, then add bouillon or water, salt
and pepper and cook until well done. During the last 15 minutes, pour
in the red wine and serve with a wreath of boiled rice. (Boil 1 cupful
of rice in salt water until tender but retaining its firmness and add
a piece of butter).

No. 22—MUTTON WITH POTATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. left over mutton roast
1 onion, sliced
1½ lbs. sliced raw potatoes
Salt, pepper
Left over gravy
1 small piece of butter

Preparation: The meat is cut into small thin slices, also the peeled
potatoes. A casserole is buttered and filled with 1 layer of raw
potatoes, 1 layer of meat, salt, pepper and sliced onion. Repeat
twice, with potatoes for the last layer. Pour the gravy over, (if it
is too thick, dilute with cream or milk) put a few small pieces of
butter on top, bake in oven for 1½ hours.

If you have no left over gravy, make one of 1 tablespoonful of browned
butter, flour, water or bouillon, cream, pepper and salt. Pour over
the contents of the casserole and bake it.

No. 23—MUTTON WITH PICKLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½–2 lbs. of mutton roast or boiled mutton remnants
Scant ⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
¼ small onion, sliced
1 pt. thin gravy or bouillon
½ tsp. of meat extract
Salt, pepper
1 clove
½ bay-leaf
1 tbsp. of wine vinegar
3 sweet-sour pickles
3 tbsps. of pickled pearl onions
1 tsp. of sugar

Preparation: The cold, fried or boiled mutton is cut into small
pieces. The butter and onions are browned, then flour stirred in. Add
salt, pepper, cloves, bay-leaf, vinegar, sugar and bouillon or thin
gravy and boil until quite thick. The pickles, cut into small cubes,
and onions, are now put in, stewed a little while; add the pieces of
meat, heat, but do not boil, then serve. If the gravy is too light,
add some meat extract or sugar coloring. Fresh boiled, peeled potatoes
go well with this dish.

No. 24—MUTTON ROAST SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. mutton roast
2 yolks of eggs
Salt, pepper
Some wine vinegar
1 tsp. of mustard
½ pt. cream
4 mustard pickles
1 vinegar pickle
2 tbsps. of pearl onions
2 tbsps. of oil

Preparation: Meat, pickles, onions, all this cut into small pieces and
mixed well with the other ingredients, then garnished with hard-boiled
eggs.

No. 25—MUTTON PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3–4 lbs. of mutton from the leg
1 qt. water
⅙ part of a small celery root
2 small onions
Some salt
2½ tbsps. of flour
Juice of one lemon
1 pinch of white pepper
3 doz. oysters
½ pt. can of champignons
2 tbsps. of chopped parsley
2 tbsps. of butter

The Paste.

½ lb. fresh butter
¼ lb. lard
¾ lb. of flour
2 tbsps. of brandy
1½ glasses water

Preparation: The meat is cut into pieces the size of cutlets, boiled
until tender in 1 qt. of water, celery root, 2 small onions, salt.
Cook 2 tablespoonfuls of butter and flour and add veal bouillon; then
add lemon juice, salt and pepper, if necessary, boil a few minutes,
but do not let the gravy get thick.

The Paste: Butter and lard must be very cold. You may omit the lard
and use more butter instead if you wish. Both are cut into the flour,
the very cold water and brandy poured in and then stirred to a light
paste and rolled out on a well-floured board. The butter must be
visible all through the paste. Do not knead much. Roll out, line a
baking dish with half of the paste, then put in layers of meat,
oysters, then sliced champignons, chopped parsley, the gravy poured
over the whole and then covered up with the other half of the paste in
which make a few cuts, finish off the edge and bake in medium hot oven
1 to 1½ hours.

Remarks: Leave some of the gravy, mix with oyster liquor and the juice
of ½ lemon and serve with the pie.

No. 26—MUTTON PIE PREPARED SIMPLY.

The preparation of this pie is just the same as in No. 25, but instead
of oysters and champignons, take raw, very thinly sliced potatoes.

No. 27—LAMB ROAST.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

6 lbs. of lamb quarter
Salt, pepper
½ lb. of butter
½ pt. sour or sweet cream
2 tbsps. of lemon juice
1 cup of water
1 tbsp. of flour

Preparation: The lamb meat must be two days old. It is pounded,
salted, peppered and put into the oven with the cup of water. After 10
minutes the browned butter is poured hot over the meat. Baste
frequently, gradually adding the cream and lemon juice, and roast for
1½ to 2 hours.

For the gravy, stir into the butter some flour and a little water and
cook (if necessary) a while longer. Serve the gravy with the roast
after straining.

No. 28—BREADED LAMB ROAST.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of lamb quarter
Salt, pepper
2 eggs
Finely sifted roll crumbs
1½ cups of sour cream
1 tbsp. of flour
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
1 cup of water
½ lb. of butter

Preparation: The meat is pounded, rubbed with salt and pepper, then
rolled in beaten egg and bread crumbs. Heat the butter and fry the
meat quickly on top of the stove, then put it into the oven, basting
it often and adding the cream in spoonfuls, also a little water, if
the butter should get too brown. Cook in slow heat 1½ hours until the
roast looks golden yellow; then serve.

For the gravy, stir 1 tablespoonful of flour into the butter, add
water, cook and strain. You can also add chopped champignons.

No. 29—MUTTON OR LAMB RAGOUT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of mutton or lamb
⅛ lb. of butter
Salt
6 pepper-corns
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
¼ carrot
1½ qts. of water
3 tbsps. of flour
Juice of ½ lemon
1 wineglass red wine
½ pt. can champignons
5 truffles, chopped and peeled
½ tsp. of sugar
½ onion

Preparation: The mutton or lamb, which should be from the breast, is
cut into equal sized pieces, stewed a little in 2 tablespoonfuls of
butter, then add 1½ qts. of water, carrot, onion, salt, pepper,
cloves, bay-leaf and cook the meat until tender.

For the gravy, take the rest of the butter, brown it with flour, add
the strained mutton bouillon, the red wine, lemon juice, some of the
champignon juice and boil slowly ½ hour. The gravy should be quite
thick. Now put in the meat, champignons, truffles and spices and boil
15 minutes longer. Taste it for salt and spices. Serve on a hot
platter, and garnish the rim with crescents of puff paste and small
fried meat dumplings. The dumplings are prepared the same way as the
Ox-tongue Ragout in No. 35, Chapter 2.

No. 30—LAMB STEW.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

Head, liver, lungs and heart
Salt
8 whole pepper-corns
1 onion
1 bay-leaf
⅛ lb. of butter
1 egg
Roll crumbs
2 tbsps. of flour
Some herb vinegar
2 cloves

Preparation: The head is split in two, brain and tongue taken out and
soaked in water. The tongue is boiled until tender in water with salt,
pepper, bay-leaf, cloves and onion. In the same water, cook the brain
and also the heart, liver, lungs and head until tender.

When the tongue, heart and lungs are well done, cut them into cubes.
All the meat is put into a pot. Season with salt, pepper and a piece
of butter, pour in some bouillon and stew. Cut the meat off the head,
season with salt and pepper, dip in egg and roll crumbs and fry in
butter to a golden yellow. The same is done with the brains. The liver
is cut into slices, salted, peppered, dipped in flour and also fried.

The hash of tongue, lung and heart is placed in the middle of a hot
platter, the liver slices placed in a wreath around it, the meat from
the head, which has been cut into neat pieces, and the brains placed
on top of the hash.

The gravy should be prepared before dishing out the hash. For the
gravy, take one tablespoonful of flour, stir it in the butter in which
the meat, brains and liver have been fried, add some of the bouillon
and a little vinegar, lemon juice or white wine. Serve the gravy with
the meat.

No. 31—PLAIN RAGOUT OF MUTTON OR LAMB.

The preparation is the same as in No. 29. Instead of wine, take wine
vinegar or herb vinegar and leave off the champignons and truffles.

No. 32—LAMB CROWN ROAST.

Contents and preparation are the same as No. 42 of previous chapter,
Veal Crown Roast.

CHAPTER 5.

PORK.

[Illustration: Numbered cuts on a hog]

1. Ham.
2. Pork Loin.
3. Pork Chops.
4. Pork Shoulder
5. Belly
6. Head
7. Snout
8. Shanks
9. Feet

Boiled, Fried and Salted Pork.

Also recipes for utilizing left over pork.

Good pork from well fed yearlings is tender, light and not too fat.
The fat or lard must be white, the hide light. Inferior pork has a
yellow hide, smeary lard and very fat, dark meat.

Suckling pig is considered a delicacy in the kitchen. It is usually 2
or 3 weeks old.

Best Pieces for Roasts.

The leg, the pork loin, the slightly smoked rib piece, the fillets.

Small Pieces for Frying.

The cutlets, the fillets and ham slices.

Best Pieces for Stew.

The pork shoulder and fillets.

Best Pieces for Boiling.

The belly, the hip-bone, (head, shoulder and marbled pieces.

Best Pieces for Smoking and Salting.

The hams, pork loins, smoked tenderloin, (called lachsschinken), the
belly for lean bacon, the pork loin as fat bacon, tenderloin and
shoulder.

For Gelatines.

The hide or skin and bones.

No. 1—PORK ROAST.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

4 lbs. rib roast
Salt
6 pepper-corns
2 cloves.
1 onion
1½ tbsps. of flour
1 cup of cream
1½ cups of water
1 bay-leaf

Preparation: The meat is washed and pounded, some fat trimmed off and
salted. The roast is put into the oven with 1 cup of boiling water,
all spices and onion and roasted 1½ to 2 hours, basting it frequently.
The roast must be crisp outside. When it is done, put it on a platter
and prepare the gravy. If there is too much fat, skim it off, put the
flour into it, stew a little while, add the cream and some water if
necessary, cook, strain and serve with the roast.

No. 2—FRESH YOUNG LEG OF PORK FOR ROAST.

Quantity for 10–15 Persons.

8–10 lbs. of leg of pork
Salt
6 pepper-corns
3 cloves
1 onion
2 tbsps. of flour
1 pt. of water
½ wineglass red wine or Madeira
2 by-leaves

Preparation: The meat is pounded, skinned, some of the fat cut off,
rubbed with salt and put in oven with 1 pt. boiling water, all spices
and onion and roasted 2½ to 3 hours, basting it frequently.

For the gravy, skim off the fat, stir in the flour, stew a little
while, then add some water, the wine or cream, and cook it well,
strain and serve with the meat.

No. 3—BREADED LEG OF PORK.

Quantity for 10–15 Persons.

The meat is prepared the same way as described in No: 2, but ¾ hours
before done, 8 cloves are stuck into it, ½ teaspoonful of sugar and 1
cup of rye bread crumbs roasted in butter are strewn over it. Cover it
well with the bread crumbs by pressing it down with a knife, baste
with drippings and roast ½ to ¾ hour longer.

For the gravy, stir in 1½ tablespoonfuls of flour, 1 glass red wine,
1½ cups of water; cook, strain and serve.

No. 4—BRAISED PORK ROAST.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of pork
Salt, pepper
3 cloves
1 bay-leaf
1 small onion
2 tbsps. of flour
1½ pts. of water
2 tbsps. of white wine

Preparation: The meat is fried quickly to a light brown in 1
tablespoonful of lard and onion on the open fire, the flour is stirred
in and browned a little. Now the water is poured on, salt and spices
and wine added and then roasted in oven 2 to 2½ hours, turning and
basting frequently.

For the gravy, skim off the fat, strain it and serve with the roast
which must be a light brown.

No. 5—SOUR PORK ROAST.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of pork shoulder
1 qt. vinegar
2 onions
6 pepper-corns
3 cloves
2 bay-leaves
1 handful of salt for pickling
1½ tbsps. of flour
2 cups of water
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 wineglass of red wine if you wish

Preparation: The meat is pounded and put into a jar or earthen dish
with 1 qt. of vinegar, sliced onion, salt, cloves, peppers and
bay-leaves and left in it for 2 days, turning it once or twice. When
taken out to roast, put it into the oven with 1 cup of water, salt and
pepper, also ½ of the onions that are in the vinegar, then roast 1¼
hours, basting frequently.

For the gravy, stir in the flour, stew a few minutes, add some water,
the wine or ½ cup of cream, cook, pour over the roast. When this is
done, strain the gravy and serve with the roast.

No. 6—PORK STEW.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of pork
Salt
4 pepper-corns
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
2½ qts. of water
½ onion

Preparation: The meat is washed and put on with 2½ qts. of cold water,
onion, salt, spices and cooked slowly 2 to 2½ hours, covered. Skim the
bouillon several times. Cut the meat in slices and arrange the
vegetables around it. The bouillon may be used for boiling all kinds
of vegetables, beans, peas and lentils.

No. 7—SALT PORK OR HIP-BONE FOR STEW.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of salt pork or hip-bone
6 pepper-corns
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
1 onion
3 qts. of water

Preparation: The salt pork or hip-bone is put on with 3 qts. of cold
water, spices and onion, and cooked slowly for 3 hours. The pot must
be well covered and ought to be an earthen dish. The broth will be
jellied when cold and can be utilized for all kinds of headcheese.

No. 8—SMOKED HAM FOR COOKING.

Quantity for 15–20 Persons.

10 lbs. of ham
2 onions
6 cloves
2 bay-leaves
10 pepper-corns
Sufficient water

Preparation: The ham is soaked in water over night, then put it on the
fire with cold water enough to cover it, onions and spices added. Cook
it slowly in a large kettle for about 4 to 5 hours. Serve it warm with
a Madeira gravy, or cold in slices.

No. 9—SMOKED HAM BOILED, BREADED WITH RYE BREAD CRUMBS.

Quantity for 15–20 Persons.

10 lbs. of ham
Sufficient water
Rye bread crumbs
1 tsp. of brown sugar
Cloves for larding

Preparation: The ham is soaked in water over night, then put on the
fire with sufficient cold water to cover it, boil slowly for 4 hours.
It will be quite done by this time. Put it on a platter, skin it and
lard it where the skin has been removed with 30 to 40 cloves, sprinkle
side with the sugar and thickly with the rye bread crumbs, then lay
the ham into a pan and bake it in the oven for 1 hour. Serve with a
Madeira gravy. This is a fine dish.

No. 10—HAM IN BURGUNDY WINE.

Quantity for 15–20 Persons.

10 lbs. of ham
2 bottles of Burgundy wine
2 small sliced onions
A leek
1 piece of thyme
1 piece of marjoram
¼ lb. of truffles
1 very large pig’s bladder
2 tbsps. of butter
2½ tbsps. of flour
¼ pt. of Madeira
½ cup of bouillon
A cloth to tie up the ham
Water to boil in
¼ lb. of champignons

Preparation: The skin is cut off and the bones are taken out as well
as possible. To the wine add the onion, the chopped leek, thyme and
marjoram, then leave the ham in it for 24 hours, turning it over
often. After that take it out, make a stuffing of truffles,
champignons, 1 tablespoonful of butter, salt, pepper and ½ cup of
bouillon mixed well and stuff the cavity left after removing the bone
with it and sew it up. Clean the bladder well inside and outside, make
a cut into it and put the stuffed ham inside, then pour in the wine
with all its contents in which the ham has been lying for 24 hours,
sew it up carefully. Then tie the whole into a white cloth and put it
on the fire in cold water to boil for 4 to 5 hours slowly. After this,
take the cloth off, open the suture, pour the fluid into a pot and put
the ham into a pan.

Brown the butter and flour, add some of the ham fluid and Madeira,
cook it well and add perhaps ½ teaspoonful of sugar, (better taste the
gravy first). Fill some of this gravy over the ham and put it into the
oven, roast for ¼ hour, then serve it with the gravy. Ham prepared in
this way is very fine. If wine cannot be had, use Ginger Ale.

No. 11—FRIED HAM WITH EGGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. raw ham sliced very thin
1½ pts. milk
12 eggs
1 pinch of salt and white pepper
⅛ lb. butter

Preparation: The ham is put in milk for 6 hours, then dry off the ham
slices and fry them quickly in butter, put them on a platter and pour
the butter over. In the meantime the eggs have been fried in butter
with salt and pepper and now they are carefully placed on the ham.

Remarks: You need not put the ham into the milk and instead of ham you
may take breakfast bacon. (Bacon and Eggs).

No. 12—BOILED HAM WITH NOODLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of boiled ham
Noodles made from 2 eggs
1 pt. milk
1 pinch of pepper
2–3 eggs
Some butter
Salt

Preparation: The ham is chopped fine. The noodles are cooked in salt
water for ten minutes, then poured into a colander. Butter a casserole
and put in a layer of noodles, then a layer of ham and repeat 2 or 3
times until all is in. The top layer must be noodles. The milk is well
mixed with 2 or 3 eggs and very little salt and pepper and poured over
the whole mass, a few pieces of butter on top and baked in oven slowly
for 1 hour.

No. 13—BOILED HAM WITH MACARONI.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of boiled ham
½ lb. of macaroni
1 pt. of milk
Very little salt and pepper
Juice of 1 lemon
2 tbsps. of Parmesan cheese or Swiss cheese
2–3 eggs

Preparation: The ham is chopped fine and the macaroni broken in 2 inch
pieces, boiled in salt water for ½ hour, then drain. Butter a
casserole, put in a layer of macaroni and one of ham, repeat 2 or 3
times, with macaroni for the last layer. The milk is stirred well with
eggs, salt, pepper, lemon juice and grated cheese and poured over the
mass, then baked in the oven for one hour, after putting a few small
pieces of butter on top. Serve in the casserole in which it was baked.

No. 14—BREADED HAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. raw ham
⅛ lb. of butter or lard, good measure
2 cups of roll crumbs
1 pinch of salt
1½ pts. of milk
3 whites of eggs

Preparation: The ham is cut into ¼ inch thick slices and put into milk
for 5 hours, then taken out, dried, salted, dipped into white of egg
and then into roll crumbs mixed with the flour. Then it is fried in
hot butter on both sides. These ham slices are nice to serve with
vegetables.

No. 15—ROASTED PORK-FILLET.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2–2½ lbs. of pork-fillet
⅛ lb. bacon for larding
Salt, pepper
1 tbsp. of flour
½ cup of sweet or sour cream
1 cup of water
2 tbsps. of butter or drippings

Preparation: The pork-fillets are pounded, the skin and most of the
fat removed, then larded with bacon, salted and peppered. Put the fat
which you cut off into a flat baking tin with some butter; into this
heated lard and butter, put your fillets, baste often and let it roast
in the oven 45 minutes to 1 hour. This depends on the size of the
meat. 15 minutes before done, pour off some of the lard, stir in the
flour to brown, then the water and gradually the cream, basting
frequently. Strain the gravy and serve with the fillet.

No. 16—STUFFED PORK-FILLET CALLED MOCK DUCK.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 large fillets of 2½ lbs. or 4 small ones
⅛ lb. bacon for larding
Salt, pepper

For Stuffing.

½ lb. chopped pork
½ lb. chopped veal
2 eggs
2 tbsps. of butter for frying
½ tbsp. of butter
½ tbsp. of lemon juice
1 tbsp. of capers
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
½ tbsp. of flour
¼ cup of sweet or sour cream
1 cup of water

Preparation: The skin and fat are removed from the fillets and these
pounded flat. Chopped pork and veal, eggs, ½ tablespoonful of butter,
lemon juice, capers, salt and pepper are mixed well. This stuffing is
placed between two fillets and these are then tied together with
string or fastened together with toothpicks. If there are four
fillets, put ½ of the stuffing on two and place the other two on top,
then put bacon strips on top and fry them like No. 15, 1 to 1½ hours.
Strain the gravy and serve with the fillets. This makes a very fine
dish.

No. 17—ROASTED PORK CUTLETS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of pork cutlets
Salt, pepper
1 egg
1½ cups grated rolls
1 tbsp. of flour
1 clove
½ bay-leaf
¼ small onion
⅛ lb. of butter or lard
1 cup of water

Preparation: The pork cutlets are pounded, salted and peppered. The
egg is beaten with a tablespoonful of milk and the cutlets dipped into
this and then into the bread crumbs, then fried until light brown in
hot butter or lard. This will require 15 minutes if they are ½ inch
thick; if they are thicker, fry them for 20 minutes and place them on
a hot platter.

If there is much fat in the pan, take some of it out and brown onion
slices and flour in the remaining fat; add water, clove and bay-leaf,
also salt and pepper, if necessary, and cook for 5 minutes. Strain the
gravy and pour over cutlets or serve it separately.

No. 18—CHOPPED PORK CUTLETS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Preparation and ingredients are the same as in No. 17. The cutlets are
chopped, carefully breaded and fried in butter about 8 to 10 minutes
if the cutlets are ½ to ¾ inch thick.

No. 19—STEWED PORK CUTLETS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. pork cutlets
Salt, pepper
½ cup of flour for dipping
1½ pts. of bouillon or water mixed with ½ tsp. of meat extract
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
4 pepper-corns
½ sliced onion
1½–2 tbsps. of flour
1 wineglass Madeira or red wine
Juice of ¼ lemon
Butter

Preparation: The fat is cut off and the cutlets salted and peppered
and dipped in flour, then fried quickly in hot butter on both sides.
They are then taken out and put on a hot platter. The sliced onion and
flour are browned in the drippings, bouillon, wine, spices, lemon
juice, salt, 4 pepper-corns added, and cooked a while. The cutlets are
then put into this gravy, covered and placed into the oven to stew one
hour. When done, strain the gravy and serve with cutlets on the same
platter.

No. 20—PORK KIDNEYS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1¾ lbs. pork kidneys
Salt, pepper
1½ tbsps. of flour
⅛ lb. of butter
1 pt. of bouillon
1½ tbsps. of vinegar

Preparation: The kidneys are cut crosswise into ¼ inch slices and
fried in the hot butter 1 minute. Salt and pepper, stir in the flour,
cook another minute and pour in bouillon and vinegar and cook 1 to 2
minutes more, stirring constantly. Have a good hot fire. The kidneys
are tender when they do not look red any longer. If they cook too
long, they get hard. Serve at once.

No. 21—PORK RAGOUT OR PORK PEPPER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of lean pork
1½ tbsps. of butter or lard
Salt, pepper
½ onion
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
1½ tbsps. of vinegar or 1 wineglassful of red wine
3 tbsps. of flour
Some water or bouillon
½ cup of pig’s blood if you can get it

Preparation: The meat is cut into 2½ inch squares. The butter and
flour is browned, then bouillon or water, onion slices, spices and
salt added and cooked a few minutes. Put in the meat and cook slowly ½
hour. Add the vinegar or red wine and continue to cook slowly until
done, which will require ½ to 1 hour. Put the ragout in a warm dish
and stir the blood into the gravy, strain and pour over the meat.

Remarks: You may omit the blood.

No. 22—MOCK RABBIT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. chopped pork
1 lb. chopped veal
1 lb. chopped beef
2 tbsps. of butter
3 eggs
2 soaked rolls
Juice of ½ lemon
1 tbsp. of capers
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
⅛ lb. of butter or lard for frying
½ tbsp. of flour
1 cup of water
1 cup of roll crumbs

Preparation: All the meat must be chopped very fine and mixed well
with the roll from which the water has been well drained, eggs, 2
tablespoonfuls of butter, lemon juice, capers, salt, pepper, and 1
teaspoonful of grated onion. It is shaped into an oblong loaf and
strewn with roll crumbs. The butter or lard is heated, the loaf of
meat put in and baked in the oven one hour, basting frequently. Take
out the mock rabbit carefully and put it on a platter. For the gravy,
brown ½ tablespoonful of flour in the drippings, add the water, boil,
and when done, strain and serve with the mock rabbit. You may also add
¼ cup of cream and some lemon juice to the gravy.

Remarks: You may also put 2 to 3 peeled, hard-boiled eggs into the
loaf of meat, whole, before baking it. It is fine for slicing cold.

No. 23—STUFFED HOG’S HEAD.

Quantity for 10 Persons.

1 hog’s head with ears
Salt
6 whole peppers
7 qts. of water for cooking
1 carrot
2 small onions
⅛ of a celery root
½ pt. of wine vinegar
4 cloves
2 bay-leaves

The Stuffing.

1 lb. chopped lean pork
1 lb. chopped lean veal
Salt, pepper
¼ lb. butter
3 eggs
Juice of ½ lemon
1 tsp. of grated onion
1 pinch of nutmeg.
2 soaked rolls

Extra.

1 lb. boiled beef tongue
½ lb. of boiled veal
½ lb. cooked pork
⅛ lb. truffles, cut in small pieces
½ lb. bacon
1 white cloth to tie up

Preparation: The head is cleaned well and split open lengthwise
without cutting the skin. The bones are all taken out and the inside
of the head is salted and peppered. The bones are split and put over
the fire with the 7 qts. of water, the carrot, onion, celery, vinegar,
cloves, and bay-leaf.

For the stuffing, mix well the chopped veal, salt, pepper, soaked
rolls, ¼ lb. of butter, 3 eggs, grated onion, lemon juice, nutmeg and
put the stuffing into the head, 1 inch thick, then make a layer of
boiled tongue (½ inch slices), pork and veal. Then a thin layer of
truffles. Repeat this, putting in stuffing, sliced meat and truffles
alternately until both sides of the head are filled, sew it up, lay a
piece of pork skin before the throat opening and sew it on. Tie up the
whole head in the white cloth or sew it into the cloth and cook it 4
hours in the same water in which you have boiled the bones. After it
is done, leave it in the bouillon and cool it off; when it is nearly
cold, place it on a board and weight it down. When it is cold, cut off
the cloth and pick out all threads. Cut off a slice from the head so
you can see the stuffing. Garnish by pinning a lemon slice into each
eye with a toothpick, into the mouth place a bunch of parsley and
around the head, green lettuce. This will make a fine cold supper or
lunch. Serve a cold mustard gravy with it.

Remarks: The bouillon, after being boiled down considerably, may be
used for aspic or head cheese.

No. 24—PORK RIBS AND SAUERKRAUT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. salted pork ribs
1 lb. sauerkraut
¼ lb. butter
1 pinch of sugar
6 large, peeled and sliced apples
½ bottle of white wine

For Meat Dumplings.

¼ lb. chopped pork
¼ lb. chopped veal
1 egg
Salt, pepper
1 tbsp. of butter
¼ tbsp. of grated onion

Preparation: The pork ribs which have been salted for several days are
cut into pieces, washed, dried and fried on both sides in hot butter,
then put into a pot, the sauerkraut on top. (If the sauerkraut is too
sour, soak it in water and drain). Add ¼ lb. of butter, apples, white
wine and sugar, cover and cook slowly for 2 hours. When it gets too
dry, pour in some water.

The Meat Dumplings: The chopped pork and veal, soaked roll, egg, 1
tablespoonful of butter and onion are mixed well. Shape into dumplings
and fry well done in the butter in which you fried the ribs.

Arrange the sauerkraut in the middle of the platter, the ribs around
it and the dumplings piled on top in a heap. Then serve. If you cannot
get wine, omit it.

No. 25—SAUSAGE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. marbled pork
Salt
½ tsp. of cloves
½ tsp. of thyme
½ tsp. of white pepper

Preparation: The meat is ground three times or chopped very fine, then
mixed well with the spices, filled into casings made from hog
intestines and fried while fresh.

No. 26—FRIED SAUSAGE.

2½ lbs. of sausage
2 tbsps. of lard
1 small onion
Salt, pepper
1 cup of bouillon or water
½ tsp. of meat extract
1 tbsp. of flour

Preparation: The sausage is fried slowly in the hot lard until brown,
then take it out and put the sliced onion into the same lard, add the
flour, brown it, add water or bouillon, meat extract, if you have it,
salt and pepper and cook. Pour this strained gravy over the sausage
and serve.

No. 27—SAUSAGES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. lean pork
½ lb. fat pork from the loin
1 pinch of white pepper
2 casings of sheep intestines
Salt

Preparation: Meat and fat are chopped fine or ground 3 times, salted
and peppered, filled into the casings and formed into lengths of
sausages. You can improve the sausage by adding chopped truffles.

No. 28—FRIED SAUSAGES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of sausages
2 whites of eggs
1 cup of grated rolls
Salt, drippings or butter
½ cup of flour

Preparation: The sausages are salted, dipped into white of egg, flour
and bread crumbs and fried in hot drippings or butter to a nice brown
color. They are nice with vegetables.

Remarks: You can prepare them like No. 26 and omit the bread crumbs.

No. 29—WHITE CABBAGE PIE WITH PORK.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

1 head of white cabbage
¾ lb. chopped pork
¾ lb. chopped beef
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
2 tbsps. of butter or drippings
2 eggs

Preparation: Remove the outer leaves and the core of the cabbage and
boil until tender in salt water. Mix well the chopped pork and beef,
butter, eggs, salt and pepper. Butter a pudding mold, drain the salt
water from the cabbage and put in layers of cabbage and meat; repeat 3
times until all is in, the cabbage being on top, then close the mold,
put it in a steamer over a kettle of boiling water and boil for 2
hours. Dump on a dish or platter after draining off the broth.

For the Gravy: Stir 5 rolled crackers with 1 tablespoonful of butter,
salt, pepper, add the broth and boil. If it gets too thick, add some
bouillon or water; stir in 2 yolks of eggs and serve with the pie.

Remarks: For the filling you may take pork only and for gravy
thickening use flour instead of crackers.

No. 30—CABBAGE SAUSAGES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 head of white cabbage
¾ lb. chopped pork
Salt, pepper
1 onion
Left over gravy or 1 pt. of false gravy
⅛ lb. of bacon

Preparation: The whole head of cabbage is boiled until half done in
salt water. The outer leaves are then carefully taken off and some of
the mixture of chopped pork, salt and pepper put on each leaf and the
leaf is rolled or wrapped around it and tied with string. The bacon
and onions are cut into small pieces and fried, then these little
cabbage sausages are fried in it to a nice brown color. The gravy is
poured over them, the pan is covered and the sausages stewed for 1½ to
2 hours, the string removed and served.

Remarks: If you have no gravy, make one by browning 1 tablespoonful of
butter and 2 tablespoonfuls of flour and adding water or bouillon. Put
in 3 tablespoonfuls of cream if you have it; salt, pepper and boil. If
you have no bouillon, stir ½ teaspoonful of meat extract with water.

No. 31—SPANFERKEL OR ROAST LITTLE PIG.

Quantity for 8–10 Persons.

1 suckling pig
Salt
½ lb. of butter
¾ pt. of water
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The well washed and dressed pig is soaked in water for a
few hours. The eyes are taken out and it is salted inside and outside.
The fore and hind legs are bent under the pig and in this way it is
placed into a pan with a tray on which it rests. Pour in some water
and let it roast for 10 minutes. The butter is melted and the pig is
brushed with it every 5 to 10 minutes. Gradually add water and cook it
1½ hours. Prick the skin several times so it will not blister; the
butter will make the pig crisp. The drippings will be served as gravy
or you can also serve a truffle, caper or tomato gravy with it.

No. 32—STUFFED SPANFERKEL OR ROAST LITTLE PIG.

Quantity for 8–10 Persons.

1 suckling pig
2 lbs. of sweet-sour apples
1 cup of dried currants
1 tbsp. of sugar
Salt
½ lb. of butter
½ cup seedless raisins

Preparation: The dressed and well washed pig is rubbed down with salt.
The apples are peeled, cored and quartered, then mixed well with dried
currants, raisins and sugar and stuffed into the pig which is then
sewed up. Now bake just the same as No. 31.

Remarks: Sauerkraut and fried potatoes are good with it.

No. 33—SPANFERKEL A LA FRENCH STYLE.

Quantity for 8–10 Persons.

1 suckling pig
Liver, lungs and heart
½ lb. finely chopped pork
Salt, pepper
2 tbsps. of butter
1 egg

Preparation: The pig is washed well, dressed and rubbed with salt
inside and outside. Liver, lungs and heart are chopped very fine and
mixed well with butter, egg, salt, pepper and a few drops of lemon
juice, then stuffed into the pig and this sewed up. The pig is brushed
with fine salad oil and roasted slowly for 1½ to 2 hours. Water is
added from time to time, garnish with lemon slices and serve with the
gravy.

No. 34—MEAT SALTING AND PICKLING.

60 lbs. of meat
2 tbsps. of ground white pepper
2 lbs. of salt

The Brine.

4¼ lbs. of salt
⅛ lb. of saltpetre
Scant ½ lb. sugar
9 qts. of water

Preparation: Rub the meat with the 2 lbs. of salt until it all
disappears and rub the joints and cuts with pepper. Then pack it into
a barrel, the big pieces at the bottom, the small ones to fill in the
cavities. After 2 days, make the brine by heating it, but not boiling,
pour it on the meat and leave it on for 20 to 30 days according to the
size of the pieces.

No. 35—PICKLED HAM.

1 raw ham, 10 to 12 lbs.
2¼ lbs. of salt
2 tbsps. of sugar
1⁄20 lb. of saltpetre

Preparation: Salt is heated in a pan and mixed well with saltpetre,
then the ham is rubbed with it for 45 minutes. After this, put the ham
into a barrel, well weighted. Pour the salt water, which it produces,
over it often and turn the ham over several times. It may remain in
the brine 5 to 6 weeks.

CHAPTER 6.

POULTRY AND GAME BIRDS.

POULTRY.

Cooked and Roasted Poultry.

Complete directions for utilizing Poultry Remnants.

THE CHICKEN.

The young chicken has a slender body and a delicate color. All young
poultry has long legs, soft skin, feathers with oily quill that can be
pulled out easily, small red comb, long claws and an elastic breast
bone.

Old hens have a small, pale comb. If you wish to keep poultry, hang it
up for a few days with the plumage, then pick it and dress it, stuff
it with white paper, hang it up or wrap it in a clean cloth and put it
on ice.

Poultry must not be cooked directly after slaughtering, because it
will not get tender. According to the season it will keep 1–3 days.

A young chicken is roasted or fried. It is best when 8 to 16 weeks
old. Old hens are good for cooking.

No. 1—ROAST SPRING CHICKEN.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2–3 young spring chickens
Salt
¼ lb. of butter
1 tbsp. of flour
½ cup of sweet cream
½ pt. of water
3 thin slices of bacon

Preparation: The chicken is dressed, washed and dried well inside and
outside and rubbed with salt.

Heart and liver may be put back into the chicken, gizzard and neck
into the pan. The bacon slices are tied over the breast of the
chicken, the pieces of butter put on top and then placed in the oven
to roast one hour, basting it often until it is a golden yellow or
light brown. Add water from time to time so that the butter will not
get too brown. During the last 15 minutes put the cream, the flour and
if necessary, water into the butter and let it simmer 15 minutes
longer. Strain the gravy and serve with the chicken.

Remarks: You may leave off the bacon, but must baste the chicken every
5 minutes, because the breast gets dry very quickly.

No. 2—STUFFED ROAST CHICKENS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 young chickens
2 slices of bacon to tie across the breast
¼ lb. butter for frying
Salt
½ tbsp. of flour
½ cup of cream
½ pt. of water

The Stuffing.

The heart, liver and gizzard
1 roll
1 tbsp. of butter
2 eggs
1 tsp. of finely chopped parsley
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 pinch of nutmeg
½ tbsp. of lemon juice

Preparation: The chickens are dressed, washed, dried and salted inside
and outside. The stuffing made of finely chopped heart, liver,
gizzard, from which the tough membrane has been removed, soaked roll,
salt, pepper, parsley, nutmeg, butter, eggs and lemon juice, well
mixed, is put into the chickens, the slices of bacon tied across the
breast, the chickens sewed up and roasted exactly like No. 1.

Remarks: The stuffing may be made richer with ½ cup of chopped
champignons and 3 truffles chopped fine.

No. 3—ANOTHER FORM OF STUFFED CHICKEN.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 young chickens
¼ lb. of butter
2 slices of bacon
½ cup of sweet cream
½ pt. of water
1 tbsp. of flour
Salt

The Stuffing.

2 tbsps. of butter
1 tbsp. of finely sliced onion
Heart, liver, gizzard chopped fine
2 eggs
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 pinch of nutmeg
1 tsp. of finely chopped parsley
1 roll soaked and the water pressed out

Preparation: The chickens are prepared as described in No. 1 and 2.

The stuffing is made by heating the butter and stewing the onion
slices to a light yellow in it, then add the chopped heart, liver and
gizzard and stew 5 minutes. Add the roll and all the other
ingredients, stew another few minutes, stir in the eggs, stuff the
chickens, sew them up, tie bacon across the breast and fry the same as
in No. 1.

No. 4—STEWED CHICKEN WITH CHAMPIGNONS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 young chickens
⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
Bouillon or water
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1½ wineglassful of red wine
½ pt. small champignons or 30 fresh, cleaned champignons
Juice of 1 lemon

Preparation: The chickens are dressed and washed and fried in ⅛ lb. of
butter in the oven for 15 minutes, basting them several times. After
this time, stir into the butter the 2 tablespoonfuls of flour, add
bouillon or water, salt, pepper, wine and champignons, cover the pot
or pan, stew the chickens for 1 hour. Lastly put in the lemon juice
and serve the chickens and gravy on one platter.

No. 5—OLD OR YOUNG CHICKEN WITH RICE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 old chicken or 2 young ones
3 qts. of water
Salt
¾ cup of rice
Water and chicken bouillon
½ tbsp. of fresh butter
2 slices of onion

For the Gravy.

1 tbsp. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
½ wineglassful of white wine
2 yolks of eggs
Chicken bouillon

Preparation: The chickens are dressed, washed and boiled until tender
in 3 qts. of water, the salt and onion slices. Boil a young chicken 45
minutes, old chicken 2–3 hours, according to its age. In the meantime,
cook the rice in a double boiler with a few cups of bouillon and a
little salt. When the rice is done, stir in a piece of fresh butter.
Do not cook it too mushy.

The Gravy: Stir 1 tablespoonful of butter and 2 of flour, add some of
the chicken broth, cook a few minutes till it thickens, add the white
wine and stir in the 2 yolks of eggs.

The chickens are carved in nice pieces and placed in a heap in the
middle of the platter, the rice around it and the gravy poured over
the meat; or leave the chicken whole, place the rice around and serve
the gravy separately.

Remarks: The gravy may be prepared without wine.

No. 6—CHICKEN PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 young chickens or 1 old one
3 qts. of water
Salt
1 tbsp. of butter
1½ tbsps. of flour

The Paste.

½ lb. of butter and lard, more butter than lard or butter only
½ lb. of flour, good measure
1½ tumblerfuls of water

Preparation: The chickens are dressed, washed and put to boil in the
water and salt. Young chicken will be tender in 45 minutes, old
chicken in 2 to 3 hours.

The Paste: Butter and lard must be very cold. Cut it into the flour
and add the very cold water, mix lightly and roll one-half of it out
in ¼ inch thick layer. The paste must be dry; the butter must be
visible after rolling. Put this layer into a baking dish, cut up the
chickens, put the pieces into the dish, pour in the bouillon so that
meat and broth are even. Roll the other half of the paste, make a few
cuts into it and cover the pie, trimming off the edge neatly. Bake in
the oven 1 hour to a golden yellow color. Leave only enough broth for
the gravy. Stir into the broth 1 tablespoonful of butter, 1½ of flour,
cook, strain and serve with the pie.

Cabbage salad and fresh boiled potatoes go nicely with it.

No. 7—PUFF PASTE PATTIES, FILLED WITH CHICKEN RAGOUT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 small young chicken
Salt
1½ qts. of water

For the Gravy.

2 tbsps. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
Chicken broth
½ wineglassful of white wine
½ cup sweet cream
Juice of ½ lemon
Salt
1 pinch of white pepper
½ pt. can champignons

The Paste.

½ lb. very cold fresh butter
½ lb. flour
1 tbsp. of strong brandy
½ of an egg
¼ pt. very cold water

Preparation: The chicken is prepared well and cooked until tender in
1½ qts. of salt water, then cut up into very small pieces.

The Gravy: Melt the butter, stir in the flour, fill up with
chicken broth, add cream and wine, cook till it thickens, put in the
chopped champignons and the meat, season with salt and pepper, fill
hot into the ready baked patties. Then bake in moderately hot oven for
about 10 minutes and serve immediately.

Bake the patties according to No. 39, Chapter 3, Veal Sweetbread
Patties.

No. 8—CHICKEN RAGOUT IN SHELLS OR OTHER SMALL MOLDS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1¼ lbs. of cooked chicken
2 tbsps. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
Some bouillon
½ wineglassful of white wine
Juice of ½ lemon
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
½ cup. of sweet cream

Preparation: The chicken meat is cut up into small pieces. Butter is
melted and flour stirred in, broth, cream and white wine added,
seasoned with salt, pepper and lemon juice, cooked and filled into the
shells or other small molds. Sprinkle with bread crumbs, place pieces
of butter on top and bake in oven to a nice brown color.

Remarks: This ragout may be improved with ½ pt. of finely chopped
champignons and 4 truffles also chopped fine. This chicken ragout in
shells makes an excellent side dish.

No. 9—CHICKEN CROQUETTES.

The preparation and ingredients are the same as in No. 31, Veal
Croquettes, or No. 30, Veal Sweetbread Croquettes. See Chapter 3.

No. 10—FINE CHICKEN FRICASSEE.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

2 young chickens
Salt
¼ lb. of butter

For the Gravy.

2½—3 tbsps. of flour
½ pt. sweet or sour cream
Bouillon or water
½ pt. champignons
6 sliced truffles
½ cup champignon juice
1 wineglassful of Madeira or white wine
Salt
1 pinch of white pepper
Some lemon juice

Preparation: The chickens are dressed and washed, fried light brown in
¼ lb. of butter, and, when well done, carved.

For the gravy, stir into the drippings the flour, water or bouillon,
cream, wine, champignons, juice and cook well. The gravy ought to be
quite thick and light yellow, strain and season it with lemon juice,
salt, if necessary, some pepper, and put in the whole champignons and
the sliced truffles.

The chicken should be so carved that the meat will not fall from the
bones and should be kept very hot. Put the meat on a platter and pour
the gravy over it. Garnish the rim with puff paste scallops and small
meat dumplings.

The dumplings are made by chopping the chicken liver, heart and
gizzard, mixing it well with ½ soaked roll, salt, pepper, 1 egg, ½
teaspoonful of lemon juice. Fry the mixture in 1 tablespoonful of
butter; when cool, form small dumplings and fry them a light brown in
very little butter. This is a very fine dish.

No. 11—VIENNA BAKED CHICKEN.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 young, fresh chickens
Salt
⅛ lb. of flour
2½ cups of bread crumbs
3 lbs. of lard for frying
1 lemon for garnishing
1–2 eggs

Preparation: The chickens are killed, dressed, washed, dried and
prepared at once. Cut the chickens in half, salt them, dip them first
into flour, then in beaten egg and then in bread crumbs. The lard is
heated in an iron pot or kettle and the pieces of chicken placed into
it carefully, one at a time, so as not to cool the fat too much and
that the crumbs may not fall off. Bake them to a nice brown color.
After the crust is hard, let them cook more slowly until well done.
Then put on paper to drain, strew fine salt over the pieces and put on
a platter after which they may be garnished with lemon slices.

No. 12—CHICKEN OR PIGEON CUTLET.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 young chickens or 6 young pigeons
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
2 eggs
Some flour
1½ cups of roll crumbs
Lemon
¼ lb. of butter

Preparation: The birds are dressed, washed and skinned. Each breast is
quartered and pounded a little, on each piece fasten a scraped
wingbone and season with salt and pepper.

Beat the egg well with 1½ tablespoonfuls of drawn butter, dip in the
cutlets and then into roll crumbs, mixed with 2 tablespoonfuls of
flour, then fry in butter 8 to 10 minutes, turning them often. With
asparagus these poultry cutlets are very fine.

Remarks: The scraps of poultry may be utilized for soup, croquettes or
fricassee.

No. 13—CHICKEN PIE, ENGLISH STYLE.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

2 young chickens
¾ lb. of veal steak
½ lb. of boiled ham
2 tbsps. of chopped parsley
3 hard-boiled eggs
2 tbsps. of flour
1 pt. of water or bouillon
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 tbsp. of butter

Preparation: The paste is made the same as the chicken pie in No. 6.

The chickens are prepared as in No. 6, the meat removed from the bones
and cut into ¼ inch slices, the ham and veal too. The baking dish is
lined with the paste and filled with alternate layers of meat, salted
and peppered, chopped parsley and champignons and the yolks of eggs
put in whole.

The tablespoonful of butter and 2 of flour are browned a little, broth
or water added, stewed, and this poured over the meat. Cover with the
paste as described in No. 6, then bake in the oven slowly for 1¾
hours. The pie may be eaten cold. Use no flour for the gravy, but
clear broth.

No. 14—PIGEON PIE, ENGLISH STYLE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 pigeons
¾ lb. of beefsteak
6 hard-boiled eggs, the yolks only
¼ pt. finely chopped champignons
¼ lb. of butter
1½ tbsps. of flour
¾ pt. of bouillon
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
2 tbsps. of finely chopped parsley
¼ onion

Prepare the pie crust as described in No. 6. See Chicken Pie.

Preparation: The pigeons are dressed, washed and fried in the butter
for ½ hour, then cut in halves. Fry the steak, which has been cut into
small pieces and the fat taken off, in the same butter for 10 minutes.
Prepare a baking dish with the crust as described in No. 6, put in the
meat, salted and peppered, parsley and champignons and place the yolks
of eggs here and there between the meat. Slice the ¼ onion and brown
together with the flour in the drippings, add the bouillon, stew,
strain and pour over the meat, then cover with crust according to No.
6 and bake in the oven 1¼ hours.

Remarks: For the crust, use butter only.

No. 15—FRIED PIGEON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 young pigeons
¼ lb. of butter
1 cup of cream
½ cup of water
1 tbsp. of flour

Preparation: The pigeons are dressed, washed, salted inside and
outside. Heat the butter and fry the pigeons light brown on every
side, basting with spoonfuls of water and cream. During the last ten
minutes stir in the flour and add some more water if necessary, strain
the gravy. On the stove it requires 1½ hours to fry the pigeons, to
roast in the oven only one hour.

No. 16—STUFFED FRIED PIGEONS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 young pigeons
¼ lb. of butter
½ cup of cream
1 cup of water
1 tbsp. of flour.

For the Stuffing.

2 soaked rolls
Chopped heart, liver, gizzard
1 tbsp. of butter
2 eggs
¼ pt. finely chopped champignons
4 truffles, chopped
Salt, pepper
1 tsp. of chopped parsley.

Preparation: The pigeons are dressed, washed and salted inside and
outside.

The stuffing is made by mixing well the chopped liver, heart and
gizzard from which the inner membrane has been removed with all the
other ingredients. Stuff the pigeons with it, sew them, up and fry
them as stated in No. 15; prepare the gravy likewise.

Remarks: You may make the stuffing more simply by omitting the
champignons and truffles.

No. 17—FRIED PIGEONS WITH SWEET STUFFING.

4 pigeons
3 soaked rolls
½ cup of ground almonds
½ cup of dried currants
2 eggs
3 tbsps. of sugar
1 pinch of salt
⅛ lb. of butter

Preparation: The butter is melted, and the soaked rolls stirred in and
sautéed or dry fried. The almonds are scalded, skinned and ground and
added with the rest of the ingredients. The pigeons are stuffed and
prepared same as in No. 15.

No. 18—ROAST TURKEY.

Quantity for 10–15 Persons.

1 turkey weighing 8 to 10 pounds
½ lb. of butter
Salt
1 cup of cream
2 cups of water
2 tbsps. of flour
1 pinch of white pepper

Preparation: The turkey is dressed and soaked in cold water 30
minutes, then dried and seasoned with pepper and salt inside and
outside. The butter is placed in bits on the turkey and if it is a
young turkey, roast it in the oven 2 hours, basting frequently with
cream and water.

For the gravy, brown the flour in the drippings, add water, cook,
strain and serve with the turkey.

If the turkey is older it will require 3 hours to cook it well, and it
is best to cover it so it will not get too brown. To prevent the
butter from getting too dark, add water from time to time.

Remarks: The leavings may be utilized in many ways. Turkey ragout in
shells, see No. 8 for Chicken ragout in shells; Turkey croquettes, see
No. 31 or No. 30, Chapter 3, Veal and veal sweetbread croquettes;
Turkey pie, see No. 6, Chicken pie. The bones make a good soup.

No. 19—ROASTED AND STUFFED TURKEY.

Quantity for 10–15 Persons.

The Stuffing.

3 soaked rolls
Chopped liver, heart and gizzard
Salt, pepper
2 tbsps. of butter
1 tbsp. of chopped parsley
1 tsp. of lemon juice

Preparation: Mix these ingredients well, stuff the turkey with the
mixture and roast as directed in No. 18. Prepare the gravy the same as
in No. 18.

The Goose.

The young goose or gosling has a soft gullet, a pale yellow bill and
feet with pointed claws. The bill and feet of old geese are reddish
yellow. The color of the skin must be white, not purple or blue.

The time for fat geese is from October to January.

No. 20—ROASTED YOUNG GOOSE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 young goose
Salt
6 pepper-corns
⅛ lb. of butter
½ onion, sliced
2 tbsps. of flour
1 pt. cold water

Preparation: The goose is cleaned and dressed. The wings, neck, head
and feet chopped off. The fat is trimmed off, even from the bowels,
and is soaked in water separately from the meat. The goose is washed
and left to soak in cold water for 15 minutes, then dried and rubbed
with salt inside and outside. Put it into the oven with 1 pt. of
water, sliced onion and pepper-corns. When the water is boiled down
pretty much, baste the goose frequently with browned butter. A young
goose will be done in 1½ hours. It should be of a light brown color
and very crisp. Sprinkle a tablespoonful of cold water over it to make
it crisp.

Now prepare the gravy by stirring the flour into the drippings, cook
it a few minutes and add water. Cook well, strain and serve with the
goose.

No. 21—FAT GOOSE STUFFED WITH APPLES.

Quantity for 7–9 Persons.

1 goose, 7 to 8 lbs.
Salt
½ sliced onion
1½ pts. of water
6 pepper-corns

The Gravy.

2 tbsps. of flour
Some water

The Stuffing.

1½ lbs. peeled, quartered apples
½ cup currants

Preparation; The goose is prepared as described in the previous
number, washed and salted inside and outside.

The prepared apples are mixed well with the currants and stuffed into
the goose, which is then sewed up. The goose is put into the oven in a
covered roasting pan with the water, sliced onion and pepper-corns,
and roasted for 1 hour. After that time, remove the cover, baste with
the drippings every 10 to 15 minutes, and if the water boils down, add
spoonfuls of it so the fat will not get too brown. It may require from
2 to 3 hours roasting before the goose is well done and crisp.
Sprinkle a tablespoonful of cold water over the skin to make it more
crisp. Then serve.

For the gravy, pour off nearly all of the grease and prepare as
described in No. 20. If there is very much grease from the goose, skim
some of it off while roasting.

No. 22—FAT GOOSE STUFFED WITH CHESTNUTS.

Quantity for 7–9 Persons.

The Stuffing.

2 lbs. of chestnuts, the liver
1 pinch of salt
1 pinch of pepper
3 tbsps. of butter
1 tsp. of sugar
Some water

Preparation: The preparation and ingredients for goose and gravy are
the same as in No. 21. The chestnuts are put into the oven; when the
shells burst take them out, peel them at once and chop them fine. Put
them into a kettle over the fire with water, butter, 1 pinch of salt
and 1 of pepper and sugar and cook until well done, then put in the
chopped goose liver, stuff the goose with this mixture and sew it up.
Prepare the roast and gravy as directed in No. 21.

No. 23—FRIED GOOSE LIVER.

Quantity for 7–9 Persons.

1 goose liver
½ pt. milk and water
1 egg
Some flour
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 piece of butter for frying
¼ cup of goose gravy or ¼ tablespoonful of flour mixed with broth

Preparation: Carefully remove the gall from the liver and put the
liver into milk diluted with water for 2 hours, dry it well, salt and
pepper, dip into beaten egg, then into flour. Heat the butter and fry
the liver 5 minutes to a light brown, turning it several times. Serve
on a hot platter. For the gravy, brown ¼ tablespoonful of flour in the
butter, add broth or water, cook well and serve with the liver.

No. 24—GOOSE GIBLETS.

Quantity for 2–3 Persons.

From one goose the heart, gizzard, head, wings, feet and neck
1 qt. of water
Salt
4 pepper-corns
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
½ onion, sliced

For the Gravy.

2 tbsps. of butter
3 tbsps. of flour
Bouillon
1 yolk of egg

Preparation: The feet are scalded and skinned, the gizzard emptied and
also scalded and skinned, the gullet cut from the neck, the eyes taken
out, wings, neck and head well cleaned and singed. Now put all this in
a kettle over the fire with the water, onion, salt, peppers, cloves,
bay-leaf and cook until tender.

For the gravy, melt the butter, stir in the flour, cook and add the
goose broth. The gravy must be smooth; stir into it one yolk of egg
and pour it on the giblets. Serve in a deep dish.

Fresh, peeled potatoes are good with it.

Remarks: You may also utilize these goose giblets for soup and put in
small potatoes.

No. 25—GOOSE LIVER PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 large goose livers
¾ lb. veal
¾ lb. fat pork
6 truffles
1½ lemon
⅛ lb. of butter
⅔ pt. of bouillon
2 tbsps. of Madeira or red wine
Salt, pepper
3 yolks of eggs
1 tsp. of grated onion
Bacon slices to line the pan
4 tbsps. of flour

Preparation: Two of the goose livers are larded with oblong slices of
peeled truffles. Drip the juice from 1½ lemons on the livers and let
stand for several hours.

The ⅛ lb. of butter is heated, mixed with the flour, salt and pepper
and ¾ pt. of broth and Madeira added. The finely chopped or ground
veal and pork are stirred into the thick gravy. The one goose liver is
chopped, fried 2 minutes in 2 tablespoonfuls of butter and the onion,
salted and peppered and mixed into the filling. Fill all this into a
deep baking pan or mold lined with bacon slices so that it makes 2 to
3 layers of stuffing, alternating with slices of goose liver. Cover
with slices of bacon, set in steamer over a kettle of boiling water
and boil for 1½ hours or bake in oven for 1 hour.

A truffle or Madeira gravy may be served with it.

No. 26—GOOSE LIVER PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 large goose livers
¼ lb. of bacon
3 tbsps. of butter
3 rolls soaked in milk
¼ onion
3 eggs
3 tbsps. grated Parmesan cheese
3 tbsps. of cream
Salt, pepper
Butter for the mold

Preparation: Liver and bacon are chopped fine. Fry the butter, grated
onion, and the roll a few minutes, then put in the chopped liver and
bacon, salt, pepper, cheese, cream, 3 yolks of eggs, the beaten whites
and mix well. Put into a buttered mold, set in a steamer over a kettle
of boiling water and boil for one hour, dump it on a plate and serve
with a hot, brown gravy. This pudding may be made of duck liver as
well; truffles may be added to make it richer. It makes a fine dish
garnished with roasted blackbirds.

No. 27—ROASTED WILD GOOSE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 wild, young goose
8 large, sour apples
2 tbsps. of butter
1 pinch of salt and pepper
3 large onions

For Roasting.

⅛ lb. of butter
Some water
Some slices of bacon

The Gravy.

1½ tbsps. of flour
1 cup of broth

Preparation: Wild geese are usually very tough, therefore take a
young goose only. Clean and dress it well, let it soak in water for ½
hour, dry it and salt it inside and outside.

The filling or stuffing is made by heating the butter, chopping the
scalded onion and put into the butter together with the peeled and
sliced apples, cut into ⅛ths. Let these cook half done, then add 1
pinch of white pepper, salt and 2 pulverized cloves, fill the goose
with this and sew it up.

Tie the slices of bacon across the breast of the goose and put into
the oven with the water and ⅛ lb. of butter, basting it frequently.
When the gravy gets too brown add more water. After it is well cooked,
take off the string and bacon and serve it.

The Gravy: Stir some flour into the broth, add water or more broth,
cook a few minutes, strain and serve.

No. 28—SMOKED GOOSE BREAST.

The breast of one goose
⅜ lb. of salt
1 tsp. of saltpetre
1 tbsp. of sugar

Preparation: The breast is cut from an undressed goose. Cut off the
legs and the meat off the breast down to the bone. Be careful not to
injure the outer skin. The small fillets are separated from the breast
and it is rubbed well with ½ the quantity of salt, which has been
mixed with the saltpetre and sugar until it dissolves. Replace the
small fillets after salting them also, fold, and sew up the breast.
Salt it well on the outside and place into a crock for 7 days,
turning it twice a day and basting it well with the brine that
collects. On the eighth day wrap in paper, place it between two
boards, well weighted, and draw a string through the top end of fat
and skin by which to hang it up. Hang it into a smoke house in medium
smoke for 8 to 10 days. Then place again between two boards weighted
down for a few days. By this process the fat becomes white and hard
and the meat keeps better.

The Duck.

When the duck is 6 months old it makes the finest roast, but you may
roast it up to a year old. The best time for duck is from August to
the beginning of December.

No. 29—ROAST DUCK.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

2 ducks
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
Some butter for roasting
10–12 sweet-sour apples
1 cup currants
2 tbsps. of flour
1½ cups of water

Preparation: The duck is dressed, neck, wings and feet cut off and it
is washed, dried and salted inside and outside. The apples are peeled,
quartered, mixed well with the currants, filled into the duck and this
sewed up. Put it into a pan with the water, 2 tbsps. butter, and roast
for 1½ hours, basting frequently.

For the Gravy: If there is too much grease, pour some of it off, stir
in the flour, brown it a little, add water, cook well, strain and
serve with the duck.

No. 30—ANOTHER FORM OF STUFFED DUCK.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

2 ducks
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
2 tbsps. of butter for roast

The Stuffing.

Chopped heart, liver and gizzard
3 rolls, soaked
3 eggs
1 tbsp. of finely chopped parsley
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
Salt, pepper
⅛ onion chopped finely
1 tbsp. of butter

For the Gravy.

2 tbsps. of flour
1½ cups of water

Preparation: The ducks are dressed after cutting off neck, wings and
feet, then washed and salted and strewn with 1 pinch of pepper inside
and outside.

The stuffing is made of chopped liver, heart, gizzard, mixed with all
the other ingredients and put into the ducks, which are then sewed up
and treated just the same as described in No. 29.

Prepare the gravy as given in No. 29.

No. 31—FRIED DUCK LIVER.

This is prepared the same as described in No. 23.

No. 32—GOOSE AND DUCK SCHWARZ-SAUER.

Black Soup.

Quantity for 4 Persons.

Giblets of 1 goose or duck
Salt
¼ lb. prunes
¼ cup of sugar
1 small stick of cinnamon
½ lb. of peeled apples or pears
2 cloves
4 pepper-corns
Scant 1 pt. of goose or duck blood
1½ tbsps. of vinegar
1½ qts. of water
2 tbsps. of flour

Preparation: Neck, head, feet, wings, heart and gizzard are cleaned
well and cooked until tender in 1 qt. of water with salt, pepper and 2
cloves. The prunes and quartered apples or pears are cooked until done
in ½ qt. of water. The blood is stirred with the flour into ½ of the
broth from the giblets and poured back on again. The chopped fruit
added, then seasoned with vinegar and sugar and brought to boil,
stirring constantly. It must not coagulate.

THE GAME BIRDS.

THE PHEASANT.

One can recognize the young bird by its less developed spurs and
flexible bones. The pheasant may become 5 to 10 years old. Freshly
shot pheasants are not good to eat because the meat is dry and hard.
In winter the bird may be left hanging with its feathers for 2 to 3
weeks.

No. 33—FRIED PHEASANT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pheasant
Salt
⅛ lb. of butter
2 thin slices of bacon to tie across the breast
1½ tbsps. of flour
1 cup of water
½ pt. sweet or sour cream

Preparation: The young pheasant is dressed, carefully washed and
dried, then salted inside and outside and the liver put back into the
bird with a piece of butter. The slices of bacon are tied across the
breast.

Put the pheasant into the oven with ⅛ lb. of butter, baste it
frequently and roast to a golden yellow. After 30 minutes, baste
frequently with the cream and water by spoonfuls. It will require 1 to
1½ hours to cook it well done. Before serving, remove the bacon slices.

Into the drippings stir the flour, brown it, if necessary add more
water, cook and strain and serve the gravy with the bird.

No. 34—FRIED OLD PHEASANT.

The preparation is just the same as the one under No. 33, with the
exception that it requires from 2½ to 3 hours to cook the bird well
done, therefore take a little more cream and water for basting and
cover the roasting pan during part of the time to keep the bird from
getting too dark.

No. 35—PHEASANT PATTIES.

In Shells or Other Small Molds.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

½ lb. roasted pheasant meat
3 tbsps. of butter
3 tbsps. of flour
Pheasant broth from bones
½ wineglassful of white wine
3 chopped truffles
½ cup of chopped champignons
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
Some butter for the molds
2 eggs

Preparation: The skin is removed from the meat. The meat, truffles and
champignons are chopped fine. The bones are put on the fire with 2 qts
of water, salt, a small piece of onion and boiled down to ½ qt. of
bouillon. Then the gravy is made by heating the 3 tablespoonfuls of
butter and the same quantity of flour stirred in to brown, ½ qt. of
bouillon added and cooked. Season with salt and pepper, add white
wine, meat, truffles and champignons and stir in the 2 yolks of eggs.
Beat the whites of eggs and stir lightly into the mixture. When this is
done, fill the shells or buttered molds with the filling and bake in
the oven to a nice brown color.

Remarks: Truffles and champignons may be omitted.

No. 36—STEWED PHEASANT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pheasant
Salt
Broth cooked from neck, wings, gizzard, liver, heart
1 large onion, sliced
6 pepper-corns
1 small carrot, sliced
2–3 wineglassfuls of white wine or sherry
3 tbsps. of butter
3 tbsps. of flour
3 tomatoes, sliced
2 bay-leaves

Preparation: The pheasant is cleaned, dressed, put into a stewpot with
3 tablespoonfuls of butter, fried a little on all sides, the flour
stirred in and then enough broth added to cover the bird. Put in the
rest of the ingredients named above and roast slowly in the oven for 2
to 2½ hours.

Strain the gravy through a fine sieve and serve with the pheasant.

No. 37—PHEASANT PIE.

Quantity for 8–10 Persons.

2 young pheasants
⅛ lb. of butter
Salt
1½ qts. broth from bones
½ wineglassful of Madeira
Juice of ½ lemon
½ pt. of champignons
1 small can of truffles

Pie Contents.

Liver, heart, gizzard, chopped fine
2½ soaked rolls
3 eggs
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 tbsp. of butter
1 tsp. of chopped onion

Preparation: The pheasants are cleaned, dressed and fried in oven for
20 minutes with ⅛ lb. of butter. The meat is then removed from the
bones and a good qt. of broth is made from the latter, seasoned with
Madeira, salt, lemon juice. The champignons are quartered and the
truffles sliced; liver, heart, gizzard chopped fine, the rolls, salt,
pepper, and yolk of egg stirred in. The onions are cooked a little in
the drippings and the whole mixture added and stewed a little while.
The whites of eggs are beaten and stirred into the mixture after it
has cooled. Now butter your dish and put in one-half of the giblet
filling as the bottom layer, then one layer of meat, then champignons
and truffles, and so on until all the meat, champignons and truffles
have been used. The broth is poured over the whole, the other half of
the giblet filling put on the top and it is now baked in the oven for
1¼ hours. Serve it in the dish or casserole.

No. 38—RED GROUSE AND GUINEA HEN.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 red grouse or 3 guinea hens
⅛ lb. of butter
Salt
½ pt. of cream
1½ tbsps. of flour
1 cupful of water
Bacon slices to tie across the breast

Preparation: The preparation is the same as No. 33, Pheasant. It also
requires 1 to 1½ hours for cooking.

Remarks: Grouse gets very tender when kept in buttermilk over night.

No. 39—GROUSE PIE.

Quantity for 14 Persons.

3 red grouse
Buttermilk
⅛ lb. of butter
Salt

Pie Filling.

¾ lb. beef with bones
¾ lb. lean pork
1 small can of truffles
1 pt. can champignons
5 soaked rolls
4 eggs
3 tbsps. of butter
Juice of ½ lemon
1 tsp. of grated onions
1 glass Madeira
Salt
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The grouse must be well hung; dress, salt and bake in hot
oven with ⅛ lb. of butter for one hour, basting frequently. If
buttermilk is to be obtained, put the grouse in buttermilk for 24
hours before baking. After frying, cut off the breasts and divide them
into ⅛ths. The other meat is cut from the bones and chopped fine, also
the beef and pork. The soaked rolls are sautéed or dry fried in 3
tablespoonfuls of butter and 4 eggs stirred into them. Now add grouse
meat, beef, pork, salt, pepper, juice of ½ lemon, 1 wineglassful of
Madeira, 1 teaspoonful of grated onion and mix well. The bones of the
birds and beef are put on the fire with the champignon and truffle
juice and boiled down to ½ qt. of broth, half of which is stirred into
the filling.

Butter your dish or casserole and after lining it with paste, put in a
layer of filling, then one of meat, strewing on some chopped
champignons and truffles. Pour in the other ½ of the broth, cover with
paste and bake in oven 1¼ hours to a nice brown color. Serve with a
Madeira gravy.

The paste is made by mixing lightly ¼ lb. of flour with ¼ lb. of cold
butter, ½ glassful of cold water and 1 teaspoonful of brandy, then
rolled out.

Remarks: These pies may be made of pheasants, heath cocks or hazel
hens, snow hens, snipes, quails and partridges.

No. 40—FRIED PARTRIDGES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 young partridges
Salt
Bacon slices
¼ lb. of butter
½ pt. sour cream
1 tbsp. flour
Some water

Preparation: After the birds have been cleaned, singed, dressed, wiped
out and salted, tie the bacon slices around them, put them into a pan,
pour on the hot butter and fry them for ½ hour, basting frequently and
adding the cream by spoonfuls. When well done, take off the bacon and
serve with the following gravy. In the drippings, brown 1
tablespoonful of flour, add a little water if necessary, cook, strain
and serve. A little white wine may be added to the gravy.

No. 41—PARTRIDGE WITH SAUERKRAUT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 young partridges
1½ lbs. of sauerkraut
2 tbsps. of butter
2 thin slices of bacon
1 wineglassful of white wine
Water for the sauerkraut
1 tbsp. of flour
1 apple

Preparation: The partridges are cleaned, singed, dressed and wiped
out, bacon slices tied on and fried in 2 tablespoonfuls of butter for
15 minutes. If the sauerkraut is too sour, soak it in water a while,
drain, then put it on the stove with the partridges and a little
water, white wine, sliced apple, cover and stew slowly for 2 hours.
When the birds are tender, take off the bacon, stir a little flour
into the sauerkraut; cook for a few minutes and serve with the birds.

No. 42—FINE RAGOUT OF PARTRIDGE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 young partridges
1 pint champignons
1 piece of bacon for larding
½ lb. goose liver or calf sweetbreads
Salt

For the Gravy.

3 tbsps. of butter
3 tbsps. of flour
Broth from the bones
3 tbsps. of red wine
3 tbsps. of Madeira
1 tsp. of meat extract
The champignon juice
3 pepper-corns
Salt
1 pinch of sugar

For the Dumplings.

Heart, liver, gizzard, some meat from the bones
1 soaked roll
2 eggs
Salt, pepper
Some butter to fry the dumplings
A few slices of toasted wheat bread
1 tbsp. of butter

Preparation: The partridges are well prepared. Cut off the breast and
drum sticks and all other meat from the bones. The latter are cracked,
put on the fire with 3 tablespoonfuls of butter and flour, fried
quickly, then 1½ qts. of water, the champignon juice, some salt, 3
pepper-corns added and boiled slowly for 2 hours to make ½ to ¾ qt. of
broth. Season this broth with red wine, Madeira, meat extract, sugar
and strain it. Lard the breasts and fry them and the drum sticks or
legs in butter. Cover and stew slowly for ½ hour until done. Drip the
lemon juice on the goose liver, salt it and fry it in butter. If you
have sweetbreads instead of goose liver, parboil in salt water for 10
minutes, remove the skin, drip on lemon juice and fry in butter.

To make the dumplings, chop the liver, heart, gizzard and meat from
the bones very fine and mix well with the soaked roll, one egg,
butter, salt, pepper, some chopped champignons and shape into
dumplings. Fry these light brown in butter or cook 10 minutes in broth.

Toast the wheat bread slices, cut each partridge breast into 4 pieces,
also the goose liver or sweetbreads. Place the toast on a hot platter,
then on this the meat, breast, legs and the goose liver or
sweetbreads. Put the champignons into the gravy and pour hot over the
meat. Garnish the dish with the dumplings.

This ragout may be made of capon, quail, hazel hen, snow hen, pheasant
or snipe.

No. 43—BLACKBIRDS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

12 blackbirds
¼ lb. of butter
1 pinch of salt
1 pinch of pepper
½ tbsp. of flour
½ tbsp. of white wine
½ cup of water or broth
6 juniper berries

For Stuffing.

The intestines of the birds
2½ rolls
½ tsp. of lemon juice
Some salt and pepper
2 tbsps. of butter

Preparation: The blackbirds must be fresh. They are cleaned, the head
skinned, the eyes taken out and bill and claws chopped off a bit. The
legs are turned inward, the right foot stuck through the eye sockets
and the claws joined. The intestines are taken out and the gizzard
removed. Juniper berries and the cleaned intestines are chopped fine,
seasoned with salt, pepper, ½ teaspoonful of lemon juice and 2
tablespoonfuls of butter. This stuffing is put into the birds and the
openings closed, fastening with toothpicks. They are then closely
packed into a pan and the browned hot butter poured on, seasoned with
more salt, pepper and 5 pulverized juniper berries, then fried 15
minutes, turning them over several times. The rolls are sliced and
toasted, placed on a platter and the birds arranged neatly on the
toast after removing the toothpicks. For the gravy, brown ½
tablespoonful of flour in the drippings, add water, wine, cook, strain
and serve with the birds.

You may drip some gravy on the toasted roll slices to make them more
palatable.

No. 44—LEIPZIG LARKS.

These birds are prepared just like the blackbirds in No. 43. The
intestines may also be used for the filling.

No. 45—FRIED SNIPES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 snipes
¼ lb. of butter
Salt, pepper
½ tbsp. of flour
1½ toasted rolls
Some broth
Bacon slices to tie around them

Preparation: The snipes are prepared the same as the blackbirds or
larks in No. 43 and No. 44. The gizzard is removed, the bacon slices
are tied around the birds, after salting and peppering inside and
outside; then fry them in butter for 20 minutes and serve them on the
toast which has been soaked with some of the gravy.

For the gravy, stir ½ tablespoonful of flour into the drippings, add
broth, cook, strain and serve with the birds. These are garnished with
snipe on toast made from the intestines.

No. 46—SNIPE ON TOAST.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Intestines from the 3 birds with the gizzard removed
1½ tbsps. of butter
1 yolk of egg
1½ tbsps. of red wine
1 tsp. of chopped capers
Salt, pepper
A few drops of lemon juice
¼ cup of bread crumbs
2½ rolls, sliced
Some butter
1 tbsp. Parmesan cheese

Preparation: The cleaned intestines are chopped and mixed well with
butter, yolk of egg, red wine, parsley, capers, salt, pepper, bread
crumbs and lemon juice. Cut the rolls in slices ½ inch thick, cut off
the crust, toast them and put the above stuffing on thick, sprinkle
some Parmesan cheese over and drip melted butter on, then bake them in
the oven for 5 minutes and place around the fried snipes.

No. 47—FRIED WOODCOCK.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 woodcock
¼ lb. of butter
⅛ lb. of bacon for larding
Salt
¾ qt. of sour cream
½ pt. of bouillon or broth

Preparation: The woodcock may hang 5 days before being cooked. Skin,
dress and pound it, wash and dry it well and salt it inside and
outside, then lard with bacon. The woodcock is fried in the butter,
the cream and broth are poured on gradually and the bird stewed for 2
hours, basting frequently. By this time the gravy will be boiled down
and smooth, strain it and serve with the bird.

No. 48—ANOTHER FORM OF FRIED WOODCOCK.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 woodcock or hen
1 bottle of red wine
1 bottle wine vinegar
3 bay-leaves
10 pepper-corns
7 cloves
1 onion, sliced
1 carrot, sliced
A little thyme
Bacon slices
⅛ lb. of butter
Salt
1 pt. sour cream
1 pt. bouillon

Preparation: The woodcock is cleaned, dressed, tied, pressed into a
jar and the bottle of red wine is emptied into this. The vinegar is
boiled together with bay-leaves, pepper-corns, cloves, onion, carrot,
thyme and when cooled, also poured on the bird; in this it remains 2
to 3 days.

After this time the bird is taken out, dried, rubbed with salt, bacon
slices tied around it, fried in the butter, and stewed for 2 hours,
basting frequently with cream and bouillon. The gravy is strained, the
bacon slices are taken off the bird. It is served on a platter, some
gravy poured over the bird and the rest served separately.

Remarks: You may serve a Madeira or pickle gravy with it.

No. 49—ROAST WILD DUCK.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

2 young, wild ducks
1 pt. water
⅛ lb. of butter
Bacon slices
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
1 onion, sliced
2 tbsps. of flour
1 wineglassful of red wine
Salt 6 pepper-corns

Preparation: The ducks are picked, singed, dressed, washed and
skinned, salted inside and outside and tied into bacon slices. The
prepared ducks are put into a stewpot over the fire with 1 pt. of
water, onion, cloves, pepper-corns, bay-leaves. Cover and stew. When
the water is boiled down, pour the ⅛ lb. of hot butter over them and
add a little water or broth so that the butter may not get too brown,
also add the red wine. 15 minutes before they are done, stir in the
flour, add more broth or water if necessary and cook. The ducks should
be of a nice golden brown color. Serve them with the strained gravy.

No. 50—ROAST CAPONS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 capon
Salt
¼ lb. of butter
Bacon for larding

For the Gravy.

1 tbsp. of flour
1 tbsp. of wine

Preparation: The capon is picked, dressed, the breast and drum sticks
larded with bacon, and the bird salted inside and outside. Then the
hot butter is poured over it and roasted 1¼ hours until done, basting
frequently with cream.

For the gravy, brown the flour in the drippings, add the wine, and
broth or water, cook, strain and serve with the bird.

No. 51—FRIED CAPON RAGOUT.

May be made from the capon. Prepare it just the same as described in
No. 42, Fine Partridge Ragout.

No. 52—STEWED CAPON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 capon
Salt
6 pepper-corns
2 onions, sliced
⅛ of a celery
½ carrot, sliced
1 clove
1 wineglassful of red wine
1 tsp. of lemon juice
1 tsp. of sugar
½ pt. champignons
Some bouillon or water
⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
1 bay-leaf

Preparation: The capon is prepared well and tied into bacon slices,
then fried in ⅛ lb. butter for ½ hour.

For the gravy, stir in the flour, fill up with bouillon or water mixed
with a teaspoonful of meat extract and the rest of the ingredients and
in this gravy stew the capon 45 minutes to 1 hour, basting and turning
it frequently. Serve the capon and strain the gravy. Quarter the
champignons and put them into the gravy. Pour in the champignon juice
while stewing.

Remarks: You can take oysters instead of champignons, allowing 3 or 4
to each person. Before serving the bird, remove bacon and strings.

No. 53—RED GROUSE CUTLETS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 grouse
8 tbsps. thick, sweet cream
Some salt
1–2 eggs
1½ cups of roll crumbs
⅛ lb. of butter, good measure
½ cup of flour

Preparation: The grouse or other poultry is cleaned well and the meat
removed from the bones while raw. Chop the meat and remove skin and
tendons. Mix with the cream and salt. Shape into cutlets 1½ inches
thick, dip into flour, then into the well-beaten egg and finally into
the bread crumbs. Stick small bones into the cutlets and fry in butter
to a nice color. These cutlets are very good served with vegetables.

Remarks: These cutlets may be made from all fine game birds, i.e.,
partridge, pheasant, hazel hen, snow hen; also from chicken.

From the bones you can make soup, which will be better if the bones
have been fried in butter and soup greens a little while.

No. 54—ROAST POULARD.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

1 poulard
Salt
¼ lb. of butter
Bacon slices to tie over the breast
½ pt. sweet or sour cream
1 tsp. of lemon juice
2 tbsps. of flour
1 cup of water

Preparation: The Poulard or French pheasant is cleaned, dressed,
washed, dried and salted inside and outside. Bacon slices are tied
over the breast and drum sticks. Roast in hot butter, adding the
water, for 1 to 1½ hours, a piece of butter being put inside the bird
also. Baste frequently with water and cream. It should be roasted to a
nice golden brown color.

Serve on a hot platter after taking off the bacon and strings.

Into the drippings stir some flour, water or cream if necessary, the
lemon juice, cook, strain and serve with the bird. The gravy should be
smooth and of a light brown color.

No. 55—POULARD FRICASSEE.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

Prepare like recipe No. 10, Chicken Fricassee. It will make a very
fine side dish.

No. 56—DUCK RAGOUT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 duck
1 tbsp. of butter
1 cup of water
Salt

For the Gravy.

2 tbsps. of butter
2 tbsps. of duck grease
2¼ tbsps. of flour
1½ pts. of bouillon or water
Duck stock
½ cup of champignon juice
Salt
6 pepper-corns
3 sprays of parsley
2 cloves
¼ pt. of port wine
Juice of ½ lemon
3 truffles
½ pt. champignons

Preparation: The duck is cleaned, dressed, washed, salted and fried 1½
to 2 hours, in 1 tablespoonful of butter and 1 cup of water, basting
frequently.

For the gravy, brown the flour in the 2 tablespoonfuls of butter, add
the duck stock and cook a little while; then add the bouillon, red
wine or port wine, champignon juice, lemon juice, salt, pepper-corns,
cloves, parsley and truffle parings. Cook the gravy for 15–30 minutes,
strain through a fine sieve. Cut the champignons in half and put them
into the strained gravy. Carve the duck and put it into the gravy too
and steep another 15 minutes. Heap the ragout in the middle of a hot
platter. Put the peeled truffles which were fried in 1 teaspoonful of
butter for 2 minutes, over the ragout. Garnish with puff paste
scallops, (see preparation in No. 29, Chapter 3, Puff Paste Patties
with Veal Ragout), and with dumplings. These are made by chopping very
fine the heart, gizzard and liver, mixed well with one soaked roll,
one egg, 1 tablespoonful of chopped champignons, 1 teaspoonful of
chopped parsley, 1 pinch of salt, pepper, and nutmeg. Sauté or dry fry
(which means cooking food in a small amount of fat) in ½ tablespoonful
of butter and add ½ grated roll. Then form small dumplings from this
mixture and fry them to a light brown in butter or duck grease.

Remarks: This duck ragout is a very fine side dish.

CHAPTER 7.

GAME.

Game must not be soaked in water and it should be washed only when
necessary and then quickly dried. The flavor of game depends greatly
on its preparation, the latter makes it one of the finest dishes. Game
ought to be fried and roasted; boiled game is never as savory.

Butter, bacon and cream are the best fats in which to fry game.
Sweet-sour victuals are best to serve with game as: Red cabbage, apple
sauce, currant jelly and Cumberland sauce.

No. 1—ROAST SADDLE OF VENISON.

Quantity for 6–10 Persons.

1 saddle of venison
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
Bacon for larding
1 pt of sour cream, good measure
1 tsp. of lemon juice
1½ tbsps. of flour
½ cupful water
½ lb. of butter

Preparation: The deer, fawn or doe must hang in its skin a few days
before it is cooked. The neck is cut off. The ribs are chopped off if
they are too long. The skin is taken off, the meat pounded and larded
closely with bacon strips; place a thin slice of bacon under the
fillets. Fry the venison on both sides with part of the ½ lb. of
butter, put the rest of the butter into the pot or pan and roast the
meat 45 minutes, basting frequently with the sour cream. The roast
should be pink inside and very juicy. Put it on a hot platter and
prepare the gravy.

Stir the flour into the frying butter, brown it a few minutes, add the
water, cook 5 minutes and add the lemon juice, then strain.

Remarks: The remnants of this venison may be utilized in a soup. Fry
them with some butter or lard and soup greens and a tablespoonful of
flour, add water and cook slowly for two hours. For directions refer
to No. 63 and 64 under Soups, Chapter 1.

No. 2—LEG OF VENISON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 leg of venison, 3½ to 4 lbs.
Salt
¼ lb. of butter
½ qt. sour cream
⅛ lb. of bacon cut in wide, thin slices, for lining the pan
1 tbsp. of flour
½ cup of water
⅛ lb. bacon strips

Preparation: The meat is pounded on both sides, washed, dried, skinned
and larded with bacon. The joint of the leg is chopped. Scald the leg
with a pint of boiling water and place it into the hot butter in the
roasting pan, brown it on both sides, then place the bacon slices on
the bottom of the pan and the leg of venison on top of them, roast in
the oven for one hour, basting it often with spoonfuls of cream.

The Gravy: After the leg of venison is done, stir the flour into the
drippings, brown it for 2 minutes, then add the water, cook for 5
minutes and strain.

Remarks: With a tablespoonful of red wine you can improve the gravy.
If you wish to have the meat rare, allow ¾ hour for roasting. Add or
subtract some of the time for frying according to the size of the
piece of venison.

No. 3—VENISON CUTLETS.

2½ lbs. of venison from back or loin
Salt
Scant ⅛ lb. of butter

For the Gravy.

⅛ lb. of butter
3 tbsps. of flour
1 qt. of water
¼ pt. of Madeira
Some soup greens
1 pinch of sugar
Salt
1 clove
1 tsp. of meat extract
½ tsp. of lemon juice
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The meat is skinned, cut into ½ inch slices, each having
a rib bone, then they are pounded on both sides and salted. Chop the
scraps and fry them with the soup greens, light brown in hot butter,
stir in the flour and brown it, add the water and season with salt,
pepper, sugar, lemon juice, Madeira and clove and cook slowly for 1½
hours. Strain the gravy and put into it the meat extract and truffle
slices and stew a little while. The cutlets are fried 4 minutes in the
⅛ lb. of butter; serve on a hot platter and pour the gravy, which
should be smooth, over it.

Remarks: You may also pour tomato or champignon gravy over the meat.
The platter with the cutlets would look well garnished with puff paste
scallops.

No. 4—DEER OR DOE LIVER.

Quantity for 2 Persons.

1 deer or doe liver
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
⅛ lb. of butter
1 tbsp. of chopped onion
2 tbsps. of vinegar
2 tbsps. of water
½ tsp. of meat extract
½ tbsp. of flour

Preparation: The liver is washed and dried. Trim off the membrane, cut
into even thin slices, salt and pepper and fry quickly in the hot
butter. Onion and flour are stirred in and stewed with the liver. Then
the water, vinegar and meat extract are added and cooked well; when
done, serve at once because the liver will get hard and tough when
standing.

No. 5—VENISON RAGOUT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3–4 lbs. of venison
¼ lb. of butter
4 tbsps. of flour
1½ qts. of water
½ onion, sliced
6 pepper-corns
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
Juice of ½ lemon
1 tumblerful of red wine
Salt

Preparation: The meat is cut into 3 inch squares. The ¼ lb. of butter
is browned with the flour, then water is added and all the spices and
cooked 5 minutes. The meat is put into this gravy, the pot well
covered and ¼ hour before done, the red wine is added. If the gravy
has boiled down too far, add some more water. When the ragout is done,
take out the meat, strain the gravy and pour it over the meat, serve
on a hot platter. The gravy should be smooth. This meat should be
cooked in an iron pot.

Remarks: Potato dumplings are nice with venison ragout.

No. 6—TO CARVE A LEG OF VENISON.

Leg of deer, doe or reindeer may be carved like a leg of veal. From
the leg, remove first the skin and membrane and you will recognize the
parts called the fricandeaux. On top of the leg lies a flat piece, on
the side of it a piece that has the shape of a small fillet. These
pieces may be used for fricassee or they may be filled and roasted.
You may leave these pieces on the leg and lard and roast it with them.
The tail end is chopped off, chopped in small pieces, and with the
last ribs which are attached to it, a soup is cooked.

Remarks: All uncooked game keeps in vinegar or milk.

No. 7—SADDLE OF VENISON.

Quantity for 14–16 Persons.

1 saddle of venison, 8 to 10 lbs.
Salt
¾ lb. of butter
¼ lb. of bacon for larding
1 pt. sour cream
1 tsp. of lemon juice
2 tbsps. of white wine
6 pepper-corns
2 cloves
2 tbsps. of flour
1 cup of water
1 tsp. of meat extract, if necessary

Preparation: The joints are chopped in several places so the meat lies
flat in the pan, then it is skinned, washed, larded well, salted and
fried on both sides in the hot butter; then put into the oven with all
the spices and left to roast for 2 to 3 hours, basting frequently with
the sour cream.

For the gravy, stir in the flour, brown it a little, then add the
water and cook with the roast for 15 minutes. Strain the gravy and if
the color is too light, add the meat extract.

No. 8—LEG OF VENISON.

Quantity for 14–18 Persons.

1 leg of venison, 10 lbs.
Salt
6 pepper-corns
2 cloves
¾ lb. of butter
1 pt. of sour cream
2 tbsps. of flour
1 cup of water
1 tsp. of lemon juice
2 tbsps. of white wine
¼ lb. of bacon for larding

Preparation: The preparation is the same as described in No. 7, only
the time for frying is longer, from 3 to 3½ hours.

Remarks: If the meat is from an old animal, it is best to keep it in
milk, wine or vinegar for 2 to 3 days.

No. 9—ANOTHER FORM OF LEG OF VENISON.

Quantity for 14–18 Persons.

1 leg of venison, 10 lbs.
Salt
Some melted butter
Rolled out bread dough
1 sheet of paper

For the Gravy.

¼ lb. of butter and ¼ lb. of drippings
Salt
1 clove
3 pepper-corns
2 tbsps. of flour
Bouillon cooked from remnants
1 tumblerful of port wine

Preparation: The meat is skinned, the bone trimmed out, washed and
salted. A sheet of paper buttered or brushed with fine salad oil, is
wrapped around the meat, then it is enveloped in a layer of white
bread dough. Heat ¼ lb. of drippings and ¼ lb. of butter, place the
leg of venison into it and roast for 5 to 5½ hours, basting it often.
Remove paper and crust, when done, and brush the meat with gravy.

The gravy is prepared by browning the flour in the drippings, adding
all the spices, the port wine, and the bouillon, then cooking it well.
If the gravy is too greasy, skim it off and strain before serving.

Currant jelly or apple sauce is served with this meat.

No. 10—CHOPPED STEAK OF GAME.

Deer, Doe, Boar or Wild Rabbit Meat is Used.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of meat
¼ lb. of bacon
⅛ lb. butter
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
Scant ½ lb. of butter for frying

For the Gravy.

1 tbsp. of flour
3 tbsps. of cream
1 tsp. of lemon juice
½ cup of water
1 tbsp. of capers

Preparation: The membrane and tendons are removed from the meat, then
it is chopped or ground fine together with the bacon and mixed well
with ⅛ lb. of butter, salt, pepper and shaped into steaks.

The other portion of butter is heated and in this the steak is fried
10 minutes on the stove, basting and turning often. Put it on a hot
platter and prepare the gravy.

If there is too much drippings left, take some out, stir in the flour,
brown a few minutes, then add all the ingredients and cook well, pour
it over the steak, serve immediately.

No. 11—COLD GAME PIE.

Made From Deer, Doe, Boar or Rabbit Meat.

A good way to utilize the remnants of game roasts.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. fried or roasted game
¼ lb. of butter
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
2 soaked rolls
1 tsp. of grated onion
¼ lb. of truffles, sliced
4 eggs
¼ lb. finely chopped sardines
2 soaked rolls
Some butter for the dish
¼ lb. finely grated Parmesan cheese

Preparation: The meat is chopped or ground very fine. The butter is
melted—add to it the rolls, chopped sardines (from which the bones
have been removed) and onions, one whole egg and 3 yolks of eggs. This
mixture is stirred on the stove and left to stew until dry.

After cooling it off, add the chopped meat, salt and pepper. Press the
whole through a sieve so there will be no chunks or pieces. Into this
mass stir the truffle slices, the beaten whites of eggs, and the
Parmesan cheese.

Fill a buttered dish or casserole with this mixture, cover it, set it
in a steamer over a kettle of boiling water and boil 1½ hours. After
cooling, turn it out on a platter, garnish the platter with prepared
lettuce. This makes a fine dish for an evening dinner.

Remarks: This pie may also be served hot; then serve a game gravy or
herb gravy with it.

No. 12—GAME RAGOUT MADE FROM REMNANTS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. cold game remnants, either deer, doe, rabbit or wild boar meat
⅛ lb. of bacon
1 tbsp. of butter
2½ tbsps. of flour
1½ tbsps. of lemon juice
1 small onion
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 pt. bouillon, boiled from the bones
½ cup sour or sweet cream
2 vinegar or dill pickles, sliced

Preparation: The meat is cut from the bones in nice, equal pieces. The
bones are brought to boil in 2 qts. of cold water and boiled down to 1
pt. of broth or bouillon.

Cut the bacon into cubes and brown it in the butter, onion slices and
flour and add the bouillon. If you have left over game gravy, add that
too, season with salt, pepper, lemon juice and cream and cook slowly
for 20 minutes, then strain and cut the pickles into it. Put the meat
pieces into this gravy and let it get hot, but do not cook or the meat
will get tough. The gravy must be smooth. After heating, serve at once.

Remarks: If you wish to have the ragout very fine, omit the pickles
and take truffles or champignons instead.

No. 13—LEG OR SADDLE OF WILD BOAR.

Quantity for 14–18 Persons.

10–14 lbs. of wild boar meat

For Pickling.

5 qts. of vinegar
10 pepper-corns
1 doz. juniper berries
1 large onion, sliced
3 cloves

For Frying.

1 bottle of red wine
Salt
1 qt. of bouillon

To Cover the Roast.

1 lb. grated rye bread
½ lb. of butter
3 tbsps. of sugar
4 pulverized cloves

For the Gravy.

3 tbsps. of flour mixed with some water
1 tsp. of meat extract

Preparation: The roast is pounded, the surface scored or cut in
squares and the meat placed into a deep pot or jar. Vinegar, pepper,
juniper berries, cloves and onion slices are put in and left with the
meat for 3 days. After this time take the roast out and roast it in a
deep roaster with all that was on it in the jar, except the vinegar.
Instead of that, pour on the red wine and bouillon, season with salt
and roast in the oven for 3½ hours. Then strew the roast with rye
bread crumbs which have been mixed with ½ lb. of butter, pulverized
cloves and 3 tablespoonfuls of sugar. Roast it 30 minutes longer so
the crust will get hard and brown. In the meantime add the flour mixed
with water to the gravy and cook it a while, then strain, add the meat
extract, cook again, taste for salt and spices and skim off the fat.

Remarks: The remnants of roast are utilized in the same way as those
of pork roast.

No. 14—HOW TO SKIN A RABBIT.

Hang the animal up by its hind legs on two nails, rip the rabbit from
tail to throat, lengthwise. Take out the insides, cut the bile
carefully from the liver, retain the latter and the heart and lungs,
and throw away the rest of the intestines. Now separate the fur skin
from the inner skin, make a cut through the fur around each ankle,
pull the legs through, cut off the ears and pull the whole fur skin
down from the hind legs over the head.

No. 15—RABBIT ROAST.

Quantity for 4 Persons.

1 rabbit
⅛ lb. bacon for larding
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
½ pt. sour or sweet cream
1 tsp. of lemon juice
1½ tbsps. of flour
1 cup of water
Scant ½ lb. of butter

Preparation: The dressed rabbit is washed and dried, head, throat and
the skin from the belly and its fore paws are cut off and the joints
of its hind paws are chopped. The back and legs are larded with thin
slices of bacon. The butter is heated and the larded hare is placed
into it to roast for 45 minutes. Season with salt and pepper and baste
frequently with cream. If it is an old hare, it will require 1¼ hours
for roasting. Ten minutes before the hare is done, add the lemon juice
and the flour and stew 5 minutes, then pour in the water, leave the
hare in this gravy 5 minutes longer, then serve it with the strained
gravy.

No. 16—STEWED RABBIT.

Quantity for 4 Persons.

1 rabbit
¼ lb. of butter
⅛ lb. of bacon
2 cloves
2 cups of rye bread crumbs
½ bottle of red wine
Salt, pepper

Preparation: The rabbit is prepared as described in No. 15, well
larded, cut into pieces large enough for each person. The forelegs may
be larded too. These pieces are fried in ¼ lb. of butter until they
are light brown. Now pour the drippings into a deep roasting pot, add
the bacon slices and make a layer of hare meat, season with salt,
pepper, cloves and put on 1 cup of rye bread crumbs. Over this pour
the red wine. After making another layer of meat and bread crumbs,
cover the pot well and stew slowly 2 to 2½ hours. Serve the meat on a
hot platter, strain the gravy, flavor and pour it over the meat. If
the pot cannot be closed tightly, paste a strip of paper or cloth
around the rim and cover.

Remarks: Potato dumplings are good with this meat.

No. 17—ANOTHER FORM OF STEWED RABBIT.

Quantity for 4 Persons.

The preparation is the same as given under No. 16 with the exception
of taking ½ pt. of sour cream instead of wine and 2 tablespoonfuls of
flour instead of rye bread crumbs.

The hare is prepared and cooked the same as given under No. 16. If the
gravy is too thick, add more water.

No. 18—RABBIT CUTLETS.

Quantity for 4 Persons.

1 rabbit
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
2 eggs
1 small piece of bacon
Grated wheat bread for breading
1 egg
Some melted butter

For the Gravy.

½ pt. broth
1½ tbsps. of flour
⅛ lb. of butter
Juice of one lemon
½ tsp. of sugar
Salt
1 wineglassful of red wine

Preparation: All meat is cut from a well dressed rabbit, skin and
membrane removed; the bacon and meat are chopped or ground fine,
seasoned with salt and pepper and mixed well with 2 eggs and small
cutlets formed. The butter is heated, the cutlets brushed with it,
then dipped into the bread crumbs and finally into the beaten egg.
Some ribs are cut off the skeleton and stuck into each cutlet. The
butter for frying is put into a pan, heated and the cutlets fried to a
nice brown color. The gravy has been prepared by browning the heart,
liver and lungs in 1½ tablespoonfuls of flour, then adding 1 pt. of
broth or water, putting into this all the bones and seasoning with
salt, cloves, and 4 pepper-corns. Cook the gravy for ½ hour and add
the red wine or port wine, lemon juice and sugar. Strain and serve
with the cutlets. Garnish the platter with currant jelly.

No. 19—HASENPFEFFER (RABBIT PEPPER).

Quantity for 2–4 Persons.

The head, neck, breast, lungs, forelegs, heart, liver, 1 lb. of rabbit
meat or lean pork
Some vinegar
1 small onion
⅛ lb. of bacon or butter
3 tbsps. of flour
Salt
4 pepper-corns
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
2 pts. of water
1 tbsp. of sugar
½ cup of red wine (or not)

Preparation: The head, neck, breast, lungs, heart, liver and forelegs
are cleaned well, cut in medium large pieces and left in vinegar for 1
day.

After the rabbit has been fried, cut 1 lb. of pork into medium large
pieces. Cut the bacon into small cubes and fry it, or if you use
butter, heat this and fry the finely sliced onion and pork in it and
the rabbit meat which has been soaked in vinegar.

For the gravy, stir the flour into the drippings, stew a few minutes,
then add water and all the spices and other ingredients. Then slowly
cook the meat until tender in the gravy. When it is done, take the
meat out and serve on a hot platter, strain the gravy and pour over
the meat.

Remarks: You may omit the rabbit meat and pork and use only the heart,
lungs, liver, head, neck, breast and forelegs if these are sufficient.
You may also stir a little vinegar into some rabbit blood and add to
the gravy. The liver may be omitted and fried separately.

No. 20—RABBIT LIVER.

Quantity for 1 Person.

1 rabbit liver
1 pinch of salt and pepper
1 well-beaten egg
Some flour
1 piece of butter for frying
1 slice of lemon

Preparation: The liver must be very fresh. As soon as the rabbit is
shot, dress it, take the liver out and prepare it the same day. If you
cannot do this the same day, it is better to leave the liver and
prepare it with the rabbit.

The fresh liver is washed, sliced, seasoned with salt and pepper,
dipped into egg and flour, then fried quickly in some hot butter and
served at once on a hot platter. Place a lemon slice on it.

No. 21—RABBIT ROAST SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¾ lb. of bare roast
3 medium-sized, boiled potatoes
2 hard-boiled yolks of eggs
2 raw yolks of eggs
¼ pt. fine salad oil
Wine vinegar according to taste
1 tsp. of mustard
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 tsp. of capers
1 tsp. of sugar
¼ cupful of cream

Preparation: The meat and potatoes are cut into small pieces. The 2
hard-boiled yolks of eggs are mixed well and stirred with the 2 raw
yolks, the oil dripped in, cream, vinegar and the other ingredients
mixed in. Taste the gravy and stir lightly into it the meat and
potatoes, then heap it in a glass dish, chop the 2 whites of eggs and
strew over the salad.

No. 22—RABBIT PIE.

2 young rabbits
1 piece of bacon for larding
½ lb. chopped pork
1½ rolls
2 eggs
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 tbsp. of butter for the filling.

For Frying.

¼ lb. of butter
3 tbsps. of flour
1½ qts. of water or bouillon
1 small onion
¼ bottle of white wine
1 bay-leaf
6 pepper-corns
1 clove
Lemon peel
1 small can of truffles, sliced

Preparation: Shoulders and legs are cut off and the rest of the meat
removed from the bones and chopped very fine, also the pork. Mix this
well with the soaked rolls, eggs, butter, salt and pepper.

Line the bottom and sides of the dish with this mixture. The meat from
the loins of the rabbits is cut into nice pieces, fried brown in ¼ lb.
of butter and put into the pie with the sliced truffles.

Now prepare the gravy. Into the butter in which the pieces of meat
have been fried, stir 3 tablespoonfuls of flour, brown and add 1½ qts.
of water or bouillon. Season it with all the spices, onion, salt,
bay-leaf, pepper, clove, lemon juice, white wine and the truffle
peelings and cook slowly for 1 hour. Strain the gravy and pour ¾ of it
into the pie, put on another layer of the filling, bake in medium hot
oven for 1½ hours or cover the dish well and set it in a steamer over
a kettle of boiling water and boil 1½ hours. The remainder of the
gravy should be served hot with the pie.

Remarks: The bones are chopped up and broth cooked from them which is
used for the gravy to make this rich and palatable.

Remarks: This, pie may be served cold.

No. 23—DOMESTIC RABBIT ROAST.

Quantity for 4 Persons.

1 domestic rabbit
⅛ lb. of bacon
⅛ lb. of butter
½ cup of sour or sweet cream
1½ tbsps. of flour
½ cup of water
Salt

Preparation: The domestic rabbit is prepared and cooked the same as
described under No. 15, Rabbit Roast.

No. 24—STUFFED DOMESTIC RABBIT ROAST.

Quantity for 4–6 Persons.

1 domestic rabbit
⅛ lb. of bacon
⅛ lb. of butter
½ cup of sour or sweet cream
1½ tbsps. of flour
½ cup of water
Salt

For Stuffing.

Heart, liver, kidneys of the rabbit
2 soaked rolls
2 eggs
1 tbsp; of butter
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
Salt, pepper, nutmeg

Preparation: The domestic rabbit is prepared like the rabbit under No.
14, but the legs, neck and breast are left on, because it is going to
be stuffed. It is washed well inside and outside and salted. Heart,
liver and kidneys are chopped fine and mixed well with the soaked
rolls and the other ingredients. The rabbit is filled with this
stuffing and sewed up, the back well larded and fried on all sides
light brown in hot butter. Then it is roasted in the oven for 1½
hours, basting frequently with the cream and lemon juice.

Remarks: The domestic rabbit may be made into ragout. See No. 5, Doe
or Deer Ragout.

Remarks: The stuffing may be improved by adding champignons or
truffles or ¼ lb. of chopped pork.

No. 25—LAPINS.

Lapins, the European hare, are prepared like rabbit. See No. 23 and
No. 24.

CHAPTER 8.

FISH.

THE VARIOUS PREPARATIONS OF FISH AND THE UTILIZING OF REMNANTS.

Every fish has a season when it is most savory. During the breeding or
spawning season, no fish is good. When you buy a dead fish, observe
carefully the following:

1. The meat of the fish must be firm and must not show any form of
decay, neither in smell nor taste.
2. The skin must be tight on the fish.
3. Both eyes must be clear, not milky or sunken.
4. The gills must be red and slimy. Fish frozen very hard are not
especially good.

The meat of middle sized fish is more savory than that of large ones.

When you buy live fish, take the lively ones, not those that swim on
their side or back. The bought fish are best killed in the market. The
quickest way of killing a fish is to stun it with a blow on the head
or neck, then cutting its throat and its tail.

You scale the fish by taking hold of its tail and with a sharp knife
or fish scaler scraping off the scales from there towards the head.

To retain the nourishing qualities of the fish, it is not soaked in
water, only washed and boiled immediately. Whole fish are put on the
fire with cold or hot water. Pieces of fish are put on with boiling
water or prepared in hot butter or lard to retain the nutriment in the
fish, since the hot water or fat contracts the cells at the cuts. The
skin of a whole fish retains the nutriment, therefore it may be put on
the fire in cold water.

Fish must not be covered up while cooking or frying so that the
temperature will not get too high. Frozen fish must be thawed
completely before using; if this is not done, the inside of the fish
is mostly rare when serving it. No dish will be good when the fish or
meat used is prepared in a frozen state.

Fish are dressed by making a slight cut along the whole under side and
taking out all intestines. The inner darker membrane must be entirely
removed and the fish washed well.

No. 1—TO BOIL.

Whitefish, shellfish, pike, codfish, pickerel, bass, black
bass, white bass, flounders, plaice or sole, carp, salmon, trout,
brook trout, cabeljou, river trout.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½–4 lbs. of fish
4 qts. of water
Salt
10 pepper-corns
4 cloves
1 large onion
2 bay-leaves
½ lemon, sliced

Preparation: The fish is dressed and washed. Into a fish kettle pour 4
qts. of water, all the spices and enough salt to make it quite salty.
Place the fish on the tray of the kettle in a swimming position and
bring slowly to boil 5 minutes in cold or hot water, then set back to
draw ½ hour. When the meat near the gills is not bloody any more, the
fish is done. Before serving, rinse it with hot water to remove the
scum and place on the platter in a swimming position. It is then
garnished with lemon slices, parsley, lettuce and potatoes.

With the fish is served a fish gravy, mustard gravy, Bearnaise gravy
or fresh creamed butter, browned butter, mustard butter, parsley
butter, etc.

No. 2—BAKED FISH.

Any of the varieties named in No. 1.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½—4 lbs. of fish
¼ lb. of fresh butter
Salt
3 pepper-corns
Some flour
1½ cups of sour or sweet cream
¼ tsp. of meat extract
Juice of ½ lemon
1 tbsp. of capers
1 tbsp. of Parmesan cheese

Preparation: The fish is dressed, washed and dried, salted inside and
outside and rolled in flour. It is placed into a pan or if possible
an earthen or porcelain dish in which the butter has been heated; then
put into the oven and baked for 10 minutes to a light yellow color.
Baste with the cream and lemon juice, sprinkle with the Parmesan
cheese, and add the capers and pepper-corns. In this gravy stew it ½
hour, then prepare carefully on a hot platter and serve. Strain the
gravy through a sieve to remove all lumps, i.e., make it smooth. If it
is too thick, add some cream or milk and pour it on the fish or serve
it extra.

Remarks: This preparation is very fine. A little meat extract makes
the sauce look more delicate.

No. 3—FISH STEAMED OR STEWED IN RED WINE GRAVY.

Any one of the varieties named in No. 1.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½–4 lbs. of fish
Salt
⅛ lb. of butter
3 tbsps. of flour
1 pt. of water or bouillon
1 pt. of red wine
1 tsp. of meat extract
½ onion, sliced
3 slices of lemon
½ carrot, sliced
Small piece of celery root
1 small piece of parsley root
6 pepper-corns
2 cloves
2 bay-leaves
1 tbsp. of sugar

Preparation: The fish is dressed, washed, dried, salted inside and
outside and left in a cold place for 1½ hours. The gravy is then
prepared. Brown the butter and flour and mix in all the ingredients,
also red wine; add water or bouillon and cook slowly 1½ hours and
strain. It must be smooth and palatable.

Rub the salt off, put the fish into a porcelain or earthen dish in
which the ounce of butter has been melted and roast in the oven for 10
minutes, basting frequently with the butter. After this, pour the
gravy over it and stew the fish uncovered in the oven for ½ hour.

Remarks: The pan or dish should not be much larger than the fish, so
that this is well covered with the gravy. Both fish and gravy are
served on the same hot platter.

No. 4—BROILED OR ROASTED FISH.

Any one kind named in No. 1.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½–4 lbs. of fish
Salt, flour
½ cup of roll crumbs
¼ lb. of butter
1 beaten egg

Preparation: The fish is dressed, washed and dried, then ripped
lengthwise into two halves and the bones removed. Then salt, dredge
with flour, dip into beaten egg and roll in bread crumbs. Drip melted
butter on the fish, place into a flat pan and roast or bake in the
oven, basting with melted butter. Serve with brown butter gravy and
garnish with lemon slices.

No. 5—BOILED SALMON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of salmon
3 qts. of water
½ cup of vinegar
1 cup of white wine
1 large onion, sliced
2 tbsps. of salt
1 tbsps. of pepper-corns
10 whole cloves
3 bay-leaves
½ lemon, sliced

Preparation: All ingredients are put into the water and then boiled.
The fish is not scaled, but the insides taken out and washed. When the
water boils, set it aside, put the fish in and let it draw ½–¾ hours.
Cooking would make it tough. Serve a butter or madeira gravy with the
fish.

Remarks: If the fish is a salmon, it requires 20 minutes to cook it.

No. 6—SALMON, BLUE.

Quantity for 15 Persons.

7 lbs. of salmon
7 qts. of water
¾ bottle of white wine
1 cup of wine vinegar
1 tbsp. of pepper-corns
6 cloves
3 bay-leaves
1 onion, sliced
1 lemon, sliced
1 piece of carrot
1 piece of celery root
1 piece of parsley root
⅛ lb. of butter
¼ cup of salt

Preparation: The is dressed, washed and dried. The vinegar is heated
and poured on the fish, then it is placed into a fish kettle in a
swimming position and the water is poured on cold, so that it almost
covers the fish. All the ingredients are added; bring it to boil and
set aside to simmer 1 hour. The fish must be served carefully and
garnished with parsley and lemon slices; potato balls are good with
it. For gravy, serve creamed butter, drawn butter, egg gravy,
remoulade gravy or mayonnaise dressing.

Remarks: Salmon is good served cold with a mayonnaise dressing.

No. 7—SALMON SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of salmon
2 hard-boiled eggs
1 raw yolk of egg
Fine salad oil
1 tsp. of mustard
Juice of 1 lemon
1 tbsp. of vinegar
1 tsp. of sugar
Salt
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The boiled fish is arranged on a glass dish in a mound
after being cut into nice pieces and the bones removed. The gravy or
dressing is made by stirring the raw yolk of egg into the boiled
yolks, adding the oil a few drops at a time, also the lemon juice,
vinegar and the other ingredients. It must be thick. The dressing is
poured over the salad and slightly mixed with a wooden spoon. Garnish
the salad with hard-boiled eggs and green lettuce leaves.

No. 8—SLICED SALMON BROILED.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of salmon
Salt
¼ cup melted butter
1 tbsp. of finely sliced onion
1 bunch of parsley
⅛ lb. of butter for frying
2 tbsps. of lemon juice

Preparation: The salmon is cut into 2 to 3 slices, cleaned, washed and
dried well. Brush the slices with the ¼ cup of melted butter, salt and
put on the lemon juice, onion slices and parsley. Cover the dish and
put on the stove for one hour but do not fry. After one hour, put into
a broiler, broil for 10 to 15 minutes, basting with butter and turning
frequently. You can also fry them in a buttered pan. Serve in a hot
dish, garnish with lemon slices and parsley and serve with a tomato or
olive gravy, or a cold, sour gravy.

No. 9—BOILED SALMON TROUT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of salmon trout
Water enough to cover the fish
Salt
¾ pt. of vinegar
10 pepper-corns
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
½ onion, sliced

Preparation: The fish is cleaned and washed. The water with all
ingredients in it is brought to boil, the fish placed into it in a
swimming position, cooked 10 minutes and served on a hot platter. A
fish or egg gravy may be served with it.

No. 10—FRIED TROUT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of trout
Salt, flour
1 beaten egg
¼ lb. of butter

Preparation: The fish is dressed, washed, dried, salted inside and
outside, dipped into the beaten egg and then into flour. The butter is
heated in a pan, the fish fried in it to a light brown color and a
butter gravy served with it.

No. 11—EEL, BLUE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of eel
1½ qts. of water
6 tbsps. of vinegar
10 pepper-corns
2 bay-leaves
4 cloves
½ sliced onion
½ sliced lemon
Salt
Water for cooking

Preparation: The eel is killed by wrapping the head into a cloth and
giving it a few blows with a hatchet; then rub it with salt from head
to tail until it looks blue. Skin the eel by making a cut in the skin
around the head and pulling this down over the tail; if it does not
strip off easily, cut it loose with a sharp knife. Cut the fish into
equal pieces and clean each piece separately, pushing out the
intestines and inner membrane and rubbing it with salt.

1½ qts. of water is brought to boil with 4 tablespoonfuls of vinegar
and the eel scalded with it. Heat fresh water, 2 tablespoonfuls of
vinegar, pepper-corns, bay-leaves, cloves, 1 onion, lemon slices and
salt; in this water the eel is cooked slowly 15 minutes. The fish is
then served on lettuce leaves and garnished with lemon slices. Caper,
mustard or remoulade dressing is served with it. This fish is good
eaten cold.

Remarks: The remnants of eel may be used to make aspic or head cheese.
The eel broth and skin are utilized for it. See Head Cheese and
Gelatines, No. 9 Eel in Jelly.

No. 12—BAKED EEL.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of eel
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 beaten egg
Flour for dredging
¼ lb. of butter or lard for frying

Preparation: The eel is prepared as described in No. 11. The bones are
taken out of the pieces, (these may be 3 to 4 inches long) salt and
pepper, roll in beaten egg and flour and bake in hot butter to a nice
brown color.

A Dutch dressing may be served with it.

No. 13—EEL IN BEER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of eel
3 tbsps. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
1 qt. of white beer
½ onion, sliced
¼ lemon, sliced
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 clove
½ bay-leaf

Preparation: The eel is prepared as in No. 11, the bones being removed
from the pieces. The 3 tablespoonfuls of butter are stirred into the
flour, the beer added and also all the spices and lemon and onion
slices. Cook this gravy and put in the pieces of eel to boil 20
minutes. Serve the eel on a hot platter, strain the gravy and pour it
over the eel. The gravy must be thick and very palatable.

Remarks: If the gravy is not thick enough, mix some more flour with
water, stir it in and let it boil.

No. 14—EEL WITH RICE. (FRICASSEE).

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of eel
⅛ lb. of butter
2½ tbsps. of flour
1 pt. of cream
Salt
Juice of 1 lemon

Preparation: The eel is prepared according to No. 11, cut into 4 inch
pieces and cooked almost done in boiling water, salt, 2 tablespoonfuls
of vinegar, ½ sliced onion, 8 pepper-corns, 2 cloves, 1 bay-leaf. When
almost done, take out the pieces and put them into the gravy, which is
prepared in the following way: Heat the butter, stir in the flour, add
the cream and stir well until smooth, add salt and lemon juice and let
it simmer 10 minutes. Serve eel and dressing on a hot platter and
place a rim of cooked rice around it. Then strew over the whole some
fine minced parsley. If you wish you may sprinkle chopped parsley over
the eel before serving, or you may cook the parsley in the dressing.

Remarks: The gravy must be smooth and savory.

No. 15—COLD EEL ROULADE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of eel
4 hard-boiled, chopped eggs
1 tbsp. of chopped parsley
1 tbsp. of chopped capers
Juice of one lemon
Salt, pepper
½ tbsp. of chopped onion

For Cooking.

2 qts. of water
10 pepper-corns
3 cloves
1 bay-leaf
1 small piece of carrot
1 small piece of parsley root
1 small piece of celery root
Salt
½ onion

Preparation: The eel is prepared as described in No. 11, its head and
tail cut off and ripped open lengthwise; intestines and bones
carefully taken out; then cut it in two crosswise, to make 4 pieces.
These pieces are washed, dried and rubbed with salt. The four hard
boiled eggs are chopped and mixed well with the chopped parsley,
onion, capers, lemon juice, salt and pepper. This stuffing is put
inside of the four pieces of eel and these rolled up tightly and tied
with string, then each tied up in a piece of white cloth. Into the 2
qts. of water put all the ingredients for cooking, and the head, tail
and skin chopped up into small pieces and cook 15 minutes. This eel
stock must be tasted as to seasoning, vinegar added and the prepared
pieces of eel cooked in it slowly for 45 minutes. Leave them in the
stock until pretty well cooled off, then take them out and place them
between two platters. After a few hours, take off the strings and
cloth and cut them into thin slices which are served on green lettuce
leaves and garnished with hard-boiled eggs. You may serve them also
with pickles and mayonnaise or mustard dressing.

Remarks: These eel roulades may be made into eel jelly. See Chapter
Nine, No. 9.

No. 16—LARDED PICKEREL.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of fish
⅛ lb. of bacon
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
¼ lb. of butter
1 tbsp. of flour
¾ pt. sweet or sour cream
½ tsp. of meat extract
1 tbsp. of Parmesan cheese
Juice of ½ lemon
1 tsp. of capers

Preparation: The fish is dressed, washed, dried and rubbed with salt
inside and outside. The back is skinned by slitting the sides and
pulling the skin off. The back is then larded with bacon strips. The
butter is heated in a pan and the fish placed into it in a swimming
position after dredging with flour and grated Parmesan cheese. The hot
butter is dripped on, also the lemon juice, and the fish put into the
oven to bake 15 minutes. During this time baste with the butter
carefully so the flour and cheese make a crust on the fish. Gradually
add the cream and capers, and bake the fish in this dressing for ½
hour, basting frequently. Serve on a hot platter. Color the gravy with
the meat extract and if it is too thin, add 1 teaspoonful of flour,
mixed with cream or milk, cook and strain. The gravy is served with
the fish; garnish with potatoes and macaroni and serve with sauerkraut.

No. 17—LARDED AND STUFFED PICKEREL.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of fish
⅛ lb. of bacon
Salt, pepper
¼ lb. of butter
tbsp. of flour
1 pt. sour or sweet cream
½ tsp. of meat extract
1 tbsp. of Parmesan cheese
Juice of ½ lemon
1 tsp. of capers.

The Stuffing.

1 pt. can of champignons
2 tbsps. of butter
½ cup of sweet cream
Salt, pepper
1 tbsp. of flour

Preparation: The preparation is the same as given in No.
16. The filling or stuffing is made from chopped champignons
stewed in the butter, flour, salt, pepper and cream. This is
stuffed into the fish which is then sewed up. The fish is larded
and cooked according to directions in No. 16. The gravy is also
prepared as in No. 16.

No. 18—STUFFED AND LARDED PIKE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The preparation and ingredients are the same as given under No. 16 and
No. 17.

No. 19—FISH FRICASSEE FROM PICKEREL OR WHITEFISH.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pickerel or whitefish, 3½ lbs.
⅛ lb. of bacon for larding
¼ lb. of butter
1 cup of cream

For the Fricassee.

18 crabs
2½ qts. of salt water
1½ lbs. veal sweetbreads
Juice of ½ lemon
Salt, pepper
⅛ lb. of butter
20 champignons
10 peeled truffles
2 tbsps. of butter
1 tbsp. of lemon juice

Preparation: The fish is dressed, washed, dried, the skin taken off
the back and this larded with bacon. Then it is sprinkled with salt
and put into a pan in a swimming position with ¼ lb. of butter and 1
cup of cream and fried slowly for 1 hour to a golden yellow color.
During this time simmer the 18 crawfish or crabs in salt water for 45
minutes. They should not boil, but simmer. From eight crabs take out
the meat and leave the other ten whole.

The veal sweetbreads are scalded, the membrane removed, salted and
peppered, the lemon juice dripped on, then dredged with flour and
fried in ⅛ lb. of butter to a nice brown color. The sweetbreads are
cut into nice pieces. The champignons are heated in 1 tablespoonful of
butter; lemon juice, salt, pepper, 2 tablespoonfuls of cream are
added. The truffles are peeled and sliced and stewed with ½
tablespoonful of butter, 3 tablespoonfuls of bouillon, 1 pinch of
salt. The crab meat from the 8 crabs is chopped fine and stirred with
1 tablespoonful of butter and 1½ tablespoonfuls of flour; add a little
cream and boil. The lemon juice, salt, pepper and 1 yolk of egg are
stirred in and set to cool. Small dumplings are formed from this
mixture and fried in hot lard. The batter for the dumplings must be
thick; try one first and if it does not hold together, add more flour.
These small dishes must be prepared while the fish is cooking. That
which is done must be kept hot in hot water. The fish, when done, is
served on a hot platter in a swimming position, three crabs are placed
on the fish’s back, the other seven along its sides. The pieces of
sweetbread are also arranged neatly around the fish and the
champignons and truffles, as well as the fish dumplings. All must be
very hot and kept so until the gravy is done.

The Gravy: Into the butter in which the sweetbreads were fried stir
some flour and add bouillon or water, pour it into the pan in which
the fish was fried and cook for 2 minutes, taste and strain. It must
be smooth and be served with the fish.

Remarks: This is a fine dish for parties. Potato balls and green
lettuce are served with it.

No. 20—PICKEREL WITH TOMATO SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of pickerel, white fish or cod fish
Salt
1 sheet of paper
⅛ lb. of butter, good measure

Gravy.

⅛ lb. of butter
⅛ lb. of ham
6 tomatoes
3 tbsps. of flour
2 tbsps. of Parmesan cheese
Salt
Pinch of pepper
½ pt. bouillon
½ pt. of cream

Preparation: The fish is dressed, washed, dried, salted, placed into a
pan and lightly covered with a buttered paper. Then the hot butter is
poured over it and it is cooked in the oven until well done, basting
frequently for about one hour. In the meantime the gravy is prepared
thus: The ham is cut into small pieces and fried light yellow in the
butter, with onion slices and flour, then add bouillon and cream,
season with salt, pepper and add Parmesan cheese; also put in the
sliced or chopped tomatoes and cook until pretty thick. Strain the
gravy, taste it and heat it again. The fish, which must be a nice pink
color, is brushed with the thick gravy and served in a swimming
position. The rest of the gravy may be served separately.

No. 21—PICKEREL OR CODFISH SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1¾ lbs. of pickerel or codfish
2 tbsps. of butter
1 scant tbsp. of flour
1 small onion
1 pt. thick cream
2 yolks of eggs
1 tsp. of mustard
2 tbsps. of vinegar
1 tbsp. of salad oil
Salt
1 pinch of white pepper
1 tbsp. of capers

Preparation: The boiled fish is cut up into nice pieces. The butter is
melted, the peeled whole onion fried light yellow in it, then taken
out. Stir in the flour, add the cream and cook 5 minutes. The 2 yolks
are stirred in, but the gravy must not cook any more, cool it and
season with salt, mustard, pepper, capers, vinegar and salad oil. Pour
the gravy over the fish.

No. 22—BAKED RED SNAPPER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of red snapper
Salt
1 beaten egg
Some flour
1 cup of rolled crackers
¼ lb. of butter

Preparation: The fish is dressed, washed, dried and rubbed with a
little salt. It is then dredged with flour, dipped into the beaten egg
and cracker crumbs. The butter is heated and put on the fish, then
baked in the oven for ½ hour until a nice brown. Serve a parsley gravy
with it.

No. 23—PICKEREL OR WHITEFISH WITH SAUERKRAUT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. boiled pickerel or whitefish
1 lb. boiled sauerkraut
1 egg
1 large piece of butter
¾ pt. of cream
Some salt

Preparation: A baking dish or casserole is buttered and filled with
layers of sauerkraut and fish alternating. The bones must have been
removed and the fish cut into nice pieces. There should be 3 layers of
sauerkraut and 2 layers of fish. After the dish is filled, stir the
cream with some salt and pour over the whole. Put a little butter on
top and bake in oven for 45 minutes.

No. 24—BOILED TURBOT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of fish
Salt
½ qt. of wine vinegar

Preparation: The turbot is drawn by making a cut across the dark side
below the gills, then rub it with salt until all slime is gone. After
washing it, pour ½ qt. of vinegar on and let it stand for ½ hour. Run
the knife along the spine on the black side and slit the white side in
several places to prevent the skin from bursting while cooking. Fins
and tail are shortened. Put plenty of salt water into the fish kettle,
put the fish in, white side up, and cook slowly for 5 minutes, then
set aside to simmer for ½ hour. Do not cover up the kettle. When
serving, the white side should be up and garnish the platter with any
kind of lettuce or salad i.e., cucumber salad, head lettuce or
endive. Place lemon slices on the fish or small boiled crabs. Serve
with a butter gravy or creamed butter and potato balls.

No. 25—TURBOT FRICASSEE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of fish remnants
A small calf’s tongue
½ pt. of champignons
1 tbsp. of capers
3 tbsps. of butter
½ pt. of cream or milk
Juice of ½ lemon
Salt, pepper
½ pt. of bouillon
2 tbsps. of Parmesan cheese
2 tbsps. of flour

Preparation: The fish is cut into large pieces. A baking dish is
buttered and the pieces of fish placed in. Add 3 tablespoonfuls of
heated butter, stirred with 2 tablespoonfuls of flour, the cream,
champignon juice and bouillon. The latter may be omitted. Cook the
gravy until it is smooth and add the lemon juice, salt, pepper,
chopped champignons and capers.

The tongue which has been boiled is skinned and sliced and put into
the gravy, then boiled a few minutes and tasted as to seasoning. Pour
this gravy over the fish, strew with Parmesan cheese and drip on some
butter. Place the baking dish into a dish with water and bake in the
oven to a nice color.

No. 26—BOILED RED SNAPPER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of fish
Salt
10 pepper-corns
4 cloves
2 bay-leaves
½ onion, sliced
½ lemon, sliced
Water

Preparation: The fish is dressed, washed and put in a swimming
position, into water enough to cover it and brought to boil. All the
ingredients are added and after boiling up once, set aside to simmer ½
hour. Garnish with lemon slices and parsley. Serve the fish with a
butter gravy mixed with fine chopped parsley or with an egg dressing.

No. 27—RED SNAPPER WITH RED WINE DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The preparation and ingredients are the same as given under No. 3.

No. 28—FRIED SMELT OR SPARLING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of sparling
Salt
1 egg
2 tbsps. of milk
Flour
½ lb. of butter for frying

Preparation: The fish is dressed, washed, rubbed with salt and left
standing for 1½ hours. Then the salt is washed off a little. Beat the
egg with the milk, brush the fish with it and dip it into the flour.
Heat the butter and bake the fish in it in the oven to a nice brown
color.

When served, pour the drippings over.

No. 29—FILLET OF SHELLFISH, WHITEFISH, CABELJOU, SOLE, WITH DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of fish
¼ lb. of butter
Salt, pepper
Juice of 1 lemon

Fish Bouillon.

Bones, skin
4 pepper-corns
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
2 slices of lemon
½ onion
1½ qts. water
Salt

Preparation: The fish is dressed, washed, the bones all removed and
cut into equal fillets. These are salted a little and left with the
salt ½ hour.

During this time prepare the fish bouillon. The bones and skin are
brought to boil in 1½ qts. of water to which the pepper-corns, cloves,
lemon and onion slices and salt have been added and then cooked until
the water has boiled down to ¾ qt. Then put the fish fillets into a
buttered pan, season with 1 pinch of pepper, lemon juice, the ¼ lb. of
butter placed on in pieces and ½ cupful of the fish bouillon poured
over them.

The pan must be covered and the fish stewed in the oven for 25
minutes, then served on a hot platter, the drippings poured over. A
Dutch gravy is served with it and the bouillon used for that. See
gravies or dressings, Dutch Dressing.

No. 30—FRIED MACKEREL.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of mackerel
Salt
1 egg
2 tbsps. of milk
Flour
½ lb. of butter for frying

Preparation: The mackerel is cleaned well, the head chopped off and
the fish split open lengthwise. The bones are all taken out, the
fillets rubbed with salt and let stand for 1 hour. Then it is washed a
little, dried, dipped into the egg beaten with milk and into flour.
The butter is heated and the fillets are fried in it to a nice color
for about 10 to 15 minutes. Serve on a hot platter, pour the drippings
over and garnish with lemon slices and parsley. If the drippings are
not sufficient, make an extra gravy of drawn butter mixed with chopped
parsley.

No. 31—ROLLED, STUFFED FISH FILLETS.

Made from whitefish, pickerel, cabeljou, shellfish, halibut.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of fish
1½ rolls, soaked in milk
1 tbsp. of chopped parsley
½ tbsp. of chopped onion
1 pinch of salt
1 pinch of pepper
3 eggs
⅛ lb. of butter

For Stew.

½ pt. of white wine
1 oz. of butter
6 pepper-corns
¼ onion
2 lemon slices
3 tbsps. of lemon juice

The Gravy.

⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
¾ pt. of fish gravy
3 yolks of eggs

Preparation: The fish is dressed, washed, skinned, split open
lengthwise and the bones taken out, then it is cut into pieces 6
inches long and 3 inches wide. The trimmings which are left, must be
fully ¼ lb. and are chopped fine. From 2 eggs make scrambled eggs.
Cream the ⅛ lb. of butter and mix it well with the soaked roll,
chopped fish trimming, 1 tablespoonful of parsley, scrambled egg,
onion, salt, pepper. Press the whole mixture through a sieve and stir
in another egg. This stuffing must taste very spicy or piquant and is
spread evenly on the fish fillets. Then roll each one up and tie it
with a white string, place them into a roasting pan, add ½ qt. of
water, ½ pt. of white wine, 6 pepper-corns, ¼ onion, 2 slices of
lemon, 3 tablespoonfuls of lemon juice and salt. The 1 ounce of butter
is cut into pieces and put on the fish, then cover the pan with a
buttered paper and bake in the oven ½ hour. Serve on a hot platter.

The gravy or dressing is prepared by mixing ⅛ lb. of butter with 2
tablespoonfuls of flour, add the strained broth from the fillets, cook
and stir in 3 yolks of eggs, strain and serve with the fish fillets.

No. 32—BOILED CODFISH.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of codfish
⅛ lb. of soda
2 onions
Salt
4 qts. of water

Preparation: The fish is pounded well, and put into water for 36
hours, changing it every 12 hours and adding a teaspoonful of soda at
every change. After that, skin the fish and cut it into pieces, place
it into boiling water with the salt, and 2 sliced onions, and let it
simmer for 45 minutes. Serve it with drawn butter or mustard gravy.

No. 33—CODFISH RAGOUT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. of boiled codfish
⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
¾ pt. of bouillon
6 pepper-corns
2 bay-leaves
Salt
A small cup of herb vinegar
½ onion

Preparation: The remnants of boiled codfish are cut in small pieces.
The ⅛ lb. of butter is browned, 2 tablespoonfuls of flour stirred in,
add the bouillon and season with vinegar, onion, pepper-corns and
bay-leaves.

The gravy is cooked slowly ½ hour, seasoned and strained. Add the
fish, reheat but do not boil and serve on a hot platter with potatoes.

No. 34—FRIED SOLE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of fish
Salt, white pepper
1 egg
2 tbsps. of milk
1 cup grated rolls
Juice of 1 lemon
1 onion, sliced thin
¼ lb. of butter for frying
Some flour

Preparation: Skin the fish by running a sharp knife around the tail;
loosen the skin from the meat and pull downward over the head. The
white side is treated the same way, the tail and fins are shortened
and the fish cut into convenient pieces. Every piece is cleaned well,
salted and peppered, the lemon juice dripped on, the slices of onion
placed on top, the pot covered up and the fish left in it to simmer 1½
to 2 hours. ½ hour before serving, each piece is dried, dredged with
flour and dipped into the egg beaten with the milk and salt and then
into roll crumbs.

The butter is heated and in it the pieces of fish are fried to a nice
brown color. Serve it on a hot platter, garnish with lemon slices and
parsley. The drippings may be used as gravy.

No. 35—BAKED SOLE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The ingredients and preparations are the same as in the preceding, No.
34. The pieces of fish are put into boiling hot lard deep enough so
they float, and baked to a golden yellow color.

Serve with a mayonnaise or caviar gravy. See Gravies or Dressings.

Remarks: The pieces of fish may be rolled in finely chopped or ground
hazel nuts instead of bread crumbs; this is very fine.

No. 36—BAKED GURNET.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of fish
Salt
1 egg
2 tbsps. of milk
Juice of 1 lemon
¼ lb. of butter

Preparation: The fish is cleaned well, dried, cut in halves,
lengthwise, the bones taken out, salted, seasoned with lemon juice,
dipped into egg beaten with milk and then into flour.

Heat the butter and fry the fish in the oven for ½ hour, basting
frequently. Serve a butter dressing with it.

No. 37—SMALL FISH RAGOUTS IN SHELLS OR SMALL MOLDS; UTILIZING REMNANTS
OF FISH.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of boiled fish
1 oz. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
½ pt. of sweet or sour cream
Juice of ½ lemon
1 tbsp. of Parmesan cheese
3 tbsps. of white wine
Salt, white pepper
2 tbsps. of roll crumbs
1 small piece of butter

Preparation: The butter is heated, the flour stirred in, also the
cream, wine and lemon juice and boiled. This gravy should be thick; if
too thick, add more cream or milk, salt, pepper and Parmesan cheese,
then boil one minute. Cut the fish into small pieces and put into the
gravy. Butter the shells or molds and fill with this mixture, strew
the bread crumbs on and bake in the oven about 10 minutes, to a light
yellow color. Serve immediately after taking out of the oven.

Remarks: This dish may be served as a fine side dish together with
head lettuce.

No. 38—FISH CROQUETTES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of boiled fish
1 oz. of butter
3 tbsps. of flour
¾ pt. of cream
3 yolks of eggs
1 tbsp. of. lemon juice
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
2 whites of eggs, beaten with 1 tbsp. of milk
Flour
Lard enough for frying

Preparation: The fish is cut into small pieces. The butter is melted,
the 3 tablespoonfuls of flour stirred in, then add cream and season
with lemon juice, salt and pepper. This gravy is cooked a few minutes
and must be thick, the 3 yolks of eggs are stirred in and the fish
added. After this mixture has cooled off, small croquettes are formed
which are dipped into the white of egg and flour or bread crumbs. Heat
the lard to the boiling point, (it must be deep enough so the
croquettes will float in it) and bake them to a golden yellow color.

Remarks: Fry one croquette first; if it should not hold together, add
more flour.

No. 39—FISH CUTLETS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The preparation and ingredients are the same as under No. 38. Form
small cutlets, bread them the same as the croquettes and fry them in
butter to a nice color. You may improve them with champignons or crab
tails.

No. 40—FISH AND POTATO PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. of boiled fish
3 lbs. potatoes
1 pt. of cream or milk
⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of Parmesan cheese
Salt, pepper
1 tbsp. of capers
1 tbsp. of roll crumbs
2 tbsps. of flour

Preparation: The boiled fish is cut up fine, the bones all taken out;
the raw potatoes peeled and sliced fine. The baking dish or casserole
is buttered and a layer of potatoes alternating with a layer of fish
put in so that the last layer will be potatoes.

The gravy is made by heating the butter, stirring in the flour, adding
the cream, salt, pepper, Parmesan cheese and capers. Cook one minute,
then pour over the layers of fish and potatoes. Strew a few bread
crumbs on top and place the pieces of butter on, then bake slowly 1½
hours. Serve in the dish with head lettuce.

No. 41—SALTED CODFISH CROQUETTES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The preparation and ingredients are the same as given under No. 38,
Fish Croquettes. If the codfish is too salty, soak it in water a few
hours or simmer in boiling water a few minutes.

No. 42—CODFISH HASH.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. of codfish
1 small piece of butter
1 tbsp. of flour
½ pt. of cream

Preparation: The codfish is picked to pieces. If it is too salty, soak
it a few hours. Heat the butter, stir in the flour, cream and fish
and cook for 10 minutes. Toast slices of wheat bread and serve the
fish hash on this.

No. 43—FRIED FRESH HERRING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

12 fresh herring
Salt
½ lb. of butter or lard
1 cup of flour

For the Gravy.

Juice of 1 lemon
⅛ lb. butter
1 tbsp. parsley

Preparation: The head of the herring must have a yellow color, if it
looks reddish, the herring is stale. The herring is dressed, washed,
salted for 45 minutes, then it is dried and rolled in flour, that has
been mixed with salt and pepper. Heat the butter or fat and fry the
herring in it to a nice color, turning occasionally. For the gravy,
brown the butter, add the juice of the lemon and finely chopped parsley.

Serve the herring on a hot platter and pour the gravy over it.

No. 44—TO MARINATE OR PICKLE FRIED HERRING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

12 fresh herring
Salt
1 cup of flour
½ lb. of butter or lard

For Marinating.

¾ qt. vinegar
¾ qt. water
1 large onion, sliced
6 cloves
6 bay-leaves
Some Salt
20 pepper-corns

Preparation: The herring are dressed, washed, salted for 45 minutes;
after that they are dried, then rolled in flour mixed with salt and
pepper and fried in butter or lard to a nice color.

For marinating, boil vinegar, water, pepper, cloves, bay-leaves,
sliced onion and salt and cool it. The fried herring are cooled and
put into a stone jar and the fluid poured over. To be prepared one day
before serving.

No. 45—MARINATED SALT HERRING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 salt herring
1 pt. sour or sweet cream or milk
2 sour apples
12 pepper-corns
4 cloves
2 bay-leaves
Vinegar to taste
1 small onion

Preparation: The salt herring are soaked for one day, then dressed and
skinned. If you wish, you may cut them into pieces or leave them whole
and put them into a dish. The gravy is then prepared.

The milt and roe, taken out of the herring, are well cleaned, chopped
and beaten with vinegar, cream, grated apples and onions, pepper,
cloves and bay-leaves. Pour this dressing over the herring and let
stand for ½ to 1 day. Serve the herring in the gravy and potatoes in
their jackets.

Remarks: Sour cream is best to use for marinating salt herring. This
preparation is very good.

No. 46—MARINATED SALT HERRING.

A Simple Way.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 salt herring
1 pt. wine vinegar
1 large onion, sliced
12 pepper-corns
6 cloves
2 bay-leaves

Preparation: The herring are dressed, skinned and soaked in water for
½ day, then cut into desirable pieces or left whole. Cook the vinegar
with ½ pt. of water and cool. Put all the spices on the herring and
pour the cold vinegar over. The milt may be put in also.

No. 47—HERRING SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 salt herring
15 boiled, peeled potatoes
3 apples
¼ lb. cold roast
⅛ lb. tongue sausage
¼ lb. pickled beets
2 salt pickles
2 pepper pickles
1 onion
1 tsp. mustard
4 tbsp. of oil
1 pinch of salt
Pepper
1 pinch of sugar
Vinegar to taste
½ pt. bouillon
3 hard-boiled eggs

Preparation: The herring are soaked in water for ½ day, then dressed,
skinned, the bones taken out, and cut into equal parts. Potatoes,
apples, roast, sausage, eggs, onion, pickles, beets are all cut up,
mixed well and seasoned with oil, salt, pepper, mustard, sugar and
vinegar, then bouillon added. The salad is served in a glass dish and
garnished with minced white of egg, yolk of egg, pickles and beets.
You may also garnish with sardines cut in halves and rolled.

No. 48—BOILED LOBSTER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lobsters, 2½ lbs.
Boiling water
Salt
12 pepper-corns

Preparation: The lobster is cleaned in water with a brush, by taking
hold of its back with the left hand and using the brush with the
right. In this way it is harmless. The water is brought to boil in the
meantime with salt and the 12 pepper-corns, then the lobsters are put
in head first, which kills them instantly. Boil 5 minutes, then set
aside to simmer 45 minutes. After this time take out the lobsters, dry
them and put them on a board, break off the claws and tail and split
the body into halves from head to tail. Arrange these halves upright
on a platter, put a bunch of parsley in the top, place lettuce leaves
around and garnish neatly with the tails, cracked claws and legs.

Creamed butter or butter balls are served with it, also a mayonnaise
dressing.

Remarks: Claws and legs are placed into a cloth and carefully cracked
so the meat is not crushed. Large lobsters may boil 1 hour.

No. 49—COLD LOBSTER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Preparation and ingredients are the same as in the preceding, No. 48.
When the lobster is done, pour a cupful of cold water into the hot
water and let the lobster cool in it. Then take it out, dry it and
press it under a heavy board for one hour. When serving, brush it with
oil and prepare it like the warm lobster. A mayonnaise dressing is
nice with it.

No. 50—LOBSTER CROQUETTES OR CUTLETS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Utilizing remnants of lobsters.

The preparation and ingredients are the same as those given under No.
38 and 39, Fish Croquettes or Cutlets.

No. 51—LOBSTER RAGOUT IN SHELLS OR ON TOAST.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lobsters, 3 lbs.
⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
½ pt. bouillon
1 tsp. of meat extract
1 pinch of salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 pinch of sugar
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
4 pepper-corns
1 clove
¼ bay-leaf
⅛ of an onion
2 tbsps. of Madeira
⅛ pt. of white wine
¼ pt. of champignons
3 truffles
1 cup tomatoes

Preparation: The lobster is prepared as given under No. 48. After the
lobster is cooked, all meat is picked out, reserving the coral, which
is pulverized. The ⅛ lb. of butter is browned with the flour, bouillon
or water added and the coral put in. Meat extract, salt, pepper,
sugar, lemon juice, cloves, bay-leaf, onion, Madeira, white wine and
tomatoes added and smooth. It is strained and must be about ¾ of a
pint, this is all cooked ½ hour. This gravy must be very savory. The
champignons are cut into small pieces, the truffles peeled and
chopped, then add the champignons, truffles and lobster to the
strained gravy. This mixture is filled into buttered shells or small
molds and baked in the oven for 5 to 10 minutes. Serve on slices of
toast.

Remarks: This is a fine side dish.

No. 52—BAKED LOBSTER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The preparation and ingredients are the same as given under No. 48.
When the lobster is cooked and split, hot butter is dripped on and the
lobster baked in it for 10 to 15 minutes.

A mayonnaise dressing and chopped pickles are nice with it.

Remarks: It is best to bake the lobster in a gas oven.

No. 53—BOILED CRAWFISH OR CRABS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

24 crabs
Sufficient water
2 tbsps. of caraway
Salt
1 large onion, sliced

The Gravy.

⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of chopped parsley

Preparation: The crabs are cleaned like the lobster. See No. 48. The
water with caraway seeds, salt and sliced onion is boiled and the
crabs put in one by one. The water must boil constantly, so that the
crabs are killed instantly. Boil 3 minutes, then set aside to simmer ¾
to 1 hour. Serve the hot crabs on a napkin. For gravy or dressing,
take hot butter mixed with minced parsley.

No. 54—CRAB CUTLETS WITH VEGETABLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

36 crabs
1 oz. of butter
2 yolks of eggs
1 egg
Salt, pepper
1 tsp. of lemon juice
1 cupful of roll crumbs
½ lb. of butter for frying

Preparation: The crabs are prepared and cooked as given under No. 53.
The meat picked out, 18 claws or legs laid aside. The meat is coarsely
minced, then mixed well with creamed butter, 2 yolks of eggs, lemon
juice, salt and pepper and small croquettes made from this mixture.
Dip in beaten egg and roll crumbs. Heat the butter and fry these
croquettes in it on both sides to a nice color. Into each put a claw
or leg. Arrange the croquettes around asparagus or peas.

Remarks: A good crab dressing may be prepared from the meat of crabs.

No. 55—CRAB RAGOUT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

50 crabs
¼ lb. of butter
3 tbsps. of flour
1 pt. bouillon
Some champignon water
¼ wineglassful of white wine
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
1 pinch of salt and pepper
2 yolks of eggs
½ pt. champignons

Preparation: The crabs or crawfish are cooked the same way as given
under No. 53, the meat all picked out, also out of the tails and cut
into small pieces. The coral is pulverized and cooked in ¼ lb. of
butter together with flour browned in it. The bouillon, the champignon
juice, white wine, lemon juice, salt and pepper are added and cooked
for 15 minutes in a covered pan. This gravy is then strained through a
fine sieve and the crab meat and champignons put in. This mixture is
filled into shells or patties and baked in oven 5 minutes. (See
Chapter 3, No. 29, Veal Sweetbread Patties). You can also serve this
ragout on toast.

No. 56—OYSTERS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 doz. oysters
1½ lemon

Preparation: The oysters are opened with an oyster knife and cleaned
with a small knife, then placed neatly on a platter covered with a
napkin, garnishing with slices of lemon.

No. 57—OYSTER PATTIES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ doz. oysters
1 tbsp. of butter
1 tbsp. of flour
1 tsp. of lemon juice
Salt, pepper
Pie crust
2 tbsps. of cream

Preparation: The butter is melted, flour, cream, lemon juice, salt,
pepper and oysters put in, then boiled up once. Small patties are made
as given under Chapter 3, No. 29, Veal Sweet Bread Patties. Fill the
patties with the oyster ragout, bake in oven a few minutes, then serve
at once. This is a fine dish.

No. 58—FRIED OYSTERS OR CLAMS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 doz. oysters
Salt, pepper
1 cupful of fine roll crumbs
⅛ lb. of butter
Some lemon juice

Preparation: The prepared oysters are put into a dish, the lemon juice
dripped on and breaded with crumbs, which are mixed with salt and
pepper. In the meantime brown the butter and fry the oysters crisp,
turning frequently. Serve them with spinage, sauerkraut and fish.

No. 59—OYSTER OR CLAM SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

50 oysters or clams
Juice of 2 lemons
Salt, white pepper
2 tbsps. of chopped parsley
4 tbsps. of oil

Preparation: The oysters or clams are mixed with the other
ingredients, put into a glass dish and garnished with green lettuce
leaves.

No. 60—OYSTER OR CLAM PUDDING WITH RICE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

50 clams
1 pt. white wine
1 tsp. of salt

For the Rice.

¼ lb. of rice
1 pt. bouillon

For the Gravy.

¼ lb. of butter
3 tbsps. of flour
¾ pt. cream or milk
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
3 yolks of egg
½ tbsp. of Parmesan cheese
2 tbsps. chopped champignons

Preparation: The clams are cleaned in cold water with a brush. Change
the water several times until it remains clear.

The white wine and salt are put into a dish and the clams put in and
shaken over the fire until they open. The inside is then taken out,
the shells thrown away. The clam liquor is used for dressing or gravy.
Heat ¼ lb. of butter, stir in the flour and add cream, the liquor from
the clams, chopped champignons and let it boil a few minutes, stirring
constantly; then stir in the 3 yolks of eggs and set aside.

While the clams and dressing are being prepared, the rice is cooked
with the bouillon to a thick mush.

A baking dish or casserole is buttered and filled with layers of rice
alternating with layers of clams, rice for the top layer. The prepared
gravy or dressing is then poured on, cheese strewn over, 1
tablespoonful of hot butter dripped on and then baked in the oven for
20 minutes. This dish may also be made of fresh oysters.

No. 61—SALMON STEAK.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½–3 lbs. of salmon in 6 slices
9 tsps. of lemon juice
2 medium-sized onions
1 bunch of parsley
Pepper 12 tbsps. of fine oil
Salt

Preparation: The steaks should be cut in 6 neat medium-sized pieces
from the middle of the fish, sprinkle with salt and pepper, pour 1½
tablespoonfuls of lemon juice on each steak, the onion must be thinly
sliced, and the slices put on the steaks, also the parsley; then
spread 1 tablespoonful of oil on each steak and let them lie for 1½
hours; get cooking utensil very hot, then remove the onions and
parsley from each slice of fish, spread another tablespoonful of oil
on each and broil for 5 minutes. Serve on a hot platter and garnish
with lemon slices and parsley. An olive sauce should be served with
this dish.

CHAPTER 9.

HEAD CHEESE AND GELATINES.

The various preparations of Gelatines, Aspic, Headcheese, Poultry and
Fish Jellies.

No. 1—HOW TO PREPARE GELATINE.

4 lbs. of pork sward or skin
4 lbs. of pig’s feet
6 qts. of water
7 whites of eggs and the shells
1 qt. of white wine
Juice of 3 lemons

Preparation: The pork sward and pig’s feet are cleaned well in cold
water, then put in cold water and brought to boil. As soon as they
begin to boil, pour this water off and cut the sward up into small
pieces, chop the feet into several pieces and put on the stove with 6
qts. of cold water to boil for 7 hours. The feet may be taken out
before this time if you wish to use them for a meal. The broth must
boil down to 2½ qts.; this is strained through a fine sieve, set aside
to cool, and all fat removed from the top.

Whites of eggs, wine and lemon juice are thoroughly beaten together;
the egg shells are crushed and all this put into the broth. Then put
the broth over the fire once more and stir constantly until it boils.
Remove at once, cover up the pot and place it in a moderate oven until
the liquid is perfectly clarified. Put a clean white cloth over a pot
and strain the broth through it. This must be as clear as water. Put
into glass jars, seal and set them in a boiler with water at the
bottom, the jars resting on a tray. Cover the kettle and boil for 1
hour. This gelatine will keep and may be used for sweet or sour
gelatines.

Remarks: The pig’s feet may be served with a brown sweet-sour gravy.
They may be eaten cold if put in vinegar, onion slices, salt and
pepper-corns for 2 days.

No. 2—MEAT GELATINE FOR PATIENTS.

Quantity 1½ qts.

1 lb. of beef
2½ lbs. veal cartilage
Salt
¾ qt. of water
1 small carrot

Preparation: The beef and the veal cartilage are washed and cut into
small pieces, the carrot is scraped, but left whole. Then this meat,
the carrot and 1 pinch of salt are put into a glass jar with ¾ qt. of
water, sealed and slowly cooked in a boiler with water at the bottom,
the jar resting on a tray, for 4 hours. After that, strain the broth,
let it get cold and remove the fat, then serve it to the patient in
spoonfuls.

Remarks: Instead of beef, you may use poultry.

No. 3—GELATINE OR HEADCHEESE FROM POULTRY BOUILLON.

Quantity for 4–6 Persons.

1 young, fried or boiled chicken
¾ qt. good beef bouillon
2 tbsps. of Madeira or white wine
½ tsp. of meat extract
5 layers of ½ box of white gelatine
2 sour pickles.

Preparation: The fried chicken is cut into small pieces, the pickles
are peeled and sliced. The strong beef broth is heated and the
gelatine dissolved in it with wine, meat extract and salt added, then
strained and tasted as to seasoning. Put ¼ pt. of the warm fluid into
a porcelain dish, skim off all fat, let it get cold and put on the
sliced pickles and a few tablespoonfuls of broth, let it cool, arrange
the chicken meat on it in the form of scales, pour the rest of the
broth on and let it get cold and stiff. Then turn it out on a platter
and garnish with parsley. Asparagus cut into small pieces may also be
used in this gelatine.

Remarks: Instead of chicken you may use veal roast, tongue or goose
liver from which all hard fried meat and cartilage is removed.

No. 4—HEADCHEESE FROM PIG’S FEET AND CALF’S TONGUE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 pig’s feet
2 calves’ tongues
Juice of ½ lemon
⅛ pt. of white wine
3 tbsps. of vinegar
Some salt
2 qts. of water
1 small onion
½ bay-leaf
¼ tsp. of meat extract
1 sour pickle, cut into small pieces
4 pepper-corns

Preparation: Pig’s feet and calves’ tongues are cleaned well, put on
to boil with the water, salt, pepper, onion, bay-leaf. Cover the pot
and boil until well done, then take the skin off the tongue and cut it
with the rest of the meat into small pieces.

Strain the bouillon and add vinegar, lemon juice, wine and meat
extract. Put the meat into a dish, pour the bouillon on and set to
cool. Then turn it out on a platter and serve with head lettuce or
potato salad, vinegar and oil, mayonnaise dressing or with fried
potatoes.

No. 5—HEADCHEESE FROM OX-TONGUE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pickled ox-tongue
½ qt. strong beef bouillon
4 pieces of white gelatine
1 tbsp. of capers
4 sliced pickles
½ pt. sliced champignons
⅛ pt. white wine
Some champignon water
½ tsp. of meat extract
Some vinegar

Preparation: The tongue is cleaned and put on to boil in cold water
until tender. It is then skinned and sliced, ½ pt. of vinegar poured
on and left for a few hours. The bouillon is seasoned with salt, wine,
champignon juice, lemon juice, some vinegar and the 4 pieces of
gelatine are dissolved in the bouillon. The tongue, champignon and
pickle slices and capers are put into a porcelain dish, the bouillon
poured on and cooled; then turned out on a platter and served.

No. 6—HEADCHEESE FROM GOOSE OR DUCK.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 goose, 8 to 10 lbs.
6 calves’ feet

For Cooking.

6 qts. of water
Salt
6 pepper-corns
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
1 large sliced onion
Some soup greens
1 tsp. of meat extract
½ cup of good vinegar
4 whites of eggs and shells

Preparation: The goose and calves’ feet are cleaned and well jointed,
then put to boil in cold water with all the other ingredients. When
the goose is tender, take it out of the broth, remove all spices that
may adhere to it, place it into a porcelain or stone jar. Let the
calves’ feet cook until boiled down to 3 qts., remove all fat and
season with vinegar, meat extract and salt if necessary. Put in the
crushed egg shells, beat the white of egg with water and add it to the
bouillon, let it come to boil and then set aside to simmer until the
white of egg curdles. After one hour, strain the bouillon and pour it
through a white cloth over the goose meat.

Remarks: If you wish to prepare the headcheese quickly, omit the
calves’ feet and use 35 pieces of gelatine dissolved in 3 qts. of
bouillon, which is also clarified with white of egg and egg shells.

Remarks: The meat of the calves’ feet may be breaded in roll crumbs,
fried in butter and served with a raisin gravy. If you wish to make
this headcheese from duck, take 2 ducks.

No. 7—HEAD CHEESE FROM PARTRIDGE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 partridges
2 qts. of water
Salt
4 pepper-corns
½ onion
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
2 tbsps. of lemon juice
4 tbsps. of Madeira or good white wine
2 whites of eggs and egg shells
15 pieces of gelatine or 1⁄20 of a lb.
¼ tsp. of meat extract

Preparation: The partridges are cleaned and dressed and put to boil in
cold water with the spices. When it is done, carve it and put it into
a porcelain dish. Let the bouillon boil down to 1¼ qts., season with
white wine or Madeira, lemon juice and meat extract and remove all
fat, then dissolve the gelatine in it. Stir the whites of eggs with
some bouillon and add it with the egg shells, then boil for a few
minutes and set aside to simmer until the bouillon is clear. Strain it
through a sieve and a cloth and pour it on to the meat to cool. Turn
it out on a platter and garnish with lettuce and lemon slices.

No. 8—FISH IN JELLY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of fish
2½ qts. of water
Salt
4 pepper-corns
2 cloves
2 lemon slices
2 tbsps. of vinegar
4 tbsps. of lemon juice
¼ pt. of white wine
10 pieces of white gelatine
1 bay-leaf

Preparation: Put the water on with all the other ingredients and boil,
then put in the fish after being dressed and cleaned and let it simmer
gently for ½ hour. Take out the fish, remove the bones and cut it up
into large pieces. The fish stock is boiled down to l¼ qts. and the
gelatine dissolved in it, then boiled for one hour, strained and
poured on the fish to cool. Serve it on a glass platter garnished with
head lettuce.

No. 9—EEL IN JELLY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of eel
1½ qts. of water
¼ qt. of wine vinegar
10 pepper-corns
3 cloves
Salt
2 bay-leaves
1 sliced onion
Some soup greens
¼ lemon, sliced
12 layers of white gelatine
¼ tsp. of meat extract
2 hard-boiled eggs
White of 1 egg

Preparation: The eel is skinned, cut in pieces and the intestines
taken out. The 1½ qts. of water are brought to boil with vinegar,
pepper-corns, salt, bay-leaf, onions, lemon slices and soup greens; add
the eel and simmer gently for 15 minutes. Take out the pieces of eel
and boil the broth down to 1 qt. Into this put the crushed egg shells,
the white of egg mixed with some broth, ¼ teaspoonful of meat extract
and the gelatine and cook for a minute, then set aside. When the
bouillon is clear, strain it through a fine cloth. Slice the two hard
boiled eggs and cover the bottom of a porcelain dish with them, then
pour on some jelly and fish bouillon and let it get cold. After that
put the eel pieces on and the rest of the sliced egg, then pour the
rest of the stock over and let it get cold. When it is stiff, turn it
out on a plate and garnish with head lettuce, It is best to prepare
this dish the day before using it.

No. 10—SALMON IN JELLY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of salmon
1½ qts. of water
½ cup of wine vinegar
1 cup of white wine
½ sliced onion
¼ sliced lemon
12 pepper-corns
5 cloves
2 bay-leaves
10 pieces of gelatine
2 whites of eggs and shells
10 crab tails if you like
Salt

Preparation: Into the water put the wine vinegar, the wine, salt,
pepper-corns, bay-leaves, cloves, onion slices, lemon slices and let
it come to boil. Clean the fish well and put it into this water to
simmer gently for ½ to ¾ hour. After this take the fish out, remove
the bones, cut in pieces and boil down the stock to 1 qt. Beat the
whites of 2 eggs with some of the broth and add it, also the crushed
shells and 10 pieces or layers of gelatine. Let this mass cook a
second and set aside to clarify, then strain through a fine cloth.

Place the pieces of fish and crab tails into a porcelain dish, pour
the fish stock on and put it on ice to cool quickly. Then turn it out
on a glass platter and garnish with head lettuce and lemon slices.
Serve with a mayonnaise dressing.

No. 11—OYSTERS AND CAVIAR IN JELLY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. strong beef bouillon
3 tbsps. of white wine
1 tsp. of lemon juice
12 layers of gelatine
4 doz. oysters
¼ lb. of caviar, ice
2 whites of eggs and shells

Preparation: The beef bouillon must be clear and free from fat; season
it with white wine and lemon juice, and dissolve the gelatine in it.
Stir the white of egg with some bouillon and add it, put in the
crushed egg shells to cook for a second, then set aside to clarify.
Strain it through a fine cloth. Fresh oysters are opened, cleaned and
cut out of the shells. A dish is set on chopped ice, some oysters are
placed in a circle into the dish and sufficient cold bouillon put on
to cover; then let them get stiff. Repeat this until all oysters have
been used. Put the rest of the bouillon on top and let it get stiff.

The caviar is poured into a sieve, let very cold water run over it
until it becomes granular. In the center of the oyster jelly cut out a
round hole, large enough to hold the quantity of caviar at hand. Heat
the oyster jelly that has been cut out and pour it over the caviar.
When it is perfectly stiff, turn it out on a platter and garnish with
lemon slices and lettuce leaves. Serve with a cold mustard dressing.

No. 12—GOOSE LIVER IN JELLY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. of fat goose liver
¼ lb. of truffles
¼ lb. of champignons
¾ qt. very strong beef or chicken broth
½ tsp. of meat extract
3 tbsps. of Madeira
10 pieces of white gelatine
1 white of egg and shell for clearing

Preparation: Remove all fat from the broth. Dissolve the gelatine in
it, color with the meat extract and season with Madeira. Add to it the
white of egg beaten into some of the broth, and the crushed shell,
cook a second and set aside to clarify, then strain through a fine
cloth.

Skin the goose liver and cut it into 1½ inch slices, also the truffles
and lard the liver slices with the truffles, then stew slowly in a
little butter. When done, place them on blotting paper to drain off
the fat. The champignons are cooked in bouillon for 10 minutes.

Into a dish set in crushed ice put part of the bouillon, let it get
stiff and put in half of the goose liver, also half of the
champignons. Some more bouillon is poured over this and cooled; then
repeat this same process until all goose liver, champignons and broth
have been used. Let it get stiff, turn it out on a platter and serve
with a cold mustard dressing and potato salad.

CHAPTER 10.

DRESSINGS or GRAVIES.

DRESSINGS FOR MEAT, POULTRY, GAME AND FISH.

SAUCES FOR PASTRY AND SWEET DISHES.

Flour Gravies.

Good butter and good flour are the essentials for a gravy and
constitute the main part of it. For the preparation of white gravies,
earthen, pewter or enameled dishes are the best. Gravies must always
be smooth and it is best to strain them through a fine sieve. If you
have them ready before the meal, put them into a double boiler. They
must neither be too thick nor too thin.

No. 1—WHITE GRAVY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 oz. butter
¼ small onion
2 tbsps. of flour
¾ pt. of bouillon
1 pinch of salt and pepper
2 yolks of eggs

Preparation: Melt the butter, add the peeled onion and steep a little
while, then stir in the flour and bouillon and cook 10 minutes, season
with salt and pepper. Beat the 2 yolks of eggs with a little water and
slowly stir it into the gravy. Do not boil any more.

No. 2—DUTCH GRAVY.

For Fish, Chicken or Veal With Rice.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 oz. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
½ pt. of fish stock, chicken or veal broth
1½ tsps. of lemon juice, for fish
2 tbsps. white wine, for chicken
Salt
2 yolks of eggs
¼ cup of cream

Preparation: Melt the butter, stir in the flour, stew a few minutes,
fill up with fish stock, stirring constantly, then season with salt
and lemon juice and add the 2 yolks of eggs as given under No. 1.

Remarks: If the gravy is for chicken or veal with rice, season it with
white wine.

No. 3—FINE DUTCH GRAVY FOR FISH OR VEAL.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 oz. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
½ pt. fish stock or bouillon.
½ cup sour cream
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
1 tbsp. of capers
3 sardines
Salt
1 pinch of white pepper
2 yolks of eggs

Preparation: Melt the butter, stir in the flour, simmer gently, fill
up with fish stock, or bouillon if it is intended for veal. Cook,
stirring constantly, add sour cream, lemon juice, salt and pepper.

The sardines are cleaned, chopped and put into the gravy with the
capers. Cook slowly for ten minutes, stirring frequently, then strain
through a fine sieve, heat it again and add the 2 yolks of eggs.

No. 4—WHIPPED DUTCH GRAVY.

For Fish, Asparagus, Cauliflower, Oyster Plants and Scorzonera.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ pt. of fish stock for fish, or ½ pt. of vegetable broth for
vegetables
1 oz. of butter
3–4 yolks of eggs
Salt, pepper
1½ tbsps. of flour

Preparation: The flour is mixed well with fish stock or vegetable
broth and whipped while over the fire, until it thickens; then add the
fresh butter and the yolks of eggs, which have been beaten with water.
Let it boil, stirring constantly. Serve at once.

Remarks: The gravy may be seasoned with 1 teaspoonful of lemon juice.

No. 5—GOOD FISH GRAVY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 oz. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
⅓ pt. of fish stock
2–3 yolks of eggs
Juice of ½ lemon
Salt
½ cup of cream

Preparation: Melt the butter, stir in the flour, add the fish stock
and cream and cook a little while, stirring constantly, then season
with lemon juice and salt if necessary. Finally stir in the yolks of
eggs.

No. 6—CAULIFLOWER GRAVY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 oz. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
½ pt. of cauliflower broth
Salt to taste
2 yolks of eggs
Nutmeg to taste

Preparation: Melt the butter, stir in the flour, gradually pour in the
cauliflower broth and boil, stirring constantly. Then season with salt
and nutmeg and stir in the 2 yolks of eggs.

No. 7—ASPARAGUS GRAVY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

⅛ lb. of butter
1 tbsp. of flour
4–6 yolks of eggs
½ cup of cream
⅓ pt. of asparagus broth
Salt to taste

Preparation: Cream the butter, add the yolks of eggs, flour and cream;
then add the boiling asparagus broth, while stirring. Let it boil,
stirring constantly. Serve at once or keep warm in water. It is very
fine.

No. 8—FINE MUSTARD GRAVY.

For Beef and Fish.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

⅛ lb. of butter
3 yolks of eggs
2 tbsps. of mustard
1 tbsp. of flour
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
1 slice of lemon
1 pinch of sugar
1 pinch of salt
½ pt. bouillon

Preparation: Cream the butter, add the yolks of eggs, mustard, flour,
and gradually pour in the bouillon, stirring constantly, then cook.
Season it with lemon juice, sugar and salt if necessary. Put in the
lemon slice which should be taken out when served.

No. 9—PLAIN MUSTARD DRESSING.

For Fish and Beef.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1⁄10 lb. of butter
1½ tbsps. of flour
2 tbsps. of mustard
1 tbsp. of vinegar
1 pinch of salt
Sugar, pepper
½ pt. of bouillon

Preparation: Brown the butter and flour, add the bouillon, cook and
season with pepper, salt, sugar and vinegar.

No. 10—FINE BEARNAISE SAUCE.

For Fillets, Saddle of Mutton, Mutton Cutlets.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 leek
3 tbsp. of vinegar
¼ lb. of butter
4 yolks of eggs
¼ cup of bouillon
½ tsp. of meat extract
1½ tsps. of chopped parsley
Salt, pepper

Preparation: The leek is cut into small pieces, vinegar added, then
boiled down to one-half of the portion and strained through a fine
sieve. Cream the butter, stir in the yolks of eggs, the leek vinegar,
meat extract and bouillon. Place into a double boiler and let it
thicken, stirring constantly; season with salt, pepper and finely
chopped parsley. It must be smooth. Serve at once.

No. 11—TOMATO GRAVY.

For Fillet, Saddle of Mutton and Mutton Cutlets.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 leek
3 tbsps. of vinegar
⅛ lb. of butter
3 yolks of eggs
¼ cup of bouillon
¼ cup of tomato pulp
1 tsp. of sugar
Salt, pepper
½ tsp. of flour

Preparation: The leek is cut into small pieces and boiled down in
vinegar to half of the portion. Cream the butter, add yolks of eggs,
tomatoes, flour, bouillon and the strained leek vinegar. Put into a
double boiler and let it thicken, stirring constantly. Season with
sugar, salt and pepper and serve at once.

No. 12—FINE TOMATO DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 oz. of butter
1½ tbsps. of flour
1 lb. or ¼ qt. can of tomatoes
¼ lb. raw ham
½ onion
1 pt. bouillon
Salt to taste
1 pinch of sugar and pepper
½ tbsp. of lemon juice
2 yolks of eggs

Preparation: Ham and onion are cut into fine pieces and fried brown in
butter. The chopped tomatoes are added and cooked a little while; then
stir in the flour and add the bouillon. Season it with salt, pepper,
lemon juice and sugar. Cook the gravy slowly for 1 hour, strain
through a fine sieve and stir in the 2 yolks of eggs.

No. 13—FINE GRAVY.

For Poultry, Meat and Fish.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

⅛ lb. of butter
⅛ lb. of raw ham
1 small onion
1½ tbsps. of flour
⅓ pt. bouillon
⅓ pt. cream or milk
¼ cup of ground poultry, fish or meat
Salt, pepper
1 tsp. of lemon juice

Preparation: The lean ham is cut into small cubes and fried in the
butter. Add the sliced onion, stir in the flour and stew a little
while, add the bouillon and cream. Now the gravy is cooked for 15
minutes and the ¼ cupful of ground fish added. When served with meats,
add meat instead of fish. Season with salt, pepper and lemon juice.
Let it boil a while and strain through a fine sieve.

No. 14—HORSE RADISH GRAVY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ cup of horse radish
1½ tsps. of flour
1 tbsp. of butter
¾ cup of cream or bouillon
1 pinch of salt
1 tsp. of sugar

Preparation: The horse radish must be scraped and grated very quickly,
flour and butter stirred in and the cream added. Let it boil 15 to 20
minutes, stirring constantly, and season with salt and sugar.

No. 15—HORSE RADISH DRESSING, RAW.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ cup of horse radish
3 tbsps. of vinegar
1 pinch of salt
1 tsp. of sugar

Preparation: The prepared horse radish is mixed with vinegar, salt and
sugar and served that way.

No. 16—SARDINE GRAVY.

For Fish and Meat.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
½ pt. of strong bouillon or fish stock
¼ pt. of white wine
Juice of ½ lemon
4–6 sardines
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
2 yolks of eggs

Preparation: The sardines are soaked in water for ½ hour, then chopped
fine and rubbed through a sieve. Melt the butter, stir in the flour
and stew a while, then add the bouillon, or fish stock if used for
fish. Add wine and lemon juice and the sardines, cook it slowly for 15
minutes and season with salt and pepper; then stir in the yolks of
eggs, but do not boil it any longer.

No. 17—CAPER SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1⁄10 lb. of butter
¼ of an onion
1½ tbsps. of flour
¾ pt. of bouillon (or fish stock, for fish)
2 tbsps. of capers
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
2 yolks of eggs

Preparation: Melt the butter, add the sliced onion and stew a while,
then stir in the flour and add the bouillon, season with salt, pepper,
lemon juice, and boil 15 minutes, stirring constantly. Strain through
a fine sieve. Put in the capers and let it simmer gently. Stir in the
yolks of eggs and a pinch of sugar.

No. 18—OYSTER DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

18 oysters
1⁄10 lb. of butter
1½ tbsps. of flour
1 pt. strong bouillon
1 sardine or 1 tbsp. sardine butter
1 pinch of salt
Pepper
½ cup of cream

Preparation: Melt the butter, stir in the flour, add the bouillon, and
oyster liquor. If the oysters are fresh, you may use some of the
beards. Cook the gravy slowly for ½ hour, then strain through a fine
sieve and season with salt and pepper. Put in the sardine butter or
finely chopped sardines. The oysters are put into boiling water for ¼
minute, then placed into a colander to drain. Put into the hot gravy
and serve at once.

No. 19—CRAB OR LOBSTER GRAVY.

For Fish, Chicken and Fricassee.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

18 crabs
2 qts. salt water
1⁄10 lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
Sugar
2 tbsps. of cream
½ pt. of rich bouillon

Preparation: The crabs are brushed well in cold water, then cooked
very red in 2 qts. of boiling salt water. The claws and tails are
broken off and the meat picked out and cut up. Remove the gravy
substance from the bodies and crush the coral in a mortar.

Heat the butter and put in the crushed coral, stir while stewing, add
the 2 tablespoonfuls of flour, stew a while and add the bouillon, cook
it slowly until it is smooth, then strain through a sieve and season
with salt and pepper. Stir in the 2 tablespoonfuls of cream, let the
gravy get very hot and put in the meat from the tails and claws. It
must not boil any more.

Lobster gravy is prepared the same way. Instead of crabs or crab
butter, take lobsters or lobster butter.

Remarks: A left over body of a lobster may be utilized for a gravy.

No. 20—REMOULADE SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 tbsps. of fine oil
1½ tbsps. of flour
½ pt. of bouillon
2 hard-boiled yolks of eggs
1 raw yolk of egg
1½ tbsps. of lemon juice
1 tsp. of mustard
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
½ tsp. of sugar

Preparation: Stew the oil and flour a little while, add the bouillon,
cook, strain and stir until cold. Stir the hard-boiled yolks of eggs
together with the raw yolk, lemon juice, mustard and gradually stir in
the oil mixture. Season with salt, pepper and sugar. It is served with
beef, eggs and head cheese.

No. 21—WHITE FRICASSEE SAUCE.

For Chicken Fricassee or Veal Fricassee.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 small piece of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
1 pt. bouillon
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
½ wineglass of white wine

Preparation: Melt the butter and stir in the flour, add the bouillon,
stir and boil 5 minutes, add white wine, lemon juice, salt, pepper and
set to simmer gently.

No. 22—ONION GRAVY.

For Boiled Beef.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 small piece of butter
1 medium-sized onion
1 tbsp. of flour
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 tbsp. of vinegar
½ pt. bouillon

Preparation: Brown the butter with the sliced onion, stir in the
flour, add the bouillon and season with salt, vinegar and pepper. Cook
the gravy 10 minutes and strain through a fine sieve.

No. 23—PEARL ONION GRAVY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 small piece of butter
½ tbsp. of sliced onion
1½ tbsp. of flour
½ pt. of bouillon
1½ tbsps. of vinegar
Salt
1 pinch of pepper
2 yolks of eggs
2 tbsps. of small pearl onions

Preparation: Prepare the gravy just like onion gravy, No. 22. After
the gravy has been strained, put in the pearl onions, cook for 1
minute and stir in the yolks of eggs, but do not cook any longer.

No. 24—PICKLE GRAVY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 piece of butter
2 tbsps. of sliced onion
1½ tbsps. of flour
¾ pt. of bouillon
¼ tsp. of meat extract
Salt, pepper
½ tbsp. of vinegar
1 tsp. of sugar
2 small chopped pickles

Preparation: Brown the butter, stir in the onion and flour, cook a
minute, and add the bouillon. Add the meat extract and cook 15
minutes, then strain and season with salt, pepper, vinegar, sugar. Put
in the finely chopped pickles and set to simmer. You can improve this
gravy with pieces of cauliflower and small pearl onions. Serve with
mutton roast or lamb.

No. 25—BURGUNDY OR MADEIRA SAUCE.

For Ham, Fish or Tongue.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1⁄10 lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
¾ pt. of bouillon
1 cup of Burgundy, red wine or Madeira
Salt
1 clove
1 bay-leaf
1 lemon slice
1 tbsp. lemon juice
1 tsp. sugar
½ tsp. meat extract
6 pepper-corns

Preparation: Brown the butter and flour, add the bouillon and all the
other ingredients.

Cook this gravy for 1 hour slowly, stirring frequently, then strain
through a fine sieve, add a few tablespoonfuls of wine, season and
serve hot. It must be a nice brown color and smooth.

No. 26—BACON GRAVY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

⅛ lb. of bacon
2 tbsps. of flour
¾ pt. bouillon
¼ onion
Salt
6 pepper-corns
1 clove
1 bay-leaf
2 tbsps. of vinegar
Sugar

Preparation: Cut the bacon into small cubes and fry to a nice yellow
color, add the finely sliced onion and fry a little while, add the
flour and bouillon and season with salt, pepper, cloves, bay-leaf,
vinegar and sugar. Cook for 15 minutes and serve with potatoes in
their jackets.

No. 27—HERB GRAVY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 tbsps. of minced herbs
1 tbsp. of minced parsley
1 tsp. of minced onions
1 spray of thyme
6 pepper-corns
2 tbsps. of flour
1¼ pts. of bouillon
½ tsp. meat extract
1 tsp. lemon juice
Salt to taste
2 tbsps. of butter

Preparation: Parsley, onion, thyme, pepper-corns are fried in butter,
the flour stirred in and browned; add the bouillon and meat extract
and boil down to ½ the quantity, strain through a fine sieve, heat
again and put in the herbs. Season with lemon juice and salt and stir
in a small piece of butter.

No. 28—BROWN CHAMPIGNON SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1⁄12 lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
1 tsp. of sliced onion
1 pt. of bouillon
1 tsp. of meat extract
½ cup champignon liquor
¼ cup of red wine or
4 tbsps. of Madeira
1 tbsp. lemon juice
Salt to taste
1 pinch of sugar
½ pt. of champignons

Preparation: Brown the butter, stir in flour and onion and cook 1
minute, add the bouillon and champignon liquor, season with meat
extract, red wine or Madeira, lemon juice and cook for ½ hour. Strain
the gravy, add the champignons, which may be quartered if they are too
large, set aside to simmer gently. Now flavor with salt, sugar and
lemon juice.

No. 29—TRUFFLE SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1⁄12 lb of butter
3 tbsps. of flour
1 tsp. of chopped onion
1 pt. bouillon or beef gravy
1 cup red wine
½ cup Madeira
2 cloves
1 bay-leaf
1 pinch of sugar
Salt to taste
1 small can of truffles
½ tsp. meat extract
6 pepper-corns

Preparation: Butter and onion are browned, flour stirred in and
bouillon added, together with red wine, Madeira, pepper, meat extract,
cloves, bay-leaf and put in the peelings of truffles, cook slowly for
1 hour, strain through a fine sieve. Chop the peeled truffles and add
them, season with salt and a little sugar.

No. 30—MOREL SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of fresh morels or ½ can of morels
1 pt. of bouillon
2 tbsps. of butter
2½ tbsps. of flour
1 tsp. onion
1 pinch of pepper
½ pt. morel liquor
½ tsp. meat extract
⅛ lb. raw, lean ham
1 tsp. minced parsley
1 tsp. of butter
Salt

Preparation: The fresh morels are cleaned, washed in lukewarm water
and put on the fire with lukewarm water, stirring carefully while
heating the water. Then they are poured into a colander. This process
is repeated until there is no more sand on the morels. The last water
is put aside. After a while pour it off carefully from the settlings
and boil down to ½ pt. The ham and onion are cut into small dice,
fried brown in 2 tablespoonfuls of butter, the flour stirred in and
browned 1 minute, then add the bouillon and morel liquor and cook
slowly for 45 minutes. Add the meat extract, pepper, salt and strain
it. Cut up the morels, put them into the gravy, let it come to boil
again, add parsley and serve very hot.

No. 31—PARSLEY GRAVY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1⁄12 lb. of butter
1 tbsp. chopped onion
2½ tbsps. of flour
1 pt. bouillon
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
1 pinch of pepper
Salt
4 tbsps. of finely chopped parsley

Preparation: The finely chopped onions and flour are browned in
butter, bouillon added and cooked 10 minutes, stirring constantly.
Season with salt, pepper and lemon juice, add the chopped parsley, but
do not cook any longer.

Remarks: ¼ cup of sweet cream will improve the gravy.

No. 32—DILL, CHIVE OR TARRAGON GRAVY.

These gravies are prepared like the parsley gravy, the ingredients are
the same also, but instead of parsley take dill for dill gravy, chives
for chive gravy, and tarragon for tarragon gravy. These gravies are
good with fish, chicken, beef and asparagus.

No. 33—SORREL GRAVY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1⁄12 lb. of butter
2½ tbsps. of flour
1 pt. bouillon
½ cupful of sweet cream
2 yolks of eggs
½ tsp. of sugar
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
½ cup of sorrel puree

Preparation: Melt the butter, stir in the flour, gradually add the
bouillon and cream, stirring constantly, cook a few minutes and add
the sorrel. Strain and season with salt, pepper and sugar. Stir in the
yolks of eggs and serve very hot.

Remarks: The sorrel is cleaned and treated like spinage and boiled the
same way, then rubbed through a sieve.

Cold Dressings.

No. 34—OIL DRESSING A LA TARTARE.

For Hard-Boiled Eggs, Cold Beef and Head Cheese.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ cup of fine salad oil
1 tbsp. finely sliced onion
2 tbsps. of flour
½ pt. of bouillon
1½ tbsps. of minced herbs or minced mixed pickles
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
Juice of ½ lemon

Preparation: Oil, onion and flour are fried light brown, bouillon and
lemon juice added, cook a little while, then strain and stir until
cold. Add the herbs or pickles and season with salt, pepper and more
lemon juice, if necessary. If the gravy is too thick, when cold, add
more bouillon.

No. 35—COLD MUSTARD DRESSING.

For Cold Lamb or Veal Roast.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 hard-boiled yolks of eggs
1 raw yolk of egg
½ cup of fine salad oil
Juice of ½ lemon
1 pinch of pepper
Sugar
1 tbsp. of cream
1 tbsp. of mustard
Salt to taste

Preparation: Hard-boiled and raw yolks of eggs are well stirred
together, the oil added in drops, season with mustard, lemon juice,
salt, pepper and sugar. If the dressing is too thick, thin it with 1
tablespoonful of cream. This dressing is very good with cold roast.

No. 36—TARTARE DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 tbsps. of oil
2 tbsps. of flour
1 tbsp. of finely chopped onions
¾ pt. strong bouillon
1 tsp. mustard
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
2 yolks of eggs
2 tbsps. of chopped mixed pickles
1 tbsp. of chopped capers
3 tbsps. lemon juice or vinegar

Preparation: Oil, onion, flour are fried light brown, bouillon added,
seasoned with mustard, lemon juice, salt and pepper and cooked slowly
for 15 minutes, then strained through a fine sieve. Stir until cold,
then stir in the 2 yolks of eggs and the pickles and capers. Taste it
again. It should be quite thick.

No. 37—COLD HERB DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 hard-boiled eggs
1 raw yolk of egg
½ cup of fine salad oil
1½ tbsps. of minced herbs
1 mustardspoonful of mustard
1 tsp. of lemon juice or vinegar
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The 2 hard-boiled and 1 raw yolk of eggs are thoroughly
beaten together, the oil added a few drops at a time, the herbs and
mustard put in and then seasoned with salt and pepper and the finely
chopped white of egg put in also.

No. 38—COLD REMOULADE DRESSING.

Very fine.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 hard-boiled yolks of egg
2 raw yolks
¾ cup of fine salad oil
¼ cup thick sour cream
3 tbsps. lemon juice or vinegar
1 tbsp. chopped capers
¼ tbsp. chopped sardines
¼ tbsp. mustard
1 pinch of salt
Pepper

Preparation: The two kinds of yolks of eggs are mixed well, the oil
added a few drops at a time, cream and lemon juice slowly stirred in,
then capers, sardines and mustard are added. Season with salt and
pepper and keep cold.

No. 39—COLD CHIVE DRESSING.

For Beef.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ cup of cream or milk
⅙ cup of vinegar
1 pinch of pepper and sugar
¼ cup of finely chopped chives
Salt to taste

Preparation: Cream, vinegar and chives are stirred together, then
seasoned with salt, pepper and sugar.

No. 40—COLD CAVIAR DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of caviar
3 yolks of eggs
½ cup of cream
2 tbsps. of vinegar
1 pinch of pepper and sugar
Salt to taste

Preparation: Put the 3 yolks of eggs and cream into a double boiler
and cook until it thickens, stirring constantly, add the vinegar and
stir until cold, then season with pepper, sugar and salt.

Put the caviar into a sieve, and let cold water run over it until it
becomes granular, then stir into the dressing. This dressing is good
with blue fish.

No. 41—MAYONNAISE DRESSING No. 1. (COLD).

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 yolks of eggs
½ pt. olive oil
Juice of ¼ lemon
1⁄10 tsp. of mustard
¼ tsp. of sugar
Salt to taste
1 pinch of white pepper

Preparation: The 6 yolks of eggs are stirred with the oil, then
seasoned with lemon juice, pepper, mustard, sugar and salt.

Remarks: Mayonnaise dressing is good with salmon.

No. 42—MAYONNAISE DRESSING No. 2.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 yolks of eggs
⅓ pt. fine salad oil
3 tbsps. of bouillon
2 tbsps. of vinegar
¼ tsp. of mustard
¼ tsp. of grated onion
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste

Preparation: The yolks of eggs are stirred adding the oil and vinegar
a few drops at a time, season with onion, pepper and salt and add
sufficient bouillon to give it the required thickness.

No. 43—COOKED MAYONNAISE DRESSING.

Very Good With Lobster or Chicken Salad.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 yolks of eggs
¾ cup of sour cream
2 tbsps. of vinegar
¼ tsp. ground mustard
1 pinch of white pepper
1 pinch of salt
1 pinch of sugar
½ pt. of thick, sour whipped cream

Preparation: Yolks of eggs, cream, vinegar, mustard, pepper, salt and
sugar are mixed well and cooked in a double boiler, stirring
constantly until it thickens. When the gravy is cold, add sour whipped
cream.

Remarks: You may peel a dill pickle, chop it very fine and add to the
dressing.

No. 44—MAYONNAISE DRESSING No. 3.

Very Good With Poultry Salad.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 yolks of eggs
1 tsp. of flour
1 cup of sweet cream
¼ cup of good poultry broth
1 pinch of white pepper
Salt
¼ tsp. of grated onion
2 tbsps. of fine oil
2 tbsps. of vinegar

Preparation: Yolks of eggs, cream, broth and vinegar are mixed well
and boiled in double boiler as before mentioned in No. 43, then
seasoned with salt, pepper and onion. Stir the dressing until cold,
then add 2 tablespoonfuls of oil a few drops at a time.

Sweet Sauces or Dressings.

Sauces for Puddings and Pastries.

No. 45—WHITE WINE SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 eggs
1 tsp. of flour
2 slices of lemon
2 tbsps. of sugar
1 tumblerful of white wine

Preparation: The 2 whole eggs, flour, wine, sugar are mixed well on
the stove and stirred until it becomes foamy and begins to thicken,
but must not cook. Then add the lemon slices.

Remarks: This sauce may be served cold or warm.

No. 46—ARRACK SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ cup of arrack or brandy
1 pt. of water
3 yolks of eggs
2 tbsps. of lemon juice
1 slice of lemon
1½ tbsps. of flour
⅛ lb. of sugar

Preparation: All ingredients except the arrack or brandy are mixed
well and treated the same as mentioned under No. 45. The arrack or
brandy is stirred in last. This sauce may be served cold or warm.

No. 47—VANILLA SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. of milk
½ vanilla bean or 1 tbsp. vanilla extract
4 yolks of eggs
1 tsp. of flour
¼ cup of sugar

Preparation: The vanilla bean is left to soak in milk for 1 hour, then
the sugar is added. The milk is brought to boil, the yolks of eggs and
flour are mixed with a little cold milk, slowly stirred into the
boiling milk and cooked for one minute. If you wish to use this sauce
cold, it must be stirred several times while getting cold so it will
not form a skin.

Remarks: The sauce must be stirred well while boiling.

When it is used cold you may add ½ cup of whipped cream or the white
of egg beaten to a froth.

No. 48—COCOA SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. milk
½ tsp. of vanilla extract
3 tbsps. of cocoa
¼ cup of sugar
4 yolks of eggs

Preparation: Stir the cocoa with the yolks of eggs and a little cold
milk and prepare the sauce like vanilla sauce given under No. 47.

No. 49—CHOCOLATE SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The preparation is the same as given under No. 47 and No. 48, but
instead of cocoa, ¼ lb. of chocolate is grated and stirred into the
yolks of eggs and milk and less sugar is needed.

No. 50—LEMON SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. of milk
⅓ lemon peel
1 tsp. of flour
¼ cup of sugar
4 yolks of eggs

The preparation is the same as given under No. 47, but instead of
vanilla use lemon peel.

No. 51—MARASCHINO SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 tbsps. of maraschino
1 pt. of milk
1 tsp. of flour
¼ cup of sugar
4 yolks of eggs

The preparation is the same as given under No. 47, but instead of
vanilla, use 4 tablespoonfuls maraschino.

No. 52—CHERRY SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. sour cherries
¾ qt. of water
Sugar to taste
1 small piece of cinnamon
1½ tbsps. of corn starch

Preparation: The cherries are stoned and boiled in the water for 1
hour, then rubbed through a fine sieve. The corn starch is dissolved
in a little water, then stirred into the boiling cherry sauce mixed
with sugar and cooked 5 minutes, stirring constantly. The sauce is
served cold.

No. 53—PRUNE SAUCE.

Preparation and ingredients are the same as given under No. 52.
Instead of cherries use 1 lb. of fresh or dried prunes.

No. 54—APRICOT SAUCE.

Preparation and ingredients are the same as given under No. 52.
Instead of cherries use 1 lb. of fresh or dried apricots.

No. 55—STRAWBERRY SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. strawberry juice
⅛ lb. of sugar
1 stick of cinnamon
1½ tbsps. of corn starch
1 tsp. of vanilla or lemon extract

Preparation: The corn starch is mixed with some juice. The remaining
juice is mixed with sugar and spices and put over the fire until it
boils, then the dissolved corn starch added and boiled 5 minutes,
stirring constantly. The sauce is served cold or warm.

Remarks: When the juice from preserved fruit is used, less sugar is
needed.

No. 56—RASPBERRY SAUCE.

Preparation and ingredients are the same as given under No. 55;
instead of 1 pt. of strawberry juice, use 1 pt. of raspberry juice.

No. 57—CHERRY, CURRANT, BLUEBERRY SAUCE.

Preparation and ingredients are the same as given under No. 55 but
instead of strawberry juice, use either cherry, currant or blueberry
juice.

No. 58—FRUIT PUREE SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Sauce made from prunes or fresh plums, cherries, strawberries,
raspberries, gooseberries, currants, grapes, apples or apricots.

½ lb. of fruit puree
Sugar to taste
1 small piece of cinnamon
¾ qt. of water
1½ tbsps. of corn starch
½ cup of white wine
¾ lemon

Preparation: The fruit puree is made very savory with sugar and
spices. The corn starch is mixed with a little water and stirred into
it, also the rest of the water, then the whole is cooked and rubbed
through a fine sieve. If the sauce should be too thin, use more corn
starch. The wine may be omitted.

CHAPTER 11.

POTATOES.

The various recipes for the preparation of potatoes.

The potato is a very useful food and may be prepared in many ways.
Salt is necessary to make the potato savory. It must be boiled well
done and quickly. It may be peeled long before using, but should be
kept covered with water after it is peeled, otherwise it will turn
brown. Potatoes lose their good flavor if they are kept in a moist
cellar where they will grow poisonous sprouts. They sprout also in the
spring; the sprouts should be immediately removed.

No. 1—POTATOES IN THEIR SKINS OR JACKETS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of medium-sized potatoes
Water sufficient to cover them
3 tbsps. of salt

Preparation: The potatoes must be of equal size. They are cleaned in
cold water and put to boil in cold water in a covered kettle. When
done, drain off the water, shake them a little and set them aside to
dry and their jackets will burst.

No. 2—NEW POTATOES IN THEIR JACKETS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of potatoes
3 tbsps. of salt
Water sufficient to cover them
1 tsp. of caraway seeds if desired

Preparation: The potatoes are cleaned in cold water and with a kitchen
knife, a small piece of peeling is cut off. Put on the fire with cold
water and caraway. When done, pour off the water, leave the dish
covered, shake it and set it aside to dry, and their jackets will burst.

Remarks: The potatoes must be kept constantly boiling.

No. 3—BAKED POTATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of potatoes

Preparation: The potatoes should be of even size. They are cleaned in
cold water, the point of each is cut off and they are baked in the
oven for 1 good hour. The oven must be very hot. Serve in their jackets.

No. 4—PEELED POTATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of raw potatoes
Water sufficient to cover them
1½ tbsps. of salt

Preparation: The potatoes are cleaned in cold water and peeled. The
very large ones are quartered, the medium-sized ones are cut into
halves and the small ones rounded, with the eyes well pierced out. Put
into clear water at once after peeling. Then put them over the fire
with cold water and salt, boil quickly, drain well and set them aside
to dry a little.

No. 5—SMALL POTATO BALLS.

To Be Served With Fish.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

5–6 lbs. of large potatoes
Water sufficient to cover them
1 tbsp. of salt

Preparation: The potatoes are cleaned in cold water, peeled, and with
a vegetable scoop cut out round balls. They are then put over the fire
in a kettle with water and salt and boiled until done which requires
about 15 to 20 minutes. Drain the water off at once and set aside to
dry.

Remarks: You may steam these potatoes, which requires ½ hour. They are
very nice when steamed.

No. 6—UTILIZING THE REMNANTS OF POTATO BALLS, MASHED POTATOES.

The remnants from potato balls
1½ tbsps. of salt
Water sufficient to cover them
2 tbsps. of butter

Preparation: The potato remnants are boiled until tender in salt
water, which is then drained off and the potatoes pressed through a
potato masher. The butter is added, the pot with these potatoes placed
into hot water and beaten until well mashed, seasoned with salt, then
served in a hot dish.

Remarks: The remnants may also be used for potato soup or dumplings.

The whites of 5 eggs, well-beaten, may be stirred into the above and
then baked in a buttered pan in the oven.

No. 7—PARSLEY POTATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

5–6 lbs. of large potatoes
1 tbsp. of salt
1 tbsp. of finely chopped parsley
2 tbsps. of fresh butter
Water sufficient to cover them

Preparation: The potatoes are peeled, scooped out and cooked as given
under No. 5. When they are done, stir in the butter mixed with parsley
and cover a few minutes.

No. 8—FRENCH FRIED POTATOES, POMME SOUFFLE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. of raw potatoes
1 tsp. fine salt
1½ lbs. clear lard

Preparation: The potatoes are peeled and cut into thin oblong or round
slices as thick as the back of a knife or cut out in small balls. The
lard is heated until it smokes, but must not boil.

The potatoes are dried with a clean cloth and fried to a golden yellow
color in the lard, then they are placed into a colander to drain,
sprinkled with salt, shaken a little and served very hot.

No. 9—POTATO CHIPS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The ingredients are the same as given under No. 8, French Fried
Potatoes.

Preparation: The potatoes are cleaned, peeled and sliced so thin that
you can see the knife through them. The lard is heated until it
smokes, a handful of potato slices at a time are dried and fried
golden yellow in the hot lard, then taken out with a skimmer and
placed on paper to drain. Salt and serve very hot. They must never be
covered, neither while cooking nor afterwards.

No. 10—STUFFED POTATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

12 large potatoes
1⁄10 lb. of butter
2 yolks of eggs
½ tbsp. of Parmesan cheese
¼ tsp. of grated onion
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
Some butter for frying
1 tsp. of finely chopped parsley

Preparation: The potatoes are washed well and cooked in their jackets,
removed from the fire when barely done, strained, peeled, then
carefully cut into halves and scooped out. The pieces which have been
removed, are pressed through a potato masher and mixed with butter,
Parmesan cheese, onion, parsley and yolk of egg. Season with salt and
pepper and put back into the scooped out potato halves, smooth off on
top, sprinkle with salt and fry in butter to a golden yellow color.

Remarks: They are very fine to serve with cold meats or to garnish hot
meat platters.

No. 11—POTATO CROQUETTES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of potatoes
⅛ lb. of butter
3 yolks of eggs
Salt to taste
⅛ lb. finely grated bread
Butter or lard for frying
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The potatoes are washed, cooked, peeled, grated and
pressed through a potato masher. The butter is creamed with the yolks
of eggs and grated potatoes stirred in and seasoned with salt and
pepper. Small croquettes are formed, rolled in bread crumbs and fried
in butter or lard to a nice color. Serve hot.

No. 12—POTATO BALLS, FRIED.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of potatoes
⅛ lb. of butter
4 yolks of eggs
1 tbsp. of Parmesan cheese
1 pinch of nutmeg
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
½ cup of flour
1 cup of roll crumbs
Lard for frying

Preparation: The potatoes are boiled, peeled, grated or mashed. Cream
the butter, stir in the yolks of eggs, Parmesan cheese, nutmeg, pepper
and salt, the mashed potatoes and flour. Balls, walnut size, are
formed from this mass, rolled in roll crumbs and fried in hot lard to
a nice golden yellow color. The lard should be deep enough for the
balls to float. Drain in a colander or on paper.

Remarks: These potato balls are nice to garnish meat platters.

No. 13—SOUR POTATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of potatoes
¼ lb. of butter or good drippings
1 tsp. of chopped onions
1 pt. good beef bouillon
1 pinch of pepper
2 tbsps. of vinegar or to taste
Salt to taste
3 tbsps. of flour

Preparation: The potatoes are cooked, peeled and sliced. While they
are boiling, the dressing is prepared. Brown the butter or lard with
the onions, stir in the flour, stew a little while, add the bouillon
and season to taste with vinegar, salt and pepper and cook a few
minutes. Put in the boiled sliced potatoes, cook a few minutes and
serve.

No. 14—CREAMED POTATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of potatoes
⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
¾ pt. of milk or ½ pt. of milk and ¼ pt. of sweet cream
1 pinch of pepper
Salt

Preparation: The potatoes are cooked in the jackets, then peeled and
sliced or cut into small dice. Or bake the potatoes in the oven, peel
them and cut into dice. Melt the butter, stir in the flour, cook 1
minute, add the milk and cream, cook a little while, season with salt
and pepper, put in the potatoes, cook and serve. The dressing must
neither be too thin nor too thick.

Remarks: Creamed potatoes are nice with soup meat, mutton chops or
fried sausage.

No. 15—BAKED POTATO PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. of potatoes
Fully ⅛ lb. of butter
4–6 eggs
½ tbsp. of Parmesan cheese
1 pinch salt
Pepper
½ cupful of flour
Butter for the mold

Preparation: The potatoes are boiled, peeled and mashed. The butter is
creamed with yolks of eggs, cheese, pepper and salt. Stir in the
mashed potatoes, the flour and lastly the beaten white of egg. Butter
the mold, put the mixture in and bake in medium hot oven for 45 minutes.

No. 16—STEAMED POTATO PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Preparation and ingredients are the same as given under No. 15. The
prepared mixture is put into a mold that has been buttered and
sprinkled with bread crumbs. Set in a steamer over a kettle of boiling
water and boil for 1 hour. Then turn it out on a platter and serve.

Remarks: Caper sauce is good with potato pudding.

No. 17—POTATO PANCAKES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of raw potatoes
3–4 eggs
1¼ cupfuls of flour
1 pinch of pepper
1 large sour apple, peeled and grated
½ tsp. of grated onion
Enough lard for baking
½ tbsp. of salt

Preparation: The raw potatoes are peeled, washed and put into cold
water. Take out of the water and grate quickly Drain off the water that
collects on the grated potatoes, mix them with the yolks of eggs,
flour, pepper, salt, apple, onion and lastly with the beaten whites of
eggs. Heat the lard and bake 3 to 4 thin pancakes in the pan at once.
They must be baked brown and crisp. The dish or plate on which they
are served, should not be covered.

Remarks: Apple sauce is good with them.

No. 18—BOUILLON POTATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of raw potatoes
1½ qts. of beef bouillon
1 medium-sized onion
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
1 piece of butter, half the size of an egg
3 tbsps. of finely chopped parsley

Preparation: The potatoes are peeled and cut into quarters or sixths,
according to their size, then partly boiled in water. Drain off the
water and pour on the boiling bouillon, season with salt, pepper and
onion, do not cover them and cook slowly until the bouillon has been
absorbed by the potatoes. Add the butter, cook a little longer, then
add the parsley.

Remarks: With new potatoes you need only 1 qt. of bouillon, because
they are not so mealy.

No. 19—SARDINE OR HERRING POTATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of boiled potatoes
Scant ½ lb. of sardines or 2 herrings

For the Gravy.

⅛ lb. of raw ham
⅛ lb. of butter
2 sliced onions
⅛ lb. of flour
¾ qt. of beef bouillon
1 pinch of pepper
Very little salt
1 tbsp. Parmesan cheese
¾ qt. of sweet cream or milk

Preparation: The boiled potatoes are peeled and sliced, sardines or
herring are soaked in water and cut in small pieces. The ham, which
may be remnants, is also cut and fried in ⅛ lb. of butter and the
sliced onion. The butter must not get brown; stir in the flour and
after cooking a little, add the bouillon and cream, season with salt
and pepper if necessary. Cook this dressing slowly for ½ hour, then
rub through a sieve. Fill a buttered baking dish or casserole with
layers of sliced potatoes and herring or sardines alternately, pour
the dressing over, strew with cheese and drip on a little butter, then
bake in oven 20 minutes, being careful that the dressing does not
boil, as that will make it thin. It is best to put the dish into
another dish with water before baking. Bake until a golden yellow.

Remarks: This may also be prepared without sardines or herring.

No. 20—POTATOES WITH CRACKERS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of raw potatoes
¼ lb. of salt crackers
1 qt. of sweet cream or milk
1 pinch of pepper
Salt
¼ lb. of butter

Preparation: The raw potatoes are peeled, sliced thin, and the
crackers rolled. Butter a baking dish or casserole, fill with layers
of potatoes and crackers alternately, with small pieces of butter,
salt and pepper between each, repeating until all has been used. Then
pour the cream or milk over, put a few pieces of butter on top and
bake 1½ hours.

Remarks: This dish is good with cold meats.

No. 21—FRIED RAW POTATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. raw potatoes
⅛ lb. of butter or good drippings
1 small, chopped onion
¼ pt. of water
Salt to taste

Preparation: The raw potatoes are peeled, sliced very thin and washed
well. Butter or drippings are put into a pan, add the sliced potatoes,
onion, salt and pepper. Cover and fry slowly, gradually adding the
water. In ½ hour the potatoes are done and of a golden yellow color.

No. 22—SWEET POTATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of sweet potatoes

Preparation: The potatoes are washed well and baked in their skins in
the oven for ¾ to 1 hour. Fresh butter is served with them.

No. 23—POTATO DUMPLINGS FROM BOILED POTATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of boiled potatoes
1½ cups of roll crumbs
½ roll cut into cubes
⅛ lb. of butter
3–4 eggs
½ tsp. of onion
1 pinch of pepper
1 heaping tbsp. of salt
½ cup of flour
Salt water

Preparation: The potatoes are boiled, peeled and grated when they are
cooled off or mashed while still hot. When cold, the mashed potatoes
are mixed well with roll crumbs, eggs, onion, pepper, salt, the ⅛ lb.
of melted butter and the flour. The roll cubes are fried in butter
crisp and yellow. These pieces are put in the middle of dumplings
formed of the mashed potatoes, rolled in flour and cooked in salt
water 15 to 20 minutes in an open kettle. The water must be boiling
when the dumplings are put in.

Remarks: Try a dumpling; if it does not hold together, add more flour.
The dumplings must be taken out of the water as soon as done. Serve hot.

No. 24—ANOTHER KIND OF POTATO DUMPLINGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3½ lbs. of boiled potatoes
1⁄12 lb. of butter
4–5 eggs
1 pinch of nutmeg
1 tbsp. of salt
2 cups of flour
1 roll cut into cubes
Salt water for cooking

Preparation: The potatoes are boiled, peeled and grated. When they are
cold, butter, eggs, nutmeg, salt and flour are stirred in. The roll
cubes are fried in butter until crisp, then medium-sized dumplings are
formed from this mixture with the roll cubes in the center. Dip your
hands into flour and make the dumplings round and firm, then roll them
in flour and boil them in an open kettle 15 or 20 minutes. The salt
water must boil briskly before the dumplings are put in.

Remarks: Try a dumpling first and if it does not hold together add
more flour. Sour roast goes nicely with potato dumplings.

No. 25—RAW POTATO DUMPLINGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

5 lbs. of large potatoes
1½ pts. of milk
⅛ lb. of fine farina
1 tbsp. of salt
1 roll cut into cubes
Salt water for cooking
3 eggs

Preparation: The raw potatoes are peeled, grated and pressed dry in a
cloth. Bring the milk to boil, pour in the farina slowly and boil it 3
to 4 minutes, stirring constantly. Mix the grated potato with the
boiling farina, yolks of eggs, salt and beaten whites of eggs. Fry the
roll cubes in butter very crisp. Rinse your hands in cold water, make
dumplings from the mixture with the roll cubes in the center. While
the dumplings are being made the salt water is brought to boil and the
dumplings are put in for 15 to 20 minutes. Do not cover the pot. The
raw potato dumplings must be prepared quickly or they will turn black.

Remarks: They may be served with any kind of meat.

No. 26—UTILIZING REMNANTS OF POTATO DUMPLINGS.

The dumplings left over are sliced and fried in butter to a golden
yellow color.

CHAPTER 12.

VEGETABLES.

The various preparations of vegetables.

Vegetables are known to be the best and most wholesome food.

Mushrooms, all kinds of cabbage, legumes are good for anemics. The
legumes and cabbages must be washed well and scalded.

The Preservation of Vegetables During the Winter.

Cauliflower is cut off above the roots, the outer leaves removed, a
string tied to the stem and hung up on the ceiling of the cellar.
White and red cabbage and savoy cabbage are preserved in the same
manner.

Kohlrabi, carrots, turnips, parsley roots, celery roots and shallots
are kept in dry sand over winter.

Fresh parsley is kept in glass jars by putting in alternate layers of
salt and parsley. Close the glass well each time after taking some
out. Rinse the parsley before using.

No. 1—ASPARAGUS WITH BROWN BUTTER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of asparagus
3 qts. of water
1½ tbsps. of salt
¼ lb. of fresh butter

Preparation: The asparagus stalks are washed and peeled thin at the
top and thicker toward the end. If the ends are woody cut them off.
Then tie the asparagus into small bundles and put them into salt water
to boil until tender, about ½ hour. Place them on a platter with the
heads all lying one way, lightly brown the butter and pour it over.
Serve hot.

No. 2—ASPARAGUS WITH CREAMED BUTTER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of asparagus
3 qts. of water
1½ tbsps. of salt
½ lb. fresh butter

Preparation: Preparation and cooking of this asparagus are the same as
given under No. 1. Serve the asparagus on a platter covered with a
napkin, then cream the butter and serve in a separate dish.

No. 3—ASPARAGUS WITH CREAM DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of asparagus
1½ tbsps. of salt
3 qts. of water

For the Dressing.

⅛ lb. of butter
1 even tbsp. of flour
4 tbsps. of sweet cream
½ pt. asparagus liquor
4 yolks of eggs

Preparation: The asparagus are prepared and cooked as given under No.
1. When they are tender pile them on a platter keeping the heads all
one way and prepare the dressing.

Melt the butter, stir in the flour, the yolks of eggs and the cream
and gradually pour in the boiling asparagus liquor. Let it come to a
boil, stirring constantly, pour over the asparagus and serve hot.

No. 4—CANNED ASPARAGUS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

This asparagus is carefully heated and served with any kind of
dressing prepared for it as given either under No. 1, No. 2 or No. 3.

No. 5—FRENCH ASPARAGUS WITH CREAM DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of fresh or 2 lb. can of asparagus
2 qts. of water
1 tbsp. of salt

For the Dressing.

⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
½ cup of sweet or sour cream
¾ pt. of asparagus liquor
2 yolks of eggs
3 tbsps. of lemon juice

Preparation: Thin stalks of asparagus may be used for this; they are
peeled and cut into 2 inch lengths, then cooked in boiling salt water
for 20 minutes. The water is poured off, the asparagus put into a dish
and the gravy or dressing poured over. For the dressing melt the
butter, stir in the flour and pour in gradually the boiling asparagus
liquor, add sour or sweet cream, 3 teaspoonfuls of lemon juice,
stirring constantly, boil 1 minute, then add the 2 yolks of eggs, but
do not boil any more.

No. 6—PRESERVED ASPARAGUS WITH CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Preparation and ingredients are the same as given under No. 5, French
Asparagus with Cream Dressing.

No. 7—GREEN ASPARAGUS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of asparagus
3½ qts. of water
¼ lb. of butter
3 slices of toasted wheat bread
2 tbsps. of salt

Preparation: The green asparagus is washed, but not peeled, and cooked
20 minutes in boiling salt water. The slices of toast are placed on a
platter and the asparagus, from which the water is drained in a
colander, put on each slice of toast, heads all one way. The butter
which has been heated to a golden color is poured on. Serve very hot.

No. 8—ASPARAGUS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of fresh or 2 lbs. of canned asparagus
½ pt. asparagus liquor
2 qts. of water
1 tbsp. of salt
⅛ lb. of butter
½ pt. sweet or sour cream
½ tbsp. of Parmesan cheese
2 tbsps. of grated rolls
1 tbsp. of butter
3 scant tbsps. of flour

Preparation: The fresh asparagus is peeled and cooked as given under
No. 5.

For the dressing melt the butter, stir in the flour, add the cheese,
the sweet or sour cream, and cook, stirring constantly. The dressing
must be thick.

Drain the water off the asparagus, butter a baking dish, put in the
asparagus and dressing, strew the roll crumbs over and drip the
tablespoonful of butter on. Bake this by setting the baking dish in a
dish with hot water in the oven about 10 to 15 minutes.

Boiled ham or tongue is nice with this dish.

Remarks: It makes a fine side dish.

No. 9—CAULIFLOWER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 head of cauliflower, 2 lbs.
2 tbsps. of salt
4 qts. of water

For the Dressing.

⅛ lb. of fresh butter
2 tbsps. of flour
¾ pt. of cauliflower liquor
¼ pt. of sweet cream
2–3 yolks of eggs
A little nutmeg

Preparation: Pick off the outer leaves and put the head of
cauliflower, the top downward, in cold water for 15 minutes to remove
the insects that might be on it. The salt water is brought to boil and
the cauliflower boiled in it a half hour.

For the dressing stew the butter and flour, add the cauliflower liquor
and cream, and boil, stirring constantly. Add the yolks of eggs and do
not boil any more.

The cauliflower is carefully placed on a platter or into a vegetable
dish so it does not fall apart and the dressing is poured over, then
the nutmeg is strewn over it.

No. 10—CAULIFLOWER WITH BUTTER SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 head of cauliflower, 2 lbs.
4 qts. of water
2 tbsps. of salt
¼ lb. of butter

Preparation: The cauliflower is prepared and cooked the same as given
under No. 9. It is carefully placed in a dish, and the hot browned
butter poured over.

No. 11—CAULIFLOWER WITH CRAB OR LOBSTER DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 head of cauliflower, 2 lbs.
4 qts. of water
2 tbsps. of salt
Crab dressing

Preparation: The preparation of cauliflower is the same as given under
No. 9. Make a dressing as described under No. 19, in Gravies or
Dressings and pour it over the head of cauliflower.

No. 12—SCALLOPED CAULIFLOWER AU GRATIN.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 head of cauliflower, 2 lbs.
2 tbsps. of salt
4 qts. of water

For the Dressing.

⅛ lb. of butter
2½ tbsps. of flour
1 pt. sweet or sour cream
1 pinch of salt
1 tbsp. of Parmesan cheese
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
2 tbsps. of fine roll crumbs
1 tbsp. of butter

Preparation: The cauliflower is cleaned and put in water ¼ hour, then
boiled in salt water ½ hour until almost tender, placed into a
buttered dish until the dressing is made.

The butter is melted, flour stirred in, and cooled 1 minute. Add the
sweet cream, boil, season with cheese, lemon juice and salt to taste.
This dressing is poured over the cauliflower, roll crumbs strewn on
and a little butter dripped over it; then baked in oven 20 to 30
minutes until it is a nice yellow color.

No. 13—ARTICHOKES WITH BUTTER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 large or 6 small artichokes
4 qts. of water
1 tbsp. of vinegar
¼ lb. of fresh butter
3 tbsps. of salt

Preparation: With a sharp knife cut off the points of the artichokes
about 1½ inches, then boil them tender in salt water and vinegar.
Serve them on a dish, cream the butter and serve with the artichokes
or brown it and pour it over.

No. 14—STEWED ARTICHOKES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 large artichokes or 6 small ones
4 qts. of water
3 tbsps. of salt
2 tbsps. of vinegar
¼ lb. of butter
2½ tbsps. of flour
¾ pt. strong bouillon
1 tsp. of meat extract
½ wineglass Madeira or red wine
2 tbsps. of grated Parmesan cheese
4 tbsps. of champignons
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The artichokes are cleaned and prepared given under No.
13 and cooked partly done in salt water and vinegar. Then each one is
cut into half and the inside white fibers removed carefully. These
pieces are put into a pot, 3 tablespoonfuls of butter, chopped
champignons, cheese and ½ pt. of bouillon added, the pot covered and
the artichokes stewed 2 hours, turning them over several times. The
stewed artichokes are put into a vegetable dish and the dressing
prepared. Heat the rest of the butter with the flour, add the
artichoke liquor, the rest of the bouillon, Madeira or red wine and
the meat extract. Cook this well and season with pepper and salt, then
pour over the artichokes.

No. 15—CANNED ARTICHOKES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lb. can artichokes
⅛ lb. butter
2½ tbsps. of flour
¼ pt. of bouillon
¼ pt. sweet cream
Juice of ½ lemon
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste

Preparation: The canned artichokes are heated and the dressing is
prepared. The butter is heated, the flour stirred in, cooked 2
minutes, the bouillon and cream added and cooked well. Season the
dressing with salt, pepper and lemon juice. Take the artichokes out of
the liquor and put them into this dressing to simmer 10 minutes. If
you like add 3 tablespoonfuls of white wine and chopped champignons or
truffles.

No. 16—SCALLOPED ARTICHOKES WITH CHEESE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 large or 6 small artichokes
4 qts. of water
3 tbsps. of salt.
2 tbsps. of vinegar

For the Dish.

¼ lb. of butter, good measure
¼ lb. of grated Parmesan cheese
¼ pt. of rich bouillon
1 pinch of pepper and salt

Preparation: The artichokes are prepared as given under No. 13. Cooked
partly done with vinegar in the boiling salt water. From the pieces of
cooked artichokes remove the white fibers. Place them into a buttered
baking dish or casserole, strewn with cheese and put on the ¼ lb. of
butter in small pieces, season with pepper and salt, add the bouillon,
cover the dish and bake them slowly in the oven 2 to 3 hours.

No. 17—OYSTER PLANTS, SALISFY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of oyster plants
2 qts. of water
1½ tbsps. of salt
2 tbsps. of vinegar

For the Dressing.

⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
½ pt. of bouillon, or ¼ pt. of bouillon and 1 pt. sweet cream
¼ tsp. meat extract
1 pinch of pepper and salt to taste

Preparation: The oyster plants are scraped and at once placed into
water mixed with flour or milk so that they keep their white color,
then cut into 2 inch lengths and cooked until tender in boiling salt
water with vinegar. While they are cooking, prepare the dressing. Melt
the butter, stir in the flour, cook and add bouillon or half bouillon
and half cream, add meat extract, cook and season with pepper and
salt. Then drain the water from the oyster plants, put them into the
dressing and set aside to simmer gently for 10 minutes.

No. 18—SCORZONERA.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of scorzonera
2 qts. of water
1 tbsp. of salt
2 tbsps. of vinegar

For the Dressing.

⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
¼ pt. of bouillon
¼ pt. sweet cream or milk
Juice of ½ lemon
2 yolks of eggs, if desired

Preparation: The vegetable is scraped, cut into 2 inch lengths and
immediately put into water, mixed with flour or milk, then cooked
until tender in salt water and vinegar. This will require ½ hour,
during which time you prepare the dressing.

Melt the butter, stir in the flour, stew a few minutes, add the
bouillon and cream or milk, boil again and season with lemon juice,
pepper and salt. Drain the water from the vegetables, put them into
the dressing and cook 10 minutes or set aside to simmer gently. When
serving stir in the yolks of eggs.

Remarks: For scorzonera salad make a dressing of oil and vinegar mixed
with mayonnaise.

No. 19—FRESH GREEN PEAS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. of fresh green peas
2 qts. of water
1 tbsp. of salt
⅛ lb. of fresh butter
½ tbsp. of flour
½ tsp. of meat extract
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
½ tbsp. of chopped parsley
½ tsp. of sugar
¼ pt. of sweet cream

Preparation: The fresh, green peas are taken out of the pods and
boiled until tender in boiling salt water. This will require ½ hour;
then drain the water off, add butter and flour, shake the pan, but do
not stir it; add cream, meat extract, 1 pinch of pepper, sugar and
salt to taste. Let it cook slowly and when you serve it put in the
chopped parsley.

No. 20—ANOTHER WAY OF PREPARING PEAS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. of fresh, green peas, or 2 lb. can
2 qts. of water
1 tbsp. of salt
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
½ tsp. of sugar
1 tbsp. minced parsley
⅛ lb. fresh butter

Preparation: The fresh green peas are prepared and cooked as directed
under No. 19. When they are done drain them, put the drawn butter on,
season with pepper, salt, sugar, shaking the pan, and sprinkle with
minced parsley before serving. Canned peas are prepared the same way,
but not cooked in salt water.

No. 21—FRESH GREEN PEAS WITH CRAB MEAT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. fresh green peas
25 crabs or crawfish

Preparation: The preparation and ingredients are the same as given
under No. 20. When they are done shake them with the hot butter, add
the crab meat, mix, drip the crab butter on.

Remarks: This is a very fine dish.

No. 22—PEA OMELET.

Look for the preparation in chapter 15, Omelets.

No. 23—ASPARAGUS AND CAULIFLOWER OMELET.

Look for the preparation in chapter 15, Omelets.

No. 24—MARROW PEAS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of marrow peas
1½ pts. of bouillon
1⁄10 lb. of butter
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
½ tsp. of sugar
½ tbsp. of flour
1 tbsp. of chopped parsley

Preparation: The marrow peas are strung like beans, washed and cooked
until tender in bouillon and butter, then add the flour, stir and
season with salt, pepper and sugar. Lastly add the parsley.

No. 25—YOUNG CARROTS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of carrots
1 pt. bouillon
1⁄10 lb. of butter
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
1 tsp. of sugar
1 tbsp. of flour
1 tbsp. of finely chopped parsley

Preparation: The carrots are scraped, cut into small pieces or sliced,
then washed and cooked until tender in bouillon and butter. This will
require from ½ to 1 hour. Season them with salt, pepper, sugar to
taste, stir in the flour and let them cook a little while longer,
lastly add the parsley. The carrots may be scooped out and the
openings filled with boiled green peas, then stewed until soft.

No. 26—FRESH GREEN PEAS AND CARROTS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The peas are prepared as directed under No. 19, but take only 1 lb. of
peas and ½ of all other ingredients. Take ½ of the quantity of carrots
also, and prepare according to directions in No. 25. When serving,
place the carrots in the center of the dish and the peas around them.

No. 27—SPINAGE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 peck of spinage
5 qts. of water
3 tbsps. of salt
⅛ lb. of butter
¼ pt. sweet cream
¼ pt. bouillon
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
2 tbsps. of flour

Preparation: The spinage is picked over, the stems cut off and washed
well. Cook it in boiling salt water for 15 minutes, drain the water
off and chop the spinage or rub it through a colander.

Melt the butter, stir in the flour, cook and stir in the spinage, add
sweet cream and bouillon, season with salt and pepper and cook a
little longer, stirring constantly.

Remarks: The dish may be garnished with hard-boiled eggs.

No. 28—SORREL.

Sorrel is prepared just like spinage, see No. 27, Spinage.

No. 29—LETTUCE.

Lettuce as a vegetable dish is prepared like spinage. See No. 27,
Spinage.

No. 30—SPINAGE IN INDIVIDUAL MOLDS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 peck of spinage
5 qts. of water
3 tbsps. salt
⅛ lb. of butter
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
3 yolks of eggs
¼ pt. sweet cream
2 tbsps. of flour

Preparation: The spinage is picked over, the stems cut off, washed
well, cooked in boiling salt water for 15 minutes, the water then
drained off and the spinage rubbed through a sieve.

Melt the butter, stir in the flour, cook, add the spinage, season with
salt, pepper, stir in the cream and yolks of eggs. Put in small
buttered molds and set in a steamer over a kettle of boiling water and
boil until the mixture stiffens, then turn them out on a platter and
serve.

No. 31—SAVOY CABBAGE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 heads of Savoy cabbage, 4–5 lbs.
6 qts. of water
4 tbsps. of salt
⅛ lb. of butter or half butter and half lard
½ tbsp. of flour
½ tbsp. finely chopped onion
¾ pt. bouillon
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste

Preparation: The head of cabbage is cut into half, remove the outer
leaves and cut out the heart or core, then cut up the rest into
several pieces, wash it and cook it 20 minutes in boiling salt water.

Butter and onions are stewed a little while, add the flour and stew a
few minutes. Drain the water from the cabbage, chop it or rub it
through a colander, then add it to the butter, onion and flour; add
the bouillon, season with salt and pepper and cook slowly for 15
minutes.

No. 32—BRUSSELS SPROUTS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of Brussels sprouts
4 qts. of water
2 tbsps. of salt
⅛ lb. of butter
½ pt. of bouillon
¼ tsp. of meat extract to taste
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
½ tbsp. of flour

Preparation: The sprouts are cleaned, the yellow leaves removed, then
slowly boiled in salt water. Drain off the water. Melt the butter,
stir in the flour, cook a little while, add the bouillon and meat
extract and put in the Brussels sprouts. Season with salt and pepper
and cook 20 minutes longer. The little sprouts must not fall apart.

Remarks: When served it may be garnished with a wreath of fried
chestnuts.

No. 33—ANOTHER WAY OF PREPARING BRUSSELS SPROUTS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of Brussels sprouts
4 qts. of water
2 tbsps. of salt
½ cup of fine roll crumbs
¼ cup of strong bouillon
1 pinch of pepper
¼ lb. of butter

Preparation: The sprouts are prepared as before, (See No. 32.) After
the water has been drained off, melt ⅛ lb. of butter, add the sprouts,
pour in some bouillon, season with salt and pepper and serve. Fry the
roll crumbs in the other ⅛ lb. of butter and put over the sprouts
before serving.

No. 34—KALE OR BORECOLE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3–3½ lbs. of kale
6 qts. of water
3 tbsps. of salt
¼ lb. of butter or good drippings
1 tbsp. of flour
½ to 1 pt. strong bouillon
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste

Preparation: The ribs of the leaves are cut out, then the kale is
washed carefully 4 to 5 times, to remove all sand. Cook in boiling
salt water for ½ hour or until tender, then pour it into a colander to
drain. Now chop it fine or rub it through the colander.

The butter or drippings are melted, the flour stirred in, stewed, the
prepared kale added, and then the bouillon. Season with salt and
pepper. Cook slowly 1 to 1½ hours and add ½ cup of sweet cream if you
like.

No. 35—STEWED RED CABBAGE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 head of red cabbage, 4 lbs.
⅛ lb. of butter or good drippings
½ glass red wine to taste
2 tbsps. of vinegar
1 tbsp. of sugar
2 peeled and sliced apples
2 cloves
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
1 pt. water

Preparation: The bad leaves are cut off, the cabbage cut into half,
the heart cut out and the cabbage sliced. Pour a pint of boiling water
on, add butter or drippings, cook one hour, add all the other
ingredients. Cook 1 to 2 hours longer, stirring occasionally. Ten
minutes before serving it, add 1 tablespoonful flour and stew 10
minutes longer.

Remarks: Taste the cabbage so that it is neither too sweet nor too
sour. You may use vinegar instead of wine.

No. 36—WHITE CABBAGE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

White cabbage, 4 lbs.
5 qts. of water
⅛ lb. of good drippings
1 pt. bouillon
1 tbsp. of flour
¼ tbsp. caraway seeds
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste

Preparation: The bad leaves are removed, the head of cabbage cut in
half, the heart cut out and the cabbage cut into 16 parts. It is
cooked in boiling salt water for 15 minutes, drained, drippings and
bouillon added and stewed for 1 hour. Add caraway seeds, flour, salt
and pepper and stew a while longer.

No. 37—STEWED WHITE CABBAGE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of white cabbage
5 qts. of water
⅛ lb. of drippings
1 tbsp. of sugar
1 tbsp. of flour
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
1 pt. of bouillon or water
3–5 tbsp. of vinegar

Preparation: The cabbage is prepared as directed under No. 36. The
sliced cabbage is stewed for 15 minutes, the water drained off,
bouillon or water and drippings added and stewed for one hour. Sugar,
vinegar, flour, pepper, salt are added and the cabbage stewed another
hour, stirring frequently.

No. 38—WHITE CABBAGE PREPARED LIKE CAULIFLOWER.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of white cabbage
4 tbsp. of salt
6 qts. of water

For the Dressing.

⅛ lb of butter
2½ tbsps. of flour
1 pt. of milk
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
2 yolks of eggs

Preparation: The outer leaves are removed and the head of cabbage
cooked until tender in 6 qts. of boiling salt water. The butter is
melted, flour stirred in, milk added, cooked and seasoned with salt,
pepper and if you like, stir in the yolks of eggs. Put the head of
cabbage on a platter and pour the thick dressing over it, then serve
at once.

No. 39—WHITE CABBAGE SAUSAGES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 head of cabbage, 4 lbs.
5 qts. of water
3 tbsps. of salt
¼ lb. chopped pork
½ lb. of chopped beef
1 tbsp. of butter
Salt to taste
¼ lb. of bacon, cut fine
1 onion, cut fine
½ pt. gravy
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The bad leaves are removed and after cleaning the cabbage
well, it is cooked partly done in boiling salt water. The outer leaves
are then carefully cut off. The leavings of the cabbage are chopped
fine, also the pork and beef and all this is mixed well, seasoned with
butter, salt and pepper. Some of this mixture is put on each cabbage
leaf and the leaf is rolled round it and tied with a clean string. The
bacon is put into a pan and the cabbage sausages fried brown in it.
The gravy is poured in and all is cooked a few minutes, then served on
a platter.

No. 40—WHITE CABBAGE WITH LAMB.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 head of white cabbage, 5 lbs.
5 qts. water
2–3 lbs. of lamb
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
1 qt. of water

Preparation: The bad leaves are trimmed off, the heart cut out, the
cabbage cut up into 8 parts and cooked 15 minutes in boiling water,
then the water is drained off. 1 to 2 qts. of water are poured on the
cabbage, the meat is put in, season with salt and pepper and boil
until tender. By the time the meat is done, the water ought to be
boiled down so the vegetables are not too juicy.

No. 41—KOHLRABI.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6–8 medium-sized kohlrabis
3 qts. of water
1 tbsp. of salt
1⁄10 lb. of butter
1½ tbsps. of flour
½ pt. of bouillon
½ tsp. of meat extract
½ cup of sweet cream
1 pinch of salt
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The kohlrabis are peeled, sliced and cooked until tender
in boiling salt water. Drain off the water. Melt the butter, add the
flour and bouillon and cook. Put in the kohlrabis, season with salt
and pepper, add the cream and stew slowly for 15 minutes.

No. 42—TURNIPS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6–8 medium-sized turnips
4 qts. of water
2 tbsps. of salt
1⁄10 lb. of butter
½ tbsp. of flour
¼ pt. of bouillon
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste

Preparation: The turnips are peeled, sliced, cooked until tender in
boiling salt water, which is drained off when done. Put the butter on
the turnips, add the flour and bouillon, season with salt and pepper
and stew 15 minutes more.

No. 43—TELTOW TURNIPS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of Teltow turnips
3 qts. of water
2 tbsps. of salt
⅛ lb. of butter
1 tbsp. of flour
1 pt. of bouillon
½ tsp. of meat extract
1½ tsps. of sugar
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste

Preparation: The vegetable is scraped, washed well in warm water, put
into boiling salt water and boiled partly done, then drained. The
turnips are stewed in butter to which the flour, sugar and bouillon
are added, then the dish is covered and left to stew until tender.
Season with salt and pepper. The vegetable must not be too juicy.

No. 44—STEWED GREEN STRING BEANS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. fresh, green beans
⅛ lb. of butter or good drippings
1½ pt. of bouillon
1 tbsp. of flour
1 tsp. of sugar
1 small piece of summer savory
1 tbsp. of chopped parsley
Salt and pepper
1–2 tbsps. of vinegar

Preparation: String the beans, slice them or break into 4 parts each,
wash them, put over the fire with the butter or drippings, some
bouillon and cook until tender, gradually adding more bouillon. ½ hour
before well done, flour, vinegar, sugar are added, also salt and
pepper. When they are cooked, add the parsley. If you like, you can
put in a little summer savory.

No. 45—GREEN STRING BEANS, PREPARED ANOTHER WAY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of fresh, green beans
3 qts. of water
⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of salt
2 tbsps. of flour
1 pt. of milk
¼ pt. sweet cream
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
1 tbsp. of minced parsley

Preparation: The beans are prepared as given under No. 44, and boiled
until tender in salt water, which is then drained off. The butter is
melted, flour stirred in and the milk added. This dressing is cooked a
few minutes, stirring constantly, and the beans put into it. Season
with salt and pepper, stew 5 minutes and add the minced parsley.

Remarks: The dressing for the beans must not be too thick.

No. 46—SALTED GREEN BEANS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of salted beans
3 qts. of water
⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
1 pt. of milk
¼ pt. of cream
1 pinch of pepper
1 tbsp. of parsley

Preparation: Soak the beans in water for a few hours, drain and put
over the fire in boiling water. Then boil until tender, drain and
prepare the beans as given under No. 44 or No. 45.

Remarks: The salted beans need more time to cook than fresh beans and
when seasoning, be careful not to add too much salt.

No. 47—CANNED GREEN BEANS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. can of green beans
1⁄10 lb. of butter
1½ tbsps. of flour
½ pt. of bouillon
1 pinch of pepper and one of salt
1 tsp. of finely chopped parsley

Preparation: The water is poured off the beans, butter is melted and
the beans put into it and cooked slowly for 15 minutes. Flour is
lightly stirred in, the bouillon poured in and the beans stewed in it
a little while, then seasoned with salt, pepper and the parsley.

No. 48—CANNED WAX BEANS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. can of beans
1⁄10 lb. of butter
1½ tbsps. of flour
½ pt. of bouillon
½ tbsp. of sugar
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
1 tsp. of chopped parsley
1 tbsp. of vinegar

Preparation: Pour off the water, melt the butter and put the beans in
to steep a little while. Then stir in the flour, add the bouillon,
season with vinegar, sugar, salt and pepper and stew 15 minutes, then
add the parsley.

No. 49—FRESH WAX BEANS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 qts. of fresh beans
3 qts. of water
2 tbsps. of salt
⅛ lb. of butter
2½ tbsps. of flour
¾ pt. of water
3 tbsps. of vinegar
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
2 yolks of eggs

Preparation: The beans are strung and broken into 2 to 3 pieces,
washed and cooked until tender in boiling salt water. The butter is
melted, the flour and water added. Boil a few minutes, stirring
constantly, and season with salt, pepper and vinegar. Put the beans
into this gravy, stew them a little, then stir in the yolks of eggs,
but do not boil any more.

No. 50—CANNED SWEET-SOUR BEANS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 qts. fresh, yellow beans
3 qts. of water
2 tbsps. of salt
1 cup of water
½ cup of vinegar
½ cup of sugar
2 cloves
1 stick of cinnamon

Preparation: The beans are strung, broken into pieces and cooked until
tender in boiling salt water. One cup of water mixed with vinegar,
sugar, cloves, cinnamon, boiled and poured over the beans, from which
the salt water has been well drained. Serve cold.

No. 51—BEETS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of beets
4 qts. of water
1⁄10 lb. of butter
1 pt. of milk
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
2 tbsps. of flour

Preparation: The beets are put over the fire in cold water and cooked
until tender, then the water is drained off and the beets peeled and
sliced. The butter is heated, the flour and the milk stirred in, then
boiled, seasoned with salt and pepper, the beets put in and cooked a
little while longer.

No. 52—YOUNG ONIONS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of onions
3 qts. of water
2 tbsps. of salt
⅛ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
1 pt. of milk
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The onions are peeled and cooked until tender in boiling
salt water, which is drained off when done. The butter is heated, the
flour stirred in, stewed a little, milk added and cooked, stirring
constantly. Lastly add the onions, season with salt and pepper, and
simmer a few minutes.

No. 53—STUFFED ONIONS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 large onions
2 qts. of water
2 tbsps. of salt
½ lb. of fine meat filling
2 tbsps. of chopped champignons
1 tsp. of chopped truffles
1 tbsp. of flour
¾ pt. bouillon
½ tsp. of meat extract
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
4 tbsps. of red wine
2 tbsps. of butter

Preparation: The onions are peeled, scooped out, put into boiling salt
water for a few minutes and then taken out and dried. The meat
stuffing is mixed well with champignons and truffles, then carefully
put into the onions. The inside of the onions is stewed in butter, the
flour stirred in and then the bouillon. Season with wine and meat
extract and stew the stuffed onions in this gravy for 1 hour until
they are brown.

Strain the gravy and add salt and pepper.

No. 54—TOMATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt, of fresh or canned tomatoes
2 cups of fine rolled crackers
1⁄10 lb. of butter
1 pinch of salt and one of pepper

Preparation: The tomatoes are sliced and put into a buttered
baking dish in layers alternating with crackers, seasoned with butter,
salt and pepper and baked in the oven ½ hour, then served in the dish.

No. 55—STUFFED TOMATOES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 nice, red tomatoes
1 cup of grated rye bread
1⁄10 lb. of butter
1 tbsp. of chopped parsley
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste
¼ tsp. of grated onion
2 yolks of eggs

Preparation: The tomatoes are wiped clean, a slice is cut off at the
top, the pulp carefully taken out with a small spoon and rubbed
through a fine sieve. Put the butter, grated bread and onions in a pan
to cook, then add the tomato pulp, salt, pepper and parsley, stew it a
little while, stir in the yolks of eggs and fill the tomatoes with
this mass. Sprinkle with roll crumbs and butter, place these stuffed
tomatoes in a buttered baking pan and bake them in the oven ½ hour.

No. 56—TOMATOES FILLED WITH MEAT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 nice, red tomatoes
½ lb. fine chopped veal or sweetbreads
1 yolk of egg
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
3 tbsps. of minced champignons
3 tbsps. of butter
3 tbsps. of cream

Preparation: Prepare the tomatoes as given under No. 55. The butter is
melted, the veal stewed in it, yolks of eggs, cream, champignons
stirred in and seasoned with salt and pepper, 2 tablespoonfuls of
tomato pulp added and the whole mixture cooked a few minutes. Now fill
the tomatoes with this, sprinkle with roll crumbs and butter, then
place in a buttered baking pan and bake in the oven ½ hour.

Remarks: You may omit the champignons. tomatoes look very nice on the
table and are served at parties.

No. 57—STUFFED CUCUMBERS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 medium-sized cucumbers
1 lb. finely chopped veal
½ roll
Salt to taste
1 pinch of nutmeg
1½ tsps. finely chopped parsley
1⁄10 lb. of butter
2 eggs
1 pinch pepper

For Stewing.

⅛ lb. of butter
1 pt. bouillon or gravy

Preparation: The cucumbers are peeled and carefully scooped out. Mix
the chopped veal with the soaked roll, stew it in the butter, add
salt, pepper, nutmeg, eggs and parsley, cook 2 minutes and fill the
cucumbers with this mixture. Melt the ⅛ lb. butter in a shallow pan,
place the cucumbers in and gradually add the bouillon, and stew ½
hour. Place the cucumbers carefully on a platter and serve very hot.

No. 58—STEWED CUCUMBERS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 large cucumbers
1 tbsp. of salt
6 tbsps. of sugar
4 tbsps. of wine vinegar
1 pinch of pepper
1 qt. of bouillon
Salt to taste
4 tbsps. of vinegar
¼ cup of sugar
⅛ lb. of butter
1 small onion
2 tbsps. of flour
1 tsp. of meat extract

Preparation: The cucumbers are peeled and cut in halves. The seeds are
taken out and the cucumbers cut into equal parts, which are marinated
for 1½ hours in 4 tablespoonfuls of vinegar, 1 tablespoonful of salt,
6 tablespoonfuls of sugar and a pinch of pepper.

The bouillon is cooked with meat extract, vinegar, sugar, salt and
pepper and the cucumbers put in to cook until tender. Then the butter
is melted, the sliced onion and flour browned in it, and the cucumber
liquor added. The cucumbers are put in and slowly stewed ¼ hour until
they are a shining brown color. Season the gravy to taste.

Remarks: Preserved cucumbers are at once placed in the gravy and
stewed ¼ hour.

No. 59—STUFFED ROOT CELERY OR CELERIAC AU JUS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 medium-sized roots of celery
4 qts. of water
3 tbsps. of salt
1 pt. of gravy
½ pt. of Madeira of red wine
1 yolk of egg
½ lb. of savory veal stuffing

Preparation: The celery is cleaned well and peeled, then carefully
scooped out and cooked in salt water for 20 minutes. Line with yolk of
egg and stuff with meat stuffing. See preparation of Stuffed Veal,
Chapter 3. The slice which had been cut from the top of the celery
before this was scooped out, is tied on to the stuffed celery and this
is put into a pot with the gravy, mixed with Madeira or red wine and
stewed slowly 1½ hours until tender, turning several times. Cut each
celery in half, pour dressing over and serve.

No. 60—“GARDI AND FINOCCI” AS VEGETABLES.

This is a southern species of thistle and is prepared like Stuffed
Root Celery, No. 59. You can prepare this vegetable without stuffing,
by cooking it tender in salt water, and stewing a few minutes in a
savory wine dressing.

No. 61—MIXED OR LEIPZIG VEGETABLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of asparagus
1 small head of cauliflower
30 small, young carrots
½ lb. of morels or fresh champignons
12 crabs
4 qts. of water
3 tbsps. of salt
¼ lb. of butter
2 tbsps. of flour
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste

Preparation: The asparagus is peeled and cut into 1½ inch pieces,
cauliflower is cleaned and broken into small roses, morels or fresh
champignons brushed well. If you use morels, put them over the fire in
lukewarm water and let them get hot, stirring gently, then strain.
Repeat this process until all sand is removed. Asparagus and
cauliflower are cooked until tender in salt water. The carrots are
scraped and stewed until tender in butter and ¼ pt. of bouillon. The
crabs are washed, brushed and cooked in boiling salt water, then the
meat is picked out, the coral broken fine and stewed in 2
tablespoonfuls of butter and 1 pt. of vegetable liquor from
cauliflower and asparagus. The flour is mixed with a little water and
stirred in and all this is cooked ½ hour, then seasoned with salt and
pepper and strained. The crab sauce is added to the carrots, the
asparagus, cauliflower, morels and crab meat added, heat it over the
fire, put into a dish with a little butter over top and serve very hot.

Remarks: This is a very fine dish and it may be prepared from canned
vegetables.

No. 62—CHAMPIGNONS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of fresh champignons
⅛ lb. of good butter
Salt to taste
1 tbsp. flour
½ pt. of cream
¼ pt. champignon liquor
2 tbsps. lemon juice
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The fresh champignons must be hard and white. Remove the
brown skin, trim off the roots and wash them. The butter is heated and
the champignons put in, season with salt and pepper and gradually pour
on ¼ cup of water, stew until tender. Stir the flour with the cream,
add to the mushrooms and stew a few minutes.

Remarks: If you take canned champignons, take ¼ pt. of cream and ¼ pt.
of champignon liquor.

No. 63—CHAMPIGNON PUREE.

The preparation is the same as given under No. 62. The champignons are
chopped fine and while preparing them, add ½ teaspoonful of meat
extract.

Remarks: May be served on toasted bread.

No. 64—TRUFFLES IN BROWN DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of fresh truffles
⅛ lb. of butter
1½ tbsps. of flour
1 pt. of strong bouillon
1 tsp. of meat extract
1 wineglassful of Madeira or red wine
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
½ tsp. lemon juice

Preparation: The truffles are put into cold water so the dirt will
dissolve, then brushed in lukewarm water. Put them on the fire with
butter, gradually add the bouillon, cover the pot and cook slowly
until tender. When done, take them out, peel them carefully and cut
them up into 6 to 8 parts. The rest of the butter is browned, flour
and the truffle peelings added, and the bouillon in which the truffles
were boiled. Season with meat extract, Madeira, salt, pepper, sugar
and lemon juice. Cook a nice, brown dressing of this, strain, put the
truffles in and stew a few minutes. Serve on toast.

Remarks: This may be used for stuffing.

No. 65—TRUFFLE PUREE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

⅓ lb. of truffles
½ pt. of good bouillon
⅛ lb. of butter
1½ tbsps. of flour
5 tbsps. of Madeira or red wine
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
¼ tsp. of sugar
¼ tsp. of lemon juice
½ tsp. of meat extract

Preparation: The truffles are cleaned and the dressing is prepared
from the peelings of the truffles, according to No. 64. The truffles
are chopped very fine, put into the strained dressing and seasoned.
Then put into shells or small porcelain dishes or serve on cutlets or
scrambled eggs.

No. 66—MORELS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of morels
1 piece of butter as large as an egg
½ tbsp. flour
½ tsp. of meat extract
½ pt. morel liquor
½ cup of cream
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
1 tsp. of finely chopped parsley

Preparation: The morels are cleaned well and put on the fire with
lukewarm water and let them get hot, stirring gently, then strain.
Repeat this until all sand is removed. The last water is boiled down
to ½ pt. The butter is browned with the flour, the morel liquor is
added and the meat extract, and then cooked slowly for 15 minutes. Put
in the cream and season with salt and pepper. Now put the morels into
the dressing, cook, put in a piece of butter and the parsley.

This dish is fine with smoked salmon or scrambled eggs.

Remarks: Canned or dried morels are prepared the same way. If you use
canned morels, then utilize the liquor in the can. Dried morels are
soaked in water for 2 to 3 hours.

No. 67—MUSHROOMS.

Edible Boletus.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of mushrooms
¼ lb. of butter
½ tbsp. of flour
1 medium-sized onion
½ pt. of sour cream
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
1 tbsp. of parsley

Preparation: Mushrooms must be firm, they are brushed and very dark
ones only are peeled. The lighter colored ones do not need to be
peeled. They are cut up into equal pieces. The butter is heated, the
mushroom pieces put in with the whole peeled onion and stewed for 15
to 20 minutes. The dish must be covered. Strew the flour on, stirring
lightly, add the sour cream, ¼ teaspoonful of meat extract, salt and
pepper, and lastly the parsley, stew 2 minutes and serve.

No. 68—CHANTERELLES.

Another Species of Mushrooms.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of chanterelles
2 qts. of water
2 tbsps. of salt
¼ lb. of butter
½ tbsp. of flour
Salt to taste
1½ tbsps. of finely chopped parsley
2 tbsps. of cream
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The chanterelles are cleaned, washed, but not left in
water; cook them 1 minute in 2 qts. of boiling salt water, drain in a
colander. Heat the butter, put in the chanterelles with flour, salt
and pepper and stew 2 minutes, then add the cream and parsley and
serve at once.

No. 69—OLIVES AS VEGETABLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

60 olives
¼ lb. of butter, scant
1 tbsp. of flour
1 pt. of bouillon
¼ tsp. of meat extract
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
½ tsp. parsley
¼ pt. of cream

Preparation: The stones are taken out and the olives cooked tender in
the bouillon; to this add 1 tablespoonful of butter. The rest of the
butter is melted, flour stirred in, then the olives, bouillon, cream
and meat extract. Season with salt and pepper, stew for 15 minutes and
add the chopped parsley.

No. 70—STUFFED OLIVES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

36 olives
½ lb. of finely ground chicken
1 egg
Salt and pepper to taste
4 tbsps. of cream
¼ tsp. of lemon juice
1 tbsp. of butter
½ pt. of Madeira sauce

Preparation: The preserved olives are scooped out and stuffed with
cooked chicken, which has been ground fine and mixed with egg, butter,
salt, pepper and lemon juice. One-half pint of Madeira sauce is
prepared. See under Gravies and Dressing, No. 25. The stuffed olives
are put in and cooked until tender.

No. 71—FILLED OR STUFFED OLIVES WITH CHAMPIGNONS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The preparation is the same as given under No. 70. One-half pound of
champignons, which have been cooked until tender in butter, are
stirred into the dressing.

Remarks: This is a fine dish to serve at parties:

No. 72—ROASTED CHESTNUTS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of sweet chestnuts
¼ lb. of fresh butter
1 lb. of salt

Preparation: The skins are rubbed off and the chestnuts slit with a
sharp knife. Into an iron frying pan or spider put ⅓ of the salt,
place the chestnuts on the salt in one layer and cover them with the
rest of the salt. Put the pan into a medium hot oven and bake them
scarcely ½ hour, then take them out and place them on a napkin to eat
with fresh butter.

No. 73—CHESTNUT PUREE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. of chestnuts
⅛ lb. of butter
1 tbsp. of flour
½ pt. of bouillon
¼ pt. of cream
4 tbsps. of red wine
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
1 tbsp. of sugar
1 tsp. of chopped parsley

Preparation: The chestnuts are taken out of the outer shell, then hot
water poured on and the inner skin pulled off. Cook them in bouillon
until tender and strain. Heat the butter, stir in the flour, stew a
few minutes, add the chestnuts and stir in cream, red wine, salt,
pepper, sugar and parsley. Let it get hot, stirring briskly, arrange
mound-shaped and serve.

No. 74—FRIED CHESTNUTS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of chestnuts
¼ lb. of butter
1 pinch of salt
1 tbsp. fine sugar

Preparation: Shell the chestnuts, scald them and pull off the inner
skin. Brown the butter and after the chestnuts are cooked slightly in
water, put them into the hot butter, add salt and sugar and fry them
light brown, shaking frequently. Serve them with roast goose stuffing
or as a garnish with cabbage.

CHAPTER 13.

SALADS.

The various preparations of green salads, potato salads, vegetable
salads and meat salads.

Green salads such as head lettuce, endive, romaine and escariol salads
are pleasing and refreshing with meats and fish.

Salads must be prepared carefully. They may be served with every meal.

Good oil and good vinegar or lemon juice are essentials for preparing
salads.

No. 1—GREEN LETTUCE.

Head Lettuce, Endive Lettuce.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 heads of lettuce
¼ cup of fine oil
⅛ cup of vinegar
¼ tsp. of salt
1 pinch of pepper
1 tsp. of minced parsley

Preparation: The head lettuce is picked over, the ribs cut through,
also the largest leaves, then washed well and dried. The oil, vinegar
or lemon juice, salt and pepper are mixed well and poured over the
lettuce. Mix thoroughly with two spoons.

No. 2—GREEN LETTUCE WITH EGG DRESSING.

Head Lettuce, Endive, Romaine, Escariol Lettuce.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 heads of lettuce
2 yolks of eggs
¼ cup of cream
¼ tsp. salt
1 pinch of pepper
¼ tsp. of sugar
Juice of ½ lemon

Preparation: The lettuce is picked over, washed and drained. The yolks
of eggs are thoroughly beaten with cream, then vinegar stirred in
slowly and salt, pepper and sugar added. Pour over the lettuce, mix
well with two spoons, and serve at once.

No. 3—GREEN LETTUCE WITH MAYONNAISE DRESSING.

Head, Endive, Escariol Lettuce.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 heads of lettuce
2 yolks of eggs
4 tbsps. of sour cream
2 tbsps. of vinegar
¼ tsp. of mustard
¼ tsp. of salt
1 pinch of white pepper
1 pinch of sugar

Preparation: The lettuce is prepared as before mentioned. Yolks of
eggs, cream, vinegar, mustard, salt, pepper and sugar are mixed well
and cooked in a double boiler until thick, stirring constantly, cooled
and mixed with the lettuce.

No. 4—GREEN LETTUCE WITH BACON.

Head, Endive Lettuce.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 heads of lettuce
⅛ lb. of bacon
5 tbsps. of vinegar
1 pinch of pepper
1 pinch of sugar
½ tsp. of mustard
½ tsp. of salt

Preparation: Prepare the lettuce as before. The bacon is cut into
small cubes and fried to a nice yellow color; add vinegar, salt,
pepper, sugar and mustard, cool and add the lettuce, stirring lightly.

No. 5—GREEN LETTUCE PREPARED SWEET.

Head Lettuce.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 heads of lettuce
1 egg
3 tbsps. of sugar
⅛ cup of vinegar
¼ tsp. of salt
1 pinch of pepper
¼ cup of cream

Preparation: Prepare the lettuce as before. The whole egg is beaten
with sugar, cream, vinegar, salt and pepper and mixed well with the
lettuce.

Remarks: Three tablespoonfuls of oil may be used.

No. 6—POTATO SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 lbs. of potatoes
½ cup of good oil
½ cup of vinegar
Salt to taste
¼ tsp. of pepper
1 tsp. finely sliced onions
½ cup of warm bouillon or water

Preparation: The potatoes should be medium-sized and not mealy. They
are boiled in the jackets, peeled and sliced. The vinegar and bouillon
are poured over while potatoes are still warm, add the oil, salt,
pepper and onions and mix well, being careful not to break the
potatoes. This salad must be prepared one hour before serving. Taste
before serving and add more seasoning if necessary.

No. 7—POTATO SALAD WITH SPICED DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of potatoes
4 yolks of eggs
1 large cup of milk
½ large cup of vinegar
2 mustardspoonfuls of mustard
1 tsp. of salt
¼ tsp. of red pepper
1½ tsps. of sugar
1 tsp. of flour
Piece of butter, the size of an egg

Preparation: The potatoes are prepared as given under No. 6. Yolks of
eggs, milk, vinegar, mustard, salt, pepper, sugar, flour and butter
are mixed well and cooked in double boiler until thick, stirring
constantly. Mix the sliced potatoes with this dressing.

No. 8—POTATO SALAD WITH SOUR CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of potatoes
1 pt. thick, sour cream
¼ cup of vinegar
1 tbsp. of sugar
½ tbsp. of salt
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: Prepare the potatoes as in No. 6. The cream, vinegar,
sugar, salt and pepper are put on the sliced potatoes and mixed well.

Remarks: Nos. 7 and 8 are fine salads.

No. 9—POTATO SALAD WITH BACON.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of potatoes
¼ lb. of bacon
½ cup of vinegar
½ tbsps. of salt
1 tbsp. of finely sliced onions
1 pinch of pepper
½ cup of bouillon or water

Preparation: Prepare the potatoes as in No. 6. Cut the bacon into
small dice, fry to a light yellow color, add the onions and fry a few
minutes, then add bouillon, vinegar, salt, pepper and let come to a
boil. Pour over the sliced potatoes.

No. 10—CUCUMBER SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 large cucumbers
½ tbsp. of salt
3 tbsps. of oil
4 tbsps. of vinegar
1 pinch of pepper
1 tsp. of finely chopped parsley

Preparation: The cucumbers are peeled and sliced very thin, salted and
left standing for a while. Drain well, add oil, vinegar, pepper,
parsley and mix well.

No. 11—SWEET CUCUMBER SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 large cucumbers
1 egg
¼ cup of cream
1 pinch of pepper
½ tbsp. of salt, for salting
1 tsp. of finely chopped parsley
3 tbsps. of sugar

Preparation: The cucumbers are prepared as given under No. 10. Egg,
cream, vinegar, sugar, pepper, parsley, are beaten well and mixed with
the cucumbers.

No. 12—CUCUMBER SALAD WITH SOUR CREAM.

2 large cucumbers
½ tbsp. of salt, for salting
½ pt. thick sour cream
2 tbsps. of vinegar
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The cucumbers are prepared as given under No. 10 and
mixed well with cream, vinegar and pepper. They are very good.

No. 13—CUCUMBERS AND HEAD LETTUCE MIXED.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 large cucumber
1 head of green lettuce
½ pt. of thick, sour cream
2 tbsps. of lemon juice
1 pinch of salt
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The lettuce and cucumber are prepared as before given
under No. 1 and No. 10. The cucumber slices are mixed well with cream,
vinegar, pepper, salt and mixed lightly with the green lettuce.

No. 14—TOMATO SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of tomatoes
¼ cup of fine oil
1 tsp. of salt
½ tsp. of onion, sliced fine
1 tsp. of finely chopped parsley
¼ cup of vinegar
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The tomatoes are scalded, skinned, sliced and mixed well
with oil, vinegar, salt, pepper, onion and parsley.

No. 15—TOMATO SALAD WITH MAYONNAISE DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 nice medium-sized tomatoes
1 head lettuce
3 yolks of eggs
½ cup of very fine oil
½ tsp. of mustard
½ tsp. of salt
1 pinch of pepper
Juice of 1 lemon
¼ cup of thick, sweet cream

Preparation: The tomatoes are scalded, skinned and placed on ice. The
yolks of eggs are mixed with oil, which is put in a few drops at a
time; add cream, lemon juice, pepper, salt and mustard. The mayonnaise
dressing must be thick. The head lettuce is treated as under No. 1,
placed on salad plates and the cold tomatoes put on them, the
mayonnaise dressing poured over the tomatoes.

Remarks: This is a fine salad.

No. 16—TOMATO SALAD WITH COOKED MAYONNAISE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 medium-sized tomatoes
3 yolks of eggs
6 tbsps. of sour cream
2–3 tbsps. of vinegar
½ tsp. of mustard
1 pinch of salt
1 pinch of white pepper
1 pinch of sugar

Preparation: Preparation is the same as given under No. 15. Yolks of
eggs, cream, vinegar, mustard, salt, pepper and sugar are mixed well
and cooked in the double boiler until thick, stirring constantly. Let
it get cold and pour over the whole tomatoes. The tomatoes may be
garnished with green lettuce as under No. 15.

No. 17—ASPARAGUS SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of asparagus
2 qts. of water
1 tbsp. of salt
2 tbsps. of good vinegar
1 pinch of salt
1 pinch of pepper
4 tbsps. of fine oil

Preparation: The asparagus are peeled, cut into equal pieces or left
whole and boiled until tender in boiling water. When cold, mix them
with the oil, vinegar, pepper and salt.

No. 18—ASPARAGUS SALAD WITH MAYONNAISE.

Preparation and ingredients are the same as given under No. 17. The
asparagus is covered with mayonnaise dressing. See No. 16, Cooked
Mayonnaise Dressing for Tomato Salad.

No. 19—CAULIFLOWER SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 large cauliflower
2 qts. of water
1 tbsp. of salt
4 tbsps. of vinegar
1 pinch of pepper
1 pinch of salt
4 tbsps. of oil

Preparation: The cauliflower is broken up into roses, boiled until
tender but not too soft, in boiling salt water, drained and mixed with
oil, vinegar, pepper and salt.

No. 20—CAULIFLOWER WITH COOKED MAYONNAISE.

Preparation and ingredients are the same as given under No. 19.
Instead of the other dressing use cooked mayonnaise dressing. See No.
16.

No. 21—CARROT SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of small, young carrots
2 qts. of water
½ tbsp. of salt
¼ cup of vinegar
1 pinch of salt
1 pinch of pepper
¼ cup of fine oil

Preparation: The carrots are scraped, cut up into equally large pieces
and cooked until tender in salt water, drained and mixed well with
oil, vinegar, salt and pepper.

No. 22—BEAN SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of yellow string beans
3 qts. of water
1 tbsp. of salt
¼ cup of oil
¼ cup of vinegar
1 tsp. of grated onion
1 pinch of salt
Pepper
1 tbsp. of chopped parsley or chives

Preparation: The beans are strung, broken into pieces, boiled until
tender in salt water, drained, and while still warm, mixed with oil,
vinegar, salt, pepper, onion and parsley. It must not be too dry.

No. 23—ROOT CELERY OR CELERIAC SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 large celery roots
3 qts. of water
1 tbsp. of salt
5 tbsps. of oil
6 tbsps. of vinegar
1 pinch of salt
Pepper
¼ pt. of cold bouillon

Preparation: The celery is washed well, cooked until tender in 3 qts.
of water, peeled, sliced and while still lukewarm, mixed with vinegar,
oil, salt, pepper, bouillon, then covered and left standing for 1 hour
before serving. ½ cup of sugar may be mixed with it.

No. 24—ROOT CELERY SALAD MIXED WITH POTATO SALAD WITH MAYONNAISE
DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. of potatoes
1 celery root
4 yolks of eggs
1 cup of cream
½ tsp. of mustard
¼ tsp. of pepper
Salt to taste
1 tsp. of sugar
½ cup of vinegar

Preparation: The potatoes and celery are cleaned, cooked until tender,
peeled and sliced thin. Yolks of eggs, cream, vinegar, mustard,
pepper, salt and sugar are mixed well and cooked in double boiler
until thick, stirring constantly. This dressing is mixed with warm
potatoes and celery.

No. 25—CELERY SALAD WITH MAYONNAISE DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 large celery roots
½ portion of mayonnaise dressing

Preparation: The celery is prepared according to No. 23. One-half of
the portion of mayonnaise dressing is made according to No. 24 and
mixed with the celery.

No. 26—BEAN SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of green or yellow beans
3 qts. of water
2 tbsps. of salt
¼ cup of fine oil
¼ cup of vinegar
½ cup of bouillon
1 tbsp. of finely chopped parsley
¼ tsp. of finely chopped onion
Salt to taste
Pepper

Preparation: The beans are strung, broken into 3 pieces, cooked until
tender in boiling water, drained and mixed with oil, vinegar,
bouillon, parsley, onion, salt and pepper. This salad must be prepared
a few hours before serving and should be kept covered until served.

No. 27—MIXED SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of asparagus
1 small head of cauliflower
½ small celery root
¼ lb. of green beans
¼ lb. of yellow beans
5 potatoes
6 young carrots
Salt water
¼ cup of fine oil
¼ cup of vinegar
Salt to taste
Pepper
½ tsp. grated onion
1 tbsp. of finely chopped summer savory
1 head lettuce

Preparation: The vegetables are cleaned, cut up and each
separately cooked until tender in salt water and drained. The
potatoes are boiled until tender, peeled and cut. When the
vegetables and potatoes are cold, mix with oil, vinegar, salt,
pepper, onion, summer savory and parsley, being careful not
to break the pieces.

No. 28—FINE MIXED VEGETABLE SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 portion of mayonnaise dressing 6 young carrots
½ cup of minced truffles and olives
¼ lb. smoked salmon
6 sardines
½ lb. asparagus
½ small celery root
6 young carrots
4 boiled potatoes
1 small head of cauliflower broken into small roses
¼ lb. green beans
¼ lb. yellow beans
1 head of green lettuce

For Mayonnaise Dressing.

4 yolks of eggs
1 cup of cream
Juice of 1 lemon
1 pinch of white pepper
Salt to taste
4 tbsps. of fine oil
½ tsp. mustard

Preparation: All the vegetables are cut into small pieces and boiled
separately in salt water until tender, but not too soft. The water is
drained off and the vegetables mixed with the potatoes, truffles,
salmon, sardines and olives, which have also been cut into pieces.

The mayonnaise dressing is made by stirring the 4 yolks of eggs into
cream; add lemon juice, mustard, pepper and salt and cook in double
boiler until thick, stirring constantly. After it has cooled off, stir
in the oil.

The salad is mixed carefully with one-half of this dressing. The head
lettuce leaves are picked off and placed into the salad dish, the
salad piled up in the center of it and the rest of the dressing poured
over. You may garnish it with olives. This is a very fine salad.

No. 29—MIXED SALAD WITH MEAT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 head lettuce
1 cup of prepared endive lettuce
½ cup of wax beans, cut in pieces
½ cup of green cut beans
½ cup of sliced radishes
¼ cup of very small pearl onions
½ small cauliflower, cut into roses
1 apple, cut into pieces
2 sour pickles, cut into pieces
½ lb. boiled potatoes, cut into pieces
2 cups of meat, cut into pieces
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
¼ cup of fine oil
½ cup of vinegar
¼ tsp. of mustard

Preparation: The vegetables are all prepared according to No. 28. The
meat may be beef, veal or poultry, which has been cooked or fried and
is cut up like the vegetables, then mixed with these and vinegar, oil,
pepper, salt and arranged on the leaves of the head lettuce.

Remarks: This salad may be served with mayonnaise dressing as No. 28.

No. 30—CHAMPIGNON SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lb. can of champignons or 2 lbs. of fresh ones
5 potatoes
1 lb. of boiled sweetbreads
1 cup sour cream
Juice of 1 lemon
½ tsp. of chopped parsley
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
10 olives
¼ cup of fine oil

Preparation: The larger champignons are cut into pieces, the smaller
ones left whole. The potatoes are boiled until tender, peeled and cut
into small dice. The sweetbreads are boiled in salt water, skinned and
minced. All this is mixed with the sour cream, oil, lemon juice, salt
and. pepper and arranged on the head lettuce leaves, strewn with
parsley and garnished with olives.

No. 31—TRUFFLE SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of truffles
1 lb. of salad potatoes
3 hard-boiled eggs
¼ cup of fine oil
½ cup of bouillon
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
3 tbsps. of fine white wine
¼ cup of vinegar

Preparation: Preserved truffles are scraped and sliced fine, fresh
ones are brushed well in much water, then put into a small pot with
the bouillon and 2 tablespoonfuls of oil and cooked until tender,
taken out of the bouillon, peeled and sliced. Into the water or
bouillon in which the truffles had been cooked, put the rest of the
oil, vinegar, salt and pepper to cook and pour it on the sliced
potatoes. Add the sliced truffles and the chopped hard-boiled eggs and
the white wine. Mix it all carefully, cover the dish and set aside for
3 hours before serving.

Remarks: If you take canned truffles cook the bouillon with the
truffle liquor and peelings for 15 minutes, strain it and mix it with
the other ingredients.

No. 32—COLD SLAW.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 small head of red or white cabbage
2 qts. boiling water
¼ cup of vinegar
2 yolks of eggs
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
3 tbsps. of oil
1 cup of sour or sweet cream

Preparation: Pick off the bad leaves and slice or cut the cabbage very
thin, scald it 5 minutes and drain the water off through a colander.
Mix it well with vinegar, cream, yolks of eggs, pepper, salt and oil.

No. 33—BEEF SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

For preparation and ingredients for this salad look to No. 24, Chapter
2, Beef salad.

Remarks: Lamb and veal salad are prepared the same way.

No. 34—RABBIT ROAST SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

For preparation and ingredients for this salad look to No. 21, Seventh
Chapter, Game.

No. 35—CHICKEN SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 chicken
3 qts. of water
Salt to taste
1 cup of cream
¼ cup of vinegar
½ cup of chicken broth
4 yolks of eggs
¼ tsp. of mustard
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
½ cup of sliced champignons
½ pt. sour whipped cream
2 tbsps. of sliced truffles
1 bunch of stalk-celery

Preparation: The chicken is well cleaned and cooked until tender in 2
qts. of water and salt. The skin is removed and the meat cut fine. The
bouillon is boiled down and ½ cup of it poured on the meat. The cup of
cream, yolks of eggs, vinegar, mustard, pepper and salt are mixed
well and cooked until thick, stirring constantly. This dressing is
poured over the meat, the chopped champignons and truffles added and
mixed with the rest or they may be omitted. Cover the salad and set it
aside for one hour before serving. This salad may be made from any
kind of poultry. You may add celery cut in small pieces. Lastly add
the whipped cream.

No. 36—HERRING SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

For preparation and ingredients see Chapter 8, No. 47.

No. 37—SALMON SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

For preparation and ingredients see Chapter 8, No. 7.

No. 38—PIKE SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of pike
2 qts. of boiling water
1 tbsp. of salt
1 piece of butter the size of an egg
1 medium-sized onion
1¼ tbsps. of flour
¾ qt. thick cream
3 yolks of eggs
2 tsps. of mustard
4 tbsps. of vinegar
2 tbsps. of fine oil
Salt to taste
1 tbsp. of capers

Preparation: The fish is scaled, dressed, washed, cooked until tender
in salt water and set to simmer gently 15 minutes. Remove the skin and
bones, cut the meat into small pieces. Heat the butter and onion, but
do not brown, stir in the flour, add the cream, stirring constantly,
cook, add the yolks of eggs, but do not boil any longer. When the
dressing is cold, add the vinegar, oil, mustard, capers and salt. Stir
the dressing for 15 minutes more, pour over the fish and mix lightly.
Take out the onion before adding the cream.

No. 39—OYSTER OR CLAM SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

For preparation and ingredients see Fish, Chapter 8, No. 59.

No. 40—LOBSTER SALAD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 lbs. of lobster
3 tbsps. of vinegar
2 tbsps. of oil
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
3 yolks of eggs
Juice of ½ lemon
1 tsp. of capers
½ tsp. of mustard
¼ tsp. of sugar
1 cup of cream

Preparation: The lobster is cooked, cooled, the meat picked out and
cut into small oblique pieces. Mix it with vinegar, oil, salt and
pepper.

The cream, yolks of eggs, lemon juice, mustard and sugar are mixed
well and cooked until thick, stirring briskly; then put in the capers.
The head lettuce is prepared and the large leaves cut into smaller
pieces. Now arrange on a platter one layer of lettuce and one of
lobster salad, pour over some mayonnaise dressing and repeat 2 or 3
times until all is used up. Garnish the dish or plate with radishes.
It makes a fine salad. This salad may be mixed with mayonnaise
dressing as in Chapter 10, No. 42.

No. 41—FRUIT SALAD AS DESSERT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 oranges
3 bananas
½ pineapple
¼ pt. cognac cherries
Sugar to taste
1 pt. whipped cream
½ pt. strawberries

Preparation: Oranges, pineapple, bananas are peeled and sliced.
Strawberries are cleaned, the cherries are stoned, all this fruit
mixed and whipped cream poured on in a glass dish. The whipped cream
may be omitted. If you like you may mix ½ cup of Sherry wine in with it.

No. 42—LETTUCE COMBINATION SALAD.

Head lettuce
4 medium-sized tomatoes
1 small cucumber
2 tbsps. vinegar
4 green onions
6 radishes
½ cup mayonnaise dressing
Roquefort cheese
¼ tsp. Worcestershire Sauce

Preparation: Line salad bowl with the crisped lettuce; peel and
quarter the tomatoes; slice and crisp the cucumbers; slice the onions
and radishes in very thin slices. Arrange the vegetables on the
lettuce; mix the vinegar with the mayonnaise dressing and pour over
the salad. A little Roquefort cheese crumbled and mixed with the
dressing is fine. Excellent, served with steak.

No. 43—FRUIT SALAD DRESSING.

Preparation: Take 1 cup boiled mayonnaise, a little powdered sugar,
juice of an orange or a lemon, ½ pint of whipped cream.

No. 44—FRUIT SALAD No. 1.

2 apples
1 small bunch celery
1 cup chopped walnuts
1 cup pineapple

Preparation: Mix all the cut fruit with fruit salad dressing.

No. 45—FRUIT SALAD No. 2.

4 oranges
1 cup pineapple
½ cup chopped nuts
2 cups cherries
½ cup shredded cocoanut

Preparation: Mix all the cut fruit with the fruit salad dressing.

No. 46—FRUIT SALAD No. 3.

6 large peaches
1 pt. strawberries
3 bananas
½ cup nuts

Preparation: Mix all the cut fruit with the fruit salad dressing.

No. 47—FRUIT SALAD No. 4.

1 lb. dates
1 cup chopped apples
1 cup chopped celery
3 sliced oranges

Preparation: Mix all the cut fruit with the fruit salad dressing.

CHAPTER 14.

EGGS.

The preparation of eggs. Eggs are a valuable food and indispensable in
the kitchen. Some dishes cannot be prepared without eggs.

Eggs can be tested as to their freshness in a basin with ½ pt. of
water mixed with a tablespoonful of salt. Fresh eggs sink to the
bottom, others float on top.

To preserve eggs for the winter, put them into salt, so that they do
not touch and are covered well. Use a stone jar for this purpose and
cover it.

No. 1—SOFT BOILED EGGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

12 eggs
3 qts. of water

Preparation: The eggs are washed well, then carefully put into boiling
water with a spoon and cooked 3 minutes. Take from the stove and let
stand 1 more minute.

No. 2—HARD-BOILED EGGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

12 eggs
3 qts. of water

Preparation: The eggs are washed well and carefully put into boiling
water to boil 20 minutes. These hard-boiled eggs are easily digested.

No. 3—HARD-BOILED EGGS FOR GARNISHING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4–5 eggs
2 qts. of water

Preparation: The eggs are boiled 20 minutes in 2 qts. of boiling
water, then shelled and either sliced or quartered and used for
garnishing spinage and ragout.

No. 4—FRIED EGGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

12 eggs
Salt and pepper
1 tbsp. of butter

Preparation: The butter is heated in a clean spider and each egg
carefully put in and fried until the white around the yolk has become
opaque or firm. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and take out with a cake
turner, place on platter and garnish with parsley.

No. 5—POACHED EGGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

12 eggs
1½ qts. of water
1 tsp. of vinegar
6 slices of toast
Salt to taste

Preparation: Add salt and vinegar to the water, boil it and put each
egg in on a ladle, hold it there until the white has become firm, then
put it on a skimmer to let the water drip off, place it on the warm
buttered toast and put into oven until all eggs are poached.

No. 6—FRIED EGGS IN TOMATO SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

10–12 eggs
1 cup of fine oil

Tomato Sauce or Dressing.

6 very ripe tomatoes
¼ lb. of raw ham
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
1 tsp. of sugar
1 tbsp. of butter
1 tbsp. of flour
¼ medium-sized onion

Preparation; The tomatoes are sliced and the ham cut into small
pieces. Melt the butter, stew the sliced onion and ham in it for 10
minutes, then stir in the flour, 1 pt. of water, tomatoes, salt,
pepper and sugar and cook ½ hour, then strain through a fine sieve.
Sprinkle each egg with salt and pepper and fry in the salad oil, which
should be very hot. Tip the pan or dish a little so the oil covers the
egg. When the white of egg is firm, take it out and put it into the
hot tomato dressing which is set where it will remain hot.

No. 7—BOILED EGGS IN BRINE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 eggs
½ lb. of salt
2 qts. of water

Preparation: The eggs are boiled five minutes in boiling water. If you
wish them hard, cook them 15 minutes, then crush the points of the egg
shells and put the eggs into 2 qts. of salt water.

No. 8—BRINE EGGS IN CREAM SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 eggs
¼ lb. of salt
2 qts. of water
2 tbsps. of butter
1½ tbsps. of flour
1 pt. cream
Juice of ½ lemon, or 2 tbsps. of vinegar
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: The eggs are boiled 15 minutes, the shells crushed and
the eggs placed into strong salt water for 4 hours. The butter is
heated, flour stirred in, cream, lemon juice, salt and pepper added
and this cooked, stirring continually.

Shell the eggs, quarter them, heat them in the gravy and serve very hot.

No. 9—SCRAMBLED EGGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

10 eggs
¼ cup of milk
½ tsp. of salt
1 tbsp. of butter

Preparation: Beat the eggs well into milk and salt for 5 minutes. Heat
the butter in a pan, pour in the mixture of egg and milk and slowly
stirring them, let them get firm, then serve on a hot platter.

No. 10—SCRAMBLED EGG PANCAKE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

10 eggs
¼ tsp. of salt.
1 tbsp. of butter

Preparation: Beat the eggs in a dish 5 minutes, adding salt. Heat the
butter in a broad pan or spider, pour in the eggs and let them get
firm over a slow fire. Lift with a knife once or twice and carefully
slip on a hot platter to serve.

No. 11—SCRAMBLED EGGS, ENGLISH STYLE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

10 eggs Salt
3 tbsps. of finely chopped champignons
1 pinch of white pepper
1 tbsp. of butter
¼ cup of cream

Preparation: The eggs are beaten 5 minutes with cream, salt, pepper,
then champignons added. The butter is heated in a pan, the eggs poured
in and stirring gently, let them get firm, then serve on a hot platter.

No. 12—SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH RED HERRING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 red herrings
6 eggs
1 pinch of pepper
2 tbsps. of butter
1 pinch of salt

Preparation: The herrings are skinned and the bones removed from them,
then stewed in the hot butter. Eggs, salt and pepper are well-beaten
and poured over the fish. Let the eggs get firm and serve on a hot
platter.

No. 13—SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH CHIVES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

10 eggs
2 tbsps. of chives
¼ tsp. salt
1 pinch of white pepper
¼ cup of milk

Preparation: The preparation is the same as No. 9. The chives are
strewn on or mixed in while baking.

No. 14—STUFFED EGGS, (DEVILED EGGS).

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 eggs
1 tbsp. of butter
½ tsp. finely chopped parsley
1 tsp. chopped capers
1 tsp. of mustard
1 pinch of pepper
1 pinch of sugar
1 tsp. of lemon juice
¼ tsp. of salt

Preparation: The eggs are cooked 15 minutes, cooled, peeled, cut into
halves, the yolk taken out and mixed well with butter, parsley,
capers, salt, pepper, sugar, lemon juice and mustard and put back into
the whites of the eggs. Place lettuce leaves on a platter, garnish
with sardines and put the stuffed eggs on.

No. 15—ANOTHER FORM OF STUFFED EGGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

8 eggs
⅛ lb. of caviar
12 crab tails
2 tbsps. of oil
¼ tsp. of salt
1 pinch of pepper
2 tbsps. of cream or bouillon
1½ layers of white gelatine
1 tbsp. of lemon juice

Preparation: The eggs are cooked 15 minutes, cooled, the top carefully
cut off and the inside carefully scooped out with a small spoon, so
the shell is not destroyed or broken. The white of egg is chopped
fine, the yolk stirred with oil, which is put in by drops, mixed with
lemon juice, salt, pepper, sugar, cream. The gelatine is dissolved in
a tablespoonful of warm water, strained and also stirred in with the
yolk mixture. The crab tails are cut into small pieces. The caviar is
poured into a sieve and cold water poured on plentifully, then drained
off. Now fill each egg with a little dressing, then crab meat, then
chopped white of egg, dressing and caviar; repeat this until the egg
is filled. Replace the tip of the egg and put the eggs on ice or
prepare them the day before serving, then no ice is needed. Garnish
with lettuce.

CHAPTER 15.

OMELETS, PANCAKES, WAFFLES, NOODLES AND PIE.

The Various Preparations of Omelets, Pancakes, Waffles, Noodles, as
Sweet Pastry and Small Side dishes.

PIES.

No. 1—OMELET FOR BREAKFAST.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

10 eggs
4 tbsps. of cream or milk
1 tbsp. butter
1½ tsps. of flour
¼ tsp. salt

Preparation: The yolks of 10 eggs are beaten 3 minutes with cream,
flour, salt. The beaten whites are stirred in lightly A large round
spider is heated, the butter melted in it, the egg batter poured in
and baked 1 minute on the stove, then put into the oven for 5 minutes.
The omelet must be a nice yellow color; do not turn it over. Serve on
a hot platter.

No. 2—SWEET OMELET AS DESSERT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

8 eggs
3 tbsps. of milk or cream
¼ tsp. of salt
1 tbsp. of butter
½ glass jelly or preserves
Sugar to sprinkle
1 tsp. of flour

Preparation: The preparation is the same as under No. 1, also the
baking. When the omelet is done, put jelly or preserves on one-half of
it and fold the other half over to cover it. Sprinkle sugar over and
serve at once.

No. 3—ASPARAGUS OMELET.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

8 eggs
3 tbsps. of cream or milk
¼ tsp. of salt
1 lb. canned asparagus or cooked fresh ones
1 tbsp. of butter
1 tsp. of flour

The preparation is the same as No. 1. The asparagus pieces are mixed
into the batter and baked the same as No. 1. Serve at once.

No. 4—PEA OMELET.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

8 eggs
3 tbsps. of cream or milk
¼ tsp. of salt
1 tsp. of flour
½ pt. can of fine peas
1 tbsp. of butter

Preparation: The water is drained from the peas. Beat the yolks,
cream, flour and salt 3 minutes and stir in the peas and the beaten
whites of eggs. Bake as given under No. 1 and serve at once.

No. 5—OMELET WITH PARMESAN CHEESE OR OYSTERS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

10 eggs
4 tbsps. of cream or milk
¼ tsp. of salt
2 tbsps. of Parmesan cheese
⅛ lb. of butter
1 cup of roast gravy
1 pinch of pepper

Preparation: Eggs, cream, salt, pepper are beaten 5 minutes and the
melted butter stirred in. A broad spider is heated with a little
butter, the omelet batter poured in, the pan shaken to and fro until
the batter is baked. Then slip the omelet carefully on a hot platter,
sprinkle with cheese, roll it up, pour a little gravy over and serve
at once. Stewed oysters may be rolled in the omelets.

No. 6—OMELETS WITH MEAT OR CHAMPIGNONS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

8 eggs
¼ cup of cream
1 tsp. of salt
1 pinch of pepper
⅛ lb. of fresh butter
1 portion of champignon puree or 1 portion of veal hash
1 tbsp. of Parmesan, cheese.

Preparation: Preparation and baking are the same as given under No. 5,
Omelet With Cheese. When the omelet is done, cover it well with
champignon puree, (see Chapter 11, No. 62,) roll up the omelet,
sprinkle it with cheese and serve at once. Remarks: Pour a cup of
gravy over the omelet.

No. 7—WHIPPED CREAM OMELET.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 fresh eggs
1 pt. of whipped cream
¼ tsp. of salt
Scant ¼ cup of fresh butter
½ cup of flour

Preparation: Yolks of eggs, flour and salt are mixed well with the
beaten whites of eggs and the cream. Melt the butter in a broad
spider, pour in the omelet batter and bake in medium hot oven 10
minutes until golden yellow.

Remarks: The omelet may be sprinkled with Parmesan cheese.

No. 8—WHIPPED CREAM OMELET AS DESSERT.

Prepare the omelet No. 7, fill it with jelly or preserves and serve a
fruit sauce with it.

No. 9—WHIPPED CREAM OMELET WITH FROSTING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 fresh eggs
1 pt. whipped cream
½ cup of flour
¼ tsp. of salt
¼ lb. of sugar
¼ cup of butter
1 cup of strawberry or plum marmalade

Frosting.

6 whites of eggs
Fruit for garnishing
½ lb. of sugar

Preparation: Yolks of eggs, flour, salt and sugar are mixed well. Add
the beaten whites of eggs and the whipped cream. The butter is heated
in a broad spider, the omelet batter poured in and baked in medium hot
oven 10 to 12 minutes until golden yellow. When done, spread it with
plum, prune, strawberry or apricot marmalade.

Beat the 6 whites of eggs to a stiff froth, stir into it the ½ pound
of sugar, then put into a cornucopia from which the point has been cut
off. Now press the frosting through the opening and make figures on
the omelet, put it into the oven for 15 minutes until the frosting is
of a light yellow color. When done, serve on a warm platter and
garnish with sugared fruit. Serve at once.

Remarks: The frosting must be ready when the omelet is taken out of
the oven the first time. Cover it with fruit marmalade and the figures
or designs of frosting and finish baking it in the oven.

No. 10—PANCAKES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 eggs
½ pt. of milk
1 cup of flour
1¼ tsps. baking powder
¼ tsp. of salt
Butter or lard for baking

Preparation: Yolks of eggs, milk, flour and salt are mixed well with
beaten whites of eggs and lastly the baking powder. Heat the butter or
lard in a small pan or spider, put in 2 tablespoonfuls of batter and
bake it to a nice color. When baked on one side, turn the pancakes and
bake on the other side. Remarks: If you use a large spider, put in 2
to 3 pancakes and bake them at once.

Potato Pancakes.

For preparation see No. 17, Chapter 11, Potato Pancakes.

No. 11—FILLED PANCAKES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 eggs
½ pt. of milk
½ cup of flour
¼ tsp. of salt
Butter for baking
Jelly or fruit marmalade for stuffing
Sugar and cinnamon to sprinkle
1 tbsp. of sugar

Preparation: The eggs are beaten 5 minutes with milk, flour, sugar and
salt. Heat a large spider and put in the butter, then 4 to 5
tablespoonfuls of pancake batter and bake until golden yellow on both
sides. Spread with the jelly or marmalade, roll up the pancake, place
it on a platter and sprinkle with sugar and cinnamon. This recipe will
make 6 pancakes. They must be baked very thin.

No. 12—WAFFLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ qt. of flour
3 eggs
4 tbsps. of melted butter
¼ tsp. of baking powder
1¼ cups of milk

Preparation: Flour, yolks of eggs, milk, butter and salt are stirred
well with beaten whites of eggs and baking powder.

Grease a waffle iron, put in 2 to 3 tablespoonfuls of batter and bake
the waffles to a nice brown color, turning it to bake on both sides.
Serve at once.

No. 13—ANOTHER FORM OF WAFFLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 eggs
2 cups of sour milk
2 tbsps. of sour cream
2½ cups of flour
½ tsp. of soda
Lard for baking

Preparation: The 4 yolks of eggs, milk, cream, flour, are mixed well
and the soda dissolved in 1 tablespoonful of milk stirred in; add the
beaten whites of eggs and bake according to No. 12.

No. 14—SAND CAKE WAFFLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of butter
4 eggs
½ lb. of sugar
¼ lb. of fine flour
¼ lb. of corn starch
¼ tbsp. of grated lemon peel
Lard for baking
Vanilla sugar to sprinkle over

Preparation: The butter is washed so it does not contain any salt,
then creamed. Add the eggs, sugar, flour and lemon and bake the batter
in a waffle iron. Put ½ teaspoonful of lard on each half of the iron,
then put in three tablespoonfuls of batter, close the iron and bake 8
minutes, turning it to bake on both sides. Sprinkle with vanilla sugar.

No. 15—YEAST WAFFLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of butter
4 eggs
¼ cup of sugar
½ grated lemon peel
¾ pt. of milk or cream
1–2 cents worth of yeast
½ lb. of flour
Lard for baking
1 pinch of nutmeg

Preparation: Cream the butter, stir in eggs, sugar, lemon peel,
nutmeg. The yeast is dissolved in the cream which has been warmed,
stirred into the mixture, then flour added to make a stiff batter. Set
to rise in a warm place. Grease the waffle iron, put in 3
tablespoonfuls of batter, close the iron and bake the waffles light
brown, turning the iron to bake on both sides. Waffles must be baked
and served quickly, because they are apt to lose their crispness and
become tough. When serving, sprinkle with sugar and cinnamon.

No. 16—LEMON PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of fresh, very cold butter
½ glass of very cold water
1½ cups of flour

For the Filling.

1 large cup of sugar
2 tbsps. of flour
Juice of one large lemon
1 small lemon peel
1 large cup of boiling water
2 tbsps. of boiling water
2 yolks of eggs
1 egg

For Frosting.

2 whites of eggs
6 tbsps. of sugar

Preparation: The 1½ cups of flour are put into a dish, the hard butter
cut into it and rubbed, not kneaded; gradually add ½ glass of cold
water, work lightly, roll it out and line a pie tin with the paste,
making a high rim. Then bake it in oven and prepare the filling. Mix
the sugar with 2 tablespoonfuls of flour, lemon juice, grated lemon
rind and hot water and boil 1 minute, stirring constantly, then cool
and mix in the 2 yolks and one whole egg. Put this filling into the
baked crust and set aside for a few minutes to thicken. The frosting
is made by beating the 2 whites of eggs to a stiff froth, stir in the
6 tablespoonfuls of sugar, cover the pie filling with it and put back
into the oven and bake to a light brown color.

No. 17—APPLE PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of butter
½ glass of water
1½ cups of flour

For the Filling.

4 medium-sized sour apples
½ cup of sugar

For Frosting.

2 eggs
½ cup of cream
2 tbsps. of sugar
¼ tsp. of cinnamon

Preparation: The paste is prepared as given under No. 16. The apples
are peeled, cored, sliced, placed into a pie tin lined with paste,
sugar strewn over and baked in oven.

The frosting is then made by beating the 2 yolks of eggs with cream,
sugar, cinnamon and the beaten whites. When the apples in the pie are
done, pour on the frosting and put back into the oven until the
frosting turns a light brown color. Apple pie must be served warm.

No. 18—ANOTHER KIND OF APPLE PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

⅓ lb. of cold butter
¾ glass of cold water
3 cups of flour

For the Filling.

4 medium-sized apples
½ cup of sugar
¼ tsp. of cinnamon
¼ glass white wine

Preparation: The paste is prepared like No. 16. Half of it is rolled
out and the pie tin lined with it. The apples are peeled, cored,
sliced, put into the crust which is not yet baked, sugar and cinnamon
strewn on, the white wine sprinkled over, the rest of the paste rolled
out, 4 slits cut in the center and placed over the apples, fastening
the edge well by pressing it down and cutting off the superfluous
crust. Bake to a nice brown color.

No. 19—STRAWBERRY OR HUCKLEBERRY PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

⅓ lb. of cold butter
¾ cup of cold water
2¼ cups of flour

For the Filling.

1–2 qts. of berries
1 cup of sugar

Prepare the crust as before, (See No. 16, Lemon Pie), roll out half of
the crust, line a pie tin with it, fill with berries and sugar, cover
as before, (see No. 18), and bake in oven to a nice brown color.

No. 20—STRAWBERRY PIE WITH WHIPPED CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of butter
½ cup of water
1½ cups of flour

For the Filling.

1–2 qts. of berries
1 cup of sugar

For the Frosting.

1 pt. whipped cream
2 tbsps. of sugar
1 tsp. of vanilla

Preparation: The pie crust is prepared and baked as given under No.
16. Then the berries and sugar are put in and put back into oven 15
minutes until berries are cooked, cool off, mix the whipped cream with
sugar and vanilla and garnish the pie with it or spread evenly over
the top and garnish with raw strawberries.

No. 21—PEACH PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

⅓ lb. of cold butter
2¼ cups of flour
2 lbs. of peaches
¾ cup of sugar
¾ cup of cold water

Preparation: Prepare the pie crust as in No. 16, but do not bake. Peel
the peaches and remove the stones, then slice them, put into the pie
and sprinkle the sugar over. Cover with the rest of the crust and bake
to a nice brown color.

No. 22—SQUASH PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of butter
½ glass of water
1½ cups of flour

For the Filling.

1 pt. of squash
3 eggs
1 tsp. of vanilla
1 pinch of nutmeg
½ cup of cream or milk
½ tbsp. of corn starch

Preparation: Prepare the crust as in No. 16, but do not bake it. Cook
the squash, rub through a sieve or colander, add eggs, vanilla,
nutmeg, cream, corn starch and put into the crust, bake 45 minutes.

No. 23—PUMPKIN PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of cold butter
½ glass of cold water
1½ cups of flour

For Filling.

¼ medium-sized pumpkin
½ cup of molasses
¾ pt. of boiling milk
1 tsp. of salt
½ cup of sugar
2 tsps. of cinnamon
1 pinch of nutmeg
2 eggs

Preparation: The pie crust is prepared as in No. 16. The pumpkin is
cut into pieces and cooked until tender. Rub through a colander or
sieve, take 2½ cups of pumpkin puree, mix it with molasses, milk,
salt, sugar, cinnamon, nutmeg and cook 15 minutes, stirring
constantly. Lastly stir in 2 eggs, put into the crust and bake 45
minutes.

No. 24—MINCE PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of cold butter
½ glass of cold water
1½ cups of flour

Mince Filling.

1 lb. of lean beef
1 lb. of sour apples
½ cup of molasses
¼ cup of sugar
½ tsp. of ground cloves
¼ tsp. of ground cinnamon
¼ tsp grated nutmeg
¼ cup brandy
¼ tsp. of salt
½ pt. of cider
¼ lb. of raisins
¼ lb. of dried currants
1 tbsp. of chopped, sugared, citron
2 tbsps. of butter
¼ lb. of suet

Preparation: The pie crust is prepared as in No. 16. The mince filling
is prepared by cooking the lean beef in a little water, then removing
fat and membranes, and chopping it fine. Apples are peeled, cored,
chopped. Mix apples, meat, molasses, sugar, cloves, cinnamon, nutmeg,
suet, chopped fine, cider, raisins, currants, citron, butter, salt and
brandy, put into the crust and bake 45 minutes.

Remarks: This filling may be sufficient for 2 pies. The mince meat not
used is kept in a sealed glass can.

No. 25—ANOTHER KIND OF MINCE MEAT.

Quantity for 4 Pies.

2 lbs. of lean beef
1 lb. of beef suet
5 lbs. sour apples
1 lb. of raisins
2 lbs. of currants
¾ lb. of minced citron
1 tsp. of salt
½ lb. of brown sugar
1 cup of molasses
1 orange
1 lemon
½ pt. of brandy
2 tsps. of all kinds of spices

Preparation: The meat is prepared as in No. 24. Apples, suet and
citron are treated as given in No. 24 and the whole mixed with the
spices, i.e., 1 teaspoonful of pulverized cinnamon ¾ teaspoonful of
cloves, ¼ teaspoonful of nutmeg, salt, sugar, molasses, raisins,
currants, juice of orange and lemon and brandy. Stir it for 10
minutes, put it into a glass can and seal.

No. 26—PIEPLANT PIE, RHUBARB.

⅓ lb. of cold butter
¾ glass cold water
2¼ cups of flour

For the Filling.

1 tbsp. of flour
1½ qts. pie plants, cut up
1½ cups of sugar

Preparation: Prepare the pie crust as in No. 16. The pie plants are
skinned and cut into 1 inch pieces, then put into pie crust, strew
sugar and 1 tablespoonful of flour over, cover with a crust, making
slits in the center, and bake 45 minutes.

No. 27—GRAPE PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of cold butter
½ glass water
1½ cups of flour

For the Filling.

2 cups of crushed and strained grapes
2½ cups of sugar

Preparation: The dough is prepared as in No. 16. The grapes crushed in
a sieve or colander, to remove the seeds and shells, then mixed with
the sugar, put into the crust. Cover with strips of pie crust and bake
45 minutes.

No. 28—SOUR CREAM PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of cold butter
½ glass of water
1½ cups of flour

For the Filling.

1 cup of light brown sugar
1 cup of sour cream
2 eggs
1 tsp. of grated lemon peel

Preparation: Prepare the crust as in No. 16 and bake it. Sour cream,
sugar, yolks of eggs, lemon peel, beaten whites of eggs are mixed well
and put into the baked crust and baked 15 minutes in medium hot oven.

No. 29—VANILLA CREAM PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of cold butter
½ glass of water
1½ cups of flour

For the Filling.

2 cups of cream
½ cup of sugar
2 tbsps. of flour
3 eggs
9 tbsps. of sugar
1 tbsp. of vanilla

Preparation: Prepare the crust as in No. 16 and bake it. For the
filling, mix the cream, ½ cup of sugar, flour, vanilla and cook in
double boiler until thick, then stir in the 3 yolks of eggs, put into
the crust and bake in oven 10 minutes. Now make the frosting with 3
beaten whites of eggs and the 9 tablespoonfuls of sugar stirred in,
cover the pie and bake in oven until light brown.

No. 30—CHICKEN PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given under No. 6, Chapter 6, Poultry,
see Chicken Pie.

No. 31—PATTY PASTE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of good cold butter
½ lb. of fine flour
¼ pt. of cold water
1 white of egg
1 tbsp. of rum
¼ tsp. of baking powder

Preparation: Flour, water, egg, rum and baking powder are mixed into a
paste. The cold butter is cut on the paste, folded around it and
rolled out. This repeated 3 times and the paste rolled out, cut into 6
small tarts or 1 large one.

No. 32—SWEET PUFF PASTE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Preparation: The ingredients and preparation are the same as given
under No. 31. The rolled out paste is cut into all kinds of shapes,
sprinkled with sugar and covered with fruit marmalade, then folded
over, baked to a nice brown color, brushed with white of egg and
sprinkled with sugar and cinnamon.

No. 33—PUFF PASTE SCALLOPS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Preparation: Ingredients and preparation are the same as under No. 31.
The paste is rolled out to ¼ inch thickness, cut out with a medium
large tumbler, cut into halves and baked.

Remarks: These scallops are used for garnishing ragout.

No. 34—PUFF PASTE TARTS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Preparation: Prepare the paste as given under No. 31, roll it out to ¼
inch thickness and cut out 12 disks, then with a smaller cutter cut
out the centers of these, so as to form 12 rings. 6 of the small disks
cut out of the centers are used to cover the tarts and the other 6 are
folded together and rolled out to ⅙ inch thickness and 6 disks cut
out a little larger than the rings. These are for the under crust. Set
the rings upon the larger disks and fasten them on with beaten egg,
brush the ring with beaten egg and put on a second ring. Then bake
them in the oven, also the small disks as covers. Fill each tart with
anything you like and put the cover on, put back into oven for a few
minutes and serve.

No. 35—SWEETBREAD PATTIES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are the same as given in Chapter 3, Veal,
No. 28, Sweetbread Patties.

No. 36—CHICKEN PATTIES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are the same as given under Chapter 6, No.
7, Puff Paste Patties.

No. 37—PIGEON PIE, ENGLISH STYLE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given in No. 14, Chapter 6.

No. 38—GOOSE LIVER PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given in No. 25, Chapter 6, Goose
Liver Pie.

No. 39—PHEASANT PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given under No. 37, Chapter 6,
Pheasant Pie.

No. 40—PIE MADE FROM GROUSE, HAZELHEN, SNOWHEN, SNIPE, QUAIL, PARTRIDGE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given under No. 39, Chapter 6.

No. 41—COLD GAME PIE.

Venison, Doe, Boar, Rabbit.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given under No. 11, Chapter 7, Cold
Game Pie.

No. 42—RABBIT PIE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given under No. 22, Chapter 7, Rabbit
Pie.

No. 43—OYSTER PATTIES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given under No. 57, Chapter 8, Fish.

No. 44—NOODLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 eggs
Piece of butter size of walnut
2 cups of flour

Preparation: Beat the eggs and butter well, mix in the flour
gradually, knead the dough 20 minutes, roll it out very thin, so it is
almost transparent, then roll it up and cut in ¼ inch slices for
cooking and baking and still finer for soup, then dry them thoroughly.

No. 45—COOKED NOODLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given under No. 44. These dried
noodles are cooked in 5 qts. of boiling salt water 10 minutes, then
the water is drained off.

No. 46—SOUP NOODLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given under No. 44. The fine soup
noodles are cooked in bouillon 15 minutes.

No. 47—HAM NOODLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given under No. 12, Chapter 5, Pork,
Boiled Ham and Noodles.

No. 48—NOODLE PUDDING WITH APPLES AS DESSERT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 eggs
Piece of butter, size of ½ walnut
1 cup of sugar
¼ cup of currants
1 cup of flour
Salt water
1 lb. of apples
½ cup of peeled, chopped almonds
1 cup of water
½ tsp. of cinnamon

Preparation: The noodles are prepared like No. 44, cooked in salt
water 10 minutes and the water drained off. The apples are peeled,
cored and sliced. Butter a baking dish or casserole and put in a layer
of noodles, then apples, currants, sugar, cinnamon and almonds, repeat
2 or 3 times until all is used. The last layer should be noodles. Pour
the cup of water over, place little pieces of butter on top and bake
in oven 1 hour.

No. 49—APPLE STRUDEL.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 eggs
Piece of butter, size of ½ egg
1 cup of flour

For the Filling.

4 medium-sized apples
½ cup of almonds
2 tbsps. of citron
¼ cup of currants
½ cup of sugar
¼ tsp. of cinnamon
1 tbsp. of butter
⅛ lb. of butter for baking

Preparation: The eggs and butter are mixed with the cup of flour and a
noodle dough made which is rolled out to be almost transparent. The
apples are peeled, cored and chopped into quite small pieces, the
almonds peeled and almonds and citron chopped quite fine. All these
are placed on the dough, then sugar, cinnamon, currants and lastly the
tablespoonful of butter cut into small pieces added, these rolled up
in the dough and placed into a long pan. The ⅛ lb. of butter is cut in
pieces and put on the strudel and this is baked in the oven to a nice
color. Cream may be served with this as dressing.

No. 50—ROLLED UP APPLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 eggs
Butter, the size of ½ egg
¼ cup of milk
2 cups of flour
½ tsp. of baking powder
6 medium-sized apples
12 strawberries
Sugar
Cinnamon
Lard for baking

Preparation: Butter and eggs are mixed well, then milk and flour added
and lastly the baking powder, a smooth paste made and rolled out thin.
The apples are peeled, cored and left whole, then each apple filled
with fresh or preserved strawberries. Each apple is wrapped into a
piece of paste, which is pressed around it, so it cannot come off and
fry in deep fat. When done, strew with sugar and cinnamon and serve hot.

No. 51—APPLE FRITTERS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

For the Pancake Batter.

3 eggs
1 cup of flour
½ cup of milk
¼ tsp. of salt
3 medium-sized apples
½ cup of sugar
¼ tsp. of cinnamon
Butter for baking
Sugar and cinnamon for sprinkling.
½ glass white wine

Preparation: Eggs, flour, milk and salt are stirred to a pancake
batter. The apples are peeled and cut into thick slices, the core
carefully removed, the white wine with sugar and cinnamon poured over
the slices, covered and left standing for 1 hour.

Heat the butter in a pan, dip the apple slices into the batter and put
them into the hot butter, then put on another tablespoonful of batter
and bake on both sides to a nice brown color. Strew sugar and cinnamon
over. Serve hot.

No. 52—MACARONI WITH PARMESAN CHEESE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of macaroni
3 qts. of water
1 tbsp. of salt
1 medium-sized onion
2 cloves
⅛ lb. of butter
1 pinch of pepper
⅛ lb. of grated Parmesan cheese

Preparation: The macaroni is broken into pieces and cooked well in
boiling salt water, which will require ½ hour. Drain the water off,
strew pepper and grated cheese on, put the butter on and cook a while
longer. Serve hot with a tomato or lobster dressing.

No. 53—BAKED MACARONI.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are the same as given under No. 52, but
these are put into a buttered baking dish, ¾ pt. of cream poured on,
roll crumbs and butter on top and baked in the oven to a nice color.

No. 54—MACARONI WITH HAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given in Chapter 5, No. 13, Boiled Ham
With Macaroni.

No. 55—FISH MACARONI.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of macaroni
3 qts. of water
1 tbsp. of salt
2 lbs. of boiled fish
¼ lb. of grated Parmesan cheese
½ pt. white wine
1 tbsp. of flour
1 pt. of cream or milk
2 tbsps. of lemon juice
Salt to taste
1 pinch of pepper
½ cup sliced champignons
¼ lb. of butter

Preparation: The macaroni is broken into inch pieces and boiled in 3
qts. of salt water. The fish is cleaned, dressed and boiled in salt
water, then the skin and bones are taken out and the fish cut into
small pieces. Butter a baking dish, put in a layer of macaroni, then
fish and Parmesan cheese and champignons, sprinkled with white wine.
Repeat this 3 times, the last layer being macaroni. A dressing is made
of ⅛ lb. of melted butter into which the flour, cream or milk, lemon
juice, salt and pepper are stirred, this poured over the macaroni, the
⅛ lb. of butter cut in small pieces, sprinkled over the top and baked
in the oven to a nice color.

No. 56—MACARONI PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of macaroni
3 qts. of water, for cooking
1 tbsp. of salt
Scant ¼ lb. of butter
⅛ lb. of grated Parmesan cheese
4 eggs
½ pt. of cream
1 pinch of pepper and one of salt

Preparation: The macaroni is broken into 1 inch pieces, cooked in 3
qts. of salt water, and drained. Cream the butter, stir in the yolks
of eggs, cheese, salt, pepper and macaroni. Beat the whites of eggs
and add, stirring lightly. Put into a buttered baking dish or
casserole, which has been strewn with bread crumbs, cover well, set in
a steamer over a kettle of boiling water and cook 1 hour. Serve with a
truffle or brown butter dressing and turn pudding out on a platter.

No. 57—MUFFINS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ pt. of flour
½ pt. of corn meal
⅓ cup of sugar
½ pt. of milk
2 tbsps. of melted butter
2 tsps. of baking powder
2 eggs

Preparation: Flour, corn meal, sugar, eggs, milk and melted butter are
mixed to a smooth batter, the baking powder added, then small muffin
tins buttered and filled with dough. Bake 20 minutes.

No. 58—CHOCOLATE PIE WITH WHIPPED CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of butter
½ glass water
1½ cups of flour

For the Filling.

¼ lb. of sugar
¼ lb. grated sweet chocolate
¼ cup of water
1 tsp. vanilla
3 eggs

For the Frosting.

Whipped cream

Preparation: The pie crust is made as given under No. 16. For the
filling, cook the chocolate 5 minutes with the water, sugar and
vanilla, stirring constantly, remove from the stove and stir in the
yolks of eggs and the beaten whites.

This mixture is poured into the baked pie crust and put back into the
oven to thicken. When cold, cover with whipped cream mixed with sugar
and vanilla.

CHAPTER 16.

SAUCES.

FRUIT.

Stewed fruit used as a sauce is a wholesome and valuable food. It is
served with poultry and game. It is refreshing for patients. The fruit
must be cooked in a pot or kettle free from any kind of grease. The
spices must be removed from sauces and jams before serving. Fruit jams
and sauces look best when served in glass dishes.

No. 1—APPLE SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of apples
3 cups of water
Sugar to taste
½ cup of white wine. If you like it
1 slice of lemon
1 tsp. of lemon juice

Preparation: The apples are pared, cored, cut up into eighths, boiled
until tender with water, wine, lemon slice, lemon juice and sugar.
They should be cooked on a moderate fire to prevent scorching, rubbed
through a colander, served cold in a glass dish.

No. 2—CHERRY SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of cherries
Sugar to taste
1 cup of water

Preparation: The cherries are cleaned, the stems picked off, cooked
until tender in sugar and water and served cold. Sour cherries require
much sugar.

No. 3—STRAWBERRY SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 qts. of strawberries
1 cup of sugar
½ cup of water

Preparation: The berries are cleaned and washed. Water and sugar are
boiled down to a syrup; cool it and put in the strawberries and shake
them until they are well mixed with the syrup. Then put them in a cool
place.

No. 4—RASPBERRY SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. of raspberries
¾ cup of sugar
½ cup of water

Preparation: Clean the berries, boil the water and sugar 5 minutes,
then put in the berries and cook a little while. Carefully remove the
scum and serve the fruit cold.

No. 5—CURRANT SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 qts. of currants
1 cup of water
1½ cups of sugar

Preparation: Clean the currants and pick them off the stems. Boil the
sugar and water, put in the berries and cook them a few minutes, take
them out and put them into a dish. Boil the syrup until thick, then
pour over the berries and serve cold.

No. 6—WHORTLEBERRY OR HUCKLEBERRY SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ qts. of whortleberries
½ cup of sugar
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
1 lemon slice

Preparation: The berries are picked over, washed, put on the fire with
water and sugar to cook. When boiling, add lemon slice and juice, let
it boil up a few times, remove the lemon slice and serve cold.

No. 7—BLACK MULBERRY SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 qts. of mulberries
½ cup of sugar
½ cup of white wine or water
1½ tbsps. of lemon juice

Preparation: The berries are picked over, washed and the water drained
off. White wine and sugar or water and sugar are brought to boil. Add
lemon juice and mulberries, cook 1 minute, take them out with a
skimmer. Boil down the juice and pour over the berries. Serve cold.

No. 8—FRESH PLUM SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of fresh plums
½ cup of water
½ cup of sugar

Preparation: The plums are cut into halves and the stones are taken
out. The water and sugar boiled a few minutes, the plums put in,
covered and cooked slowly without stirring until tender. Carefully
place them into a dish so they will not be crushed. Boil down the
juice and pour it over the fruit. Serve cold.

No. 9—GOOSEBERRY SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ qts. of gooseberries
¼ cup of water
2 cups of sugar
1 piece of lemon peel

Preparation: The unripe berries are cleaned, i.e., stems and calix
removed, scalded and left in the water a few minutes and drained.

Water and sugar are boiled, the berries put in and covered. Let them
simmer ½ hour, strew with sugar and serve cold.

Remarks: If there should be much syrup, boil some of it down with
sugar until it becomes pink and forms bubbles, then pour on to a
moistened plate. This jelly may be used for garnishing.

No. 10—BILBERRY OR BLUEBERRY SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. berries
2 cups of water
1 cup of sugar

Preparation: The berries are washed, cooked until tender in water and
sugar, rubbed through a sieve or colander and served cold.

No. 11—PEACH SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ lbs. of peaches
¾ cup of sugar
½ cup of water
10 peach stones

Preparation: The peaches are pared, cut into halves and the stones
removed. Sugar and water are boiled a few minutes, the peaches put in
and 10 of the stones, set to simmer a few minutes; then take them out
with a skimmer, boil down the syrup and pour over the fruit when cold.

No. 12—APRICOT SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The ingredients and preparation are the same as given under No. 11,
Peach Sauce.

No. 13—PLUM SAUCE.

Mirabelle Plum.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ lbs. mirabelle plums
¾ cup of white wine or water
1 cup of sugar

Preparation: Sugar and wine are boiled for ½ minute, prick each plum,
put them into the boiling sugar and stew them slowly until tender.
Serve cold.

No. 14—GREENGAGE SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The preparation of this fruit is the same as given under No. 13,
Mirabelle Plum.

No. 15—PINEAPPLE SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pineapple
1 cup of sugar
2 tbsps. of lemon juice
1 cup of water

Preparation: The pineapple is peeled, cut up into neat pieces and
cooked well done in sugar and water mixed with lemon juice. If there
is too much syrup, take out the fruit, boil down the syrup and pour
over the fruit. Serve cold.

No. 16—MELON SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 melons
Juice of 1 lemon
1 cup of sugar
½ cup of water

Preparation: The melons are peeled, the seeds taken out, the fruit cut
into neat pieces and boiled until tender in sugar, water and lemon
juice. Then take out the melon with a skimmer, boil down the juice to
a syrup and pour it over the fruit. Serve cold.

No. 17—ORANGE AND APPLE SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 sweet-sour apples
6 oranges
½ cup of white wine
½ cup of water
1 cup of sugar

Preparation: The apples and oranges are peeled, the core and seeds
removed and each sliced or cut into 8 to 10 equal pieces. The sliced
apples are boiled in white wine, water and ½ cup of sugar. Cook
slowly, taking care that the pieces do not break. Let them cool. The
white skin is removed from the oranges. The yellow skin or peeling is
cut up and thickly sugared, set on the stove so the sugar will adhere
to the pieces, then set to cool. The orange slices are also sugared
well. Now in a glass dish, alternate layers of boiled apples and
sliced oranges are placed, repeating twice, and the apple and orange
juice poured over. The sugared orange peel is used for garnishing the
dish; but the rind of one orange should be sufficient for that.

No. 18—STEWED SLICED APPLES FOR SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

12 sweet-sour apples
2 cups of water ½ cup of white wine
¾ cup of sugar
¼ cup of currants

Preparation: The apples are peeled, cored and cut into 8 or 10 equal
parts. The currants are washed and put to boil with apples, water,
wine and sugar. Boil until tender, but not broken. Serve them cold.

No. 19—DRIED APPLES FOR SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of dried apples
¾ qt. of water
¼ lb. of sugar
1 slice of lemon
Juice of ½ lemon
1 cup of white wine, if you wish

Preparation: The apples are washed, drained and put to boil in ¾ qt.
of water. Set them on the back of the stove where they will heat very
slowly and soak while heating. Add the sugar, lemon slice, lemon juice
and white wine, let them boil until tender and serve cold.

Remarks: These dried apples may be made into a smooth sauce by rubbing
them through a colander or sieve when done.

No. 20—PRUNES FOR SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 lb. of prunes
¾ cup of sugar
1 pt. of water
1 slice of lemon
Juice of ½ lemon

Preparation: The prunes are washed and set to boil with 1 pt. of
water, sugar, lemon slice and lemon juice. If there is too much juice,
take the prunes out, boil down to a thicker syrup and pour over the
prunes. Serve cold.

No. 21—RHUBARB SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 bunches of pie plants
1 cup of water
Sugar to taste

Preparation: Skin the rhubarb and cut it up in 2 inch pieces, cook
until tender in water and much sugar. Serve cold. Rhubarb requires
much sugar, as it is very sour.

Remarks: If you like, you can thicken this sauce with a little corn
starch dissolved in water.

No. 22—PEAR SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of juicy pears
1½ qts. of water
¼ lb. of sugar
1 stick of cinnamon
1 slice of lemon
1 tbsp. of corn starch
1 clove

Preparation: The pears are peeled, large pears cut into 4 parts, small
ones into halves. The core is cut out and the pears cooked until
tender in water, sugar, cloves, cinnamon and lemon slice. It is best
to cook them very slowly in a granite or porcelain dish. When the
pears are soft, take them out, add the corn starch to the syrup, boil
it down and pour over the fruit. Serve cold or warm.

No. 23—TOMATO SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

12 medium-sized tomatoes
2 cups of sugar
3 cloves
½ sliced lemon
1½ cups of water

Preparation: The tomatoes are scalded and skinned. Water, sugar,
cloves and lemon slices brought to boil and the tomatoes put in 2 or 3
at a time. When they are done, take them out and put in others until
all are boiled. Boil down the syrup if there is too much of it and
pour over the tomatoes after straining.

CHAPTER 17.

DESSERTS.

Directions for preparing all kinds of desserts, cold and warm;
puddings, puff pastes, souffles, sherbets, creams, ices and ice creams.

Steamed Puddings.

No. 1—RICE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of rice
1 qt. of milk
¼ lb. of fresh butter
¼ lb. of sugar, scant
¼ lb. of raisins
¼ lb. of ground almonds
7 eggs
1 pinch of salt

Preparation: The rice is washed and brought to boil in 1 cup of water.
When the water is boiled down, add the milk gradually and 1 pinch of
salt and boil to a thick mush. When done, cool it off. Cream the
butter, add sugar, 7 yolks of eggs, raisins, almonds and the beaten
whites of eggs. Butter a pudding mold, strew in some bread crumbs, put
in the rice pudding, close the mold well and set in a steamer over a
kettle of boiling water and boil for 1½ hours. When serving, turn the
pudding out on a platter and serve cold with a vanilla or wine sauce
or sweet cream.

No. 2—APPLE RICE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of rice
¾ qt. of milk
⅛ lb. of butter
¼ lb. of raisins
7 eggs
1 pinch of salt
6 sweet-sour apples
1 cup of sugar
¼ lb. of blanched, ground almonds

Preparation: The rice is cooked slowly with one cup of water; when the
water is boiled down, add the milk gradually and cook it to a thick
mush. Cream the butter, add the sugar, then the yolks of eggs, raisins
and almonds. Let rice cool, then mix all together. The apples are
peeled, cored, cut into 16 parts and stewed until tender in a little
water and sugar. Butter a pudding mold and strew with bread crumbs.
Stir the well-beaten whites of the 7 eggs into the rice, put a layer
of rice into the mold, then a layer of apples and repeat this twice;
the last layer to be rice. Close the mold, set in a steamer over a
kettle of boiling water and boil 1½ hours, then turn over on platter
and serve with sweet cream.

No. 3—CHERRY RICE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of rice
¾ qts. of milk
⅛ lb. butter
7 eggs
¼ lb. of peeled and ground almonds
¼ lb. of raisins
1 lb. stoned sour cherries
1 cup of sugar

Preparation: The preparation is again the same as No. 2, instead of
apples put in layers of sour cherries, boiled until tender in 1 cup of
sugar and 1 cup of water. Boil down the cherry juice with sugar to
taste and serve it with the pudding.

No. 4—PEACH RICE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of rice
¾ qt. of milk
7 eggs
⅛ lb. of butter
¼ lb. of peeled and ground almonds
¼ lb. of raisins
1½ lbs. of peaches
½ lb. of sugar

Preparation: The preparation is again the same as No. 2, instead of
apples put in layers of peaches, boiled until tender in 1 cup of water
and one of sugar. Boil down the peach juice, putting in a few stones
which should be removed before serving, and serve the syrup with the
pudding.

No. 5—APRICOT RICE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of rice
¾ qt. of milk
⅛ lb. of butter
7 eggs
1½ lbs. of stoned apricots
¼ lb. of sugar
¼ lb. of peeled and ground almonds
¼ lb. of raisins

Preparation: The preparation is the same as given under No. 2, see
Apple Rice Pudding. Instead of apples put in layers of apricots boiled
until tender in 1 cup of water and ½ cup of sugar. Boil down the juice
with some sugar and serve with the pudding.

No. 6—PLAIN RICE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of rice
1 qt. of milk
¼ lb. of butter
7 eggs
¼ lb. of sugar

Preparation: The preparation is the same as given under No. 1, Rice
Pudding.

No. 7—FROTH OR FOAM PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ pt. of milk
¼ lb. of butter
¼ lb. of sugar
¼ lb. of fine flour
1 lemon peel
8 eggs

Preparation: The milk is brought to boil, the butter added, sugar and
flour are mixed and stirred into the boiling milk until the mixture
comes off the sides of the skillet. Then cool it, grate the lemon peel
and stir it in with the yolks of eggs and the beaten whites. Butter a
pudding mold and strew in bread crumbs, then put in the pudding, set
in a steamer over a kettle of boiling water, cover the mold tightly
and boil for 2 hours. Turn it, and serve with a fruit sauce.

No. 8—CABINET PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

8 zwieback
12 lady fingers
¼ lb. of raisins
¼ lb. of currants
1 pt. of milk
1 pt. of cream
6 eggs
¼ lb. of sugar

Preparation: The zwieback is broken into 3 parts, the lady fingers
into halves. Butter a mold and make a layer of zwieback, raisins,
currants, then one of lady fingers, repeat this 2 to 3 times, the last
layer being zwieback. Then mix well the milk, cream, sugar and eggs
and pour on the pudding, set in a steamer over a kettle of boiling
water and boil 1½ hours. When done, turn it out on a platter and serve
with a wine sauce.

No. 9—WHEAT BREAD PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of fresh butter
6 eggs
¼ lb. of sugar
½ cup of raisins
¼ cup of currants
½ cup of fine cut citron
½ cup blanched, grated almonds
4 milk rolls

Preparation: Cream, the butter with yolks of eggs, sugar, raisins,
currants, citron and almonds, mix and stir well. The crust of the
rolls is grated off, then they are soaked in milk, the surplus milk
pressed out and the rolls stirred with the rest of the ingredients,
also the beaten whites of eggs. Butter a mold, strew with bread
crumbs, put in the pudding and steam 1 hour. Serve with a fruit sauce.

No. 10—PLUM PUDDING.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

1 pinch of salt
1 lb. raisins
1 lb. currants
1 lb. of flour
1 lb. of sugar
1 lb. beef kidney suet
6 eggs
1 lemon peel
2 cups of milk
2 small cups of grated bread
½ cup of brandy
Rum

Preparation: Raisins and currants are washed well and dried. The suet
is chopped very fine and mixed well with 6 eggs, sugar, raisins,
currants, grated lemon peel, milk, bread crumbs, brandy and lastly the
flour. Butter a mold, strew with bread crumbs, put in the pudding and
steam for 5 hours. Turn the pudding out on a platter, pour the rum
over and light it. The flaming pudding is brought to the table and
served with a wine sauce.

No. 11—CHOCOLATE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. of milk
Scant ¼ lb. of butter
¼ lb. grated sweet chocolate
Scant ¼ lb. of sugar
⅛ lb. blanched, ground almonds
6 eggs
¼ lb. fine flour

Preparation: The milk is brought to boil, butter, sugar, flour,
chocolate well stirred in until the mixture comes off the sides of the
skillet, then take from the stove. Cool it and stir in the almonds,
yolks of eggs and the beaten whites.

Butter a mold, strew with bread crumbs, fill with the pudding, cover
tightly and steam 1½ hours, then turn out on a platter and serve with
a vanilla sauce.

Remarks: The dish must be only ¾ full because the pudding raises very
much.

No. 12—FLOUR PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of fine flour
8 eggs
½ grated lemon peel
¼ lb. of sugar
4 tbsps. of lemon juice

Preparation: Beat the yolks of eggs with sugar 20 minutes, add lemon
juice and grated rind and lastly stir in the flour, which must be
sifted 4 times. The whites of eggs are beaten to a stiff froth and
mixed in. Butter a mold, put in the pudding, close it well and steam
1¼ hours. Turn the pudding on a platter and serve with a wine sauce.

No. 13—LAYER PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ pt. of cream
¼ lb. of flour
⅛ lb. of butter
5 beaten whites of eggs
¼ lb. of sugar
½ lemon peel
5 yolks of eggs

For the Filling.

½ lb. peach marmalade, or 1 qt. of cherry or strawberry preserves

For Between Layers, 4 Small Pancakes.

¼ lb. of flour
3 tbsps. of butter
4 eggs
1 pinch of salt
¼ lemon peel
Butter, for baking
¼ pt. of milk

Preparation: Cream, flour, butter, yolks of eggs are mixed well and
brought to boil. When the batter rolls from the sides of the pot, take
it off the fire to cool. Then add sugar, grated lemon peel, and 5
whites of eggs beaten to a stiff froth.

Now bake the pancakes. Mix well the milk, flour, 3 tablespoonfuls of
melted butter, 4 eggs and a little salt. Heat a pan with butter and
bake the pancakes the size of the pudding dish. Now butter the mold,
strew bread crumbs in, make 1 layer of pudding batter, one layer of
fruit marmalade or preserved fruit as peaches, cherries, strawberries
or raspberries; on this fruit layer, place a pancake, then another
layer of pudding batter, again a layer of fruit, another pancake and
so on according to the number of pancakes you have. The top layer must
be the pudding batter. Close the dish well and steam for 1½ hours.
When done, turn the pudding out and serve with a fruit sauce.

No. 14—FARINA PUDDING No. 1.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. of milk
1 cup of fine farina
⅛ lb. of butter
Scant ¼ lb. of sugar
¼ lb. of blanched, ground almonds
The rind of ¼ lemon
6 eggs

Preparation: Milk and butter are brought to boil, the farina stirred
in, the sugar and lemon rind added and all stirred and cooked until
the batter rolls from the sides of the skillet, then cool it off and
add almonds, yolks of eggs and beaten whites. Butter a mold, strew
with roll crumbs, put in the pudding, close the mold well and steam 1½
hours. Turn the pudding out on a platter and serve with cherry or
raspberry sauce.

No. 15—MACARONI PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are the same as given under No. 56, in
Chapter 15, Macaroni Pudding.

No. 16—POTATO PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given in Chapter 10, No. 16, Potato
Pudding.

No. 17—MEAT PUDDING WITH RICE LAYERS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients, and preparation are the same as given as in Chapter 2,
Beef, No. 2, Meat Pudding, from Roast Beef, Stew or Soup Meat.

No. 18—ANOTHER FORM OF MEAT PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are the same as given in Chapter 2, Beef,
No. 26, Meat Pudding.

No. 19—MUTTON KIDNEY PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparations are given in Chapter 4, Lamb, No. 20,
Lamb Kidney Pudding.

No. 20—VEAL ROAST PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are the same as given in Chapter 3, Veal,
No. 6, Veal Roast Pudding.

No. 21—GOOSE LIVER PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given in Chapter 6, Poultry, No. 26,
Goose Liver Pudding.

No. 22—CHERRY PUDDING.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

8 milk rolls
¾ qt. of milk
¼ lb. of butter
8 eggs
Rind of 1 lemon
¼ tsp. of cinnamon
2 lbs. stoned cherries
¾ cup of sugar

Preparation: The milk rolls are grated and soaked in milk. When well
soaked, press out the milk and rub them through a strainer or
colander. Melt the butter in a spider, put in the mashed rolls and
sauté or dry fry them on the stove. Now mix this well with yolks of
eggs, grated lemon rind, cinnamon, sugar, stoned cherries and cherry
syrup. Beat the whites of eggs to a stiff froth and add to the
mixture. Butter a pudding mold, strew in bread crumbs, then fill with
the pudding and steam for 2 hours. Turn out and serve.

No. 23—FARINA PUDDING No. 2.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. of milk
¼ lb. of butter
¾ cup of sugar
1 grated lemon peel
¾ cup of fine farina
8 bitter almonds
¼ lb. sweet almonds
8 eggs

Preparation: The milk and butter are brought to boil, then the sugar,
lemon peel and farina poured in and cooked 5 minutes to a thick paste,
stirring constantly. Now take from the fire, cool off and add blanched
and ground sweet and bitter almonds, the 8 yolks of eggs and the
beaten whites. Butter a pudding mold, strew with bread crumbs, put in
the pudding and steam 1½ hours. Turn the pudding out and serve with a
fruit or wine sauce.

No. 24—SOUR CREAM PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ pt. thick, sour cream
Juice and peel of ½ lemon
10 eggs 1 cup of currants
¾ lb. of roll crumbs
¼ tsp. of salt
¼ cup of sugar

Preparation: The thick sour cream is mixed well and stirred 10 minutes
with juice and grated peel of lemon, yolks of eggs, roll crumbs, salt,
currants and beaten whites of eggs. A mold is buttered and strewn with
roll crumbs, the pudding filled in and steamed 1½ hours. Then it is
turned out on a platter and served with a wine or fruit sauce.

No. 25—BLACK PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of ground almonds
¼ lb. sweet chocolate
¼ lb. of sugar
⅛ lb. of small raisins
¼ cup chopped citron
¼ tsp. cinnamon
⅛ tsp. ground cloves
¾ cup of roll crumbs
¼ cup of white wine
6 eggs

Preparation: The unblanched almonds are ground, the chocolate grated.
Sugar and yolks of eggs are stirred 20 minutes, then mixed well with
almonds, chocolate, raisins, citron, cinnamon, cloves, roll crumbs,
white wine and beaten whites of eggs. Butter a mold, strew it with
crumbs, put in the pudding, close it well and steam 1½ hours. Turn it
out and serve with a chocolate sauce.

No. 26—PUDDING A LA BRANDENBURG.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

1 pt. of milk
⅛ lb. of butter
¼ lb. flour, good measure
¼ lb. of sugar
⅛ lb. of blanched, chopped sweet almonds
1 tbsp. chopped bitter almonds
2 tbsps. chopped citron
1 tbsp. chopped orange rind
½ grated lemon peel
7 eggs
¼ cup of rum

Preparation: Milk and butter are brought to boil, add the flour and
boil, stirring constantly till it comes from the sides of the skillet.
Cool and stir in the sugar, sweet and bitter almonds, citron, orange
and lemon peel, yolks of eggs and the beaten whites. Butter a pudding
mold, strew it with roll crumbs, put in the pudding, close well and
steam for 2 hours. Turn the pudding out on a platter, pour on ¼ cup of
rum, light it and bring it to the table. Serve with a wine sauce.

Warm Puddings, Baked Puddings.

No. 27—BAKED CREAM PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¾ qt. of sour cream
¾ cup of sugar
½ lemon peel
2 tbsps. of lemon juice
3 tbsps. of flour
7 eggs

Preparation: The sour cream is mixed well with sugar, grated lemon
peel, lemon juice, flour, 7 yolks of eggs and beaten whites. Then bake
in the oven in a buttered pudding dish for 25 to 30 minutes.

No. 28—BAKED RICE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 cup of rice
¾ qt. of milk
⅛ lb. of butter
4 eggs
½ cup of sugar

Preparation: The rice is boiled to a thick mush with milk. Cream the
butter with sugar and yolks of eggs, add the rice and the beaten
whites of eggs, fill into a buttered pudding dish and bake in oven ½
hour.

Remarks: The pudding may be made richer with ¼ lb. blanched, ground
almonds, ½ cup of raisins, 6 to 8 eggs instead of 4.

No. 29—BAKED RICE PUDDING WITH FRUIT LAYERS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 cup of rice
¾ qt. of milk
⅛ lb. of butter
1 qt. boiled fruit, (cherries, apricots or peaches)
6 eggs
½ cup of sugar

Preparation: The preparation of the rice is the same as given under
No. 28, Baked Rice Pudding.

The buttered pudding dish is filled with alternating layers of rice
and fruit, from which the juice has been drained. Put in 3 layers of
each and the top layer should be rice. Bake in oven for 1 hour and
serve with the sauce from the fruit used in the pudding.

No. 30—BAKED FARINA PUDDING WITH FRUIT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. of milk
1 cup of farina
¼ lb. of butter
1 grated lemon rind
3 tbsps. of lemon juice
¼ lb. sugar
5 eggs
1 qt. cherries

Preparation: The milk is brought to boil, the farina put in and
stirred 10 minutes. Let it get cold. Cream the butter, add grated
lemon rind, lemon juice, sugar, 5 yolks of eggs and the farina and
stir in the beaten whites of eggs. Butter a pudding dish and fill it
with alternating layers of farina and cherries, 2 layers of each; the
top layer should be farina. Put a few pieces of butter over the top
and bake in oven 1 hour.

No. 31—BAKED CHERRY PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of butter
¼ lb. of sugar
6 eggs
¼ lb. blanched, ground almonds
3 rolls
3 lbs. sweet cherries

Preparation: Soak the rolls in milk, cream the butter with sugar, add
the yolks of eggs, almonds and rolls, after pressing out the milk; mix
well, add the stoned cherries and beaten whites of eggs. Butter a
baking dish, put in the pudding and bake in oven 1 hour.

No. 32—BAKED LEMON PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

8 eggs
¼ lb. of sugar
½ lemon peel
1 tbsp. corn starch
Juice of 1½ lemons

Preparation: The 8 yolks of eggs are beaten ¼ hour with sugar, lemon
juice and grated lemon peel, the corn starch and beaten whites of eggs
added last. Butter a baking dish, fill in the pudding and bake 15
minutes.

No. 33—BAKED POTATO PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. boiled, grated potatoes
6 eggs
½ pt. of cream
¼ lb. of sugar
1 grated lemon rind

Preparation: Cream the yolks of eggs and sugar, add the grated lemon
peel, grated potatoes, cream, beaten whites of eggs, and mix well. Put
the batter into a buttered baking dish and bake in oven 45 minutes.
Serve with a fruit sauce.

No. 34—BAKED POTATO PUDDING.

To be Served with Meat.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

8 medium-sized potatoes
1⁄10 lb. of butter
2–3 eggs
½ tbsp. Parmesan cheese
1 pinch of pepper
Salt to taste

Preparation: The potatoes are boiled, peeled and grated. Cream the
butter with the yolks of eggs, add the potatoes, cheese, salt, pepper
and beaten whites of eggs. Butter a casserole or pudding dish, put the
pudding in, sprinkle bread crumbs and pieces of butter over the top
and bake in oven 45 minutes.

No. 35—BAKED CHARLOTTE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 rolls
½ pt. of milk almonds
¼ pt. of white wine
¼ lb. of sugar
½ cup of blanched, ground
½ cup of raisins
½ grated lemon peel
4 eggs

Preparation: The rolls are soaked in milk and wine, add ground
almonds, sugar, raisins, lemon peel, yolks of 4 eggs and lastly the
beaten whites of eggs. A baking dish is buttered, the pudding filled
in and baked in oven 45 minutes. A fruit or wine sauce is served with
the pudding.

No. 36—BAKED ALMOND PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

8 eggs
¼ lb. blanched, ground almonds
¾ cup of sugar
¼ lb. fine flour

Preparation: The yolks of eggs, almonds and sugar are stirred 20
minutes, then the flour and whites of eggs added. A pudding dish is
buttered, the pudding filled in and baked 45 minutes.

No. 37—BAKED YORKSHIRE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 egg
1 white of egg
½ pt. of milk
1 pinch of salt
6 tbsps. of butter
6 tbsps. of mutton suet
1 cup of flour

Preparation: Egg, white of egg, milk and flour are mixed well. Butter
is heated in a pudding dish, the batter put in, the suet heated and
poured over and the pudding baked in a hot oven 20 minutes.

No. 38—BAKED CHOCOLATE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1¼ pts. of milk
¼ lb. of sweet chocolate
4 tbsps. of flour
¼ lb. of sugar
¾ cup of butter
7 eggs
1 tsp. of vanilla

Preparation: The chocolate is grated and mixed with flour and sugar.
The milk is brought to boil and the chocolate with the flour and sugar
added, stirred over the fire until the mixture is thick, then cooled.
Cream the butter with the yolks of eggs and vanilla, mix with the
chocolate batter and the beaten whites of eggs. Butter a pudding dish,
fill in the pudding and bake in oven for 1 hour.

No. 39—BAKED APPLE AND FARINA PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. of milk
½ cup of fine farina
4 eggs
¼ lb. of butter
6 large sweet-sour apples
¼ lb. of raisins or currants
⅛ lb. blanched, ground sweet almonds
6 blanched, ground bitter almonds
One lemon peel

Preparation: The milk is brought to boil, the farina added and cooked
10 minutes, stirring constantly, then cooled. Cream the butter, mix
with yolks of eggs, sugar, grated lemon peel, the boiled farina, and
the beaten whites of eggs.

The apples are peeled, sliced into ¼ inch slices, mixed with ½ cup of
sugar. Butter a pudding dish and put in layers of farina, apples,
currants and almonds alternating, repeat 3 times; then bake in oven
for 1 hour.

No. 40—BAKED APPLE STEW PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

⅛ lb. of good butter
8 medium-sized sweet-sour apples
½ cup of sugar
1½ heaping tbsps. of flour
1 pt. thick sweet cream
4 eggs
1 lemon peel

Preparation: The apples are peeled, cut into 4 inch slices and stewed
in ⅛ lb. of butter, then cooled. Beat 4 yolks of eggs for 30 minutes
with sugar, add flour, grated lemon peel, cream and the stewed apples.
Lastly add the beaten whites of eggs. Butter a pudding dish, put in
the pudding and bake 45 minutes.

No. 41—FINE BAKED APPLE PUDDING:

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 medium-sized, sweet-sour apples
½ cup of currants
¼ cup of blanched, ground almonds
2 tbsps. of sugar
¼ tsp. of cinnamon
½ grated lemon peel
¾ qt. thick, sweet cream
5 eggs
½ cup of sugar
2 tbsps. of flour

Preparation: The apples are peeled, cored and filled with a mixture of
currants, almonds and 2 tablespoonfuls of sugar. Butter a
pudding dish, put in the filled apples, make a batter of cream,
cinnamon, lemon peel, yolks of eggs, sugar, flour and beaten whites of
eggs, then pour over the apples and bake slowly.

No. 42—BAKED OMELET PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 eggs
½ grated lemon peel
6 tbsps. of sugar

Preparation: The yolks of eggs are beaten 25 minutes with the sugar,
the beaten whites of eggs lightly mixed in, then put into a buttered
pudding dish, and bake in oven 20 minutes.

No. 43—BAKED CREAM PUDDING.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

1 pt. of milk
7 eggs
⅛ lb. of corn starch
1 tbsp. of butter
½ grated lemon peel
⅛ lb. of sugar

Preparation: Milk, butter and sugar are brought to boil. Four yolks of
eggs are stirred smooth with the corn starch and added to the boiling
milk to cook 3 minutes, stirring constantly; then cooled and three
yolks of eggs, grated lemon peel, beaten whites of 7 eggs added.

Butter a dish, put in the pudding and bake in oven ½ hour. Serve with
a fruit sauce.

No. 44—BAKED FLOUR PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¾ qt. of milk
½ cup of flour
¼ lb. of sugar
¼ lb. blanched, ground almonds
5 eggs

Preparation: Flour and ½ cup of milk are stirred smooth, the rest of
the milk brought to boil and the flour stirred in to boil 1 minute.
The almonds, sugar and eggs are stirred in and beaten 10 minutes.
Butter a pudding dish, put in the batter and bake in oven for 1 hour.
Serve with a raspberry sauce.

No. 45—BAKED SPONGE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 eggs
4 tbsps. of thick, sour cream
¾ cup of sugar
2 tsps. of vanilla

Preparation: Yolks of eggs, cream, sugar and vanilla are stirred 20
minutes. The beaten whites of eggs are mixed and put into a buttered
pudding dish. Bake in medium hot oven for ½ hour. A fruit sauce is
served with it.

No. 46—BAKED VEAL ROAST PUDDING.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given in Chapter 3, Veal, No. 6, Veal
Roast Pudding.

No. 47—BAKED SWEET PUDDING WITH WINE FROSTING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 rolls
1 pt. of milk
¼ lb. of good butter
¼ lb. of sugar
⅛ lb. chopped citron or almonds
1¼ grated lemon peel
¼ tsp. of cinnamon
6 eggs

For Wine Frosting.

6 eggs
⅛ lb. of sugar
Peel and juice of 1 lemon
¼ tsp. of cinnamon
2 glasses of French white wine
1 glass of arrack

Preparation: The crust is grated off the rolls, these are cut up,
soaked in milk for 1 hour, then the milk is pressed out and the soaked
rolls stirred with the melted butter to a creamy mass. Add sugar,
citron, cinnamon, 6 yolks of eggs, and the beaten whites. Butter a
pudding dish, put in the batter and bake 1 hour.

Prepare the frosting by mixing 6 yolks of eggs, sugar, grated lemon
peel and lemon juice, cinnamon, French white wine and arrack and
heating it on the fire while beating constantly. Then add the 6 beaten
whites of eggs to the hot sauce. Pour the wine sauce over the hot
baked pudding and serve at once.

No. 48—BAKED RYE BREAD PUDDING WITH APPLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2½ cups of soaked rye bread
3 eggs
1 cup of sugar
6–8 medium-sized, sweet-sour apples
⅛ lb. of butter
¾ cup of currants

Preparation: The apples are peeled, cored, cut into slices ¼ inch
thick. Cream the butter, add sugar, yolks of eggs, rye bread, currants
and beaten whites of eggs. Butter a pudding dish and fill it with
alternating layers of rye bread mixture and apples with sugar
sprinkled over, repeat 2 or 3 times. The top layer should be rye
bread. Put on small pieces of butter and bake in oven 1 hour. Serve
sweet cream with the pudding.

No. 49—BAKED NOODLE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Noodles made front 2 eggs
Salt water
6–8 medium-sized, sweet-sour apples
¾ cup of sugar
½ cup of currants
1 cup of water

Preparation: The noodles are cooked in salt water for 10 minutes, then
the water is drained off. The apples are peeled, cored and sliced.
Butter a pudding dish and fill with alternating layers of noodles and
apples with sugar and currants. The top layer should be noodles.
Pour on a cup of water, put on small pieces of butter and bake in oven
1 hour.

No. 50—BAKED QUINCE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6–8 quinces
¼ lb. of sugar
Juice and peel of 1 lemon
6 eggs

Preparation: The quinces are boiled until soft in water, then skin and
grate them. The grated quince should weigh about ¾ lb. Stir until
white. Add sugar, grated lemon peel and juice, yolks and beaten whites
of eggs. Put into a buttered dish and bake in oven ½ hour.

No. 51—BAKED MACAROON PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 tbsps. of butter
½ pt. of milk
Scant ⅛ lb. of flour
2 tbsps. of cream
3 cups of sweet macaroons
¼ cup of bitter macaroons
5 eggs
⅛ lb. of sugar
⅛ lb. blanched, ground almonds
1 tbsp. of vanilla

Preparation: Butter, milk, flour, crushed macaroons are stirred over
the fire until they form a thick batter; remove from the fire and stir
until it has cooled off. Add the yolks of eggs, sugar, almonds,
vanilla, beaten whites of eggs. Put into a buttered dish and bake in
oven for 1 hour. Serve with a fruit sauce.

Remarks: This pudding may be steamed for 1½ hours.

Sweetmeats Baked or Fried in Pans On the Stove.

No. 52—FRENCH TOAST.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 milk rolls
1 pt. of cream or milk
¼ cup of sugar
2 eggs
½ tsp. of cinnamon
Butter or lard for baking

Preparation: The rolls are sliced, cream, sugar, eggs, cinnamon are
mixed and poured over the slices to soak. Butter is heated in a pan,
the roll slices baked a golden yellow in it and sprinkled thickly with
sugar and cinnamon. Serve dried or fresh fruit sauce with it.

No. 53—CARTHUSIAN DUMPLINGS WITH WINE SAUCE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 fresh rolls
1½ pts. of milk
2 eggs
¼ cup of sugar
½ tsp. of cinnamon
Butter for baking

Preparation: The crust of the rolls is grated off, then quarter them
and soak in a pint of milk. After soaking, press out the milk, mix the
milk well with eggs, sugar, cinnamon and pour it back on the roll
slices to soak for a while longer. Now roll each piece in the crumbs
from the crusts and bake in butter to a nice color. Serve on a hot
platter with wine sauce.

No. 54—APPLE FRITTERS OR BANANA FRITTERS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 sweet-sour apples or bananas
½ glass of white wine
½ cup of sugar

For the Batter.

3 eggs
¼ tsp. of salt
1 cup of flour
1½ cups of milk
Butter for frying

Preparation: The apples are peeled, the core removed, sliced in ½ inch
thick, round slices, white wine and sugar poured over. Eggs, milk,
flour and salt are mixed to a batter. Butter is heated in a pan, each
apple slice dipped into the batter, put into the hot butter and fried
a nice color. Serve on a hot platter, sprinkled with sugar and cinnamon.

No. 55—APPLE STRUDEL.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Noodle dough from 3 eggs
Flour
⅛ lb. of butter

For the Filling.

6 medium-sized, sweet-sour apples
½ cup of sugar
½ cup of currants
½ tsp. of cinnamon
¼ lb. blanched, chopped almonds
¼ cup of chopped citron
Butter for baking

Preparation: The noodle dough is rolled out very thin. Melt the butter
and brush it on the dough. Peel and core the apples and slice them
thin. Then put the apple slices, sugar, cinnamon, almonds and citron
on the dough, roll it up, brush it with butter and bake in a buttered
pan 30 to 45 minutes. Sprinkle with sugar and cinnamon and serve.

No. 56—CHOCOLATE STRUDEL.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Noodle dough from 3 eggs
⅛ lb. of butter
Flour

For the Filling.

5 eggs
Scant ½ cup of sugar
⅛ lb. blanched, chopped sweet almonds
10 blanched, chopped bitter almonds
⅓ lb. grated sweet chocolate
Butter for baking

Preparation: The noodle dough is kneaded with ⅛ lb. of butter, then
rolled out very thin. The 5 yolks of eggs are stirred with sugar for
15 minutes, almonds and chocolate are added, and lastly the beaten
whites of eggs. This mixture is spread on the dough which is then
rolled up. A baking pan is buttered and the strudel baked ½ to ¾ hour.

No. 57—CHOCOLATE STRUDEL WITH DRESSING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The ingredients and preparation are the same as given under No. 56,
Chocolate Strudel. When ready to be baked, place it into the pan in
the form of a snail, pour on ¾ pt. of hot cream mixed with ⅛ lb. of
fine grated chocolate and 1 tablespoonful of vanilla, then bake ½ hour.

No. 58—STEAM NOODLES.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

⅛ lb. of flour
½ pt. of milk
1 cent’s worth of yeast
¼ lb. of butter
3 eggs
1½ cups of flour
1 qt. of cream
⅛ lb. of butter
½ cup of sugar

Preparation: Mix flour, milk and yeast to a batter and set to rise.
When risen, mix in butter, sugar, eggs and flour. Put on a
well-floured baking board and form dumplings from the dough, leaving
them on the board to rise. Stew them 15 minutes in the hot cream and ⅛
lb. of butter until light brown, then sprinkle with sugar and pour
drawn butter over.

No. 59—FRIED APPLE POCKETS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 small apples
½ cup of sugar
Raspberry jelly

Pancake Batter.

3 eggs
¾ cup of milk
Salt
2 cups of flour
Lard for baking

Preparation: The apples are pared, cored, filled with jelly and
strewn with sugar.

Eggs, milk, salt and flour are stirred into a dough that is rolled out
to ¼ inch thickness. With a tumbler cut out 12 round disks. Put each
apple between two disks and press the edges together, so as to
completely cover the apple. Then fry in much hot lard, place into a
colander to drain off the fat and sprinkle with sugar and cinnamon.
They may be served warm or cold.

No. 60—BISCUIT TORTONI. MACAROON MOUSSE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 eggs
1 cup of powdered sugar
1 tsp. vanilla
1 cup of grated macaroons
1 pt. whipped cream

Preparation: Whip the yolks of eggs, vanilla and sugar well, mix in
the macaroons, beaten whites of eggs and whipped cream. Oil a mold,
put in the mixture and let it stand in ice 6 hours before serving.

No. 61—RUM CREAM WITH CHERRY SAUCE.

Quantity for 6–10 Persons.

6 eggs
¾ cup of rum
¼ lb. of sugar
1½ tsps. of vanilla
5 layers of gelatine or ½ package
½ pt. of milk
1 pt. whipped cream

Preparation: Yolks of eggs, rum and sugar are whipped to a froth. Milk
and vanilla are brought to boil, the gelatine dissolved in a little
milk and mixed with the boiling milk to which also the mixture of
yolks of eggs, rum and sugar is added. This mixture must be stirred
until it is cold, then the beaten whites of eggs and finally the
whipped cream is stirred in. Rinse a mold with cold water, put in the
pudding and place on ice or in a cold place. Turn the pudding out on a
platter and serve with cherry sauce.

No. 62—WHIPPED CREAM PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. of whipped cream
½ cup of sugar
2 tsps. of vanilla
2 qts. of fresh strawberries
1 cup of sugar
1 cup of grated pumpernickel
¼ lb. of grated chocolate
¼ cup of sugar

Preparation: The cream is mixed with sugar and vanilla. The
strawberries are cleaned and mixed with 1 cup of sugar. Pumpernickel,
chocolate and ¼ cup of sugar are mixed. Now arrange in a glass dish
layers of strawberries, pumpernickel and whipped cream. The latter
garnished with strawberries make the top layer.

No. 63—WINE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¾ pt. good white wine
Juice of 2 lemons
1 grated lemon rind
½ lb. of sugar
8 eggs
4 layers or ⅓ package of white gelatine
Fruit for garnishing

Preparation: White wine, lemon juice, and lemon rind, sugar, 8 yolks
of eggs are stirred well on the stove and brought to boil ¼ minute.
The gelatine is dissolved in 4 tablespoonfuls of wine and mixed in
with the rest, also the beaten whites of eggs. Oil a mold, put in the
mixture and put on ice or in a cold place. When stiff, turn it out on
a platter and garnish with fruit.

No. 64—WINE CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¾ pt. good white wine
¼ cup of French brandy or cognac
½ cup of cherry juice
Juice of 1 lemon
¼ lb. of sugar
6 eggs
6 layers or ½ package of red gelatine
Juice of 1 orange
1 pinch of salt

Preparation: White wine, brandy, cherry juice, lemon juice, orange
juice, sugar, yolks of eggs and the gelatine dissolved in wine are
mixed well and stirred over a slow fire until it thickens, but do not
let it boil. While still warm, add the whites of eggs beaten to a
froth and salt. Oil a mold, put in the cream and place on ice or
prepare it a day before using. When serving, turn it out and garnish
with cherries.

No. 65—WINE JELLY WITH RICE LAYERS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Wine Jelly.

½ bottle of white wine
9 layers of gelatine or ¾ package
1½ cups of water
Juice of 2 lemons and 1 orange

Rice Layer.

¼ lb. of sugar
¾ cup of good rice
3 qts. of water
Juice and grated rind of ½ lemon
1 pinch of salt
½ pt. of white wine
3 layers or ¼ package of white gelatine
3 oranges

Preparation: White wine, lemon and orange juice, sugar and gelatine
dissolved in 1½ cups of water are well mixed over a slow fire. The
rice is washed and cooked 25 minutes in 3 qts. of water, then poured
into a colander or sieve. Now add the wine, sugar, lemon juice and
rind, salt and dissolved gelatine, cover and cook very slowly. When
the juice has been absorbed by the rice, take it from the stove and
cool. A dish is placed into ice or very cold water and a layer of wine
jelly poured in to stiffen. When that is stiff, cut out oblong
dumplings of cold rice and place them on the jelly layer in circles,
pour on another layer of wine jelly and so on until the rice and jelly
are used up. When stiff, turn it out and garnish the jelly and platter
with orange slices.

No. 66—WHITE WINE JELLY WITH FRUIT LAYERS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ bottle of white wine
9 layers or ¾ package of white gelatine
¾ pt. of water
¾ cup of sugar
Juice of 2 lemons and one orange

Fruit for Layers.

Bananas
Strawberries or pineapples

Preparation: White wine, dissolved gelatine, sugar, lemon and orange
juice are well mixed and stirred over the fire until it starts to
boil, then strain through a cloth. Place a dish on ice or into very
cold water, pour in a cup of jelly to stiffen, on this place a layer
of fruit, strawberries, sliced bananas or pineapples and repeat
several times.

If you have no fresh fruit, use preserves from which the syrup has
been drained. The jelly layer must be on top. Turn it out before
serving. The platter may be garnished with various kinds of fruit.

No. 67—LEMON JELLY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¾ qt. of water
Juice of 4 to 5 lemons
10 layers or 1 package of white gelatine
½ lb. of sugar

Preparation: The gelatine is dissolved in ¾ qt. of warm water, sugar
and lemon juice added and the whole warmed a little, then strained
through a cloth. Put into a mold and when stiff, turn it out on a
platter.

Remarks: You may put layers of fruit into the jelly according to No.
66, Wine Jelly With Fruit Layers.

No. 68—ORANGE JELLY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1¼ pts. of orange juice, (about 10 oranges)
5 tbsps. of lemon juice
¼ lb. of sugar
9 layers or ¾ package of red gelatine
1 cup of champagne or good white wine

Preparation: The oranges are cleaned, cut into halves, and the juice
carefully pressed out with a lemon squeezer. The gelatine and sugar
are dissolved in this juice, then warmed and lemon juice and wine
added. Strain through a cloth. The orange rinds are carefully cleaned
out without breaking them and filled with the above gelatine, then
placed on ice. When stiff, place the oranges on a platter and garnish
with fresh leaves.

No. 69—PINEAPPLE JELLY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 large pineapple
1 pt. of water or white wine
8 layers or ¾ package of white gelatine
1½ cups of sugar

Preparation: The pineapple is peeled and grated on a fine grater. The
gelatine is dissolved in 1 pt. of warm water, then mixed well with
sugar and the grated pineapple. This mixture is strained through a
fine sieve, poured into a mold, placed on ice to harden. When cold,
turn it out.

No. 70—CHERRY JELLY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 qts. of sour cherries
1 pt. of water
½ lb. of sugar
1 stick of cinnamon
10 layers or 1 package of gelatine
½ cup of red wine
2 cloves

Preparation: The cherries are cleaned and stoned. Two dozen of the
stones are crushed and boiled with the crushed cherries, cloves and
cinnamon for 20 minutes in 1 pt. of water, the dish being covered.
Strain, add gelatine and sugar, then strain again and add the red
wine. Put the jelly into a mold, place on ice and when cold, turn out
on a platter.

No. 71—STRAWBERRY JELLY.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 qts. of nice, ripe strawberries
¾ lb. of sugar
Juice of 2 lemons
8 layers or ¾ package of red gelatine
2 tsps. of vanilla
1 pt. of water

Preparation: The strawberries are crushed, water, sugar, lemon juice
mixed in and cooked over a slow fire for 10 minutes, then strained
through a fine sieve. The gelatine is dissolved in this juice and the
whole strained again. Fill into a mold, place on ice to stiffen, then
turn out and garnish with strawberries and whipped cream.

No. 72—ORANGE GELATINE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. of cream
Grated rind of 1 orange
Juice of 3 oranges
6 layers or ½ package of white gelatine
½ lb. of sugar

Preparation: Cream, grated orange rind and juice, sugar and gelatine
are mixed well and cooked ¼ hour, stirring constantly, then strained
through a fine sieve. Oil a mold, put in the jelly and place on ice or
prepare the day before serving. Turn out on a platter or glass dish.

No. 73—ARRACK CREAM WITH WHIPPED CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 yolks of eggs
½ lb. of sugar
5 layers or ½ package of red gelatine
½ cup of warm water
6 tbsps. of arrack
1 pt. of whipped cream

Preparation: Yolks of eggs and sugar are whipped ½ hour. The gelatine
is dissolved in warm water and strained, then mixed with the yolks of
eggs and sugar, arrack and lastly the whipped cream. This is filled
into a glass dish and set to stiffen.

No. 74—STRAWBERRY CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. of preserved strawberries, or 2 qts. of fresh ones
¼ lb. of sugar
1 tsp. of vanilla
5 layers or ½ package of white gelatine
½ cup of warm juice
1 pt. of whipped cream
12 lady fingers

Preparation: The juice is drained from the strawberries and strained
to remove the seeds. The gelatine is dissolved in ½ cup of the juice
and mixed with strawberries, vanilla, sugar and whipped cream. Oil a
mold, strew with sugar, put in a layer of lady fingers, then the cream
on top of the lady fingers, place on ice to harden, turn it out and
serve with strawberry juice.

Remarks: If you take fresh strawberries, use more sugar.

No. 75—RASPBERRY CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are the same as given under No. 74,
Strawberry Cream. If you use fresh raspberries, you need 2 pts.

No. 76—PINEAPPLE CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. of preserved pineapple
½ cup of sugar
1 tsp. of vanilla
6 layers or ½ package of white gelatine
1 pt. whipped cream

Preparation: The juice from the pineapple is drained off
and warmed, the gelatine dissolved in some of it and strained
through a fine sieve. Sugar and vanilla are stirred in and the
pineapple cut up into small pieces. Lastly add the whipped
cream which has been drained on a sieve. Oil a mold, strew
in a little sugar, fill in the cream and place on ice or prepare
the day before serving. Turn out on a platter.

No. 77—VANILLA CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ pt. of milk
3 eggs
1 vanilla bean or 2 tbsps. of vanilla
5 layers or ½ package of gelatine
1 pt. of whipped cream
¼ lb. of sugar

Preparation: The vanilla bean is put into the milk to soak, or the
vanilla extract put into the milk; also the yolks of eggs, sugar and
gelatine. Let this mixture come to a boil, stirring constantly, boil ¼
minute, mix in the beaten whites of eggs and stir until cold. Now add
the whipped cream. Oil a mold, fill in the cream, and place on ice;
turn it out when stiff.

No. 78—COLD APPLE CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 apples
½ pt. white wine
½ lb. of sugar
1 qt. of cream
5 eggs
1 tbsp. of flour
½ lemon peel
1 qt. of strawberries or raspberries

Preparation: The apples are peeled, cored and cut into 8 parts, then
boiled until soft in ½ pt. of white wine and ¼ lb. of sugar. When
done, cool them.

The cream, yolks of eggs, flour, grated lemon peel and ¼ lb. of sugar
are mixed well, then boiled to a cream, stirring constantly. Now oil a
mold and put in a layer of boiled apples, then strawberries or
raspberries, then a layer of cream, then frosting made of the whites
of eggs beaten to a froth with 6 tablespoonfuls of sugar. This is
baked 10 minutes in a medium hot oven. Let it get cold and serve in
the dish.

Remarks. This cream may be served hot, but it is better cold. If you
have no fresh fruit, use preserved, but drain off the juice.

No. 79—COLD APPLE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

12 sweet-sour apples
Water
2 cups of white wine
8 layers or ½ package of white gelatine
1 cup of sugar

Preparation: The apples are cut up and put into a pot with enough
water to cover them, then boiled until soft, very slowly, so they do
not get slushy. Pour them into a sieve or cloth and drain off the
juice. This is boiled down to 1 qt., add to it the sugar and gelatine
and strain; boil up again, then mix in the white wine. Fill the whole
into a glass dish to stiffen and serve with a vanilla sauce.

Remarks: The apples may be used for apple sauce.

No. 80—NECTAR.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. of sour cream
½ lb. of sugar
1½ tsps. of vanilla
9 layers or ¾ package of red gelatine
4 tbsps. of rum
¼ cup of milk

Preparation:

Sour cream, sugar, vanilla and rum are mixed well. The gelatine is
dissolved in warm milk, strained and mixed with the other ingredients.
Pour into a mold and set on ice to stiffen. Turn it out before serving.

No. 81—CORN STARCH PUDDING.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

1 qt. of milk
Scant ¼ lb. of corn starch
¼ lb. of sugar
⅛ lb. peeled, ground almonds
1 tbsp. of vanilla
8 eggs

Preparation: ¾ qt. of milk, sugar, almonds and vanilla are mixed well
and brought to boil. Then the corn starch is stirred into ¼ qt. of
milk, poured into the boiling mixture and boiled 5 minutes, stirring
constantly. Yolks of eggs are stirred in as soon as the pudding is
taken from the fire, also the beaten whites of eggs. Put into a dish
to stiffen, turn it out and serve with a vanilla or wine sauce.

No. 82—COLD LEMON CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 eggs
½ lb. of sugar
Juice and rind of 1 lemon
½ glass white wine
5 layers or ½ package of white gelatine
3 tbsps. of arrack

Preparation: The yolks of eggs and sugar are stirred 1 hour, then add
the grated rind and juice of 1 lemon and the arrack. Dissolve the
gelatine in warm white wine, stir until cold and strain before mixing
with the other ingredients. Add the whites of eggs beaten to a froth,
place on ice or prepare a day before serving. Turn it out on a platter.

No. 83—RUSSIAN CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 eggs
¾ cup of sugar
2 tbsps. of rum

Preparation: Yolks of eggs and sugar are beaten for 15 minutes, add
the rum, then the beaten whites of eggs. Serve in glass dishes.

No. 84—ORANGE CREAM PREPARED COLD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

5 eggs
½ lb. of sugar
Grated rind of ½ orange
2 tbsps. lemon juice
4 layers or ⅓ package of white gelatine
8 tbsps. of orange juice

Preparation: The yolks of eggs and sugar are beaten ½ hour, add the
gelatine dissolved in the orange juice, and strained. Then add the
lemon juice, grated orange rind and the beaten whites of eggs. Put
into glass dishes and set to stiffen.

No. 85—COLD LEMON CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The preparation is the same as given under No. 84, Orange Cream
Prepared Cold. Instead of 8 tablespoonfuls of orange juice and rind,
take the same quantity of lemon juice and rind.

No. 86—COFFEE CREAM PREPARED COLD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The preparation is the same as given under No. 84, Orange Cream
Prepared Cold. Instead of the juice of oranges, the juice of lemons
and the rind, take ¼ pt. of coffee extract in which you dissolve 1
tablespoonful of cocoa.

No. 87—CHOCOLATE CREAM PREPARED COLD.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The preparation is the same as given under No. 84, Orange Cream
Prepared Cold. Instead of the juice of oranges, the juice of lemons
and the rind, take 1⁄10 lb. of bitter chocolate or cocoa dissolved in
¼ cup of water and 1 teaspoonful of vanilla.

No. 88—CHOCOLATE CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. of chocolate
⅛ lb. of sugar
1 pt. of water
6 layers or scant ½ package of white gelatine
4 eggs
1 tsp. of vanilla

Preparation: The chocolate is dissolved in ½ pt. of water and the
gelatine in the other ½ pt., mix the two. Add sugar and vanilla and
boil this mixture ½ minute. Take from the fire and add the yolks of
eggs, a little later the whites of eggs beaten to a froth. Rinse a
mold with cold water, put in the mixture to stiffen, turn it out and
serve with a vanilla sauce.

No. 89—CHOCOLATE MOUSSE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ cup of cocoa
¾ cup of sugar
1 tbsp. vanilla
4 layers or ⅓ package of gelatine
½ cup of water
1 pt. of whipped cream

Preparation: Dissolve the cocoa and gelatine in ½ cup of water on a
small fire, with sugar and vanilla well mixed in. Stir until cold, add
the whipped cream. Rinse a mold with cold water; put in the mixture,
close the dish well, pack in ice and salt and let stand several hours.
When serving, dry the dish and turn the cream out on a platter.

No. 90—VANILLA MOUSSE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. of whipped cream
4 layers or ⅓ package of white gelatine
5 tbsps. of warm water
2 tsps. of good vanilla
½ lb. of sugar

Preparation.: The gelatine is dissolved in the warm water and
strained. The sugar and vanilla are added and the whipped cream in
spoonfuls. Rinse a mold with cold water, fill in the mixture, close
well and pack in ice and salt for several hours. Then dry and turn out
on a platter.

No. 91—COFFEE MOUSSE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The preparation is the same as given under No. 90, Vanilla Mousse.
Instead of vanilla, take 6 to 8 tablespoonfuls of coffee extract.

No. 92—HAZELNUT MOUSSE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The preparation is the same as given under No. 90, Vanilla Mousse. Mix
in ¼ lb. roasted, coarsely chopped hazelnuts.

No. 93—PINEAPPLE MOUSSE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The preparation is the same as given under No. 90. Instead of
vanilla, take ½ lb. of pineapple, cut into small pieces, or pineapple
puree.

No. 94—RUM OR COGNAC MOUSSE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

The preparation is the same as given under No. 90, Vanilla Mousse.
Instead of vanilla, take 8 tablespoonfuls of rum or cognac.

No. 95—COUNT PUECKLER OR LAYER MOUSSE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1½ pts. whipped cream
½ lb. chocolate
½ lb. of sugar
½ cup of raspberry jelly
2 whites of eggs
⅛ lb. of macaroons
1½ tsps. of vanilla
12 layers or 1 package of white gelatine
½ cup of warm water

PART I.

Preparation: ½ lb. of chocolate is grated and mixed well with ¼ cup of
warm water and ⅛ lb. of sugar. Dissolve the gelatine in the other ¼
cup of warm water, strain and divide into 3 parts; mix ⅓ of it with
the chocolate, ½ teaspoonful of vanilla and ½ pt. of thick whipped
cream.

PART II.

Dissolve the raspberry jelly over the fire, mix in ⅛ lb. of sugar, 2
beaten whites of eggs, and ⅓ of the dissolved gelatine, also ½
teaspoonful of vanilla and ½ pt. of thick whipped cream.

PART III.

The macaroons are crushed, mixed with ½ pt. of whipped cream, ⅛ lb. of
sugar, ½ teaspoonful of vanilla and ⅓ part of the dissolved gelatine.

A form is rinsed with cold water and layers of the chocolate,
raspberry and macaroon mixtures are put in. Then the mold is closed
well and packed in salt and ice for some hours. When serving, dry the
mold and turn it out on a platter.

No. 96—COLD RICE STARCH PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¼ lb. rice starch
¼ lb. of sugar
1 pt. of milk
1 grated lemon peel
5 eggs
1 pinch of salt

Preparation: The milk and grated lemon peel are brought to boil;
sugar, rice starch and yolks of eggs are mixed well with a little cold
milk, stirred into the boiling milk and boiled again 5 minutes,
stirring constantly; then take from the stove. When the mass has
cooled, mix in the beaten whites of eggs. Rinse a mold with cold
water, fill in the pudding and set to stiffen. Turn it out on a
platter and serve with a fruit sauce.

No. 97—COLD CHOCOLATE PUDDING WITH FARINA.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of fine chocolate
⅛ lb. of fine farina
½ cup of sugar
1 qt. of milk
1 tsp. of vanilla

Preparation: The chocolate is grated and mixed with farina, vanilla
and sugar. The milk is brought to boil, the farina mixture put in and
boiled 15 minutes, stirring constantly. Rinse a mold with cold water,
fill in the pudding and set to stiffen. Vanilla sauce is served with it.

No. 98—COLD RICE PUDDING WITH PEACHES.

Quantity for 6–10 Persons.

1 cup of good rice
¾ qt. of milk
1 pinch of salt
1 cup of sugar
1 tsp. of vanilla
½ cup of raisins
1 cup of blanched, ground almonds
5 finely chopped macaroons
5 layers or ½ package of white gelatine
1 pt. of whipped cream
1 qt. preserved or fresh stewed peaches

Preparation: Wash and boil the rice for 5 minutes in 1 cup of water
with a pinch of salt, then add the milk gradually and cook until the
rice is done and thick, but not mushy. Mix with sugar, vanilla,
raisins, almonds and macaroons. Dissolve the gelatine in ¼ cup of warm
water and mix with the rice, then cool and stir in the whipped cream.
Rinse a mold with milk and sprinkle with sugar, then make alternating
layers of rice and peaches from which the syrup has been drained. The
top layer must be rice. Close the mold well and place on ice or into a
very cold place. When serving, use the fruit juice for a sauce.

No. 99—PLAIN COLD RICE PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 cup of rice
¾ qt. of milk
1 cup of sugar
1 tsp. of vanilla
5 layers or ½ package of white gelatine
1 pt. of whipped cream
1 pinch of salt

Preparation: Wash and boil the rice 5 minutes in 1 cup of water and a
pinch of salt, then gradually add the milk until the rice is thick,
but not mushy. Now stir in the sugar and vanilla. Dissolve the
gelatine in ¼ cup of warm water and stir into the rice, then cool and
mix in the whipped cream. Rinse a mold or dish with milk and sprinkle
with sugar. Put in the pudding, close it well and place on ice or into
very cold water. Turn it out on a platter and serve with cherry sauce.

No. 100—CHAMPAGNE CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

8 eggs
Scant ½ lb. of sugar
1 pt. champagne
5 layers or ½ package of white gelatine
1 pint of thick whipped cream

Preparation: 5 yolks of eggs, 3 whole eggs, sugar and champagne are
mixed and boiled to cream, stirring constantly. The gelatine is
dissolved in ¼ cup of water and mixed into the cream, also the beaten
whites of 5 eggs. Put it into a mold or into glasses and put on ice.
Serve with macaroons.

Remarks: Omit the gelatine when using the whipped cream.

No. 101—CURRANT AND RASPBERRY PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 qts. of currants and 1 qt. raspberries
1 pt. of water
¾ lb. of sugar
1 cup of fine farina or sago
¾ cup of corn starch

Preparation: Currants and raspberries are picked over and cooked in 1
pt. of water ½ hour, then strained through a cloth and the juice
brought to boil. Add the sugar and farina and cook for 20 minutes,
stirring constantly; fill the mass into a mold rinsed with cold water
to stiffen. Turn it out and serve with cream or milk.

Remarks: If you use corn starch instead of farina, mix it with 1 cup
of cold juice before putting it into the boiling juice. Then boil it 5
to 8 minutes and fill it into the mold. If the farina is not sweet
enough, add more sugar while boiling.

No. 102—GOOSEBERRY PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 qts. of gooseberries
1 qt. of water
1 lb. of sugar
¾ cup of fine farina

Preparation: Gooseberries are best when still unripe. Cook them in
water for ½ hour, then press through a fine sieve and put in the sugar
and cook again with the farina for 10 minutes. Fill it into a dish
rinsed with cold water and set aside to stiffen, turn it out and serve
with cream or milk.

No. 103—CHERRY PUDDING.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 lbs. of sour cherries
1 pt. of water
¼ lb. of sugar
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
¼ lb. of corn starch

Preparation: Clean and stone the cherries, then crush about 20 stones
and cook them with the cherries in the water slowly for ½ hour, after
that strain them and add lemon juice and sugar. Then let it come to
boil again. Mix the corn starch with 1 cup of cold juice and stir it
into the boiling juice to cook 5 to 8 minutes more, stirring
constantly. Put into a dish rinsed with cold water and after
stiffening, turn it out and serve with cream or milk.

Remarks: If the pudding is too thin, add more corn starch.

No. 104—HILL CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

¾ qt. sweet cream
5 yolks of eggs
½ lemon peel
1 tbsp. of flour
¼ lb. of sugar
3 whites of eggs
1 glass of raspberry jelly

Preparation: Cream, yolks of eggs, grated lemon peel, flour and sugar
are mixed well and boiled to a cream. The 3 beaten whites of eggs and
the jelly are stirred 1 hour, then fill the cream into a glass dish
and set to cool. After cooling, fill the jelly on top of it. Serve cold.

Desserts That Are Frozen.

No. 105—VANILLA ICE CREAM.

Quantity for 10 Persons.

1 qt. of cream
1 pt. of milk
¾ tbsp. of flour
2 tbsps. of vanilla
Sugar to taste
3 eggs

Preparation: ½ pt. of milk 3 yolks of eggs and flour are boiled to a
cream, stirring constantly; mix the beaten whites of eggs with sugar
and add to the cream. To this add the rest of the milk, cream and
vanilla. Freeze the mass and pour a hot chocolate sauce over it when
serving. It is very fine.

No. 106—STRAWBERRY ICE CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 qts. of fresh or 1 qt. preserved strawberries
1 qt. of cream
1 tsp. of vanilla
Sugar to taste

Preparation,: The strawberries, fresh or preserved, are rubbed through
a sieve, cream and vanilla, sugar to taste added, then frozen.

No. 107—RASPBERRY ICE CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

2 pts. of fresh or 1 pt. preserved raspberries
1 pt. of cream
1 tsp. of vanilla
Sugar to taste

The preparation is the same as given under No. 106, Strawberry Ice
Cream.

No. 108—PEACH ICE CREAM.

Quantity for 8–10 Persons.

2½ qts. of fresh or 1 qt. preserved peaches
1 qt. of cream
1 tsp. vanilla
Sugar to taste

Preparation: Fresh peaches are peeled, stoned and rubbed through a
sieve, mixed with cream, vanilla and sugar and frozen.

No. 109—APRICOT ICE CREAM.

Quantity for 8–10 Persons.

2½ qts. of fresh or 1 qt. of preserved apricots
1 qt. of cream
1 tsp. of vanilla
Sugar to taste

The preparation is the same as given under No. 108, Peach Ice Cream.

No. 110—LEMON ICE CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. of milk
½ pt. of cream
2 cups of sugar
Juice of 2½ lemons

Preparation: Milk, cream and sugar are mixed and put into the ice
cream freezer to freeze a little, then the juice of lemons are added
and frozen.

No. 111—PINEAPPLE ICE CREAM.

Quantity for 6–8 Persons.

1 large pineapple
1 qt. of cream
Sugar
Juice of ½ lemon

Preparation: The pineapple is peeled and grated, then rubbed through a
sieve, mixed with cream, sugar and lemon juice and frozen.

No. 112—CHOCOLATE ICE CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. of cream
1 pt. of milk
4 yolks of eggs
½ lb. of chocolate
1½ tsps. of vanilla
About ½ lb. of sugar

Preparation: Dissolve the chocolate in milk, add sugar, cream,
vanilla, yolks of eggs and heat to the boiling point, stirring
constantly. Remove from the fire immediately, stir until cold and
freeze.

No. 113—COFFEE ICE CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. of cream
¼ lb. of finely ground strong coffee
1 pt. of milk
½ lb. of sugar
4 yolks of eggs

Preparation: The coffee must steep in the milk for 1 hour, then strain
through a fine cloth. Cream, yolks of eggs and sugar are mixed well
and cooked to a cream, stirring constantly. Then take it off the stove
and stir until cold, mix with coffee and milk and freeze.

No. 114—NUT ICE CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. of cream
1 pt. of milk
About ¼ lb. of sugar
3 yolks of eggs
½ lb. ground hazelnuts

Preparation: Milk, cream, sugar and yolks of eggs are mixed well and
boiled, stirring constantly; then cooled, the nuts mixed in and the
mass frozen.

Remarks: One teaspoonful of vanilla may be added.

No. 115—TEA ICE CREAM.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. of cream
1 pt. of milk
⅛ lb. of sugar
4 yolks of eggs
2 tbsps. of fine tea

The preparation is the same as given under No. 113, Coffee Ice
Cream. Instead of steeping the coffee in the milk, put in tea.

No. 116—VANILLA ICE CREAM WITH FRUIT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 qt. of cream
1½ tbsps. of vanilla
¼ lb. of sugar
4 eggs
1 cup of large raisins
¼ cup of chopped citron
¼ lb. of crushed macaroons
25 preserved cherries
3 tbsps. of maraschino

Preparation: Cream, vanilla, sugar and yolks of eggs are mixed well
and brought to boil, stirring constantly, then cook it. The raisins
are scalded, put into a colander, cut into small pieces, mixed with
the cut citron, crushed macaroons and quartered cherries, also 3
tablespoonfuls of maraschino are mixed into the cold cream. Add also
the beaten whites of eggs and freeze.

No. 117—STRAWBERRY ICE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 qts. of fresh or 1 qt. preserved strawberries
1 tsp. of vanilla
Sugar to taste

Preparation: The strawberries are rubbed through a sieve, sugar and
vanilla added, then frozen. Serve with whipped cream.

No. 118—RASPBERRY ICE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3 pts. of fresh or 1 qt. of preserved raspberries
1 tsp. of vanilla
Sugar to taste

The preparation is the same as given under No. 117, Strawberry Ice.

No. 119—PEACH ICE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

3–4 qts. of fresh or 1½ qts. of preserved peaches
Sugar to taste

Preparation: The fresh peaches are peeled, stoned, pressed through a
sieve, mixed with sugar and frozen.

No. 120—APRICOT ICE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Preparation and ingredients are the same as given under No. 119, Peach
Ice.

No. 121—PINEAPPLE ICE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 large pineapple
½ pt. of water
½ lb. of sugar, (good measure)
2 whites of eggs
Juice of ½ lemon

Preparation: The pineapple is peeled, grated, mixed with sugar, whites
of eggs, lemon juice and water, then frozen.

No. 122—TUTTI-FRUTTI ICE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 large pineapple
½ pt. of water
3 whites of eggs
½ lb. of sugar, (good measure)
Juice of ½ lemon
2 oranges
1 cupful of preserved cherries

Preparation: This tutti-frutti ice is prepared like No. 121, Pineapple
Ice. Oranges are peeled and cut into small pieces and sugared, the
cherries are quartered and sugared. When the pineapple ice is nearly
frozen, mix with orange and cherry and freeze a little more, but do
not turn the freezer.

No. 123—CHAMPAGNE SHERBET.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. of water
1 qt. of champagne
2 cups or 1 pt. of sugar
1 pt. of orange juice

Preparation: Dissolve the sugar in a little water then add champagne
and orange juice. Fill the mixture into a freezer and pack with finely
chopped ice and salt. Do not turn freezer, stir contents occasionally
with spoon.

No. 124—CHAMPAGNE FRAPPE.

Quantity for 8 Persons.

1 pt. of water
Whites of 2 eggs
Juice of 1½ lemons or to taste
2 cups of sugar
1 bottle of champagne

Preparation: Dissolve the sugar in water and add the juice of lemon,
beat the whites of eggs well and add, then let it freeze. Before
serving the lemon ice, it should be put into a larger dish when taken
out of the freezer. Pour the champagne over the mass and beat quickly,
serve at once in glasses.

No. 125—MAPLE SYRUP ICE.

Quantity for 8 Persons.

Yolks of 8 eggs
2 tbsps. of water
1 cup of maple syrup
1 qt. of whipped cream

Preparation: The yolks of eggs and water are beaten 15 minutes, add
the syrup, let it come to a boil in a double boiler, stirring
constantly. Let it cool, add the whipped cream, pour into a mold,
close the mold and pack in ice with salt.

No. 126—ROLL DUMPLINGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 rolls
1 piece of butter, (egg size)
2–3 eggs
½ cup of sugar
1 pinch of salt
1 cup of flour
4 qts. of water mixed with 1 tbsp. of salt

Preparation: The rolls must be soaked in water or milk and the liquid
pressed out. Cream the butter with the eggs and sugar, then mix all
this with the soaked rolls, flour and salt. Now boil 4 qts. of water
with one tablespoonful of salt, cut off dumplings from the batter with
a tablespoon, drop into the boiling salt water and boil them 10
minutes. Always try one dumpling first, if too loose, mix a little
more flour into the batter.

No. 127—BETTER KIND OF ROLL DUMPLINGS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

6 rolls
3 eggs
¼ lb. of butter
½ cup of sugar
A pinch of salt
½ cup of currants
¼ lb. of blanched, ground almonds
Rind of ½ lemon
¾ cup of flour
4 qts. of salt water

Preparation: The rolls must be soaked in milk and the milk pressed
out. Cream the butter with the yolks of eggs and sugar, add the
almonds, currants, grated lemon rind, rolls, flour and salt. Beat the
whites of eggs to a stiff froth and stir into the mixture. Let the 4
qts. of salt water boil, cut off dumplings from the batter with a
tablespoon, drop into the boiling salt water and boil them 10 minutes.

Remarks: Always try one dumpling first, if too loose, mix a little
more flour into the batter.

No. 128—LEMON ICE GARNISHED WITH FRUIT.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

1 pt. of milk
Juice of 1 lemon
1½ cupfuls of sugar
6 slices of canned pineapple
6 boiled prunes
6 tsps. of whipped cream
6 tsps. of brandied cherries
½ cupful of fruit juice
6 preserved apricots cut in half

Preparation: Mix the milk, lemon juice and sugar, but do not freeze.
On each dessert plate put a slice of pineapple, on this the half of an
apricot, a prune on the apricot, then a teaspoonful of whipped cream,
finishing with the brandied cherries, adding a small piece of lemon
ice to the fruit. Mix some of the pineapple and apricot juice, boil
with sugar and 2 tablespoonfuls of sherry until it thickens. Add 3
tablespoonfuls of this sauce to each plate of dessert.

CHAPTER 18.

BEVERAGES.

Cold and Hot Beverages.

No. 1—COLD PUNCH.

2 bottles of white wine
½ bottle of arrack
Juice of 3 lemons
1 lb. of sugar
1 thin lemon rind

Preparation: The ingredients are mixed well, put into a punch bowl and
covered to stand several hours.

No. 2—HOT PUNCH.

1 bottle of fine rum
1 bottle of white wine
1½ lbs. sugar
Juice of 2 lemons
Rind of 1 lemon
2½ qts. of boiling water

Preparation: The punch bowl is put into hot water. Pour into it 1 pt.
of boiling water, sugar and lemon rind and let stand for a while, then
add white wine, rum, lemon juice and 2 qts. of hot water, stir with a
wooden ladle and serve hot.

No. 3—HOT KING’S PUNCH.

1 bottle of white wine
1 pt. fine rum
Juice of 1 lemon
½ lemon peel
¾ lb. of sugar
1 qt. of water

Preparation: Mix the ingredients, boil and serve hot.

No. 4—PRESIDENT’S PUNCH.

Cold or Warm.

1 bottle of fine white wine
1 wineglassful of fine rum
3 pts. of water
½ lb. of sugar
⅛ lb. of preserved pineapple
1 cup of pineapple juice

Preparation: Sugar and water are boiled 15 minutes, then wine, rum,
pineapple juice and preserved pineapple added. This punch is served
hot or put on ice and served cold.

No. 5—EGG PUNCH.

1 bottle of white wine
¾ pt. of arrack
1¼ cups of sugar
½ lemon rind
Juice of 1½ lemon
7 eggs

Preparation: Mix white wine, sugar, lemon juice and rind, add the well
beaten eggs and bring to a boil, beating constantly, then take from
the stove and mix in the arrack. Serve at once.

No. 6—WARM BURGUNDY PUNCH.

½ bottle of Burgundy wine
½ bottle of good white wine
½ bottle of arrack
½ pt. pineapple juice
2 oranges
½ bottle German champagne
¼ lb. of sugar
¼ pt. of water

Preparation: Sugar, water, Burgundy wine, white wine, arrack and
pineapple juice are mixed well and heated but not boiled. The orange
is sliced with the peel and put into the bowl, then the hot fluid is
poured in and the champagne added at the table.

No. 7—HOT WINE.

1 bottle of red wine
¼ lb. of sugar
10 cloves
1 stick of cinnamon
½ lemon rind

Preparation: The ingredients are mixed well and brought to the boiling
point, but not boiled, strained and served hot.

No. 8—GROG.

½ pt. of rum
Liberal ½ lb. of sugar
¾ qt. of boiling water

Preparation: Mix the ingredients and serve at once.

No. 9—BISHOP.

1 tbsp. of Bishop essence, or the thin peel of a small orange
1 bottle of red wine
¼ lb. of sugar
½ cup of water

Preparation: The sugar is dissolved in the red wine and the Bishop
essence mixed in or the orange peel is soaked in water for ½ hour and
mixed with the wine.

No. 10—CARDINAL, (COLD).

2 bottles of good white wine
Juice of 2 oranges
½ lb. of fresh pineapple
1 bottle of champagne
1 lb. of sugar
½ orange peel

Preparation: The pineapple is cut into small pieces, put into a bowl,
the piece of orange peel and juice, with the sugar added and left to
stand 15 minutes, then the white wine is poured on. Put the beverage
on ice and when serving, add the champagne.

No. 11—CREAM PUNCH.

5 eggs
½ lb. of sugar
1½ qts. of whipped cream
½ pt. of arrack

Preparation: Yolks of eggs and sugar are beaten to a froth, the arrack
mixed in, the beaten whites of eggs added and lastly whipped cream.
Serve this punch in glasses or tumblers.

No. 12—PINEAPPLE PUNCH.

1 large, fresh pineapple
½ lb. of sugar
2 bottles of white wine
¾ bottle of champagne

Preparation: The pineapple is peeled and sliced very thin. The sugar
is added, ½ bottle of the wine poured over and let stand several
hours, then add the rest of the wine and when serving, pour in the
champagne.

Remarks: Instead of the champagne you may put in a small bottle of
Seltzer-water.

No. 13—STRAWBERRY PUNCH.

2 qts. of fresh strawberries
Scant ½ lb. of sugar
2 bottles of white wine

The preparation is the same as No. 12, Pineapple Punch. If you like
you may add ½ bottle of champagne.

No. 14—RASPBERRY WINE.

Raspberries and sugar
Light white wine

Preparation: The berries are crushed and strained through a cloth.
With 1 qt. of raspberry juice, use 2 lbs. of sugar and 2 qts. of white
wine and let it come to a boil. Cool it and fill into bottles that are
well corked and kept in a cool place.

No. 15—PEACH PUNCH.

3 lbs. of peaches
½ lb. of sugar
2 bottles of white wine
1 bottle of red wine

Preparation: The peaches are peeled and sliced, put into a bowl with
sugar, ¼ bottle of white wine and let stand 3 to 4 hours. Then pour on
the rest of the white wine and red wine and serve very cold.

No. 16—MAY BOWL OR WOODRUFF PUNCH.

2 bottles of white wine
About 1⁄20 lb. of woodruff
¼ lb. of sugar

Preparation: One-half bottle of white wine is poured on the woodruff.
Cover the bowl and let stand several hours. Then add the rest of the
wine and sugar. Place the bowl on ice.

Remarks: This May bowl may be improved by mixing a bottle of champagne
and 1 cupful of strawberries with it when serving.

No. 17—CURRANT WINE.

10 qts. of currant juice
20 qts. of water
15 lbs. of sugar
1 qt. corn brandy

Preparation: Red and white currants are mashed and strained through a
cloth. To 10 qts. of juice, add 15 lbs. of sugar and 20 qts. of water.
Put it into a clean cask, and leave it to ferment for 3 weeks. After
that time empty the cask, clean it well, then pour back the wine and
leave it two weeks longer, then add the brandy. Now close up the cask
tightly and place it so that it need not be moved when the wine is
drawn off. Bottle the wine after six months, without moving the cask.

No. 18—WARMBEER.

1 qt. beer
Sugar to taste
A piece of butter the size of an egg
½ pt. of milk
3 yolks of eggs
1 piece of cinnamon

Preparation: Beer, sugar and butter are brought to boil; then milk and
yolks of eggs are mixed well and added; season with cinnamon, let all
come to a boil and serve hot.

No. 19—COLD LEMONADE.

1 qt. of cold water
Juice of 1 lemon
¾ cup of sugar

Preparation: Dissolve the sugar in the water, add the lemon juice, mix
well and serve very cold.

No. 20—FINE LEMONADE.

1 qt. of cold water
Sugar
Juice of 1 orange
2 bananas
Juice of ½ lemon

Preparation: Dissolve the sugar in the water, mix in the lemon and
orange juice and pour the whole over the sliced bananas.

No. 21—ALMOND MILK.

½ lb. sweet almonds
1¼ qts. of water
Scant ½ lb. of sugar
4 tbsps. of rose water

Preparation: The almonds are blanched and ground, then put into a
porcelain dish. Add the water and sugar and let stand 20 minutes, then
strain through a cloth and add the rose water.

No. 22—CHOCOLATE.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

½ lb. of chocolate
½ cup of water
Sugar to taste
1½ qts. of milk

Preparation: The chocolate is broken into pieces and dissolved in the
water on the stove, the milk is added and brought to boil. Mix in
sugar to suit your taste.

Remarks: You may stir in 2 yolks of eggs. Plain chocolate is made by
using more water and mixing 1 tablespoonful of flour with water and
adding this to the chocolate while cooking.

No. 23—ICE CHOCOLATE.

Ingredients and preparation are the same as given under No. 22,
Chocolate. When cooled off, strain through a sieve, add 1 teaspoonful
of vanilla, place into ice and salt for 3 hours and serve in tumblers
or sherbet cups with whipped cream on top.

No. 24—COCOA.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

4 tbsps. of cocoa
1½ qts. of milk
½ tsp. of vanilla
Sugar to taste
2 yolks of eggs

Preparation: The cocoa is stirred smooth with milk, add the sugar, let
it get hot, stirring constantly. Add the rest of the milk, cook 1
minute and add the vanilla. Mix the yolks of eggs well with one
tablespoonful of milk and stir into the cocoa.

Remarks: You may omit the yolks of eggs and instead stir a
tablespoonful of flour, mixed with water, into the boiling cocoa.

No. 25—TEA.

Enough for 12 cups.

8 even tsps. of tea
2 qts. of water

Preparation: The tea is put into a well covered pot. Pour on 1 pt. of
boiling water, cover and let it steep 3 minutes, then pour on the rest
of the water and set to draw again 5 minutes before serving.

No. 26—TEA WITH VANILLA.

Ingredients and preparation are the same as given under No. 25, Tea.
But add to this ½ teaspoonful of vanilla.

Remarks: You may add a small piece of lemon peel when pouring on the
water.

Dried tea leaves may be used for sweeping carpets. Moisten the leaves
and sprinkle them on the carpet. This will clean the carpet and absorb
the dust when sweeping.

No. 27—ICED TEA.

The ingredients and preparation are the same as given under No. 25,
Tea. After the tea has steeped long enough, pour it off, cool it and
put in pieces of clean ice, sugar and into each glass 1 to 2 slices of
lemon.

No.28—COFFEE.

Enough for 12 cups.

6 tbsps. of ground coffee
14 cups of boiling water

Preparation: It is best to grind the coffee fresh and fine every time
you wish to make some. The water must boil when you pour it on. Close
the pot well.

Remarks: There are various ways of making coffee. A. An egg may be
stirred into the ground coffee before pouring on the hot water. B. It
may be made in a machine in which the water boils and little water
gets onto the coffee at a time. This is the best way. C. Pour the hot
water on the coffee, simmer 5 minutes and strain. This is the quickest
way of making coffee.

No. 29—GOOSEBERRY OR CURRANT WINE.

For a 6 gallon cask use 18 lbs. of sugar
3–4 gallons of juice
Water to fill the cask

Clean and pick over the berries, wash them and press out the juice
well. The cask must be very clean and odorless. Scald it several times
and then dry it in the fresh air, put in the sugar and enough water to
dissolve it while shaking the cask. When the sugar is dissolved, add
the strained juice. Place the cask into a place like the garret where
it is warm. It will soon ferment, then remove the foam from the
bunghole every morning, stir the wine with a clean wooden stick and
fill in fresh water so the cask remains full. After about 6 weeks the
fermenting will cease, then close the bunghole with a cork, leave it
in the cask another 3 to 4 months and then put the wine into bottles.
Cork and seal them well and set them upright in the cellar, where it
is dark and cold.

CHAPTER 19.

BREAD AND CAKES.

No. 1—WHEAT BREAD No. 1.

Enough for 2 Loaves.

8 cups of wheat flour
1½ cents’ worth of yeast
1 pt. of milk
1 pt. of water
2 tbsps. of salt

Preparation: The 4 cups of flour are put into a mixing bowl, lukewarm
milk and wafer added and mixed into a smooth batter. The yeast is
dissolved and stirred in ¼ cup of milk and mixed into the batter;
sprinkle a little flour over it and put the sponge in a warm place to
rise. If the pan is ¼ full, it, must rise to half fill the pan. Put in
the salt and the rest of the flour, knead the dough for 15 minutes and
put into two greased bread pans to rise again. If the pans are half
full, the bread must rise to the brim of the pan. Brush the top of the
bread with cold water and bake it in medium hot oven for 45 minutes.

No. 2—WHEAT BREAD No. 2.

Enough for 2 Loaves.

8 cups of flour
1½ cents’ worth of yeast
1 qt. of milk
2 tbsps. of salt
1 tbsp. of lard

The preparation is the same as given under No. 1. When the second part
of the flour is kneaded into the dough, work in 1 tablespoonful of lard.

Remarks: You may take butter instead of lard. One cup of boiled and
grated potatoes may be mixed with the flour.

No. 3—RYE BREAD WITH LEAVEN.

Enough for 2 Loaves.

11 cups of rye flour
1 qt. of water
3 cents’ worth of leaven
2 tbsps. of salt
1 tsp. of caraway seed if you like

Preparation: Mix 4 cups of flour with lukewarm water, then add the
leaven or yeast, strew a little flour over and set to rise to double
its bulk. Then knead in the salt and caraway seed and the rest of the
flour and continue kneading for 20 minutes. Make two loaves and put
them into greased pans and set to rise again to twice its size, brush
it with cold water and bake 1 hour.

No. 4—RYE BREAD WITH YEAST.

Enough for 2 Loaves.

11 cups of rye flour
1 qt. of water
2 cents’ worth of yeast.
1 tsp. of caraway seed if desired
2 tbsps. of salt

The preparation is the same as given under No. 3, using yeast instead
of leaven. Dissolve the yeast in ¼ cup of lukewarm water and mix it
with the flour.

No. 5—HEALTH BREAD OR GROATS BREAD.

Enough for 2 Loaves.

8–9 cups of coarse meal or flour (groats)
1 qt. of water
2 cents’ worth of yeast.
1½ tbsps. of salt

Preparation: Sift 4 cups of flour and mix it to a smooth batter with
lukewarm water and yeast that is dissolved in ¼ cup of water, then set
the sponge to rise. After this mix in the salt and knead the rest of
the flour in and continue kneading 20 minutes. Form two loaves and put
them into greased pans, then set them to rise again to twice their
size. Bake ¾ to 1 hour in medium hot oven.

No. 6—BREAD STICKS.

Quantity for 6 Persons.

Ingredients and preparation are given under Chapter 1, Soups, No. 16,
Bread Sticks.

No. 7—BISCUIT.

Quantity for 10 Persons.

4½ cups of flour
1 pt. of milk
1½ cents’ worth of yeast
¼ lb. of butter
1 egg
½ tsp. of salt

Preparation: Mix 2 cups of flour to a smooth batter with the lukewarm
milk and the yeast dissolved in ¼ cup the lukewarm milk, then set to
rise in a warm place. Mix in the melted butter, egg and salt and beat
the batter 20 minutes, then add the rest of the flour. Roll out the
dough to about ¾ inch thickness, cut out biscuits with a tumbler, fold
them half over or leave them round, put them into floured or greased
tins, set to rise and bake them to a nice color.

Remarks: If you wish sweet biscuits, stir in ½ cup of sugar. The dough
must be beaten 20 minutes.

No. 8—COFFEE CAKE.

Enough for 2 Cakes.

3½–4 cups of flour
1 pt. of milk
¼ lb. of butter
¼ lb. of sugar
3 eggs
1 cent yeast
½ grated lemon rind

Preparation: The milk is made lukewarm and stirred to a smooth batter
with 2¼ cups of flour, then the yeast dissolved in ¼ cup of lukewarm,
milk is mixed in quickly and put in a warm place to rise. After the
sponge has risen well, mix in the melted butter, sugar, grated lemon
rind, the eggs and the rest of the flour, stir the dough thoroughly
with a spoon. Butter 2 tins and put in the dough about 1 inch thick,
then set to rise; after this strew on sugar, cinnamon and put on small
pieces of butter and some chopped almonds. Bake in medium hot oven.

No. 9—STREUSEL COFFEE CAKE.

Preparation of the Streusel.

A piece of butter the size of an egg
½ cup of flour
1¼ cups of sugar
½ cup of ground almonds
Yeast dough like No. 8
1 tsp. of cinnamon

Preparation: The dough is prepared as given under No. 8, Coffee Cake.
Instead of strewing on sugar, cinnamon and pieces of butter, you make
sugar crumbs as follows: Melt the butter, mix flour, sugar, cinnamon
and almonds with it and rub to crumbs with the hands. Sprinkle over
the cakes before baking.

No. 10—SCHNECKEN (SNAILS).

Yeast dough like No. 8

For the Filling.

⅛ lb. of butter
1 cup of sugar
½ cup of blanched, ground almonds
1 cup of currants

Preparation: The preparation is the same as given under No. 8, Coffee
Cake. Stir in 1 cup of flour more than given in No. 8, roll out the
dough to 1 inch thickness, strew it with sugar, cinnamon, currants,
almonds, sprinkle with melted butter, roll it up carefully and cut
slices off to make the snails. Place these into a buttered tin and set
to rise about ½ hour. Then bake them in a medium hot oven, brush them
while hot with melted butter and sprinkle with sugar.

No. 11—FILLED BERLINER PANCAKES OR STUFFED DOUGHNUTS.

Yeast dough, according to No. 8
Lard for baking
Jelly for filling

Preparation: The dough is prepared like No. 8, Coffee Cake, but 1 cup
of flour more is kneaded in than given under No. 8. Roll out the dough
½ inch thick, cut out small disks with a tumbler, put on one disk some
jelly or thick apple sauce, place another disk on top and fasten the
two by pressing the dough together all around, leave them on a floured
board or tin and set to rise. Heat the lard in an iron kettle and put
in a few Berliners at a time and bake them golden yellow. They must be
fried in deep fat. Prick them with a knitting needle to see whether
the dough is baked enough. While hot, roll them in sugar.

No. 12—WREATH CAKE.

1 lb. of flour
¾ cup of butter
4 eggs
1½ cents yeast
2 tbsps. of vanilla
½ cup of milk
¼ lb. of sugar

Preparation: Cream the butter, stir in the eggs, sugar vanilla, the
yeast which has been dissolved in ½ cup of lukewarm milk and the
flour. Roll out the dough quite thick, cut three strips of it and
braid it. Then make a wreath of this braid and put it into a buttered
pan to rise in a warm place. Brush it with yolks of eggs, strew sugar
on and bake in a hot oven to a nice color.

No. 13—ROUND COFFEE CAKE No. 1.

1 lb. of flour
½ lb. of butter
½ lb. of sugar
½ lemon peel
1½ cents yeast
3 eggs
1 cup of milk

Preparation: Cream the butter with sugar and eggs. The yeast is
dissolved in 1 cup of lukewarm milk and mixed in, also the grated ½
lemon peel; then stir in the flour and beat the dough well for 20
minutes. Butter a round cake pan with tube, fill in the dough to half
full and let it rise in a warm place to the top of the pan. Then bake
it 1 hour.

No. 14—ROUND COFFEE CAKE WITH RAISINS.

4 cups of flour
1 pt. of milk
3 eggs
Scant ½ lb. of butter
½ lemon peel
1 cup of sugar
1 cup of raisins
2 cents yeast

Preparation: Let the milk get lukewarm and stir to a smooth batter
with 2¼ cups of flour, mix with the yeast dissolved in ¼ cup of
lukewarm milk. Set the sponge to rise in a warm place, then stir in
the melted butter, eggs, sugar, grated lemon peel, raisins and the
rest of the flour, beat this dough well for 10 minutes. Butter a round
cake pan with tube, fill it half full and set to rise in a warm place
until the pan is full, then bake to a nice color for ¾ to 1 hour.

No. 15—STOLLEN.

Sufficient for 2–3 Cakes.

1 qt. of milk
6 cents yeast
12 to 15 cups of flour
1 lb. of sugar
1 lb. of butter
6 eggs
¼ lb. of blanched, ground almonds
⅛ lb. of bitter, blanched, ground almonds
¼ cup of brandy
1½ lbs. of raisins
¼ lb. of cut citron

Preparation: Warm the milk and stir into a smooth batter with 4½ cups
of flour, add the yeast dissolved in ½ cup of lukewarm milk and set
the sponge to rise. Stir in the melted butter, sugar, eggs, raisins,
citron, sweet and bitter almonds, brandy and the rest of the flour to
make a pretty stiff dough. Knead it until it will not adhere to the
hands. Cut the dough into 2 or 3 parts, as many “stollen” as you wish
to have, and shape them nice and round, then set to rise in a warm
place. Butter a pan for each cake, double up the dough, place it into
the pan and set to rise again. Bake in a medium oven. If the cakes are
large, bake them 2 hours, if small, 1½ hours. As soon as you take them
out of the oven, brush them with butter and strew them with sugar.
These cakes must be prepared in a warm place.

No. 16—APPLE CAKE.

Yeast dough like No. 8
Sweet-sour apples
Sugar
Cinnamon

For Frosting.

½ cup of cream
2 eggs
¼ cup of sugar

Preparation: The dough is prepared like No. 8, Coffee Cake. Butter
some pans and spread the dough out in them ¼ inch thick, then set to
rise in a warm place.

Peel and slice the apples, place them on the dough in rows, sprinkle
with sugar and cinnamon, then bake. After the cake is baked, spread
the frosting on. The frosting is made by mixing cream, yolks of eggs,
sugar and beaten whites of eggs; spread it on the cakes and bake them
10 minutes longer.

Remarks: The frosting is sufficient for 1 small cake. The dough will
make 4 to 5 cakes, according to size.

No. 17—CHERRY CAKE.

Yeast dough like No. 8
Stoned sweet-sour cherries
Sugar
Frosting like No. 16

Preparation: The dough is prepared like No. 8, Coffee Cake. Put the
dough, about ½ inch thick, into buttered pans and set to rise in a
warm place. The cherries and the sugar are put on thick, then the cake
is baked in a hot oven. After taking it out, spread on the frosting
which has been prepared according to No. 16, Apple Cake, and bake 10
minutes longer. This cake may be prepared without the frosting.

No. 18—PLUM CAKE.

Yeast dough like No. 8
Stoned plums
Sugar
Frosting like No. 16

The preparation is the same as given under No. 17.

No. 19—CHEESE CAKE.

Feast dough like No. 8
1½ lbs. cottage cheese
½ pt. of cream
¼ lb. of sugar
3 eggs
½ tsp. of vanilla
1 pinch of salt
⅛ lb. of butter

Preparation: The dough is prepared according to No. 8. Butter some
pans, spread the dough out in them ¼ inch thick and set to rise.
During this time prepare the cheese. The cottage cheese, cream, sugar,
eggs, salt and vanilla are mixed well and spread over the dough quite
thick. The butter is melted and sprinkled over the cheese, then the
cake is baked to a nice color.

Remarks: You may mix into the cheese ½ cup of currants.

No. 20—CURRANT CAKE.

Yeast dough like No. 8
Currants
Sugar
Frosting like No. 16

The preparation and baking are just the same as given under No. 17,
Cherry Cake.

No. 21—POPPY SEED CAKE.

Yeast dough like No. 8
2 lbs. of poppy seed
3 juicy pears
¼ lb. of sugar
3 eggs
⅛ lb. of butter

Preparation: The dough is prepared according to No. 8 and spread out
in buttered pans about ¼ inch thick, then set to rise in a warm place.
The poppy seed is scalded and the water drained off. The pears are
peeled and grated into the poppy seed, sugar and eggs are mixed in.
Spread the poppy seed mixture thick on the dough, sprinkle melted
butter on and bake ¾ hour.

No. 22—HUCKLEBERRY CAKE.

Yeast dough like No. 8
Huckleberries
Sugar
Frosting according to No. 16

Preparation: The dough is prepared as given under No. 8, spread out in
buttered pans about ¼ inch thick, then set to rise in a warm place.
The berries are strewn on thick and sprinkled with sugar. Bake it and
if you wish, spread the frosting on according to No. 16.

No. 23—ONION CAKE.

Yeast dough like No. 8
6 peeled onions
2 sweet-sour apples
¼ lb. of sugar
¼ lb. of butter

Preparation: The dough is prepared as given under No. 8, spread out in
buttered pans about ¼ inch thick and set to rise in a warm place. The
onions are peeled, sliced and stewed a little in ⅛ lb. of butter, to
which the peeled and finely chopped apples are added. Strew sugar on
the dough and spread on the onions mixed with apples ¼ inch thick,
sprinkle with sugar, then with the melted butter and bake to a nice
golden color.

Remarks: The apples may be omitted.

No. 24—COFFEE CAKE WITH EGG CREAM.

Yeast dough like No. 8
½ lb. of butter
11 eggs
¾ lb. of sugar

Preparation: The dough is prepared as given under No. 8, rolled out to
¼ inch thickness and put into buttered pans to rise in a warm place.
Melt the butter and stir with the eggs to a thick cream. This cream is
spread thickly on the dough and the cake baked quickly in a hot oven.
When the cake is done, put on quite a little butter and sprinkle with
plenty of sugar.

Baking Powder Cakes.

No. 25—COFFEE CAKE WITH ALMOND FROSTING.

½ cup of butter
1½ cups of sugar
1 cup of milk
3 cups of flour
4 eggs
Juice and rind of 1 lemon
2 heaping tsps. of baking powder

For the Frosting.

1 cup of almonds
¼ cup of melted butter
1 cup of sugar
1 tsp. of cinnamon

Preparation: Cream the butter, stir in sugar, lemon juice and rind,
gradually mix in yolks of eggs, milk and flour. Lastly add the baking
powder and the beaten whites of eggs. Spread this batter out 1 inch
thick into buttered pans, sprinkle with sugar, cinnamon and blanched
almonds cut into narrow strips, sprinkle butter over and bake to a
nice color.

No. 26—COFFEE CAKE WITH CHOCOLATE FROSTING.

The batter according to No. 25
¼ lb. of chocolate
⅛ lb. of sugar
1 tsp. of vanilla
3 tbsps. of cold water
1 white of egg

Preparation: The batter is prepared and baked as in No. 25. Dissolve
the chocolate over the fire in the water, add sugar and vanilla and
stir until it becomes stringy. Now mix the beaten whites of eggs with
it and spread on the cake when it is baked.

No. 27—ROUND COFFEE CAKE No. 2.

Ingredients and preparation are given under No. 25. Put the batter
into a round cake pan with tube and bake it ½ hour.

No. 28—STIRRED CAKE.

¾ cup of butter
1¼ cups of powdered sugar
2 cups of flour
Juice of ½ lemon
1½ tsps. of baking powder
6 whites of eggs

Preparation: Cream the butter and mix with sugar, lemon juice and
flour, add 1½ teaspoonfuls of baking powder and the beaten whites of
eggs. Put in a buttered pan and bake ½ to ¾ hour.

No. 29—LAYER CAKE WITH CHOCOLATE.

½ lb. of butter
½ lb. of sugar
6 eggs
½ lb. of flour
2 heaping tsps. of baking powder
¼ lb. of chocolate

For the Filling.

½ cup of cream
3 eggs
1½ tsps. of vanilla
4 tbsps. of sugar

Preparation: Cream the butter, then mix with sugar, yolks of eggs,
flour, and lastly the baking powder and beaten whites of eggs. The
chocolate is grated and mixed with one-half of the batter. Bake in
four layers, 2 light or yellow ones and 2 dark ones containing
chocolate.

The filling is made by mixing well: cream, yolks of eggs, vanilla and
sugar and cooking it in a double boiler to a thick cream, stirring
constantly. Let it get cold, mix with the beaten whites of eggs and
spread it between the layers, putting them together light and dark
alternately. The cake may be covered with a chocolate frosting.

No. 30—LAYER CAKE WITH JELLY FILLING.

½ lb. of butter
½ lb. of sugar
5 eggs
½ lb. of flour
2 heaping tsps. of baking powder
Jelly for the filling

Preparation: Cream the butter with sugar, add the yolks of eggs, then
gradually work in the flour, baking powder and beaten whites of eggs.
Bake in three layers and when these are cooled off, spread jelly over
them and place one on the other. If you like, cover the cake with a
white frosting.

No. 31—LAYER CAKE WITH BANANA FILLING.

1 cup of butter
2 cups of sugar
2½ cups of flour
6 eggs
½ cup of milk
2 heaping tsps. of baking powder

For the Filling.

4–5 peeled and sliced bananas
¼ cup of sugar

Preparation: Cream the butter with the sugar and yolks of eggs;
gradually add the milk and the flour, and lastly the baking powder and
beaten whites of eggs. Bake in 4 layers and when these are cooled,
spread the sugared, sliced bananas between the layers and cover the
cake with white frosting.

No. 32—LAYER CAKE WITH COCOANUT FILLING. No. 1.

1 cup of butter
2 cups of sugar
4 yolks of eggs
2 whites of eggs
1 cup of milk
2½ cups of flour
2 heaping tsps. of baking powder

For the Filling.

¼ lb. of cocoanut
2 whites of eggs
½ cup of sugar
1 tsp. of vanilla

Preparation: Cream the butter with the sugar, add yolks of eggs and
the milk and gradually stir in the flour. Lastly add the baking powder
and beaten whites of eggs. Bake in three layers and prepare the
filling in the meantime. Mix the beaten whites of eggs with sugar,
cocoanut and vanilla and spread between the layers as well as on and
over the whole cake.

No. 33—SPONGE CAKE.

4 eggs
1 cup of sugar
5 tsps. of milk
1 tsp. of vanilla or lemon juice
1 cup of flour
1 pinch of salt
1 heaping tsp. of baking powder

For the Filling.

½ cup of milk
4 tbsps. of sugar
1 tsp. of vanilla or essence of lemon
2 eggs
1 tsp. of flour

Preparation: Cream the sugar and yolks of eggs and add milk, vanilla
and ½ cup of flour. To the beaten whites of eggs stir ½ cup of flour
and mix it with the rest, then add salt and baking powder. Bake in two
layers and prepare the filling in the meantime. Milk, yolks of eggs,
sugar and vanilla are mixed well and cooked to a thick cream in a
double boiler, stirring constantly. When this is cooled off, mix in
the beaten whites of eggs and spread the filling between the layers.
Put a cocoanut frosting on the cake.

No. 34—GOLD CAKE.

1 cup of butter
2 cups of sugar
6 yolks of eggs
1 tsp. of vanilla to taste
1 cup of milk
3½ cups of flour
1½ heaping tsps. of baking powder

Preparation: Cream the butter and mix with sugar, yolks of eggs and
vanilla, then add milk and gradually the flour and lastly the baking
powder. Butter a cake pan, fill in the dough and bake 1 hour.

No. 35—SILVER CAKE.

½ cup of butter
l½ cups of sugar
1 tbsp. of vanilla
1 cup of milk
l½ cups of flour
½ cup of corn starch
2 heaping tsps. of baking powder
6 whites of eggs

Preparation: Cream the butter and sugar, add vanilla, milk, gradually
the corn starch, then baking powder and lastly the beaten whites of
eggs. Put into a buttered pan and bake 1 hour.

No. 36—THEATER CAKE.

1 tbsp. of butter
2 cups of sugar
1 egg
1 tsp. of lemon essence or vanilla
1 cup of milk
1¾ cups of flour
1½ tsps. of baking powder

Preparation: Cream the butter with sugar, yolks of eggs and vanilla;
add the milk, then flour, baking powder and the beaten whites of eggs.
Put into a buttered pan and bake ½ hour.

No. 37—FLAT CAKE.

1 lb. of butter
1 lb. of sugar
8 eggs
Juice of 2 lemons
1½ lemon peels
A little cardamom
2 lbs. of flour
1 heaping tsp. of salt of hartshorn

Preparation: The butter is melted, yolks of eggs and sugar are put in
and stirred to a cream. Add the grated lemon peel and juice, cardamom
and gradually work in the flour. Mix the salt of hartshorn with a
little flour and stir it in. Lastly mix in the well-beaten whites of
eggs and spread the dough out in buttered pans about 2 inches thick.
Sprinkle with sugar, cinnamon and ground almonds and bake to a nice
color.

No. 38—POTATO CAKE OR TART.

1 lb. boiled, peeled, grated potatoes
14 eggs
1 lb. of sugar
Juice and rind of 2 lemons
½ lb. blanched, ground almonds

Preparation: The yolks of eggs and sugar are beaten to a cream; then
grated lemon rind and juice, the ground almonds, potatoes and beaten
whites of eggs mixed in. Butter a round, loose bottom pan and strew
with bread crumbs, put the batter in and bake slowly for 1 to l½ hours.

Remarks: Tarts, so-called in Europe, differ very much from the
dainties similarly designated in this country. The former are more
like our American pies, but without an upper crust. Sometimes they
have narrow strips of crust laid in the form of lattice work across
the top.

No. 39—RICE CAKE OR TART.

1 lb. of rice
2½ qts. of milk
12 eggs
½ lb. of butter
½ lb. of sugar
1 lb. of raisins
1 tsp. of cinnamon

Preparation: The rice is washed and partly cooked in milk, but do not
stir it, for the kernels must stay whole. Cool the rice. Cream the
butter and sugar, add raisins and cinnamon, then the rice and lastly
the beaten whites of eggs. Butter a round, loose bottom cake pan,
strew with bread crumbs, put the batter in and bake slowly.

No. 40—STRAWBERRY SHORT CAKE.

½ cup of butter
½ cup of sugar
½ cup of milk
3 eggs
2 cups of flour
2 heaping tsps. of baking powder

For the Filling.

2–3 qts. of strawberries
1 pt. of whipped cream
Sugar to taste
1 tsp. of vanilla

Preparation: Cream the butter with sugar, yolks of eggs and milk,
gradually work in the flour and baking powder and lastly the beaten
whites of eggs. The dough is baked in 2 layers, each being 1½ inches
thick. When they are cool, spread between the layers and on top
crushed strawberries mixed with sugar and on this the whipped cream
mixed with sugar and vanilla.

Remarks: After the whipped cream is on the strawberry short cake, it
must be served at once.

No. 41—DEVIL’S FOOD.

For the First Half.

½ cup of butter
½ cup of milk
1 cup of brown sugar
2 cups of flour
1 egg
2 yolks of eggs
1 tsp. of soda

For the Second Half.

1 cup of brown sugar
½ cup of milk
1 cup of grated bitter chocolate

For the Filling.

The cream prepared according to No. 29

Preparation: The first half is prepared by creaming the butter, mixing
with sugar, egg and yolks of eggs. Dissolve the soda in milk and stir
it into the mixture, then measure and sift the flour and add it
gradually.

The second half is prepared by putting the brown sugar, the bitter
chocolate and milk into a double boiler, to stew to a smooth cream
which is set to cool. Now the first and second half are put together,
mixed and baked in three layers. When these are cooled, make the cream
according to No. 29, see Layer Cake with Chocolate, and spread between
the layers. Cover the cake with a chocolate frosting.

No. 42—ANGEL’S FOOD.

9 whites of eggs
1 tsp. of cream of tartar
1 cup of sugar
1 cup of the finest flour
1 tsp. of vanilla

Preparation: The whites of eggs are beaten to a stiff froth, the cream
of tartar stirred in and also the sugar and vanilla. The flour is
sifted 7 times and at last mixed with the other ingredients. Put into
a buttered pan and bake slowly ½ hour.

No. 43—YELLOW ANGEL’S FOOD.

12 ounces of sugar
5 ounces of fine flour
1 tsp. of cream of tartar
11 whites of eggs
6 yolks of eggs
1 tsp. of vanilla

Preparation: The sugar is sifted 4 times and stirred to a cream with
yolks of eggs; add the beaten whites of eggs, cream of tartar and
vanilla. Sift the flour 5 times and work it in. Put the batter into a
buttered pan and bake slowly ¾ to 1 hour.

No. 44—FIG CAKE.

¾ cup of butter
2 cups of sugar
6 whites of eggs
1 cup of milk
2 cups of flour
½ cup of corn starch
12 figs
3 heaping tsps. of baking powder
1 tsp. of cinnamon
1 tsp. of cloves

For the Frosting.

3 whites of eggs
1 tbsp. of sugar
4 tbsps. of water
½ lb. finely chopped almonds

Preparation: Cream the butter, add the sugar, milk, flour, baking
powder and lastly the beaten whites of eggs. Divide the batter into 3
parts. Into the first part mix the cinnamon, cloves and chopped figs.
Bake two light and one dark layer and arrange them with the dark layer
in the middle. Prepare the frosting by beating the whites of eggs to a
stiff froth and mixing it with 1 tablespoonful of sugar and 4
tablespoonfuls of water which have been boiled 5 minutes. The mixture
is stirred until cool, the almonds are added and the frosting spread
over the cake.

No. 45—LAYER CAKE WITH COCOANUT. No. 2.

⅔ cup of butter
2 cups of sugar
1 cup of flour
2 heaping tsps. of baking powder
7 whites of eggs

For the Filling.

Cream according to No. 29.

For the Frosting.

4 whites of eggs
½ cup of sugar
¼ lb. of cocoanut

Preparation: Cream the butter with sugar, then add flour and baking
powder and the beaten whites of eggs. Bake in 4 layers. Make the
filling according to No. 29, Layer Cake With Chocolate, and when the
layers are cool, spread the cream between them. Make the frosting from
the beaten whites of eggs mixed with sugar, spread it on the cake and
sprinkle with grated cocoanut.

No. 46—TEA CAKE.

½ lb. of sugar
10 eggs
½ lb. of fine flour
¼ lb. of blanched, grated almonds
Juice and rind of 1 lemon
2 heaping tsps. of baking powder

Preparation: The sugar and yolks of eggs are stirred 20 minutes, the
ground almonds added and the mixture stirred again 20 minutes. Now add
lemon juice and grated lemon rind, the whites of eggs beaten to a
froth, and then quickly stir in the flour. Lastly add the baking
powder mixed with some of the flour. Put the batter into a buttered
pan and bake 1 hour.

Remarks: In the beginning, the heat may be greater in the bottom of
the oven than in the top.

No. 47—SUNSHINE CAKE.

5 eggs
1 cup of sugar
¼ tsp. of salt
¾ cup of flour
½ tsp. of cream of tartar
1 tsp. of lemon juice
1 tsp. of orange juice

Preparation: The yolks of eggs are stirred with sugar ½ hour. The
flour mixed with the cream of tartar is sifted 4 times. Add salt,
lemon and orange juice, the sifted flour and the whites of eggs beaten
to a froth. Butter a pan and strew it with roll crumbs, put the batter
in and bake 40 minutes in medium hot oven.

No. 48—FRUIT CAKE.

1 lb. of butter
1 lb. of brown sugar
12 eggs
1½ lbs. of flour
6 tbsps. of molasses
2 tsps. of soda
4 lbs. of Sultana raisins
3 lbs. of small raisins
1 lb. of chopped citron
1 chopped orange rind
½ lb. of chopped figs
½ pt. of brandy
¼ pt. of white wine
¼ pt. of rose water
½ tsp. ground cloves
¼ tsp. mace and nutmeg

Preparation: Cream the butter with sugar and yolks of eggs. Dissolve
soda in molasses and mix it into the batter, add the brandy, white
wine, rose water, ground cloves, mace, nutmeg, flour and lastly the
beaten whites of eggs. Mix in the Sultana and the small raisins,
citron, orange rind and figs. Line a pan with buttered paper, put the
batter in and bake slowly for 2 hours.

No. 49—BREMER BLOCK.

1 lb. washed butter
¾ lb. of sugar
1 lb. of seeded raisins
¾ lb. of currants
¼ lb. blanched, chopped almonds
¼ lb. of chopped citron
¾ qt. warm milk
5 cents yeast
3 tsps. of salt
3 lbs. of sifted flour

Preparation: Cream the butter and sugar. Wash the raisins and currants
and put them in a warm place; when real warm, mix them with the
butter. Almonds and citron are next stirred in, then the warm milk,
the yeast dissolved in ½ cup of warm milk, salt and flour. Put the
dough into buttered pans, set to rise and bake 1½ to 2 hours.

No. 50—PLAIN FRUIT CAKE.

1 cup of butter
1 cup of brown sugar
1 cup of white sugar
1 cup of raisins
1 cup of currants
½ cup of molasses
1½ cups of black coffee
3 eggs
4 cups of flour
3 tsps. of saleratus

Preparation: Cream the butter with sugar and yolks of eggs, add
raisins, currants and saleratus dissolved in molasses; then coffee,
flour and lastly whites of eggs beaten to a stiff froth. Put the
batter into a pan lined with buttered paper and bake in a moderate
oven 1 to 1½ hours.

No. 51—BROWN SPICE CAKE No. 1.

2 eggs
2 heaping tbsps. of lard
1 lb. best molasses
1 lb. of brown sugar
1 tsp. of ground cloves
1 tsp. of cinnamon
1 cup of raisins
1 pinch of salt
1 level tsp. baking soda
1 heaping tsp. of cream of tartar
1 cup of sour milk or black coffee
4 cups of flour
½ grated nutmeg

Preparation: The eggs are beaten thoroughly, lard heated a little,
sugar, molasses, cloves, cinnamon, nutmeg, raisins and salt mixed in.
The soda is dissolved in the milk or coffee and added. The cream of
tartar is mixed into the flour, and this added gradually. Line a pan
with buttered paper, put the batter in and bake 1 to 1½ hours in
medium hot oven.

No. 52—NATRON OR CARBONATE OF SODA CAKE.

¼ lb. of butter
2 cups of sugar
1 cup milk
5 eggs
Juice and rind of 1 lemon
10 bitter almonds
1 lb. of flour
1½ tsps. of cream of tartar
1 tsp. of natron, (carbonate of soda)
⅛ lb. of sweet almonds

Preparation: Cream the butter, sugar and yolks of eggs, then add lemon
juice and grated rind and the blanched, ground sweet and bitter
almonds. The carbonate of soda and cream of tartar are mixed into the
flour and this is gradually worked into the batter; and lastly, stir
in lightly the stiffly beaten whites of eggs. Put into a buttered pan
and bake 1 hour.

No. 53—LIGHTNING CAKE.

½ lb. of sugar
4 eggs
½ lb. of butter
1 grated lemon rind
½ lb. of flour
2 tsps. of baking powder

For Sprinkling on the Cake.

¼ lb. blanched, ground almonds
½ cup of sugar
1 tsp. of cinnamon

Preparation: Cream the butter, sugar and yolks of eggs, add the lemon
rind, flour mixed with baking powder and lastly the stiffly beaten
whites of eggs. Butter some pans, spread the dough out in them about ⅛
inch thick, sprinkle with almonds, sugar and cinnamon. Bake in medium
oven and while still warm, cut into nice pieces and serve warm.

No. 54—CARAWAY CAKE.

½ lb. of butter
¾ cup of sugar
1 lb. of flour
¼ lb. of raisins
3 eggs
½ pt. of milk
1 tbsp. of caraway
1 tsp. of natron or soda

Preparation: The butter and flour are rubbed together, raisins, sugar
and caraway and the well-beaten eggs stirred in. Boil the milk and
dissolve the soda in it, let it get cold and stir into the dough. Put
the batter into a buttered pan and bake ¾ to 1 hour.

No. 55—WIT CAKE.

6 eggs
¾ lb. of sugar
½ lb. of flour
Juice of ½ lemon
2 tbsps. of arrack
1½ tsps. of baking powder
¼ lb. of butter

For Sprinkling.

¼ lb. of chopped, blanched almonds

Preparation: Stir the yolks of eggs and sugar to a cream, work in the
flour. Add the melted butter, arrack, lemon juice, baking powder and
beaten whites of eggs. Butter some pans, spread the batter in 1 inch
thick, sprinkle the almonds over and bake the cake ½ hour.

No. 56—ENGLISH CAKE.

¼ lb. of butter
¾ lb. of flour
Scarce ½ lb. of sugar
⅛ lb. of raisins
2 tbsps. of chopped orange rind
4 eggs
½ pt. of milk
4 grams of ammonium
2 tbsps. of chopped citron

Preparation: Butter, flour and sugar are rubbed together with the
hands. Add to this the raisins, citron, grated orange rind; beat the 4
eggs to a froth, boil the milk and mix it with the eggs, then stir
into the batter and lastly mix in the ammonium. Butter a pan, strew it
with roll crumbs, fill in the batter and bake in medium hot oven 1 hour.

No. 57—WALNUT CAKE.

½ cup of butter
1 cup of brown sugar
2 eggs
1 cup of sour milk
½ cup of chopped walnuts
½ cup of chopped raisins
2 cups of flour
2 tsps. of baking powder
½ tsp. of soda

Preparation: Cream the butter, add sugar and eggs and beat 10
minutes. Soda is dissolved in sour milk and mixed into the batter, the
walnuts, raisins, flour and lastly the baking powder added. Put the
batter into buttered pans and bake to a nice color.

No. 58—SPICE CAKE No. 2.

1 cup of butter
1½ cups of sugar
1 cup of sour milk
1 tsp. of soda
3 eggs
2 cups of raisins
2 tsps. of cinnamon
1 tsp. of cloves
½ tsp. of nutmeg
2 cups of flour

Preparation: Cream the butter with sugar and yolks of eggs, then add
soda, dissolved in sour milk, and raisins, cinnamon, ground cloves,
nutmeg and flour, and lastly the whites of eggs beaten to a stiff
froth. Butter a pan, put in the batter and bake 1 hour.

No. 59—SOUR CREAM CAKE.

1 cup of sugar
1 cup of sour milk
1 egg
1 pinch of salt
1 pinch of nutmeg
1 tsp. of soda
1 cup of flour

Preparation: The soda is mixed with sour milk and to it are added in
the order named, sugar, yolk of egg, salt, nutmeg, flour and the
stiffly beaten white of egg. Bake the batter in two layers and spread
on the lower layer the sour cream filling. This is made by mixing well
¼ cup of sour cream, 1 yolk of egg, 2 tablespoonfuls of sugar, ½
teaspoonful of flour, teaspoonful of lemon juice and cook it ½ minute,
stirring continually. When this has cooled, stir in the beaten white
of egg.

No. 60—THOUSAND PUFF TART.

1 lb. of fresh washed butter
1 lb. fine flour
½ pt. cold water
Whites of 2 eggs
2 tbsps. of rum
½ tsp. of baking powder
½ lb. of apricot or raspberry marmalade

Preparation: Mix the flour, water, egg, rum and baking powder. Cut the
cold butter into bits and spread it over the dough, fold the dough
over and roll out, repeat 3 to 4 times, then roll out thin. Now cut
out 6 to 8 disks the size of the tart you wish to make, turn up the
edge, brush over with yolks of eggs and bake light brown or yellow.
Dust with sugar when done, fill in apricot or raspberry marmalade,
place the disks one on top of the other. The top one should have no
marmalade, but be dusted with powdered sugar.

Remarks: This tart dough can be prepared like Good Tart dough in No.
93, a very good recipe.

No. 61—CHEESE TART.

¼ lb. of butter
¼ lb. of sugar
½ lb. of flour
2 eggs
½ tsp. of baking powder

For the Filling.

2 lbs. of cheese
¼ lb. of butter
¼ lb. of sugar
1 tbsp. of vanilla
2 tbsps. of flour
3 eggs

Preparation: Cream the butter, add sugar, eggs, flour and baking
powder. Butter a pan, roll out the dough and put in, turning up a high
rim. Cheese, butter, sugar, vanilla, flour, yolks of eggs and beaten
whites are mixed well, filled into the tart and baked until of a
yellow color.

No. 62—APPLE TART.

½ lb. of washed butter
½ lb. of flour
¼ pt. of water
White of 1 egg
1 tbsp. of rum
¼ tsp. of baking powder

For the Filling.

1 qt. of thick apple sauce or ½ peck of apples, stewed soft in 1½
glasses of white wine and sugar

For the Frosting.

6 whites of eggs
1¼ cups of sugar
½ lb. blanched, ground almonds

Preparation: The preparation of the dough is the same as given under
No. 60. The dough is rolled out, put into a buttered, round, loose
bottom pan with a high rim, partly baked and spread thick with apple
sauce. The 6 whites of eggs are beaten to a stiff froth, sugar and
ground almonds mixed in and this frosting spread on the sauce. Now the
tart is baked again to a nice light brown color.

Remarks: This tart dough can be made like Good Tart dough, in No. 93,
a very good recipe.

No. 63—ORANGE TART.

8 yolks of eggs
¼ lb. of sugar almonds
Juice of 2 large oranges
¾ lb. unblanched, ground
2 tsps. of baking powder

Preparation: Yolks of eggs and sugar are stirred ½ hour, almonds and
orange juice mixed in, then the baking powder and beaten whites of
eggs. This dough is put into a buttered, round, loose bottom pan,
strewn with bread crumbs and baked ¾ hour in medium hot oven.

No. 64—RICE TART WITH ORANGES.

¼ lb. of washed butter
½ lb. of flour
2 eggs
¼ lb. of sugar
¼ tsp. of baking powder

For the Filling.

½ lb. of rice
1 lb. of sugar
½ pt. of white wine
Juice of 1 lemon
Juice and rind of 1 orange
4 eggs

Preparation: The preparation of the dough is the same as No. 61. The
dough is rolled out and put into the pan, making a high rim, and
baked. The rice is cooked done but not mushy in 3 qts. of water. Then
pour off the water, add white wine, lemon juice, orange juice, grated
rind of ½ orange and sugar mixed with the rice to simmer ¼ hour. The
yolks of eggs and the beaten whites are added and this mixture spread
thick on the tart which is baked 20 minutes more in a medium hot oven.
Instead of baking this dough, the batter may be prepared for the tart
according to No. 93.

No. 65—BREAD TART.

12 eggs
1 lb. powdered sugar
1 pt. grated rye bread
1 tbsp. of cinnamon
1½ cups of blanched, ground almonds
1 tbsp. of citron
¼ tsp. of cardamom
1½ tsps. of baking powder

Preparation: Yolks of eggs and sugar are stirred 20 minutes, then
bread, cinnamon, almonds, citron, cardamom, baking powder and beaten
whites of eggs mixed in. A round, loose bottom pan is buttered, the
batter filled in and the tart baked in a slow oven. You can cover the
tart with a chocolate frosting.

No. 66—PUFF PASTE TART WITH CREAM.

½ lb. of washed butter
½ lb. of flour
¼ pt. of water
White of 1 egg
1 tbsp. of rum
¼ tsp. of baking powder

For the Cream.

1 pt. of cream
1½ tbsps. of flour
6 yolks of eggs
2 tbsps. of butter
Rind of ½ lemon
¼ lb. of sugar
½ cup of blanched, ground almonds

Preparation: Flour, water, egg, rum and baking powder are mixed into a
dough, the butter cut into bits and spread on, the dough folded over,
rolled out and this repeated several times. Cut out 3 round layers and
bake them each in a round baking pan to a golden color. Meanwhile mix
the cream, flour, butter, sugar, yolks of eggs, grated lemon rind and
cook in double boiler to a thick cream, add the ½ cup of ground
almonds, spread this cream between the layers and cover with the
frosting. To make this, beat the whites of 4 eggs to a stiff froth,
add 12 tablespoonfuls of sugar. After the frosting is on, put the tart
into the oven again and bake to a golden yellow.

No. 67—CHERRY TART.

½ lb. of fresh butter
½ lb. of flour
¼ pt. of water
White of 1 egg
1 tbsp. of rum
¼ tsp. baking powder

For the Filling.

2 qts. of stoned cherries
1 cup of sugar

For the Frosting.

¼ lb. blanched, ground almonds
5 eggs
Sugar to taste
3 tbsps. of lemon juice

Preparation: Flour, water, egg, rum and baking powder are stirred to a
dough and rolled out. The butter is cut into bits and spread on and
the dough folded over and rolled out again; repeat this process 3 to 4
times and lastly put the dough into a round baking pan shaping it with
a high rim. Now fill in the cherries and partly bake the cake. In the
meantime prepare the frosting by mixing well 5 yolks of eggs, ground
almonds, sugar, lemon juice and beaten whites of eggs. Bake the tart
again to a nice color.

Remarks: This tart dough can also be made like Good Tart dough, in No.
93.

No. 68—STRAWBERRY OR RASPBERRY PUFF TART.

½ lb. of washed butter
½ lb. of flour
¼ pt. of water
White of 1 egg
1 tbsp. of rum
¼ tsp. baking powder

For the Filling.

2 qts. of strawberries
1 cup of sugar
1 qt. whipped cream

Preparation: Butter, flour, water, egg, rum and baking powder are
stirred into a dough, rolled out and butter cut into bits and spread
on, then folded up and rolled out again. Repeat this 3 to 4 times, cut
out 3 layers which are baked to a nice color. The strawberries or
raspberries are picked over, washed, mixed with sugar and whipped
cream and spread between the layers. Cover with whipped cream.

No. 69—EMPEROR TART.

½ lb. blanched, roasted hazelnuts
10 eggs
½ lb. sugar
1 tsp. vanilla
2½ ozs. fine flour

For the Filling.

1 glass apricot marmalade

Preparation: The nuts are ground and stirred for ½ hour with yolks of
eggs and sugar, then vanilla and flour are added and lastly the beaten
whites of eggs. Bake in two layers, cool them, spread apricot
marmalade between them and cover the cake with pineapple frosting.

No. 70—MOUTH POCKETS.

½ lb. of washed butter
½ lb. of flour
¼ pt. of water
¼ tsp. of baking powder
White of 1 egg
1 tbsp. of rum
Fruit marmalade

Preparation: The preparation of the dough is the same as given under
No. 68. Roll out the dough very thin, cut out little tarts, put in the
center of each some kind of marmalade, either raspberry, apple sauce,
cherry or plum, and bake the tarts after folding one-half of each over
the fruit.

No. 71—PUFF PASTE STRIPS.

½ lb. of washed butter
½ lb. of sugar
¼ pt. of water
White of 1 egg
1 tbsp. of rum
¼ tsp. baking powder
Sugar
Fruit marmalade

Preparation: The preparation of the dough is the same as given under
No. 68. When the dough is rolled out thin, cut strips 3 inches long
and 1½ inches wide, bake them until done, dust with sugar and finish
baking. When done, spread with fruit marmalade and place two and two
together.

No. 72—ALMOND TART FILLED WITH CREAM.

6 eggs
1 large cup of powdered sugar
½ lb. of unblanched, ground almonds
1½ tsps. baking powder

For the Filling.

1 pt. of whipped cream
½ cup of sugar
1 tsp. of vanilla

Preparation: Yolks of eggs and powdered sugar are beaten for 15
minutes, the ground almonds added, then the baking powder and the
beaten whites of eggs.

Bake in 3 layers, cool them, then spread on whipped cream mixed with
sugar and vanilla, place the layers one on the other and cover the
whole cake with whipped cream. The cake may be filled with fruit
marmalade.

No. 73—HUNTER’S TART.

6 eggs
½ lb. of sugar
1 grated lemon rind
1½ tsps. of baking powder
¼ lb. of fine flour

For the Filling.

Fruit marmalade or jelly

For the Frosting.

2 whites of eggs
¼ cup of sugar
2 tbsps. of lemon juice
¼ lb. blanched, ground almonds

Preparation: 4 yolks of eggs and 2 whole eggs are stirred with sugar
15 minutes, add 1 grated lemon rind, flour, baking powder, the beaten
whites of 4 eggs. Butter a round, loose bottom pan, sprinkle with roll
crumbs, put the batter in, and bake it in medium hot oven. When baked,
spread it with marmalade and then with the frosting. This is made by
beating the whites of eggs to a stiff froth and mixing it with sugar,
lemon juice and almonds. Then bake the cake again in a medium hot oven
until the frosting is yellow.

No. 74—FIRE TART.

7 hard-boiled eggs
½ lb. blanched, ground almonds
½ lb. sugar
Flour enough to make stiff dough

For the Filling.

Jelly or marmalade

For Sprinkling.

¼ lb. blanched, ground almonds
¼ cup of sugar

Preparation: Stir the yolks of the hard-boiled eggs well with sugar,
add the almonds, then the flour, enough to make a stiff dough. Butter
a pan and cover the bottom of it with dough. Leave enough for strips.
Then bake the tart in a slow oven, cool it and spread it with jelly or
marmalade. Mix the ground almonds with sugar and sprinkle over the
jelly, then arrange the strips of dough nicely over the top and bake
again. Place something under the pan that the bottom of the tart will
not get dark.

No. 75—WHITE ALMOND TART.

½ lb. of butter
½ lb. of sugar
3 eggs
½ lb. of blanched, ground almonds
2½ tbsps. of baking powder
½ lb. of flour

For the Frosting.

¼ cup of rum
Powdered sugar

Preparation: Cream the butter, sugar and yolks of eggs, then add the
ground almonds, the flour, the baking powder and lastly the beaten
whites of eggs. Butter a round, loose bottom pan, put the batter in
and bake to a nice color. The rum is mixed with enough powdered sugar
to make a creamy frosting and when the tart has cooled off, spread it
with this frosting.

No. 76—HEAVEN’S TART.

1 cup of fresh butter
1 cup of powdered sugar
1 egg
1 tsp. of vanilla
2 scant cups of flour
2 heaping tsps. of baking powder
3 yolks of eggs

For the Filling. No. 1.

3 whites of eggs
4 tbsps. of powdered sugar
6 bitter, ground almonds
½ tsp. of cinnamon
¼ lb. blanched, ground almonds

No. 2.

1 glass raspberry jelly

No. 3.

1 cup of cream
2 yolks of eggs
Juice of 1 lemon
1 tbsp. of flour
2 tbsps. of sugar
1 tsp. vanilla

Preparation: Cream the butter, add the sugar, egg, yolks of eggs,
flour and baking powder, mix well and bake in three layers.

Beat the 3 whites of eggs to a stiff froth, add 4 tablespoonfuls of
powdered sugar, ¼ lb. sweet and 6 bitter, ground almonds and vanilla,
and spread on the baked layers. Put them back into the oven to bake
light yellow. On two of the layers put jelly. The cup of cream, 2
yolks of eggs, lemon juice, flour, 2 tablespoonfuls of sugar and 1
teaspoonful of vanilla are mixed well and boiled to a cream, stirring
constantly. Let it get cold, spread it over the two layers covered
with jelly and place one on the other. Place the layers covered with
the beaten whites of eggs on top.

No. 77—HEAVEN’S FOOD.

2 eggs
1 cup of sugar
2 heaping tbsps. of flour
1 tsp. of baking powder
½ cup of ground walnuts
½ cup of chopped dates

For the Filling.

3 oranges
1 pt. of whipped cream
2 bananas

Preparation: The eggs are well-beaten and stirred with sugar for 10
minutes; add flour and baking powder, ground walnuts and chopped dates
and bake the cake to a nice color. When it is done, break it in
desirable pieces, place them close together again, put the sliced
oranges and bananas on and cover the whole with whipped cream mixed
with sugar and vanilla. Serve at once.

No. 78—MERINGUE TART.

6 whites of eggs
2 cups of sugar
1 tsp. of vanilla
¼ tsp. of cream of tartar
1 tbsp. of vinegar

Preparation: The whites of eggs must be beaten very stiff, the cream
of tartar, sugar and vanilla added and beaten or stirred 1 hour. Rinse
a round cake pan with water, put the mixture in and bake in a slow
oven 1 hour. When cold, fill it with whipped cream.

No. 79—SPONGE CAKE.

4 eggs
1 cup of sugar
3 tbsps. of water
1 cup of sifted flour
1 pinch of salt
1 tsp. of vanilla or lemon
1 tsp. of baking powder

Preparation: Cream the yolks of eggs and sugar, add the flour, water,
salt and vanilla, then add baking powder and beaten whites of eggs.
Butter a pan, put the batter in and bake slowly.

No. 80—WALNUT TART.

7 eggs
2 cups of powdered sugar
Juice of 1 lemon
½ cup of dates
2½ tsps. of baking powder
½ cup of sifted cracker crumbs
¾ lb. of blanched walnuts

Preparation: Rub yolks of eggs to a cream with sugar, add the ground
walnuts, chopped dates, lemon juice, cracker crumbs, baking powder and
beaten whites of eggs. Butter a round, loose bottom cake pan, put the
batter in, bake it to a nice color, and cover with a chocolate frosting.

No. 81—BISCUIT TART.

12 eggs
1 lb. of sugar
1¼ tsps. baking powder
1 tsp. of vanilla or lemon rind
11 ozs. of flour

Preparation: Cream the yolks of eggs and sugar, add vanilla or grated
½ lemon rind, flour, baking powder and the beaten whites of eggs.
Butter a round, loose bottom pan, put the batter in and bake in a slow
oven. A glass of fine wine poured over the baked tart makes it very
nice.

No. 82—SAND TART.

1 lb. of butter
10 eggs 1 lb.
1 lb. of sugar
The juice and rind of 1 lemon
2 tbsps. of good brandy
1 lb. corn starch or half corn starch and half flour
1 tsp. of baking powder

Preparation: The butter is washed to take the salt out, then creamed;
add gradually the sugar and yolks of eggs, lemon juice, grated lemon
rind and brandy. Then add the flour in spoonfuls. All in all the
batter must have been stirred 1 hour. Now add the baking powder and
beaten whites of eggs. Butter a round, loose bottom pan, put the
batter in and bake slowly 1½ hours.

No. 83—FILLED BISCUIT ROLLS.

4 eggs
¼ lb. of sugar
1 tsp. grated lemon rind
¼ lb. of flour
1 tbsp. of butter
1 cup of fruit marmalade

Preparation: The yolks of eggs and sugar are stirred ½ hour, then the
grated lemon rind, flour and beaten whites of eggs mixed in. A pan is
buttered with the 1 tablespoonful of butter, the batter spread in ¼
inch thick and baked in a medium hot oven to a light brown color. When
still warm, spread with the marmalade, roll it up and cut slices of it
which may be baked or dried a little in the oven. If you wish, cover
them with frosting.

No. 84—DATE CAKE WITH WHIPPED CREAM.

6 eggs
½ lb. of sugar
½ lb. of chopped walnuts
1 lb. chopped dates
½ cup of wheat bread crumbs
2 tsps. of baking powder

For the Filling.

1 pt. of whipped cream

Preparation: The yolks of eggs are creamed with sugar, then add the
chopped or ground walnuts and dates, bread crumbs, baking powder and
beaten whites of eggs. Bake in 2 layers. Mix the whipped cream with
sugar and ½ teaspoonful of vanilla, spread on the layers and arrange
these one on the other. Serve at once.

No. 85—FARINA TART.

7 eggs
¾ cup of sugar
½ cup blanched, ground, sweet almonds
15 bitter, blanched, ground almonds
1 grated lemon peel
¼ lb. of farina, good measure

Preparation: The yolks of eggs, sugar, lemon peel and almonds are
stirred 1 hour, the farina mixed in dry and lastly the beaten whites
of eggs. Butter a round, loose bottom pan, put the batter in and bake
slowly 1 hour.

No. 86—BROWN SPICE CAKE No. 3.

2 cups of brown sugar
1 cup of butter
3 eggs
1 cup of milk
3 cups of flour
1 tsp. of cloves
½ tsp. of nutmeg
1 cup of chopped raisins
1 cup of chopped hickory nuts
3 tsps. of baking powder
1 tsp. of cinnamon

Preparation: Cream the butter with sugar and yolks of eggs, add the
milk, cloves, cinnamon, nutmeg, raisins, nuts, flour, baking powder
and whites of eggs. Butter a pan, put the batter in and bake 1¼ to 1½
hours in medium hot oven.

No. 87—SPICE CAKE No. 4.

½ cup of butter
½ cup of lard
1½ cups of dark brown sugar
2 eggs
½ cup of cold coffee
½ cup of sour milk
1 tsp. of soda
¾ tsp. of cinnamon
½ tsp. cloves
3½–4 cups of flour

Preparation: The butter, lard, yolks of eggs and sugar are stirred to
a cream, add the coffee, sour milk in which the soda has been
dissolved, cinnamon, cloves, flour and beaten whites of eggs. Butter a
pan, put the batter in and bake 1 hour or bake in 3 layers.

No. 88—SCOTCH TART.

¾ lb. of butter
1 lb. of sugar
½ lb. of finely cut raisins
9 eggs
Juice and rind of 1 lemon
1 lb. of flour
2 heaping tsps. of baking powder

Preparation: The butter is stirred to a cream, with yolks of eggs,
sugar, lemon juice and rind; add the flour and lastly the baking
powder and beaten whites of eggs. Butter a pan, put the batter in and
bake to a light brown color.

No. 89—LARD CAKE.

½ lb. pork lard
6 eggs
½ lb. of sugar
¼ lb. of corn starch
¼ lb. of flour
½ lb. blanched, ground, sweet almonds
20 blanched, ground, bitter almonds
1 heaping tsp. of baking powder

Preparation: Stir the yolks of eggs and sugar to a cream; cream the
lard and mix with the eggs and sugar. Now add flour and almonds in
spoonfuls and lastly the baking powder and beaten whites of eggs.
Butter a pan, put the batter in and bake to a nice brown color.

No. 90—SEXTON’S CAKE.

½ lb. of butter
¼ lb. of sugar
½ lb. of extra fine flour
¼ lb. blanched, ground, sweet almonds
½ tsp. baking powder

Preparation: The butter is stirred to a cream; add the sugar, ground
almonds, flour and baking powder and stir 45 minutes. Spread the
batter ½ inch thick in small square muffin pans or in a large square
buttered cake pan, bake it to a light brown color and leave it to cool
a little before taking out of the pan, because it breaks easily. After
it has cooled off completely, dust with sugar or spread frosting on.

No. 91—CHOCOLATE TART.

¼ lb. sweet chocolate
1 cup of water
¼ lb. ground almonds
¼ lb. of butter
3 eggs
1¼ cups of sugar
1½ tsps. of baking powder
2 cups of flour

For Filling.

1 pt. of whipped cream

Preparation: Stir the butter, sugar and yolks of eggs to a cream. Add
the chocolate dissolved in water, unblanched, ground almonds, flour
and baking powder and the beaten whites of eggs. Butter a round, loose
bottom pan, put the batter in and bake in a slow oven. Mix the whipped
cream with sugar and vanilla and fill or cover the tart with it before
serving.

No. 92—ENGLISH BRIDE’S CAKE (FRUIT CAKE).

1 lb. of butter
1 lb. brown sugar
10 eggs
1 lb. of flour
1 pt. of brandy
1 tbsp. ground cinnamon
2 lbs. finely cut citron
½ tbsp. of ground cloves
4 ground nutmegs
1 tsp. of baking soda
1 cup of molasses
10 lbs. of raisins
4 lbs. of currants
1 tbsp. of ground bark of nutmeg

Preparation: The butter is stirred to a cream with sugar and yolks of
eggs. Then work in ½ lb. of flour, the brandy mixed with the spices
and the molasses in which the soda is dissolved, the beaten whites of
eggs, then raisins, currants, citron and the other ½ lb. of flour. The
cake is baked 3 to 4 hours.

Remarks: This cake may be kept 20 years and longer and will still be
palatable. Wine is served with it.

No. 93—GOOD TART DOUGH.

¼ lb. of butter
2 yolks of eggs
¼ lb. of blanched, ground almonds
¼ lb. of sugar
1 tbsp. of brandy
2 cups of flour
½ cup of cracker crumbs

Preparation: Cream the butter with sugar, egg yolks and brandy, and
add the flour. Roll out the dough and line a round, loose bottom pan
with it. Strew with ½ cup of cracker crumbs and ¼ lb. blanched, ground
almonds. Spread the fruit on the almonds. This dough is very good for
any kind of Fruit Tart.

No. 94—CHOCOLATE TART No. 2.

6 eggs
1 cup sugar
⅛ lb. chopped bitter chocolate
20 chopped almonds
½ cup of flour
1 heaping tsp. of baking powder

For Filling.

1 pt. of whipped cream

Preparation: Beat the whites of eggs to a stiff froth, add the chopped
bitter chocolate and almonds, then yolks of eggs and sugar, and lastly
the flour and baking powder. Bake in two layers. A little before
serving, spread whipped cream between the layers.

No. 95—FILLED SAND TART.

Sand tart batter as in No. 82.

For Filling.

1 glass of fine fruit marmalade

For Frosting.

Rum frosting according to Chapter 20, No. 22

Preparation: The sand tart batter should be baked in 3 layers; when
cold, spread the fruit marmalade between the layers. Then cover with
rum frosting.

No. 96—TREE TART.

7 eggs
1 cup sugar
1 cup finest flour
Chocolate or sour filling

Preparation: Beat the yolks with a rotary egg beater, add ½ cup sugar
and beat well again, then set aside. Beat whites to stiff froth, add
other ½ cup sugar. Mix both and add 1 cup flour measured before
sifting. Butter pans, dredge them with flour and put the batter in.
Bake in 8 layers in a slow oven. Spread chocolate or sour cream
filling as in No. 76, between the layers. You may also cover with a
frosting if you wish.

No. 97—FENCE TART.

First Layer.

4 whites of eggs
3 yolks of egg
1 pinch of salt
⅓ tsp. cream of tartar
1¼ cups of sugar
1 cup flour

Second Layer.

⅓ or ¼ lb. bitter chocolate dissolved in ¼ cup hot water
1 cup of powdered sugar
1 tsp. of vanilla
½ package Knox gelatine dissolved in ¼ cup of water
1½ cups of cream
½ pt. whipped cream

Third Layer.

½ package Knox gelatine with pink coloring dissolved in ¼ cup of water
1 cup of powdered sugar
1½ cups of cream
½ pt. whipped cream
1 tsp. of vanilla

For the Covering.

1 pt. whipped cream

For the Fencing.

1½ doz, ladyfingers or macaroons

Preparation: The first layer. Whip whites of eggs to thin froth, add
salt and cream of tartar, then whip to a stiff froth, mix in the sugar
and then the yolks of eggs whipped to a cream. Mix the flour in
lightly and bake this batter in a buttered, round, loose bottom pan.
Loosen edge of layer and arrange ladyfingers or macaroons around in
circle. For the second layer. The dissolved bitter chocolate, sugar,
cream and vanilla are boiled for 2 minutes, stirring constantly; stir
in the dissolved gelatine, set the mixture in cold water and continue
stirring until it begins to thicken, then add the ½ pint of whipped
cream and spread the mixture over the baked layer. The third layer is
made exactly like the second layer only using the pink coloring
instead of the bitter chocolate; after the whipped cream is added,
spread the mixture over the chocolate layer.

Before serving, spread the 1 pint of whipped cream, to which has been
added a little sugar and vanilla, over the cake.

No. 98—FRUIT TART.

Apricot, Peach, Plum, Blueberry, Raspberry or Strawberry Tart.

Prepare the batter according to No. 93, Good Tart Dough. Cover with
the desired fruit, either fresh or canned, sprinkle with sufficient
sugar, bake for 25 minutes. Before serving the cake, cover with beaten
cream or almond frosting, prepared according to No. 23, Chapter 20 and
then bake.

No. 99—SUNSHINE CAKE.

6 eggs
1 cup sugar
1 cup flour
1 even tsp. cream of tartar
Pinch of salt
½ tsp. vanilla

Preparation: Beat the yolks of eggs first and add half the sugar; beat
the whites of eggs very dry and add remaining sugar; beat well and add
the vanilla, salt and the yolks of eggs; lastly, add the flour and
cream of tartar. Bake in a moderate oven one hour.

No. 100—LOVE CHOCOLATE CAKE.

¼ cup butter
1 cup sugar
1 egg
1 tsp. vanilla
½ cup sour milk
½ tsp. soda
2 squares bitter chocolate
½ cup hot water
1 large cup flour

Preparation: Cream butter and sugar; add the egg and vanilla; add the
milk in which the soda is dissolved; dissolve the chocolate in a half
cup boiling water, let cool and add; lastly, add the flour. Bake in
flat cake tin about 45 minutes.

No. 101—ANGEL FOOD.

Whites of 9 eggs
1 cup sugar
1 tsp. vanilla
1 cup flour
1 tsp. cream of tartar

Preparation: Beat the whites of eggs to a stiff froth; boil the sugar
with 4 tablespoons of water until all the sugar is dissolved; beat the
sugar syrup into the whites of the eggs; add vanilla and the flour and
cream of tartar. Bake slowly one hour.

No. 102—FRUIT CAKE.

1¼ cups sugar
½ cup butter
Yolks of 2 eggs
1 cup sour milk
1 tsp. baking soda
1½ cups flour
½ tsp. cloves
½ tsp. cinnamon
½ cup dates, raisins and citron
1 cup walnuts

Preparation: Cream the sugar and butter, add yolks of eggs, cloves and
cinnamon; dissolve the soda in the sour milk and add to the rest; add
the flour and mix well; lastly add the raisins, dates, citron and
walnuts. Bake about 45 minutes.

No. 103—CREAM PUFFS.

1 large teacup hot water
½ tsp. butter
1 teacup flour
4 eggs

Preparation: Stir the flour into the boiling water and butter. Set
aside to cool and, when cold, stir in the unbeaten eggs one at a time.
Drop in muffin tins and bake in a fairly hot oven. When baked, fill
with beaten cream, sweetened to taste and flavored with vanilla.

No. 104—CREAM PUFFS.

1 cup boiling water
½ cup butter
1 cup pastry flour
3 eggs, beaten
Small pinch of soda

Preparation; Pour the water over the butter. As soon as it boils and
the butter is melted, stir in the flour and keep stirring until it
leaves the sides of the pan. Let cool, stir in the eggs and soda, drop
on the buttered pans and bake thirty minutes. Do not open the oven
door for twenty minutes for fear they will fall. Fill with whipped
cream, sweetened and flavored.

No. 105—YEAST DOUGHNUTS.

1 cup sugar
3 cups milk
Flour to make soft sponge
1 yeast cake
Mix and let stand over night

In the Morning Add:

1 cup sugar
½ cup butter
3 eggs
½ a nutmeg
½ tsp. soda
Flour to mix stiff

Preparation: Let rise, then roll and cut in shape desired, or roll
into long strips and twist into shape. Let rise again while the lard
is heating and then fry. Raised doughnuts require longer cooking.

No. 106—SOUR CREAM DOUGHNUTS.

5 tbsps. sour cream
1 cup milk
½ cup butter
2 eggs
Little salt
1 tsp. soda
¼ tsp. cinnamon
¼ tsp. nutmeg
1 tsp. baking powder
1 cup sugar
1¼ pts. of flour

Preparation: Stir butter, eggs and cream well, add all other
ingredients, roll and cut the dough, bake in hot lard to golden brown
color and sprinkle powdered sugar over.

No. 107—BLITZ-KUCHEN.

1 lb. sugar
½ lb. butter
8 eggs
1 lb. flour

Preparation: Stir sugar, butter and yolks of eggs together well, add
the stiffly beaten whites of eggs and flour. Bake in a long tin and
cover with sugar, cinnamon and chopped almonds. Cut and serve while
warm.

No. 108—SPICE CAKE.

2 cups brown sugar
½ cup butter
2 eggs
2 egg yolks
½ cup sour milk
1 tsp. nutmeg
2 cups flour
1 tsp. cloves
1 tsp. cinnamon
1 tsp. soda

Preparation: Beat the sugar, butter and eggs together until smooth;
add the remaining ingredients. Bake in three layers and put together
with white frosting.

No. 109—WHIPPED CREAM CAKE.

Make a good sponge cake dough (see No. 29). and omit the chocolate.

Filling.

1 pint whipped, sweet cream
1 pound blanched, chopped almonds
Vanilla
Sugar

Preparation: After the layers are baked, beat the cream stiff, add
sugar, vanilla and almonds; sweeten the cream and spread between the
layers and on top. This is the queen of all cakes.

No. 110—WALNUT CAKE.

1 lb. walnuts (leave out 14 halves for the top)
1 cup powdered sugar
¾ cup crackers (rolled fine)
8 eggs
1 tsp. baking powder
1 cup powdered sugar

Filling.

2 cups milk
Corn starch to thicken
½ cup sugar
Vanilla
Yolks of 2 eggs

Preparation: Cream the yolks of eggs and the sugar; add the beaten
whites of the eggs; mix the rolled crackers, finely chopped nuts and
baking powder and add. Bake in three layers in a slow oven.

Stir powdered sugar with a little water, spread on top of cake and
put on the walnut halves.

No. 111—ANGEL CAKE.

1 scant cup flour
1 scant cup sugar
1 tsp. baking powder
1 cup walnuts (cut)
1 cup dates (cut)
4 eggs

Preparation: Cream the eggs separately, add sugar, walnuts, dates,
baking powder and flour. Bake in a buttered pan.

CHAPTER 20.

FILLINGS AND FROSTINGS FOR CAKES.

No. 1—VANILLA FILLING.

½ cup of sweet cream
3 eggs
1½ tsps. of vanilla
4 tbsps. of sugar

The preparation of the vanilla filling is the same as given in Chapter
19, No. 29, Layer Cake with Chocolate.

No. 2—NUT FILLING No. 1.

1 tsp. of butter
½ cup of milk
2 tbsps. of flour
1 cup of sugar
½ cup of chopped nuts
1 egg

Preparation: The ingredients, excepting the white of egg, are all
mixed well. The mixture is cooked one minute, stirring constantly,
then cooled and the beaten white of egg mixed in.

No. 3—RAISIN FILLING.

1 cup of sugar
¼ cup of water
1 cup of seedless chopped raisins
1 white of egg

Preparation: Water and sugar are stirred well, then boiled for one
minute and taken from the stove. The raisins and beaten white of egg
are mixed in and the filling spread on the cake, while still warm.

No. 4—NUT FILLING No. 2.

1 cup of sugar
1 cup of finely chopped nuts
1 cup of sour cream

Preparation: The ingredients are mixed and cooked for several minutes,
stirring constantly.

No. 5—ALMOND FILLING.

2½ tbsps. of sugar
1 tbsp. of water
½ tsp. of vanilla
1 cup of blanched, ground almonds
Whipped cream, to taste

Preparation: The sugar, water and vanilla are boiled 1 minute and
spread on the cake while warm. The almonds are strewn on immediately,
then cover with the sweetened whipped cream.

No. 6—LEMON FILLING.

½ cup of milk
4 tbsps. of sugar
1 tsp. of lemon extract
2 eggs
1 tsp. of flour

Preparation: This is given in Chapter 19, No. 33, Sponge Cake.

No. 7—WALNUT FILLING.

½ cup of chopped walnuts
½ cup of chopped seedless or seeded raisins
1 cup of sugar
¼ tsp. of vanilla
¼ cup of water

Preparation: The ingredients are mixed and boiled, stirring
constantly, then spread on the cake while still warm.

No. 8—CHOCOLATE FILLING.

¼ lb. of sweet chocolate
½ cup of sugar
1 tsp. of vanilla
2 tbsps. of water
3 whites of eggs

Preparation: The chocolate is dissolved in the water, vanilla and
sugar added and boiled 3 minutes while stirring constantly. Mix in the
beaten whites of eggs while the chocolate is still warm.

No. 9—COCOANUT FILLING.

¼ lb. of cocoanut
2 whites of eggs
½ cup of sugar
1 tsp. of vanilla

Preparation: The whites of eggs are beaten to a stiff froth, the
cocoanut mixed in, then sugar and vanilla.

No. 10—BANANA FILLING.

4–5 bananas
¼ cup of sugar

Preparation: The bananas are peeled and sliced, mixed with sugar and
spread between the layers of the cake.

No. 11—DATE FILLING.

1 cup of dates
Juice and rind of 1 orange
2 tbsps. of water
½ cup of sugar

Preparation: The dates are chopped fine and mixed with orange juice
and grated orange rind, water and sugar and spread on the cake.

No. 12—CHOCOLATE FROSTING No. 1.

⅛ lb. of sweet chocolate
¼ lb. of sugar
4 tbsps. of water
1 tsp. of vanilla

Preparation: Chocolate and sugar are dissolved in the water and
vanilla and cooked until it threads. Stir it a little while longer and
spread on the cake quickly, then put the cake into the oven again for
1 minute.

No. 13—CHOCOLATE FROSTING No. 2.

½ cup of butter
⅛ lb. of chocolate
2 cups of sugar
1 cup of boiling water
½ tsp. of vanilla

Preparation: The chocolate is grated, mixed with the other
ingredients, and boiled a few minutes, stirring constantly, until
quite stiff. Take off the fire, stir until nearly cold and spread on
the cake immediately.

No. 14—CHOCOLATE FROSTING No. 3.

½ lb. of confectionery sugar
2 heaping tbsps. of cocoa
1 tsp. of vanilla
3–5 tbsps. of water

Preparation: Sugar, cocoa and vanilla are mixed and the cold water
gradually stirred in, being careful not to take too much water because
the mixture must be thick. Spread on the cake at once. If you wish,
add ½ cup of blanched and chopped almonds.

No. 15—VANILLA FROSTING.

1 lb. of confectionery sugar
1 tbsp. of vanilla
Sufficient cream to make the frosting of proper consistency

Preparation: Vanilla is added to the sugar and the cream in ½
teaspoonfuls. Take only sufficient cream to make the frosting of
consistency to spread.

No. 16—LEMON FROSTING.

1 lb. confectionery sugar
Juice of 1 lemon
Cream, if necessary

Preparation: The lemon juice is mixed with the sugar and stirred a
while. If the frosting is too thick, add more cream.

No. 17—TUTTI-FRUTTI FROSTING No. 1.

1½ cups of sugar
1 tbsp. of cocoa or chocolate
1 tbsp. of butter
¼ cup of cocoanut
¼ cup of chopped walnuts
½ cup of milk
¼ cup of finely chopped raisins

The ingredients are mixed well and cooked until the mixture may be
spread on the cake while still warm.

No. 18—TUTTI-FRUTTI FROSTING No. 2.

3 tbsps. hot milk
½ cup of confectionery sugar
½ lb. of ground peanuts
1 cup of finely chopped seedless or seeded raisins
¼ cup of chopped citron

Preparation: The sugar and hot milk are stirred a while, then the
other ingredients are added and the frosting spread on the cake
immediately.

No. 19—PLAIN FROSTING.

½ cup of confectionery sugar
1 white of egg
1 tsp. of vanilla or lemon

Preparation: White of egg and sugar are stirred well and vanilla or
lemon essence added; white of egg is not beaten to a froth.

No. 20—CARAMEL FROSTING.

1 cup of brown sugar
¼ cup of milk
1 tsp. of butter
1 tsp. of vanilla

Preparation: Sugar and milk are boiled until the mixture draws
threads, take off the fire, add butter and vanilla and stir
continually until you spread it on the cake while still warm.

No. 21—GLAZE FROSTING FOR HONEY CAKES.

¼ lb. of confectionery sugar
3 tbsps. of rose water
1 white of egg

Preparation: All ingredients are stirred to a cream and spread on the
cake.

No. 22—RUM FROSTING.

¾ cup of confectionery sugar
1½ tbsps. of rum
¼ pt. of water

Preparation: The sugar is dissolved in water and cooked until it
threads. Then cool it a little, add the rum and stir until the
frosting begins to get white, then spread on the cake.

No. 23—ALMOND FROSTING FOR FRUIT TART No. 1.

6 whites of eggs
1¼ cups of sugar
Scant ½ lb. blanched almonds cut in long thin strips

Preparation: The whites of eggs are beaten to a stiff froth, mixed
with sugar and almonds and spread on the cake. This is then put into a
medium oven and baked lightly to harden the frosting.

No. 24—ALMOND FROSTING No. 2.

5 eggs
¼ lb. blanched, ground almonds
¾ cup of sugar
3 tbsps. of lemon juice

The preparation is the same as given in Chapter 19, No. 67, Cherry Tart.

No. 25—FRUIT FROSTING.

⅓ lb. of powdered sugar
2 tbsps. of fruit marmalade
1 white of egg

Preparation: The ingredients are mixed well, stirred 25 minutes until
thick and foamy, then spread on the cake immediately.

No. 26—CREAM FROSTING FOR FRUIT CAKE.

½ cup of sweet or sour cream
2 eggs
¼ cup of sugar

Preparation: Cream, sugar and yolks of eggs are mixed well and the
beaten whites of eggs added. This frosting is spread on the cake and
baked 10 minutes until the frosting is a nice yellow color.

No. 27—PLAIN ALMOND FROSTING.

½ lb. of confectionery sugar
¼ cup of cream or milk
1 cup of blanched, ground or chopped almonds

Preparation: The cream and the almonds are stirred into the sugar. The
frosting must be quite thick, then spread on the cake immediately.

CHAPTER 21.

COOKIES.

Directions for Preparing Christmas Cookies.

No. 1—BUTTER COOKIES.

1 lb. of butter
1½ lbs. of flour
2 yolks of eggs
1 tbsp. of arrack or brandy
½ lb. of sugar
¼ lb. of blanched, ground almonds
¼ cup of chopped citron

Preparation: The butter is washed to take the salt out. Then butter,
flour and sugar are mixed, yolks of eggs, arrack and almonds added and
the dough rolled out to ¼ inch thick. Cut out with cookie cutters and
bake to a light yellow color.

Remarks: These cookies may be brushed with whites of eggs and dusted
with sugar, cinnamon and almonds before they are baked.

No. 2—HAZELNUT COOKIES.

¾ lb. of sugar
4 eggs
1 lb. of flour
1½ tsps. of vanilla
½ lb. of ground hazelnuts

Preparation: The ingredients are mixed into a smooth batter, rolled
out thin, cut out in various designs and baked a nice yellow color.
When done, spread with vanilla frosting.

No. 3—KISSES.

½ lb. of sugar mixed with vanilla
4 whites of eggs

Preparation: The sugar and whites of eggs are whipped to a stiff
froth. The pan is spread with wax, little heaps of froth are put on
and baked in a very moderate oven.

No. 4—SAND COOKIES.

1 cup of butter
1½ cups of sugar
3 eggs
1 tbsp. of water
½ tsp. of baking powder
Flour enough to make a stiff dough
Sugar and cinnamon

Preparation: Butter, sugar, yolks of eggs and 1 tablespoonful of water
are stirred well, then the beaten whites of eggs and baking powder are
added and flour mixed in to make the dough stiff enough to roll out.
Cut it into squares, dust with sugar and cinnamon and bake.

No. 5—ALMOND HEAPS.

½ lb. of sugar
3 whites of eggs
¼ tsp. of cinnamon
½ lb. unblanched almonds, cut into long strips
¼ tsp. of corn starch

Preparation: Stir the beaten whites of eggs with sugar ½ hour, add
almonds, cinnamon and corn starch. Rinse the cake pans with water, put
little heaps of the batter on and bake 20 minutes in a medium oven.

No. 6—ALMOND MACAROONS.

½ lb. of sugar
3 whites of eggs
½ lb. blanched, ground almonds
1 tsp. of corn starch

Preparation: The beaten whites of eggs and sugar are stirred ½ hour,
then the almonds and corn starch are added. The cake tins are rinsed
with cold water; put little heaps of the mixture on and bake in a
medium oven to a golden yellow.

No. 7—CHOCOLATE MACAROONS WITH ALMONDS.

½ lb. unblanched almonds, cut into long strips
¾ cup of sugar
¼ lb. of grated sweet chocolate
3 whites of eggs
2 tbsps. of water

Preparation: The almonds are blanched and cut into long strips, then
they are stirred in the sugar and water over the fire until they
become sugared. When this has cooled, stir in the chocolate and beaten
whites of eggs. Grease the pans with a bacon rind, put little heaps of
the batter on and bake in a medium oven.

No. 8—CHOCOLATE MACAROONS WITH COCOANUT.

1 lb. of sugar
4 eggs
¼ lb. of sweet, grated chocolate
¼ lb. of cocoanut
1 tsp. of cinnamon
1 lb. of flour
2 tsps. of baking powder

Preparation: Sugar and eggs are stirred well, then chocolate,
cocoanut, cinnamon, lastly flour and baking powder added. Grease the
pans with a bacon rind. Put little heaps of the batter on and bake in
a slow oven.

No. 9—WALNUT MACAROONS.

½ lb. of ground walnuts
½ lb. of sugar
3 whites of eggs
½ tsp. of vanilla

Preparation: The whites of eggs are beaten to a stiff froth, sugar is
mixed in and stirred ½ hour, then walnuts and vanilla are added. Rinse
the pans with cold water, place little heaps of the mixture on and
bake in a medium oven.

No. 10—FLAWNS.

½ lb. of butter
3 eggs
½ lb. of sugar
1 lb. of flour
1 tsp. of baking powder

For Sprinkling.

Sugar, almonds and cinnamon

Preparation: The butter is stirred to a cream with sugar and the eggs,
then work in flour and baking powder. Roll out the dough to the
thickness of a knife, cut out designs, sprinkle with sugar, blanched
and cut or ground almonds and cinnamon and bake in medium hot oven.

The butter must be washed to take out the salt.

No. 11—ALMOND PUFFS.

3 whites of eggs
½ lb. of sugar
1 grated lemon rind
½ lb. blanched almonds, cut in long strips
2 tsps. of corn starch

Preparation: The whites of eggs are beaten to a froth and stirred ½
hour with the sugar, grated lemon rind, almonds and corn starch. Rinse
the pans with cold water, put on small heaps of the mixture and bake
in medium oven.

No. 12—ALMOND STRAWS No. 1.

6 eggs
1 lb. of sugar.
¾ lb. blanched, grated almonds
1 grated lemon rind

Preparation: Eggs, sugar, almonds and lemon rind are mixed well and
stirred until the dough rolls from the spoon with which you stir it.
The bread board is floured, the dough rolled out to ½ inch thickness
and cut into strips 3 inches long and 2 inches wide. Leave them on the
board over night, turn them in the morning and leave them 6 hours
longer, then bake in a medium hot oven to a golden yellow color.

No; 13—VANILLA STRAWS.

½ lb. of butter
½ lb. of sugar
5 eggs
1½ tbsps. of vanilla
½ tsp. of baking powder
½ lb. of flour

Preparation: The butter is washed to take out the salt, creamed
and mixed with sugar, eggs and vanilla. Add the baking powder mixed
with the flour. Roll out the dough on a well-floured board to ¼ inch
thickness, cut out oblong strips and bake them in buttered pans to a
dark yellow color.

No. 14—ANISE COOKIES.

1 lb. of sugar
4 large eggs
Butter, the size of a nut
1 level tsp. of ammonium
1½ lbs. of flour
Anise to taste

Preparation: Sugar, eggs, butter, anise and ammonium dissolved in a
little milk are mixed well and stirred ¼ hour, then gradually add the
flour. Roll out the dough on a floured board, cut out designs, leave
them on the board for 24 hours and bake to a yellow color.

No. 15—VANILLA FLAWNS.

4 eggs
½ lb. of sugar
1 tbsp. of vanilla
½ lb. of flour

Preparation: The eggs and sugar are stirred on the stove for ½ hour,
then vanilla and flour are added. With a coffee spoon put little heaps
of the batter on a pan, let them stand 4 to 5 hours, put in the oven
and bake to a nice color.

No. 16—OATMEAL COOKIES No. 1.

2 cups of sugar
½ cup of lard
½ cup of hot water
2½ cups of dry oatmeal
1 tsp. of soda dissolved in water
Spices to taste

Preparation: The lard and sugar are stirred well; oatmeal, hot water
and the dissolved soda mixed in; 1 pinch of salt and some nutmeg,
cloves and cinnamon added. Put little heaps on a buttered pan and bake
to a light brown color.

No. 17—OATMEAL COOKIES No. 2.

¾ lb. of butter
1 cup of brown sugar
2 eggs
½ tsp. of salt
1 tsp. of cinnamon
½ tsp. of cloves
¼ tsp. of nutmeg
2 cups of dry rolled oatmeal
2 cups of flour
½ tsp. of saleratus, dissolved in 1 tbsp. of milk

Preparation: The butter is rubbed to a cream; mix well with sugar,
eggs, salt, cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, oatmeal, then add the dissolved
saleratus and flour. Roll out the dough, cut out cookies with a cutter
and bake to a light brown color.

No. 18—BROWN COOKIES No. 1.

½ pt. of molasses
1 pt. of syrup
½ lb. of maple sugar
½ lb. of butter
⅛ lb. of lard
¼ lb. of chopped almonds
¼ cup of chopped citron
1 tsp. of cloves
1 tsp. of cinnamon
1½ grated lemon rind
2 tsps. of potash
½ tsp. of hartshorn salt
2½ lbs. of flour

Preparation: Rub the butter and lard to a cream with sugar, add
molasses, syrup, chopped almonds and citron, cloves, cinnamon, grated
lemon rind, potash, hartshorn salt and flour. Roll the dough, cut out
cookies and bake to a light brown color.

No. 19—BUTTER COOKIES.

¾ cup of butter
2 cups of sugar
4 eggs
5 tbsps. of sour cream
1 tsp. of saleratus
½ tsp. of nutmeg
4–5 cups of flour

Preparation: The butter, sugar and eggs must be stirred to a cream,
then add cream, saleratus, nutmeg, and lastly the flour. Roll out the
dough, cut out cookies and bake to a golden yellow color.

No. 20—BROWN COOKIES No. 2.

½ lb. of butter
2 lbs. of syrup
¼ lb. of sweet, chopped almonds
⅛ lb. of bitter, ground almonds
½ oz. potash, dissolved in ¼ cup of rose water
½ tsp. of cloves
1½ tsps. of cinnamon
1 tsp. of cardamom
1 grated lemon rind
⅛ lb. of finely chopped citron
2 lbs. of flour
1½ lbs. of sugar

Preparation: Rub the butter to a cream with syrup, sweet and bitter
almonds, potash, cloves, cinnamon, cardamom, lemon rind and citron.
Lastly mix in the flour and sugar. Roll out the dough, cut out and
bake in medium hot oven.

No. 21—BROWN COOKIES No. 3.

1 qt. of syrup
2 cups of sugar
1½ cups of melted lard
1 cup of hot water
1 tsp. of baking soda
½ tsp. of allspice
1 tsp. of cinnamon
¼ tsp. of ginger
½ tsp. of nutmeg
¼ tsp. of salt
½ tsp. of pepper
Flour enough to make a stiff dough

Preparation: Mix the ingredients well, put in enough flour to make a
stiff dough, roll it out, cut out cookies and bake.

No. 22—BROWN COOKIES No. 4.

1 qt. of syrup
1 lb. of brown sugar
1 lb. of lard
1 pinch of salt
1 tsp. of cinnamon
1 cup of sour milk dough
2 tsps. of baking soda
Flour enough to make a stiff

Preparation: Mix well the melted lard, sugar, syrup, cinnamon, salt
and sour milk in which the soda is dissolved; then work in enough
flour to make a stiff dough. Roll out the dough, cut out cookies and
bake.

No. 23—BROWN COOKIES No. 5.

1 cup of sugar
1 cup of lard
2 cups of molasses
2 tsps. of baking soda
1 tsp. of cloves
¼ tsp. of ginger
1 tsp. of salt
1 tsp. of cinnamon
2 eggs
Flour enough to make a stiff dough

Preparation: Melt the lard and add sugar, molasses, baking soda,
cloves, cinnamon, ginger, salt, eggs and enough flour to make a stiff
dough. Roll out the dough, cut out cookies and bake.

No. 24—WHITE COOKIES No. 1.

¼ lb. of butter
½ lb. of sugar
¼ lb. of blanched, ground almonds
2 yolks of eggs
½ cup of sweet cream
1 tbsp. of cardamom
½ lemon rind, grated
2 tsps. of hartshorn salt, dissolved in ¼ cup of rose water
1¼–1½ lbs. of flour

Preparation: Cream the butter with sugar and yolks of eggs, then add
almonds, cream, cardamom, lemon rind, dissolved hartshorn salt and
flour enough to make a stiff dough. Roll it out, cut out cooking and
bake.

No. 25—WHITE COOKIES No. 2.

4 lbs. of fine sugar
1 bottle of rose water
4 yolks of eggs
1 cup of butter
½ oz. hartshorn salt
⅛ lb. of grated orange rind
1 grated lemon rind
½ lb. of blanched, chopped almonds
¼ lb. of finely chopped citron
4 lbs. of flour

Preparation: The sugar is dissolved in the rose water and brought to
boil. Yolks of eggs and hartshorn salt are mixed and stirred into the
sweetened rose water while still warm, (not hot), then all the other
ingredients are quickly mixed in and lastly the flour. Roll out the
dough, cut out cookies and bake to a golden yellow color.

Remarks: Let the dough stand for a day before baking.

No. 26—WHITE COOKIES No. 3.

¾ lb. of butter
3 eggs
1 tsp. of hartshorn salt, dissolved in ¼ cup of rose water
1 lb. of sugar
½ cup of blanched, ground almonds
2 grated lemon rinds
2 lbs. of flour

Preparation: The butter is washed to remove the salt. The cold butter
is cut into the flour and mixed with the hands, then eggs, dissolved
hartshorn salt, sugar, almonds and lemon rind are added. The dough is
now rolled out and cut out with a tumbler or cookie cutter. Bake in
pans to a golden yellow color.

No. 27—BUTTER STRAWS WITH ALMONDS.

½ lb. of butter
2 eggs
½ lb. of sugar
½ lb. of blanched, ground almonds
1 grated lemon rind
½ lb. of flour
1 tsp. of baking powder

Preparation: Rub the butter to a cream with yolks of eggs. Then add
the beaten whites of eggs, lemon rind and baking powder mixed with
flour. The dough is rolled out, cut into strips and baked to a golden
yellow color.

No. 28—CHOCOLATE COOKIES.

½ lb. of grated, sweet chocolate
¼ lb. of butter
1 lb. of sugar
½ lb. of blanched, ground almonds
3 eggs
1 tsp. of vanilla
1 lb. of flour
1 tsp. of baking powder

Preparation: Rub the butter and sugar to a cream, add chocolate,
almonds, eggs and vanilla, then baking powder mixed with flour and
roll out the dough. Cut out the cookies with a tumbler or cutter and
bake in a slow oven.

Remarks: Cookies containing chocolate take more time for baking.

No. 29—NUT CHOCOLATE COOKIES.

1 cup of grated, sweet chocolate
1½ cups of sugar
4 eggs
12 tbsps. of ground walnuts
1 tsp. of cinnamon
1½ cups of flour

Preparation: The ingredients are mixed well and stirred, the flour
added last, then this dough is rolled out and cut into strips or into
disks with a tumbler and baked slowly.

No. 30—MOLASSES COOKIES.

1 cup of lard
1 cup of sugar
2 eggs
2 cups of good or best molasses
⅔ cup of hot water
2 tsps. of soda
1 tsp. of cream of tartar
½ tsp. of cinnamon
½ tsp. of ginger
½ tsp. of salt
Flour enough to make a stiff dough

Preparation: The lard is melted and mixed with sugar, molasses, water,
the soda dissolved in a little water, the cream of tartar, cinnamon,
ginger, salt and enough flour added to make a stiff dough. Roll out,
cut out cookies and bake.

No. 31—COCOANUT DROP CAKES.

5 eggs
2 cups of sugar
½ lb. of cocoanut
2 tsps. of baking powder
3 cups of flour

Preparation: The ingredients are mixed well and the flour stirred in
last. With a teaspoon drop on well buttered pans and bake until light
brown.

No. 32—HICKORYNUT DROP CAKES.

1½ cups of sugar
1 cup of butter
2 eggs
1 cup of sour cream
1 tsp. of vanilla
1 cup of hickory nuts
2 tsps. of baking powder
3½ cups of flour
1 tsp. of soda

Preparation: The butter is stirred to a cream and mixed with sugar and
eggs. The soda is dissolved in the sour milk and added, also the
vanilla, the nuts and the baking powder mixed with the flour. Little
heaps of dough are placed on well buttered pans and baked in a slow
oven.

No. 33—SMALL HERMIT CAKES No. 1.

1½ cups of brown sugar
1 cup of butter
3 eggs
1 cup of ground nuts
1 cup of finely chopped raisins
1 tsp. of cloves
1 tsp. of cinnamon
1 tsp. of baking soda
1 tbsp. of good molasses
3 cups of flour
1 cup of finely chopped dates

Preparation: Butter, sugar and eggs are stirred well. The soda
dissolved in the molasses and mixed in; then add nuts, raisins, dates,
cloves, cinnamon and flour. Grease the pans with a bacon rind, make
little cakes the size of a walnut and bake in a slow oven.

No. 34—SMALL HERMIT CAKES No. 2.

1 cup of butter
2 eggs
2 cups of sugar
1 cup of currants
1 tbsp. of molasses
1 tsp. of cinnamon
1 tsp. of cloves
1 tsp. of nutmeg
Flour enough to make a stiff dough
1 tsp. of soda

Preparation: The butter, eggs, sugar and currants are mixed well, soda
dissolved in the molasses added, also cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg and
enough flour to roll out the dough, being careful not to make it too
stiff. Roll out thin, cut out with a cookie cutter or in strips and
bake in a hot oven.

No. 35—MOTHER’S COOKIES.

1½ cups of butter
3 eggs
3 cups of sugar
3 tsps. of baking powder
6 cups of flour
½ grated lemon rind
¾ cup of milk

Preparation: Cream the butter with eggs and sugar, add the milk, lemon
rind and baking powder mixed with the flour. Roll out quite thin, cut
out cookies and bake to a golden yellow color.

No. 36—PEANUT DROP CAKES.

2 tbsps. of butter
2 eggs
4 tbsps. of sugar
1 cup of ground peanuts
1 tsp. of salt
4 tbsps. of milk
1 tsp. of baking powder
1 cup of flour

Preparation: The butter, sugar and yolks of eggs are stirred to a
cream; add the milk, nuts, salt, the beaten whites of eggs and baking
powder mixed with the flour. With a teaspoon drop on well buttered
pans, place a peanut on each and bake in a slow oven.

No. 37—PEANUT STRAWS.

¾ cup of butter
1 large cup of flour
1 large cup of sugar
4 whites of eggs
Some chopped or cut peanuts

Preparation: The very cold butter is cut into the flour, sugar is
added and quickly mixed with the hands. Beat the whites of eggs to a
stiff froth and add it to the dough. Spread the dough into buttered
pans, strew the peanuts on and bake the cake. When it has cooled, cut
it into small equal strips.

No. 38—SMALL PLAIN COOKIES.

½ cup of butter
½ cup of lard
3 eggs
1½ cups of sugar
1 tsp. of baking soda
½ tsp. of salt
Flour enough to make a stiff dough
3 tsps. of boiling water

Preparation: Butter, lard, eggs and sugar are stirred well. The soda
is dissolved in the hot water and added, then salt and not too much
flour. The dough should be rather soft; roll it out, cut out cookies,
sprinkle with sugar and bake to a golden yellow color.

No. 39—RAISIN CAKE.

1 cup of butter
3 eggs
1½ cups of sugar
1½ cups of finely chopped raisins
6 tbsps. of strong coffee
1½ cups of chopped English walnuts
1 tsp. of cinnamon
1 tsp. of baking soda
¼ cup of hot water
3 cups of flour

Preparation: The butter, eggs and sugar are stirred well, raisins,
walnuts, coffee, cinnamon, soda dissolved in the hot water and flour
mixed in. The pans are buttered well and the dough put on in
teaspoonfuls, flattened a little and baked slowly.

No. 40—GINGER SNAPS.

1 cup of butter and lard
1 cup of brown sugar
3 eggs
1 cup of molasses
½ cup of sour milk
2 tsps. baking soda
1 tbsp. of ginger
1 tbsp. of cinnamon
1 tsp. of cloves
Flour enough to make a stiff dough.

Preparation: Butter, lard, sugar and eggs are stirred well; baking
soda dissolved in the sour milk, coffee, ginger, cinnamon, cloves
added and flour to make a stiff dough. Roll it out, cut out the
cookies with a tumbler and bake.

No. 41—BROWN PEPPERNUTS No. 1.

1½ lbs. of sugar
2 lbs of butter
1½ lbs. of syrup
¼ oz. of cardamom
¼ oz. of cinnamon
3 grated lemon rinds
½ lb. ground almonds
¼ lb. of finely chopped citron
1¼ ozs. of potash, dissolved in ¼ cup of rose water
5 lbs. of flour

Preparation: Sugar and butter are stirred to a cream, then all
ingredients mixed in and lastly the flour. Make little heaps or nuts
on buttered pans and bake them.

No. 42—BROWN PEPPERNUTS No. 2.

1½ lbs. of butter
1 lb. of sugar
1 lb. of syrup
1 cup of rose water
2 tsps. of hartshorn salt
½ cup of finely chopped citron
¼ lb. of ground almonds
1 tbsp. of cardamom
1 grated lemon rind
3 lbs. of flour

Preparation: Preparation is the same as the one before, No. 41, Brown
Peppernuts. The hartshorn salt is dissolved in the given quantity of
rose water.

No. 43—SUGAR PEPPERNUTS.

1 lb. of butter
1½ lbs. of sugar
¼ lb. of blanched, ground almonds
¾ cup of sweet cream
½ cup of finely cut citron
1 tbsp. of cardamom
2 tbsps. of brandy
1½ tsps. of hartshorn salt dissolved in 1 cup of rose water
3 lbs. of flour

Preparation is the same as given under No. 41.

No. 44—VANILLA STARS.

1 lb blanched, ground almonds
5 eggs
1 lb. of sugar
2 vanilla beans

Preparation: The vanilla is crushed with the sugar, then yolks of
eggs, almonds, beaten whites of eggs mixed in and stirred 1 hour. Roll
out the dough, make little stars and bake in medium hot oven. The
board must be well-floured when rolling out the dough.

No. 45—EGG CRACKNELS.

1 lb. of butter
¼ lb. of sugar
½ cup of arrack or rum
6 hard-boiled yolks of eggs
1 lb. of flour

Preparation: The ingredients are mixed well with the hands, and the
dough formed into small rings; these are dipped into beaten egg, then
rolled in sugar and cinnamon and baked to a golden yellow color.

Remarks: The eggs must be boiled 20 minutes. The yolks are chopped
fine before working into the dough. The whites may be chopped, mixed
with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar and used for garnishing green
lettuce.

No. 46—ALMOND BREAD.

1 lb. of brown sugar
4 eggs
¼ lb. of grated, sweet chocolate
½ lb. of chopped almonds
½ tsp. of ground cinnamon
½ tsp. of ground nutmeg
½ tsp. of ground cloves
1½ tsps. of baking powder
2 cups of flour

Preparation: Sugar and eggs are stirred well, the other ingredients
mixed in and lastly the baking powder mixed with the flour. Roll out
the dough and bake. When done and still warm, cut into strips.

No. 47—SPRINGELS.

1 lb. powdered sugar
4–5 eggs
¼ tsp. of ammonia or 1 tsp. of baking powder
1 lb. of flour

Preparation: The sugar and eggs are beaten well. The ammonia is
pulverized with a knife blade and added, then the flour. Roll out the
dough and cut out small cookies, then bake in medium oven to a nice
color.

No. 48—PLAIN PEPPERNUTS.

½ lb. of sugar
2 eggs
1½ tsps. of cinnamon
1 tsp. of cloves
¼ tsp. of pepper
½ tsp. of ammonia
Flour enough to make a stiff dough
½ cup of brandy

Preparation: The sugar is stirred ½ hour with the eggs, then add
cinnamon, cloves, pepper and the ammonia, pulverized with a
knife blade. Stir in enough flour to make a stiff dough, roll it out
and cut out small cookies. Leave these for 2 to 3 days, turning them
over and dipping in brandy and bake slightly in a medium oven.

No. 49—ALMOND STRIPS No. 2.

½ lb. of sugar
3 eggs
½ lb. of almonds, sliced fine and roasted
Flour enough to make a stiff dough

Preparation: Sugar and eggs are stirred well, the almonds mixed in
after they are cold, then flour to make a stiff dough. Roll it out and
cut into small strips and bake.

No. 50—HONEY CAKES.

2 lbs. of honey
1 lb. of sugar
5 cents worth of refined potash
3 tbsps. of rum
¼ lb. of unblanched, chopped almonds
2 tbsps. of sugared orange rind
¼ lb. of butter
4 eggs
1 tsp. of cinnamon
½ tsp. of ground cloves
3 lbs. of flour
⅛ lb. of finely cut citron

Preparation: Melt the honey. Dissolve the potash in the rum and cover
the dish. Then mix all the other ingredients with the honey, add the
rum with the dissolved potash, and lastly the flour. Knead the dough 1
hour and set it in a warm place for 5 days. Then roll it out and bake
it. When it is still warm, cut it into squares, oblongs or triangles.
If you wish, you may cover them with a frosting, or with almonds and
citron before baking.

No. 51—COCOANUT KISSES.

Whites of 4 eggs
2 cups sugar
1 tsp. cream of tartar
1 tsp. vanilla
¾ lb. cocoanut

Preparation: Beat the whites of eggs very stiff; add the sugar and
beat well; add cream of tartar and vanilla and lastly the cocoanut.
Drop from a spoon on a buttered tin and bake in a moderate oven
one-half hour.

No. 52—CINNAMON STARS.

Whites of 8 eggs
1 lb. sugar
1 tbsp. cinnamon
1 lb. almonds

Preparation: Stir the sugar, eggs and cinnamon together one hour; put
six tablespoonfuls in a separate dish for frosting. To the remainder,
add the grated, unblanched almonds; mix well; roll out upon a molding
board strewn with flour and sugar; form with a star; frost; bake on
buttered tins.

No. 53—LADY FINGERS.

8 eggs
¾ lb. sugar
¾ lb. flour
Flavoring and salt

Preparation: Beat eggs and sugar stiff, add salt and flour; put the
dough in a form 3 inches long and 2 inches wide, bake rapidly. It will
also make a fine cake if baked in a buttered pan.

CHAPTER 22.

CONFECTIONERY.

No. 1—MOLASSES CANDY.

1 qt. of good molasses
½ cup of sugar
1 tbsp. of butter
1 tbsp. of vinegar
1 tsp. of baking soda
1 tbsp. of lemon extract or vanilla

Preparation: Boil the molasses, sugar, butter and vinegar, stirring
constantly. Test it by dropping a few drops into cold water; if it
hardens it has been boiled sufficiently. Then add soda dissolved in 1
tablespoonful of hot water and lemon essence or vanilla. Pour the
candy into a buttered pan and when cool, pull it with your hands well
buttered until it is a light color. See candy pulling.

No. 2—VINEGAR TAFFY.

6 tbsps. of sugar
4 tbsps. of water
2 tbsps. of vinegar

Preparation: Mix the ingredients and boil 20 minutes, then pour into a
buttered pan and pull.

No. 3—CHOCOLATE FUDGES.

½ cup of molasses
2 cups of sugar
½ cup of milk
½ cup of butter
½ cup of grated, sweet chocolate
2 tbsps. of finely chopped figs
2 tbsps. of finely chopped raisins
1 tbsp. vanilla
½ cup of ground English walnuts

Preparation: Mix the molasses, sugar, milk and butter and cook 7
minutes, add the chocolate and cook 7 minutes more, then add the other
ingredients. Pour into a buttered pan and when cold, cut into squares.

No. 4—BUTTER SCOTCH.

1 cup of corn-syrup
2 cups of sugar
¼ cup of water
¼ lb. of butter
1 tbsp. of vinegar
1 tbsp. of vanilla

Preparation: Boil the syrup, sugar, water and butter until it hardens
when testing in cold water. Add the vinegar and vanilla and pour into
a buttered pan. When cold, cut into squares.

No. 5—LEMON CANDY.

1 lb. of sugar
½ pt. of water
1 tsp. of cream of tartar
⅓ tsp. of tartaric essence
⅓ tsp. of lemon extract

Preparation: Mix the sugar, water and cream of tartar and boil until
it cracks and breaks when tried in cold water. Pour into a deep
buttered dish and when cool, mix in the tartaric essence and lemon
extract, and shape into any desired form.

No. 6—CHOCOLATE CARAMELS No. 1.

2 cups of sugar
1 cup of syrup
½ cup of grated, sweet chocolate
1 cup of milk
1 tbsp. of butter
1 tbsp. of vanilla

Preparation: Mix the sugar and syrup and boil 5 minutes, add the other
ingredients and boil until it stiffens. Pour into a buttered pan and
cut into squares.

No. 7—BON-BONS.

2 lbs. of sugar
1 pt. of water
1 vanilla bean or 2 tbsps. of vanilla extract

Preparation: Mix the sugar, water and vanilla and boil until it cracks
when tried in cold water. Pour into an oiled pan or porcelain platter,
spread it out and cut into cubes.

Remarks: You can also flavor with rosewater, orange or lemon instead
of vanilla.

No. 8—CHOCOLATE CANDY.

3 pieces of sweet chocolate or 2½ tbsps. of cocoa
2 cups of sugar
½ cup of milk
½ tbsp. of vanilla
½ tbsp. of butter

Preparation: Mix the ingredients and boil 3 minutes, then pour into
buttered pans and cut into cubes when cold.

No. 9—NUT CANDY.

3 cups of brown sugar
¾ cup of milk
¼ cup of cream
1 tbsp. of butter
1 pinch of salt
1 tsp. of vanilla
1 lb. of chopped walnuts

Preparation: Mix the sugar, milk and cream and boil until, when trying
a few drops in cold water, it holds together and forms a soft mass.
Then add butter and salt, take from the stove, mix in vanilla and nuts
and stir the mixture until it gets creamy. Pour it to 1 inch thickness
into buttered pans and cut it into cubes when cold.

No. 10—POPCORN CANDY.

1 cup of sugar
1 tbsp. of butter
3 tbsps. of water
1 pinch of salt
4 qts. of popped corn

Preparation: Pour enough popped corn into a pan to cover the bottom of
the pan, put it on the stove to get very hot, being careful not to
burn it. Mix the sugar, butter, water and salt and boil until it
hardens when tried in cold water. Now mix it with the hot corn, add
the rest of the popped corn and stir until it rolls from the spoon,
then spread it out in buttered tins.

Remarks: It is best to use old popcorn.

No. 11—COCOANUT DROPS.

1 cocoanut
About 2 cups of sugar
1 white of egg

Preparation: Grate the cocoanut and weigh it, add to it ½ of its
weight in sugar, mix this with the beaten white of egg, drop on
buttered paper and bake in oven 15 minutes.

No. 12—CHOCOLATE CARAMELS No. 2.

1 cup of sugar
½ cup of butter
¼ cup of grated, sweet chocolate
1 cup of molasses
1 cup of milk

Preparation: Cream the sugar and butter, add chocolate, molasses and
milk and boil until it hardens when tried in cold water. Pour it about
1 inch thick into buttered pans and when cold, cut into squares with a
buttered knife.

No. 13—PEANUT CANDY.

2 cups sugar
1 cup chopped peanuts

Preparation: Put two cups white sugar into a porcelain kettle; stir
constantly until dissolved. Add one cup chopped peanuts. Turn at once
into a buttered dish and cut in squares.

No. 14—PULLED TAFFY.

3 cups granulated sugar
½ cup mild vinegar
½ cup water
Butter, size of a walnut

Preparation: If vinegar is strong, use two-thirds water and one-third
vinegar. Boil the sugar, water and vinegar together until half done;
then add the butter and stir until mixed well. When it snaps when
tested in cold water, it is done. Pour on buttered tins, let cool,
flavor and pull.

No. 15—ICE CREAM CANDY.

2 cups sugar
½ cup vinegar
½ cup water
Butter, size of an egg

Preparation: Boil sugar, vinegar and water together about ten minutes;
add butter and let it boil another five minutes. Try a few drops in a
glass of cold water. If hard, pour the mass into a buttered tin and
set in a cool place until cool enough to pull. Pull it until it
becomes white. Cut in pieces as desired.

No. 16—CRACKER JACK.

3 qts. popped corn
½ cup sugar
¼ cup syrup
½ tsp. vinegar
½ tsp. soda
½ cup peanuts

Preparation: Boil syrup, sugar and vinegar until it will crack when
tried in cold water. Add the soda, stir well and pour the foamy
mixture over the corn and peanuts.

No. 17—POP CORN BALLS.

8 qts. popped corn
2 cups granulated sugar
1 cup water
Flavoring to taste

Preparation: Pop the corn and remove all the hard kernels. Boil the
sugar and water until it hairs, add the flavor, pour over the corn and
form into balls.

No. 18—CHOCOLATE FUDGE.

1 cup granulated sugar
1 cup brown sugar
1 cup milk
2 squares chocolate
2 tbsps. butter
1 tsp. vanilla

Preparation: Put sugar, chocolate and milk on to boil and stir
occasionally to prevent burning. Remove from fire as soon as a soft
ball can be formed when mixture is tested in cold water. Add butter;
stir vigorously until creamy. Pour into buttered shallow pan and mark
in squares.

No. 19—CARAMELS.

1 cup milk
1 cup syrup
1 cup sugar
1 cup brown sugar
¼ lb. sweet chocolate
1 tbsp. flour
1 tbsp. butter
1 tsp. vanilla

Preparation: Mix everything together. Boil until it hardens in cold
water. The last quarter hour stir well. Put in buttered tins. When
cold, cut in squares.

No. 20—FUDGE.

2 cups sugar
1 cup grated chocolate
1½ cups milk or 1 cup cream
Butter, size of walnut
1 tsp. vanilla
1 cup chopped walnuts

Preparation: Boil together sugar, chocolate and milk or cream until it
hardens in water. Add the butter; take off the fire; add the vanilla
and walnuts. Stir until it thickens. Pour in a greased tin and put in
a cool place to harden.

CHAPTER 23.

PRESERVES.

Preserving Fruits and Vegetables.

Only the best quality of fruit should be used for preserving, and the
preserves must be kept in a cool dry place.

Glass jars are the best to put up preserves; tin cans must be soldered
and this cannot very well be done at home.

The kettle in which the preserves are cooked should be clean and kept
for this purpose only. The spoon or ladle used for stirring is best of
silver or new wood.

The jars should be clean and scalded before using. They must have good
rubbers and be closed so tightly that not a drop will come out when
turned upside down.

No. 1—STRAWBERRIES.

1 lb. of strawberries
½ lb. of sugar

Preparation: The strawberries must be dry and sound. Clean them, pour
water on and let stand for a few minutes, then drain in a colander.
Now weigh the fruit and take ½ lb. of sugar to every pound of fruit.
Boil the fruit and sugar a few minutes over a slow fire, then fill it
at once into the jars. Close these tightly and set them upside down to
test the covers. When they are cold, store them in a cool, dry place.

Can also be made according to No. 13, but cook only 20 minutes instead
of 2 hours.

No. 2—RASPBERRIES.

1 lb. of raspberries
½ lb. of sugar

Preparation: The preparation of the raspberries is the same as that of
strawberries. See No. 1, Strawberries.

No. 3—PINEAPPLE.

1 lb. of pineapple
¼ cup of water, scant
¾ lb. of sugar

Preparation: Pare and slice the pineapple, which is best done with a
silver knife. Weigh the fruit after it is sliced and take to every
pound of fruit ¾ lb. of sugar and small cupful of water. Boil the
sugar and water 5 minutes, skim it and put in the fruit to boil 20
minutes until it is transparent, skim it again and put it hot into the
jars; then treat the jars as in No. 1 and store them in a cool, dry
place.

No. 4—PEACHES AND APRICOTS.

1 lb. of peaches or apricots
½ lb. of sugar
¼ cup of water
4 peach stones

Preparation: Peel the peaches or apricots very thin, cut in halves and
stone them. To one pound of fruit take ½ lb. of sugar and ¼ cup of
water. Boil the sugar, water and 4 crushed stones 5 minutes, skim and
add the fruit and boil a few minutes longer until it is soft. Do not
let it get mushy. Skim the fruit again and fill it hot into the jars.
Then treat the jars again as in No. 1 to test the covers. Store them
in a cool, dry place.

Remarks: The peelings may be used for jelly. See Preparation of Jelly.

No. 5—PEACHES IN JELLY.

2 lbs. of nice, large peaches
1 lb. small peaches
1 pt. of water
3 lbs. of sugar
Brandy paper

Preparation: Cut the small peaches into pieces, stone them, weigh
them, boil until tender in the water and drain in a colander. Now put
the sugar into the fruit syrup and boil until thick, skim it and put
the large peeled peaches into it whole. Boil until the fruit is tender
but not mushy, then put it carefully into the jars, pour the thick
syrup on, place a brandy paper over and close the jars up tightly.

No. 6—APRICOTS IN JELLY.

2 lbs. of nice, large apricots
1 lb. of small apricots
1 pt. of water
3 lbs. of sugar
Brandy paper

Preparation: The preparation of apricots is the same as that of
peaches. See No. 5, Peaches in Jelly.

No. 7—PICKLED PEACHES.

1 lb. of peaches
¼ lb. of sugar
¼ cup of vinegar
¼ cup of water
3 cloves
1 small stick of cinnamon

Preparation: Peel the peaches, leave them whole and weigh them. Boil
the given quantity of water with sugar, vinegar, cloves and cinnamon 5
minutes, skim and add the peaches. When the fruit is soft, put it into
the cans or jars and pour the syrup over. If there is too much syrup,
boil it down to fill the cans or jars. Cover with a brandy paper and
close them up tightly. The stone jars may be tied up with parchment
paper.

No. 8—PICKLED APRICOTS.

1 lb. of apricots
¼ lb. of sugar
¼ cup of vinegar
¼ cup of water
3 cloves
1 small stick of cinnamon

Preparation: The preparation of pickled apricots is the same as that
of pickled peaches. See No. 7, Pickled Peaches.

No. 9—APRICOTS OR PEACHES IN BRANDY.

1 lb. of apricots or peaches
¾ lb. of sugar
¼ cup of water
1 wineglassful of French brandy

Preparation: Peel and weigh the apricots or peaches. Boil the sugar
and water 5 minutes and skim, then put in the fruit, boil a few
minutes and put into the jars. Let the syrup boil down and pour it
onto the fruit hot, then pour the brandy on top, close the jars
tightly and treat them as in No. 1.

Remarks: To every pound of fruit use 1 glass of brandy.

No. 10—STRAWBERRIES IN JELLY.

1½ lbs. of nice, large strawberries
1 lb. of small strawberries
2 lbs. of sugar
Juice of ½ lemon
Brandy paper

Preparation: Prepare the large strawberries as in No. 1, and drain off
the water. Treat the small berries the same way, put the latter on the
stove with the sugar, boil until soft, then rub through a sieve or a
white, clean cloth so the juice will run into a dish. Put this juice
back into the kettle, add to this the lemon juice and boil it down to
jelly. Then add the large strawberries and boil 3 to 4 minutes. Put
carefully into the jars, boil down the syrup if it is too much and
pour it on the fruit hot. Cover with brandy paper and close the jars
tightly. Treat them as in No. 1, to test the covers and when cold,
store them in a cool, dry place. Melted paraffine is often used to
make jars air-tight.

No. 11—RASPBERRIES IN JELLY.

1½ lbs. of raspberries
2 lbs. of sugar
Juice of ½ lemon
Brandy paper

Preparation: The preparation of raspberries is the same as that of
strawberries. See No. 10, Strawberries in Jelly.

No. 12—STONED SOUR CHERRIES.

1 lb. of nice cherries
¾ lb. of sugar
Brandy paper

Preparation: Wash the cherries, stone them and weigh them. To every
pound of cherries take ¾ lb. of sugar, boil 5 minutes and fill hot
into the jars. Cover with a brandy paper and treat the jars as in No. 1.

No. 13—LARGE SWEET CHERRIES.

1 lb. of cherries
1 lb. of sugar
¼ cup of water
Brandy paper

Preparation: Wipe the cherries with a cloth and place them into the
jars. Boil the sugar and water 5 minutes, skim it and pour over the
cherries. Close the jars, but not tightly. Put the jars into a boiler
with water reaching nearly to the top of the jars. Cover the boiler,
boil for 2 hours, take out the jars, close them tightly and treat them
as in No. 1.

Remarks: The cherries may be stoned. Put a tray or several thicknesses
of cloth on the bottom of the boiler, also hay or cloth between the
jars.

No. 14—COGNAC CHERRIES.

1 lb. of large, sweet cherries
1¾ lbs. of sugar
1 cup of water
1½ pts. of corn brandy

Preparation: Wash and dry the cherries, prick them with a needle, and
trim the stems with a pair of scissors. Fill a jar half full with
them. Boil down the sugar and water to one-third of the quantity and
add the brandy. When this syrup is cold, pour it into the jars, close
them tightly and treat them as in No. 1.

No. 15—MIRABELLE PLUMS, No. 1.

1 lb. of mirabelles
½ lb. of sugar
¼ cup of water

Preparation: Mirabelles are the small, round, yellow plums; they must
be firm and sound when preserved. Rub them with a cloth and prick them
with a needle a few times. Boil sugar and water 5 minutes, skim, add
the plums, boil a few minutes and put into the jars. Boil down the
syrup and pour it over the plums hot. Treat the jars as in No. 1 and
store in a cool, dry place.

No. 16—MIRABELLE PLUMS, No. 2.

1 lb. of Mirabelle Plums
¾ lb. of sugar
¼ cup of water
Brandy paper

Preparation: Treat the plums as before. After they have been rubbed
with a cloth and pricked, fill a jar half full. Boil the sugar and
water 10 minutes and pour over the plums hot. Close the jars, but not
tightly, then place into a boiler with water to boil 2 hours. After
that time take out the jars, close them tightly and treat them as in
No. 1.

Remarks: Put a piece of brandy paper inside before closing them up
tightly.

No. 17—PLUMS.

1 lb. of plums
¾ lb. of sugar
¼ cup of water

Preparation: Wipe the plums with a cloth. Boil the sugar and water for
5 minutes, skim and add the plums. Let them boil up a few times; as
soon as they begin to crack, skim and put them carefully into the
jars. Boil the syrup down and fill into the cans hot. Then close the
jars tightly and treat them as in No. 1.

No. 18—PEELED PLUMS.

1 lb. of plums
¾ lb. of sugar
1 small stick of cinnamon
1 tbsp. of wine vinegar
¼ cup of water

Preparation: Put the large, blue plums into hot water for a minute and
skin them. With a sharp knife make a slit into the side of each plum
and take out the stone; place them into the jars in layers. Boil the
sugar and water with cinnamon and vinegar for 5 minutes, skim and pour
it hot over the plums. Close the jars and boil them in a boiler for 45
minutes. Then take them out, close them tightly and treat the jars as
in No. 1.

Remarks: Plums must be prepared quickly, as they will easily turn
brown. To avoid this, one may sprinkle some of the sugar over as soon
as they are skinned.

No. 19—PLUMS IN RED WINE.

1 lb. of plums
½ lb. of sugar
½ cup of red wine
¼ cup of wine vinegar
1 clove
1 small stick of cinnamon

Preparation: Wipe the ripe, blue plums with a cloth. Boil the sugar,
red wine, vinegar, cloves and cinnamon 5 minutes, skim, add the plums
and boil a few minutes. Take them out as soon as the skins begin to
crack and put them into the jars. Boil down the syrup and fill it hot
into the jars. Close the jars tightly and treat them as in No. 1.

No. 20—PICKLED PLUMS.

3 lbs. of plums
1 lb. of sugar
½ pt. of vinegar
Several small sticks of cinnamon
6 cloves

Preparation: Wipe the plums with a cloth, prick with a toothpick
several times and place carefully into a stone jar. Boil the sugar,
vinegar, cinnamon and cloves a few minutes, skim and pour over the
plums boiling hot. This process is repeated 3 times. When the juice
boils for the third time, the plums are put in, let boil up a few
times, then all is put back into the stone jar or cans and tightly
closed or tied up. These pickled plums are nice to serve with meat.

No. 21—GOOSEBERRIES.

3 lbs. of gooseberries
2½ lbs. of sugar
A few sticks of cinnamon
1½ cups of water

Preparation: Clean, wash and drain nice, large gooseberries, which are
not overripe. Boil the sugar, water and cinnamon until clear and jelly
like, then add the berries, boil a few minutes and put into jars. Boil
down the syrup and pour it into the jars. Close tightly and treat them
as in No. 1.

Remarks: If after 1 day the syrup is too thin, pour it off and boil it
once more.

No. 22—PICKLED PEARS.

2 lbs. of pears
1 lb. of sugar
1 cup of water
⅛ cup of wine vinegar
Several sticks of cinnamon
2 cloves

Preparation: Peel the pears, cut them into halves and core them, then
put into cold water or rub with lemon juice to keep them white. Boil
the sugar, water and vinegar 5 minutes with the cloves and cinnamon
tied into a white cloth, skim, add the pears and boil until soft but
not mushy. Fill the fruit into jars and close them tightly, then treat
them as in No. 1.

No. 23—PICKLED CRAB APPLES.

1 lb. of crab apples
½ lb. of sugar
1 cup of water
⅛ cup of vinegar
1 stick of cinnamon

Preparation: Wipe the little red crab apples with a cloth, leave the
stems on. Boil the sugar, water, vinegar and cinnamon 5 minutes, skim,
add the apples and boil 10 minutes. They must not cook to pieces and
the skin must stay whole if possible. Place the apples carefully into
the jars, boil down the syrup and pour it on hot. Then close the jars
tightly and treat them as in No. 1.

No. 24—BLUEBERRIES, HUCKLEBERRIES.

1 lb. of blueberries
½ lb. of sugar
⅛ cup of vinegar or juice of ½ lemon

Preparation: Pick the berries over, wash and drain them, then boil in
sugar and vinegar or lemon juice a little while. When still hot, pour
them into jars, close tightly and treat them as in No. 1.

No. 25—GREEN GAGES.

1 lb. of green gages
¾ lb. of sugar
½ cup of water

Preparation: The genuine green gages which have red dots are the best
for preserving. Wipe them with a cloth, shorten the stem and prick the
plum to the stone several times with a darning needle. Then boil the
sugar and water 5 minutes, put in 8 to 10 plums, boil them until the
skin begins to burst, take them out immediately and put them into the
jars. Continue this until all plums are cooked. Pour the syrup over,
close the jars and put them into a boiler with water to cook for 45
minutes. Then take them out, close the covers tightly and when cold,
store them in a cool place.

No. 26—PEELED GREEN GAGES.

1 lb. of green gages
¾ lb. of sugar
½ cup of water

Preparation: Peel and stone the plums. Boil the sugar and water 5
minutes, add the plums and boil until tender, then skim and put them
into the jars. If there is too much syrup, boil it down and pour it
over the plums hot, then close the jars tightly and treat them as in
No. 1.

No. 27—CRANBERRIES.

1 lb. of cranberries
½ lb. of sugar
¼ cup of water
Brandy paper

Preparation: The American cranberries are in the market in winter to
be used fresh, while the German cranberries are in the market in
summer to be preserved for the winter. Pick them over and wash, them
in much water, then drain in a colander. Boil the sugar and water 1
minute, add the berries and boil until they are light red and
transparent, skim and fill into cans or stone jars. Boil syrup 15 to
20 minutes longer and pour boiling hot over the berries. Cover with a
piece of brandy paper and close the cans or tie up the jars tightly.
If you put them into jars, let the fruit cool off before you put on
the brandy paper and tie up the jars.

No. 28—CURRANTS.

1 lb. of currants
1 lb. of sugar

Preparation: Only the largest currants are used for preserves. Strip
them from the stems, wash in cold water, drain well and weigh them.
Boil the sugar and berries slowly for 10 minutes, skim and put into
jars hot. Close the jars tightly and treat them as in No. 1.

No. 29—BLACKBERRIES.

1 lb. of blackberries
¾ lb. of sugar

The Preparation is the same as that of currants, but let them boil
only a few minutes instead of 10 minutes.

No. 30—MELONS.

3 lbs. of melon
3 lbs. of sugar
1 pt. of water
¼ pt. of wine vinegar
4 cloves
Some sticks of cinnamon
Brandy paper

Preparation: Peel ripe but firm melons, cut them in halves and scoop
out the seeds with a silver spoon, then cut into small pieces and
weigh. Boil the sugar, water, vinegar, cloves and cinnamon 5 minutes,
add the melon and boil until transparent and soft. Now fill them into
jars, boil down the syrup and pour it on the fruit hot. Close the jars
tightly and treat them as in No. 1.

No. 31—QUINCES.

5 lbs. of quinces
3 lbs. of sugar
10 cloves
2 finely chopped lemon rinds
Several sticks of cinnamon
Water

Preparation: Pare the quinces, slice them very thin and boil in water.
When partly done, take them out and drain on a cloth. Boil the sugar,
2 cups of water, cinnamon, lemon rind and cloves 5 minutes, skim, add
the partly boiled quinces and boil until soft. Then put them into jars
with the syrup, close the jars tightly and treat as in No. 1.

No. 32—QUINCES IN COGNAC.

1 lb. of quinces
½ cup of water
¾ lb. of sugar
3 sticks of cinnamon
½ lemon rind cut fine
3 cloves
1 wineglassful of cognac

Preparation: Pare the quinces, cut them into small pieces and put at
once into cold water. When they are all cut up, put them into boiling
water and boil until tender. Boil the sugar, water, cloves, cinnamon
and lemon rind 1 minute, add the quinces and boil slowly for 5
minutes. Put the quince into jars, boil down the syrup until it gets
thick, add the cognac and pour it hot over the fruit. Close the jars
tightly and treat them as in No. 1.

No. 33—PUMPKIN.

3 lbs. of pumpkin flesh
2½ lbs. of sugar
1 qt. of vinegar
3 qts. of water
5 cloves
2 sticks of cinnamon
1 piece of ginger
½ lemon rind
Brandy paper

Preparation: Peel the pumpkin, cut in halves, scoop out the seeds and
all juicy or thready matter. Cut the flesh into slices ¼ inch thick
and put into 1 qt. of cold vinegar mixed with 2½ qts. of cold water.
Let it stand 12 hours. Then boil the sugar, ½ qt. of water and the
spices tied into a white cloth 1 minute. Add the sliced pumpkin after
draining it well, and boil until tender and transparent. Put into
jars, boil down the syrup until it thickens, fill up the jars with it
while boiling hot, cover with a brandy paper, close and treat them as
in No. 1.

No. 34—GREEN OR SMALL YELLOW ORANGES.

60 small oranges
3 lbs. of sugar
¾ qt. of water

Preparation: Prick the oranges with a fork and blanch them in water
for 5 minutes. Then cover them with water and let them stand 10 days,
changing the water twice daily. On the eleventh day boil the sugar and
¾ qt. of water 5 minutes, skim and pour cold on the well drained
oranges. On the twelfth day pour off the sugar water and boil it until
it gets thick. Put in the oranges, let them boil a few minutes and
then fill the jars. If necessary, boil the sugar water a little more,
pour it over the oranges, close the jars tightly and treat them as in
No. 1.

No. 35—PICKLED WALNUTS.

1 lb. of green walnuts
1 lb. of sugar
20 grams of whole cinnamon
1 cup of water

Preparation: The walnuts must be picked before they form a hard shell.
Clean the walnuts well and let stand in water 14 days, changing the
water once a day. Then drain well and boil until tender in fresh
water. Boil the sugar, water and cinnamon 1 minute, add the nuts and
boil a few minutes, pour into a porcelain dish and let stand 3 days,
then boil again a few minutes and fill the nuts into jars. Boil the
syrup if it is not thick enough and pour it over the nuts cold, then
close the jars well.

No. 36—GREEN ALMONDS.

60 green almonds
¼ lb. of wood ashes
4 qts. of water
1 pt. of water
1½ lbs. of sugar
¼ tsp. of bishop extract

Preparation: The almonds must be green, but soft enough to be easily
pierced with a fork. Mix the wood ashes and 4 qts. of water and boil
until the mixture feels greasy. Now put in the almonds and boil them
until the skin can be pulled off. After skinning them, put them into
fresh water, pierce them with a fork, put into hot water, set them on
the stove and let them simmer, but not boil, until they are soft. Pour
off the water, put on fresh cold water and let stand until the next
day. Now boil the sugar in 1 pt. of water until it gets thick and pour
it cold over the well drained almonds. The next day pour off the sugar
water, boil it again, and when cold, pour over the nuts and let stand
another day. The third day repeat the cooking again, add the bishop
extract, when cold, pour it over the almonds in the jars and close
them tightly.

No. 37—GRAPES.

3 lbs. of grapes
¾ lb. of sugar
½ cup of water

Preparation: Boil the sugar and water 5 minutes, pour over the grapes
and let stand for 12 hours. After this time pour off the sugar water,
bring it to boil, add the grapes, let them boil a few minutes and put
into jars. Boil the syrup down thick, pour over the grapes hot, close
the jars tightly and treat them as in No. 1.

Remarks: The little seeds are taken out with a skimmer.

How to Make Jelly, Marmalade and Jam.

No. 38—STRAWBERRY MARMALADE.

1 lb. of strawberries
¾ lb. of sugar
Brandy paper

Preparation: Rub the prepared strawberries through a sieve, then mix
with sugar and boil down to a thick marmalade, stirring constantly.
Fill it into jars, let it get cold, put on a piece of brandy paper and
close the jars well, or tie them up with parchment paper.

No. 39—RASPBERRY JELLY.

4 lbs. of raspberries
2 lbs. of currants
1 pt. of water
2½ lbs. of sugar
Brandy paper

Preparation: Clean and wash the currants and raspberries, then put on
the stove with the water and boil until the berries burst and are
soft; then pour them through a thin white cloth and let the juice
drain off into another dish. Weigh this juice and to 1 pound of juice
take ¾ pound of sugar or to 1 pt. of juice take 1 lb. of sugar and
boil 5 minutes or until it jellies when a little of it is cooled in a
dish. Put into jars or glasses and when cold, cover with the brandy
paper and tie up well with parchment paper.

No. 40—CURRANT JELLY.

Currants
1 pt. of currant juice
1 lb. of sugar
Brandy paper

Preparation: Clean and wash the ripe, red currants, press through a
white cloth, squeezing out all juice. This juice is left to stand over
night. The next day slowly pour off the clear juice from the
settlings. To each pint of juice take 1 pound of sugar, boil it until
it jellies when cold. Put it hot into glasses or jars, let it get
cold, cover with brandy paper and tie it up or close the jars well.

No. 41—BLACK CURRANT JELLY.

Black currants
1 pt. currant juice
l½ cups of sugar
Brandy paper

The preparation of black currants is the same as that of red currants.
See Currant Jelly, No. 40.

No. 42—ROSE JELLY.

2 lbs. of green apples
3 pts. of water
1 lb. of red currants
1 pt. of rose water
1 drop of oil of roses
3 lbs. of sugar

Preparation: Wash the unpeeled apples, cut them up and boil without
stirring, in a covered kettle with 3 pts. of water until they are
soft. When nearly done, put in the currants and boil a while until the
berries burst. Now pour the whole mass into a white muslin bag and let
the juice run into a dish. Let it stand for a while, then carefully
pour it off the settlings into the preserve kettle. Add the sugar and
rosewater and boil until it jellies when cold. Stir in the drop of
rose oil, fill the jelly into glasses, let it get cold, cover them
with paraffine or tie them up.

No. 43—BLUEBERRY JELLY.

1 lb. of blueberry juice
1 lb. of sugar
Juice of 1 lemon

Preparation: The preparation of blueberry jelly is the same as that of
Currant Jelly, see No. 40.

No. 44—APPLE JELLY.

8 lbs. of sweet-sour apples
4 qts. of water
4 lbs. of sugar
½ pt. of white wine
4 tbsps. of lemon juice
½ vanilla bean or 1 tbsp. of vanilla essence
Brandy paper

Preparation: Wash and quarter the unpeeled apples and boil slowly in 4
qts. of water until tender, but do not stir them. Then pour the mass
into a muslin bag and let the juice run into a dish. When settled,
pour the juice into the kettle and boil down to one-half the quantity.
Then add sugar, wine, lemon juice and vanilla and cook until it
jellies; fill it into glasses, when cold, cover with a piece of brandy
paper and tie them tightly.

No. 45—CRAB APPLE JELLY.

1 cup of crab apple juice
Water
1 cup of sugar
Vanilla to taste
Brandy paper

Preparation: Wash and quarter the crab apples, put on with water to
barely cover the apples, then cover the kettle and cook until tender.
When they are done, pour them into a white muslin bag and let the
juice run into a dish. Carefully pour the juice off the settlings, add
to each cup of juice one cup of sugar, put in vanilla as much as you
like and boil the whole to jelly, which will take about 10 minutes.
Pour it into glasses or jars, when cold, cover with a brandy paper and
close up tightly.

No. 46—QUINCE JELLY.

8 lbs. of quinces
4 qts. of water
4 lbs. of sugar
4 tbsps. of lemon juice
Brandy paper

Preparation: The preparation is the same as that of apple jelly. See
No. 44, Apple Jelly.

No. 47—PEACH MARMALADE.

1 lb. of peaches
¾ lb. of sugar
¾ cup of water
Brandy paper

Preparation: The peaches are peeled very thin, cut into pieces and
boiled in the water until soft. Rub through a sieve. Moisten the sugar
with water and boil 5 minutes, skim it, add the fruit and boil 20
minutes, stirring constantly. Pour it into glasses or jars, cover with
a brandy paper when cold and close up the glasses or jars tightly.

Remarks: You can add to the marmalade some kernels of peaches and cut
the peaches into very small pieces without rubbing them through a
sieve. Through the long cooking much of the fruit flavor is lost.

No. 48—APRICOT MARMALADE.

1 lb. of apricots
¾ lb. of sugar
¾ cup of water
Brandy paper

The preparation is the same as that of peach marmalade. See No. 47,
Peach Marmalade.

No. 49—PLUM MARMALADE.

1 lb. of large, blue plums
½ lb. of sugar, scant
½ cup of water

Preparation: Peel and stone the plums, then slice into narrow strips.
Boil the sugar and water 1 minute, skim, add the sliced plums and boil
until soft and thick but not mushy. Then fill them into glasses or
jars, cover with a brandy paper and close them up tightly.

No. 50—RASPBERRY MARMALADE.

1 lb. of raspberries
¾ cup of sugar
Brandy paper

The preparation of raspberry marmalade is the same as that of
strawberry marmalade. See No. 38, Strawberry Marmalade.

No. 51—PLUM JAM.

30 lbs. of plums
2 tsps. of ground cloves
1 small piece of ginger
1 lemon rind
2 tsps. of ground cinnamon
10 green nuts

Preparation: Wipe the plums with a cloth, stone them and boil 4 hours
while stirring constantly with a wooden ladle. After this time put in
the spices and boil the jam until it is thick, then pour it into stone
jars, put these into the oven to dry a little over the top and tie
them up with paper, or strew cinnamon on thickly before tying them up.
Store the jam in a cool, airy place but never in the cellar; this way
it will keep for years.

No. 52—PEAR JAM.

5 lbs. of pears
2 lbs. of sugar
1 qt. of water
1 tsp. of cinnamon

Preparation: Quarter the pears and boil in the water until tender.
When you preserve pears, you may use the peelings for jam by boiling
them with the pears and rubbing them through a sieve. Then put the jam
back on the stove and boil it until it gets thick, stirring
constantly. While it is boiling, add sugar and cinnamon; fill it into
stone jars, cover with ground cinnamon when cold, tie up the jars well
and keep them in a dry, airy place.

No. 53—MIXED MARMALADE.

1 lb. of apples
1 lb. of yellow plums
1 lb. of peaches
1 lb. of quinces
1 lb. of pears
1 lb. of melon
1 stick of cinnamon
2 qts. of water
3 lbs of sugar
Brandy paper

Preparation: Wipe the fruit with a cloth, slice it and boil with the
water and cinnamon until very soft. Then rub through a fine sieve, add
the sugar and boil until it thickens, stirring constantly. Fill it
into jars or glasses; when cold, cover with a brandy paper and close
them up tightly.

No. 54—GRAPE JELLY.

1 cup of grape juice
1 cup of sugar
Brandy paper

Preparation: Wash the grapes, boil with a little water until they
burst, then pour them into a muslin bag and let the juice run into a
dish. After it has settled, pour the clear juice off carefully from
the settlings and to every cup of juice take one cup of sugar. Now
boil it down until it jellies, skim it and fill into glasses, cover
with a brandy paper when cold and close up tightly.

The Preparation of Fruit Juices or Syrups.

No. 55—RASPBERRY SYRUP.

1 lb. of raspberries
1 lb. of sugar

Preparation: Put the berries into a deep dish or jar in alternating
layers with sugar and let it stand for 2 days. Strain the juice into
clean bottles through a white muslin or linen bag, cork tightly and
then boil ½ hour in water, being careful that the bottles stand
upright and do not touch. Put a tray or cloth on the bottom of the
boiler or kettle and pack hay between the bottles. Put a cover on the
boiler or kettle.

No. 56—STRAWBERRY SYRUP.

1 lb. of strawberries
1 lb. of sugar

The preparation of this syrup is the same as that of raspberry syrup.
See No. 55, Raspberry Syrup.

No. 57—CHERRY SYRUP.

1 pt. of cherries
½ lb. of sugar
A little fine oil
1 stick of cinnamon

Preparation: Take nice, sour cherries, pick off the stems and crush
the cherries with the stones in a mortar or in a fruit press. The next
day pour off the clear juice from the settlings and boil 15 minutes
with sugar and cinnamon, skimming it frequently. When cold, strain it
and fill into bottles; into each bottle of syrup pour 1 teaspoonful of
fine oil, cork the bottles well and seal them with sealing wax. Before
using the syrup, dip off the oil with cotton batting.

No. 58—RASPBERRY WINE.

2 lbs. of raspberries
1 pt. of water
25 grams of tartaric acid
2½ lbs. of sugar

Preparation: Dissolve the tartaric acid with the water in a stone jar,
add the raspberries and let stand for 30 hours. Press through a white
muslin or linen bag and let it stand a while, then carefully pour it
off from the settlings, add the sugar and stir the syrup for ½ hour.
Fill it into clean, dry bottles, cork them loosely or put cotton
batting on top of the bottles. Let stand 8 weeks before using and then
strain the juice because the impurities have come to the top.

No. 59—WILD STRAWBERRY WINE.

2 lbs. of strawberries
1 pt. of water
25 grams of tartaric acid
2½ lbs. of sugar

The preparation is the same as that of raspberry wine, see No. 58,
Raspberry Wine.

No. 60—BLUEBERRY JUICE.

1 qt. of juice
1 lb. of sugar
1 stick of cinnamon

Preparation: Crush the berries and press through a white muslin bag.
Put the juice into a cool place to clarify. Carefully pour the clear
juice off from the settlings and boil it 10 minutes with the sugar and
cinnamon. When cold, strain it, fill it into bottles and cork well.

No. 61—ORANGE JUICE.

8 large oranges
1 lemon
10 pieces of lump sugar
1 lb. of sugar
¼ pt. of water

Preparation: Clean the oranges and the lemon with a cloth and grate
off the rind with the lump sugar. Mix the sugar, water, grated rind of
oranges and lemon and boil 1 minute, then add orange and lemon juice,
boil another minute, strain through a cloth, fill into bottles and
cork well.

No. 62—QUINCE JUICE.

1 pt. of quince juice
1 lb. of sugar

Preparation: Take nice, yellow quinces, clean them with a cloth, grate
them down to the granular part, press out and put into glasses or jars
over night to clarify or settle. The next day carefully pour off the
clear juice, boil 3 minutes with the sugar and when cold, fill it into
bottles, and cork well.

No. 63—CURRANT JUICE.

1 pt. of juice
¾ lb. of sugar
¼ cup of water
Oil

Preparation: Clean the currants, press through the fruit press and let
stand for a few hours to clarify. Then carefully pour off the
settlings, boil sugar and water 5 minutes, skim and put in the juice.
Boil 10 minutes, skim and when cold, fill into bottles. Into each
bottle pour 1 teaspoonful of fine oil; cork well, seal the bottles and
keep them in the cellar. Before using, dip off the oil with cotton
batting.

No. 64—BLACKBERRY JUICE.

1 pt. of juice
¾ lb. of sugar
¼ cup of water
Oil

Preparation:. The preparation is the same as that of currant juice.
See No. 63, Currant Juice.

No. 65—TUTTI-FRUTTI IN ARRACK.

1 qt. of arrack or rum
1 lb. of strawberries
1 lb. of raspberries
½ lb. of large, red, stoned cherries
6 lbs. of sugar
½ lb. of large, black, stoned cherries
½ lb. of blue, peeled plums
10 medium-sized peaches
10 apricots
10 good preserving pears

Preparation: The fruit must be ripe but not soft. Take each fruit as
it appears in the market, clean it and put into a large jar. For
instance, if strawberries are in the market, prepare these, wash and
drain them, put them first into the jar with ½ lb. of sugar and ½ pt.
of arrack. Close the jar well and if it is a stone jar, tie it up
well. Continue to put in the rest of the fruit as it comes and use the
rest of the sugar and arrack, closing the jar or can well every time.
Peaches, pears and apricots must be peeled and quartered before they
are put in and pears should be boiled partly done in sugar and water.

Remarks: After the fruit has all been used, the juice may be used for
pudding sauce.

Preserved Vegetables.

No. 66—ASPARAGUS.

Asparagus
To 1 qt. of water 1 tsp. of salt

Preparation: Take nice, white, thick stalks of asparagus, peel
carefully and cut into small pieces that will fit into a jar. Economy
jars may be used for asparagus. Pack the asparagus with heads downward
into the jars. Mix 1 teaspoonful of salt into each qt. of water and
fill up the jars with this salt water. Close the jars and place them
into a wash boiler with cold water enough to cover the jars by 1 inch.
Place a cloth on the bottom of the boiler, if it has no tray, cover
the boiler and boil for 3 hours. After that, take out the jars, dry
them and keep them in a cool, airy place.

No. 67—WAX BEANS No. 1.

Wax beans
Salt water
1 qt. of water
1 stick of cinnamon
3 cloves
½ cup of sugar
¾ cup of vinegar

Preparation: Wash the beans, string and slice them, and boil until
tender in boiling salt water. Drain the water off and pack them into
the jars. Boil the water, vinegar, sugar, cinnamon and cloves a few
minutes, skim and pour it over the beans boiling hot. Close the jars
tightly and place them upside down to test the covers and rubbers.

Remarks: The syrup should have quite a sweet-sour taste. The jars must
be well filled with the beans.

No. 68—WAX BEANS No. 2.

Young wax beans
To 1 qt. of water 1 tsp. of salt

Preparation: The beans must be very tender. String the beans and leave
them whole. Wash them and fill the jars with them. Mix the salt water
and pour over the beans, close them and boil them in a covered wash
boiler as before, for 3 hours. Then take out the jars, which may be
Economy jars, and test the covers. If some of them are not tight, put
on others and place the jars into the boiler to boil 15 minutes longer.

No. 69—GREEN BEANS.

Very young, green beans
To every qt. of cold water, 1 tsp. of salt.

Preparation: The preparation of these beans is the same as that of wax
beans No. 2, see No. 68, Wax Beans No. 2.

No. 70—SALTED GREEN BEANS.

Green beans
Salt

Preparation: Wash, string, and slice the beans, and pack in layers
with salt into stone jars. Each layer of beans must be stamped down
with a wooden pestle. Through this process some juice will collect on
the beans when they are all in. Now place a white piece of muslin on
them, a little board weighted with a stone on top of that and keep
them cool. When using, soak them in water to take out some of the
salt. Look to it that there is no mould forming on them. The cloth,
board and stone must be cleaned occasionally.

No. 71—YOUNG CARROTS.

Young carrots
Salt water for cooking
For pickling, to each qt. of water, 1 tsp. of salt

Preparation: The young carrots should be of a uniform size. Clean and
wash them, put them into boiling salt water until they are partly
done, pour them into a colander and drain off the water. Place them in
Economy jars, the first layer must have the points up and the second
layer the points down. Make the jars ¾ full and pour on the cooled
salt water in the proportions given above, close the jars tightly and
boil them for 1½ hours in a boiler, as stated before.

No. 72—RED BEETS.

2 tbsps. of caraway seeds
1 pt. of vinegar
3 tbsps. of horseradish pieces
¼ cup of sugar
2 tsps. of salt
5 lbs. of red beets

Preparation: Clean the beets, boil until tender in boiling water, skin
them and slice them about 1⁄10 inch thick into a stone jar. Strew
caraway seeds on every layer and place the pieces or slices of horse
radish between each layer. Boil the vinegar with salt and sugar and
when cold, pour it over the beets to well cover them, tie up the jar
or close the can well.

No. 73—GREEN PEAS.

Green peas
To every qt. of cold water, 1 tsp. of salt

Preparation: Shell the peas, wash them and put into Economy jars. Boil
the salt water, cool it and fill the jars with it. Close the jars and
boil in a covered wash boiler for 3 hours. Then take them out, dry
them and test the jar covers. If these are not tight, put on other
covers and boil the jars for ½ hour longer. The peas must not be
yellow but tender and sound. If there are bad ones among them, they
must be carefully selected or the preserves will not keep.

No. 74—CORN.

Very fresh corn
Juice from the corn cobs

Preparation: Cut the kernels from the cobs and put into the jars,
press the juice out of the cobs and pour it over the corn. Close the
jars and boil in a covered wash boiler for 5 hours. After cooling,
take out the jars, test them as to the rubbers and covers, close them
up tightly and treat them as in No. 1. Covers that are not tight must
be replaced by others and the jars put back into the boiler to cook
another 15 minutes. Remarks: Everything must be very clean.

No. 75—WHOLE TOMATOES.

Nice, medium-sized tomatoes
Fresh water
To every qt. jar full of tomatoes 1 tsp. of salt

Preparation: Dip the tomatoes into boiling water for 1 minute and skin
them, put into Economy jars. Strew the salt into the jar and fill it
with cold water. Close the jars and boil them in a covered boiler for
1 hour. The water in the boiler must be ½ inch above the jars.

No. 76—PICCALILLI.

Vinegar water
1 pk. of green tomatoes
About 1 cup of salt
10 cents worth of small onions
4 cups of sugar
7 cups of vinegar
5 cents worth of mixed spices

Preparation: Slice the tomatoes and strew with 1 cup of salt. Peel the
onions and put into salt water. Let both tomatoes and onions stand
until the next day. Now take both out of the salt water and bring them
to boil in weak vinegar water. When that turns yellow, strain it, put
the tomatoes and onions back into the kettle, add sugar, 7 cups of
vinegar and spices and boil until nearly done. Fill into cans or stone
jars and close them tightly.

No. 77—TOMATO MARMALADE.

Tomatoes
Sugar

Preparation: Put the tomatoes into boiling water for one minute, skin
them, slice thin and bring slowly to a boil. Boil to a marmalade,
stirring constantly. When you think it is thick enough, mix in the
sugar and boil 15 minutes more. Put into jelly glasses and tie them up
well.

Remarks: If you like, the tomatoes may be pressed through a sieve
before the sugar is added.

No. 78—PLAIN TOMATOES FOR SOUP.

Tomatoes

Preparation: Peel the tomatoes, boil until tender and fill into jars.
Close tightly and put in a dry, cool place.

No. 79—SWEET TOMATOES.

1 lb. of tomatoes
½ lb. of sugar
¼ slice of lemon
⅛ cup of water
3 cloves
1 stick of cinnamon
2 pieces of ginger

Preparation: Put the medium-sized, red tomatoes into boiling water for
a minute and skin them. Boil the sugar, water, cloves, cinnamon and
ginger 1 minute, skim, add the tomatoes and boil slowly until they are
tender but not too soft. Fill them carefully into the jars. Boil the
syrup thick, pour it over the fruit and close the jars tightly. Treat
the jars as in No. 1 and store them in a cool, dry place.

No. 80—TOMATO CATSUP.

1 pk. of tomatoes
1 tsp. of ground, black pepper
¼ tsp. of red pepper
½ tsp. of ground cloves
½ tsp. of ground allspice
3 large onions
2 tbsps. of sugar
Salt to taste

Preparation: Peel and slice nice, ripe tomatoes, add the spices and
boil until thick. Strain through a fine sieve, put it back into the
kettle, boil until of the consistency of thick cream, fill into
bottles and when cold, cork them well.

No. 81—RHUBARB.

Rhubarb

Preparation: Skin the rhubarb, cut into small pieces and pack into
jars or bottles. Close them well and boil in a covered wash boiler
with a tray or cloth on the bottom for 45 minutes. The water is put
into the boiler cold and must be ½ inch above the jars or bottles.
When they are cooled off, take them out, test the covers, treat them
as in No. 1. Before using the contents, put sugar in and boil it a
little, then serve cold.

No. 82—RHUBARB MARMALADE.

Rhubarb
Sugar

Preparation: Skin the rhubarb, cut into small pieces, bring slowly to
boil in a little water, stirring constantly until it thickens. Add
sugar, fill it into jars and close them up tightly.

No. 83—SAUERKRAUT.

Firm, white cabbage heads
Salt
Pepper-corns

Preparation: Remove the bad outer leaves, cut the cabbage in halves,
cut out the heart, slice the cabbage in fine shreds and put into a
clean barrel or stone jar. First place whole cabbage leaves over the
bottom of the jar or barrel, pack on a layer of sliced cabbage, strew
it with salt and pepper-corns, pack on another layer and so on until
the cabbage is all used up. Stamp it down firmly so the liquor will
cover the cabbage, then cover it with a clean piece of white muslin, a
board and a stone to hold it down. Look after it occasionally and
clean the cloth, board and stone. After the cabbage has fermented
enough, which you will know by its sour odor, put it into a cool place.

No. 84—PARSLEY.

Green parsley
Salt

Preparation: Wash the parsley, cut off the stems and wipe dry. Pack in
layers with salt into jars, close the jars tightly and keep them like
preserves.

Remarks: When using, soak in water to take out some of the salt and
close the jar well every time.

No. 85—TO KEEP RED AND WHITE CABBAGE.

Cabbage heads
Paper
Twine

Preparation: The cabbage heads must be firm. Remove all bad leaves,
tie the heads in paper and hang them up in the cellar. They will keep
all winter.

No. 86—PARSLEY, CARROTS, CELERY AND BORAGE FOR THE WINTER.

Firm parsley roots
Firm carrots
Firm borage
Firm celery roots
Fine, dry sand

Preparation: The sand must be fine and dry. Pour it into the cellar
on the cement floor or into a box. Cover each vegetable with it. In
this way they will keep all winter.

No. 87—TO PRESERVE PEARL ONIONS.

Onions
Salt
Vinegar

Preparation: Salt the onions well and leave in the salt for 8 to 10
days, peel and partly cook them in vinegar. Put them into jars with
sufficient salt to cover them and close the jars well.

No. 88—CHAMPIGNONS OR MUSHROOMS.

3 lbs. of champignons
2 qts. of water
2 tbsps. of vinegar
1 qt. of water
2 tbsps. of salt

Preparation: There are forest champignons and manure champignons. The
former are whiter and easily turn soft. They grow wild while the
latter are cultivated.

The champignons to be preserved must be firm; if they have been
exposed to the air too long, they are not good for preserving. Wash
them in 2 qts. of water mixed with 2 tablespoonfuls of vinegar. Cut
off the stems and brush both the stems and caps of the champignons in
the vinegar water until they are white. Rinse them in 1 qt. of fresh
water mixed with 1 tablespoonful of vinegar. The quart of water mixed
with 2 tablespoonfuls of salt is brought to boil. As soon as you have
prepared a handful of champignons, throw them into the boiling salt
water and let them boil until the second handful is prepared. Now take
the boiled champignons out with a skimmer, put them into the jars
and continue the boiling until the jars are ¾ full, pour on the liquor
to fill the jars completely. Close up the jars or if you are using tin
cans, solder them, and boil them in a boiler ¾ to 1 hour.

Remarks: Only in this careful manner, white champignons are obtained
and preserved.

No. 89—CHAMPIGNONS IN VINEGAR.

1 lb. of small champignons
1 tbsp. of salt
1 tbsp. of vinegar
1 qt. of wine vinegar
1 tbsp. of salt
¼ tsp. of white pepper

Preparation: The champignons must be firm and small. Clean them by
rubbing each one with salt and brushing them with a brush, rinse them
in cold water mixed with 1 tablespoonful of vinegar. Bring the one
quart of vinegar to boil with 1 tablespoonful of salt and pepper, and
add the champignons. As soon as they begin to get tender, fill them
into the jars and when cold, close tightly.

No. 90—TRUFFLES.

1 lb. of truffles
1 tbsp. of salt
1 pt. of water

Preparation: Put the truffles in water for 1 hour and brush them until
they are perfectly black and clean. Then put them immediately into
boiling water for ½ hour and put into jars. Boil 1 pt. of water mixed
with 1 tablespoonful of salt, let it get cold and fill the jars with
it, close them and boil in water in a covered boiler for 1 hour.

No. 91—SALT PICKLES No. 1.

Medium-sized pickles
Minced dill In 6 qts. of water, ½ lb. of salt
Cherry leaves from sour cherry trees

Preparation: Brush the pickles in fresh water, pack into a stone jar
in alternate layers with cherry leaves and chopped dill, the uppermost
layer being leaves and dill. Boil the water and salt, let it get cold
and pour it on the pickles to cover them by 1 to 2 inches. Leave them
in a warm place for about a week until they have fermented
sufficiently, then set them into a cool place. They can soon be used.

Remarks: If you want these pickles for the winter, pack them into a
cask, pour the brine over to completely fill the cask and close the
cask tightly, except for a bunghole in the cover through which it can
work off. Put the cask into the sun for a while and when the pickles
have fermented sufficiently, put a new cork into the bunghole and
carry the cask into the cellar. Examine the cask from time to time to
see if there is sufficient brine on it. If there is not enough, add
fresh cold brine and close up the bunghole.

No. 92—SALT PICKLES No. 2.

Medium-sized pickles
Salt
Dill
Herbs
Mustard seeds
Pepper-corns
Cloves
1 piece of ginger
Half water and half vinegar

Preparation: Wash the pickles and pack them into a stone jar with salt
about ⅜ inch thick. Pour cold water over to cover them well and place
a weight on them. After 3 weeks the pickles are taken out, washed and
the water drained off. Then put them back into the jar in layers with
dill, herbs, cloves, pepper-corns, and a small piece of ginger, the
uppermost layer being herbs. Now boil one-half the quantity that the
jar would hold of equal parts water and vinegar and a handful of salt
and pour it warm over the pickles. The liquid should cover the pickles
by 2 inches. Cover with a round, white muslin bag in which you put
yellow and green mustard flour and place a weight on them.

No. 93—VINEGAR PICKLES No. 1.

Small pickles about 3 to 4 inches long
Salt
Tarragon
Dill
Summer savory
Pepper-corns
Bay-leaves
Cloves
Some green or red peppers
Wine vinegar

Preparation: Cut the blossoms and stems off and put the pickles in
fresh water for several hours, drain through a colander, strew thickly
with salt and let stand over night. The next morning rub the salt off,
pack them, closely into a stone jar. Make layers of pickles, herbs and
spices, the latter on top. Boil enough wine vinegar to cover them by 2
inches and pour it hot over them. After 4 days, pour it off again,
boil and skim it, let it get cold, then pour it over again. If there
is not enough to cover them, boil some more. Put a weight on the
pickles, and set in a cool place.

No. 94—VINEGAR PICKLES No. 2.

Medium-sized, firm cucumbers or pickles
Vinegar
Tarragon
Green or red peppers
Summer savory
Thyme
Cloves
Pepper-corns
Bay-leaves

Preparation: Wash the cucumbers and put on to boil with the vinegar.
As soon as they begin to boil, take them off, drain them and let them
get cold. Put in layers in a stone jar with herbs and spices, the
latter on top. Then cook fresh wine vinegar and pour on sufficient to
cover the pickles by 1½ inches. The vinegar must be hot. After 8 days,
drain off the vinegar, cook it again and pour it hot over the pickles.
When it is cold, cover them, put a weight on and keep them in a cool
place.

No. 95—MUSTARD PICKLES.

Large, full-grown cucumbers
Salt
Tarragon
Pearl onions
Some cloves
Mustard seeds
Horse radish
Spanish peppers
Basil
Pepper-corns
Wine vinegar

Preparation: Peel the cucumbers, cut in halves, scoop out the seeds
and cut the vegetable into desirable pieces. Cover thickly with salt
and let stand over night. The next morning rub the salt off, pack the
cucumbers into stone jars or cans and put all herbs and spices named
between them. To every quart of vinegar take one tablespoonful of
salt, boil it, and when cold, pour it over the cucumbers. The next day
pour it off and cook it again and pour on cold. Repeat this process
for the third time. The vinegar should cover the cucumbers by 1 to 2
inches. Tie up the jars or close the cans tightly. After three weeks
they will be ready to serve.

No. 96—SPICED PICKLES.

Large, full-grown cucumbers
Salt
Wine vinegar
Water
Sugar
Some cloves
Pepper-corns
Mustard seeds
Pearl onions

Preparation: Peel the cucumbers, cut in halves, scoop out the seeds
and cut the vegetable into desirable pieces. Over every 3 lbs. of
cucumbers, sprinkle 1 oz. of salt and leave them over night. The next
day rub off the salt well and boil them in a pickle of 1 pint of
vinegar, ½ pint of water, 1 lb. of sugar, 1 stick of cinnamon 3 inches
long, 6 cloves, 10 pepper-corns and 1 tablespoonful of mustard seeds.
When it boils, put in the cucumbers and boil them until they are
transparent. Fill them into jars and close up tightly.

No, 97—MIXED PICKLES.

Very white cauliflower
Small salad beans
Pearl onions
Red radishes
Cucumbers 2 to 3 Inches long
Red and green Spanish peppers
Very small carrots
Lemon slices
Whole white pepper-corns
Tarragon leaves
Bay-leaves
Nutmeg
Pieces of horse radish
Salt
Good wine vinegar

Preparation: Prepare each vegetable in the proper way. Break the
cauliflower into little roses. Cauliflower, beans, onions and carrots
should be separately cooked in salt water and drained. Put salt on the
cucumbers and radishes and let stand over night, the next day rub off
the salt. When all is prepared, arrange nicely according to color in
jars and strew the pepper-corns, tarragon and bay-leaves, nutmeg,
slices of lemon, cubes of horse radish over each layer. Then boil the
vinegar, cool it and pour it over to cover well. After a few days,
repeat this process with the vinegar and close the jars tightly.

No. 98—DRIED PEARS.

Pears

Preparation: Peel the pears, cut them in halves or quarters and place
on very clean baking pans. Cover the bottom of the oven with bricks
and start a fire to produce moderate heat. Then place the pans on the
bricks and dry the pears, turning them occasionally. This will require
fully one day. Store the dried pears away in bags.

No. 99—DRIED APPLES.

Apples

Preparation: The process of drying apples is the same as that of
drying pears. See No. 98, Dried Pears. Air the apples for a few days.

No. 100—SUGARED LEMON AND ORANGE RIND.

1 lb. of lemon or orange rind
2 lbs. of sugar

Preparation: Peel the oranges or lemons very thin and cut the rind,
pack into jars and cover thickly with sugar. Close the jars well.

No. 101—GREEN COLOR FOR COLORING ICES OR OTHER FOOD.

White of an egg
20 coffee beans, (raw)

Preparation: Rinse the coffee beans, and set aside in the beaten white
of an egg for 12 hours in a covered dish; the nicely colored white of
egg will then be found convenient to color ices or other sweetmeats.

No. 102—GLAZED CHESTNUTS.

Good chestnuts
Boiling salt water
1 lb. of sugar
½ cup of water

Preparation: Boil the chestnuts in salt water until they can be easily
pierced with a pin or needle. Drain the water off and take off the
brown thick shell and then the thin white skin underneath. String 4 to
5 chestnuts on a toothpick or thin stick so they do not touch. Boil
the water and sugar until it is jelly-like, dip the stick with
chestnuts in and turn them around in the sugar, take them out and dip
and turn them once more, then hand them to a second person who will
turn them until the sugar is cooled. Place them in an upright position
into a dish and put in a dry place until you strip them from the stick
to serve.

No. 103—ROASTED ALMONDS.

1 lb. of sweet almonds
1 lb. of sugar
½ vanilla bean
½ pt. of water
A few drops of oil

Preparation: Boil the sugar, water and vanilla for 15 minutes and add
the blanched almonds. Stir them until they pop, then pour them into
oiled dishes.

No. 104—SALTED ALMONDS.

Almonds
Fine salt
Hot lard

Preparation: Put blanched, sweet almonds into clean, boiling lard for
1 minute. Then take them out with a skimmer and place on pans lined
with blotting paper to drain off the lard. Dust them with very fine
salt and dry them in the oven.

No. 105—CANNED SPRING CHICKEN.

Chicken cut into desirable pieces
Salt and pepper to taste

Preparation: Dress the chickens, cut into desirable pieces, wash and
pack into Economy jars. Salt and pepper to taste, pour on cold water
to fill the jars, close them and boil in a wash boiler with cold water
enough to cover the jars by 1 inch. Cover the bottom of the boiler
with several thicknesses of cloth. Put the cover on the boiler and
boil for 3 hours. When cold, take out the jars and store them in a
cool place.

No. 106—CANNED SALMON OR OTHER LARGE FISH.

Preparation: Dress and wash the fish and remove the backbone. Cut it
into pieces that will go into a jar, sprinkle with salt and pepper and
fill the jars with cold water. Close the jars and boil them in a
boiler as before for 3 hours. When cold, store them in a cool place.

No. 107—CANNED FRIED CHICKEN, DUCK OR WILD GAME.

Chicken
Water
Butter for frying
Salt and pepper

Preparation: Carefully dress and prepare the fowl, bake quickly in the
oven for 20 minutes, then cut into desirable pieces, leaving the bones
in. Sprinkle with salt and pepper, and fill the jars with the hot
meat. Make a gravy from the drippings and pour it on hot to cover the
meat well. Close the jars and boil in a covered boiler as before for 3
hours. The water in the boiler must cover the jars by 1 inch. When
they are cold, put them into a cool place.

No. 108—MINCE MEAT.

For About 22 Pint Glasses.

1 pk. green tomatoes
1 cup cold water
3 lbs. brown sugar
1¼ tbsps. cinnamon
2½ lbs. finely chopped apples
1 lb. finely chopped plums
2 cans syrup
1 cup vinegar
2 tsps. salt
1 lb. raisins
2 finely chopped oranges
1 finely chopped lemon
1 tsp. nutmeg
1 tbsp. allspice
1¼ tbsps. cloves
2 lbs. currants
½ lb. finely chopped suet

Preparation: Chop tomatoes fine, let boil 5 minutes, run through a
sieve, and add the other ingredients. Let boil 45 minutes and stir or
let steam 30 minutes. While hot, put in glasses and screw covers on
tightly. Very good.

No. 109—SPICED GREEN TOMATOES.

For About 12 Pint Glasses.

1 pk. green tomatoes
5 cups vinegar
2 cups ground table celery
½ cup salt
2 cups sugar
6 ground red peppers (empty inside)
2 cups ground onions
½ cup mustard seed

Preparation: Put the tomatoes through a meat grinder, add salt and let
stand all night. Drain and squeeze out the juice. Mix well and pack
cold into jars, closed tight.

No. 110—SWEET-SOUR SLICED CUCUMBER PICKLES.

For About 15 Pint Glasses.

18 large cucumbers
9 onions
1½ pts. vinegar
1½ cups brown sugar
2 tsps. celery salt
1½ tsps. ginger
2 tsps. mustard seed
1½ tsps. pepper
1½ tsps. salt
1½ tsps. turmeric powder
1½ tsps. cinnamon buds

Preparation: Peel and slice fine cucumbers and onions, sprinkle with
salt and let stand one hour. Drain and add remaining ingredients; let
come to a boil and seal while hot.

No. 111—CHILI SAUCE.

For About 6 Pint Bottles.

1 onion
12 medium-sized ripe tomatoes
3 red peppers
2 cups vinegar
3 tbsps. sugar
1 tbsp. salt
2 tsps. cloves
2 tsps. allspice
2 tsps. grated nutmeg

Preparation: Peel and slice tomatoes; add peppers and onion, cut very
fine. Boil one-half hour, and add the rest of the ingredients and boil
two hours. Put in jars while hot and seal well.

No. 112—ENGLISH CHOW CHOW.

For About 24 Pint Glasses.

1 qt. young cucumbers
2 qts. small white onions
2 qts. string beans
3 qts. green tomatoes
2 heads cauliflower
2 heads cabbage
1 oz. turmeric powder
6 red peppers
4 tbsps. mustard seed
2 tbsps. allspice
⅔ cup mustard
2 tbsps. celery seed
2 tbsps. whole cloves
Vinegar

Preparation: Put cucumbers, onions, tomatoes, cauliflower, and cabbage
through the food chopper. Mix all together and put into stone jars
with a sprinkling of salt. Let stand 24 hours and drain off the brine.
Put the vegetables in a kettle over the fire and stir in the turmeric,
red pepper chopped fine, mustard seeds, allspice and ground mustard.
Pour over enough vinegar to cover. Cover tightly and let simmer until
thoroughly cooked, stirring often. Put into glass jars and seal while
hot.

No. 113—CHILI SAUCE.

For About 18 Pint Glasses.

1 pk. ripe tomatoes
2 cups chopped celery
3 green peppers
3 onions
1 cup sugar
1 qt. vinegar
½ cup salt
2 ozs. mustard seed

Preparation: Chop tomatoes fine and strain, add all other ingredients,
boil about two hours, fill-glasses while hot and close up tight.

No. 114—DILL PICKLES.

For About 14 Pint Glasses.

To 6 qts. of water, add 2 qts. vinegar
1 lb. of salt
5 cents worth of Weinsteinsaeure (tartaric acid)
Pepper
Cloves
Allspice
A good quantity of dill
Horse radish
Grape leaves
Bay-leaves

Preparation: Place a layer of cucumbers in a stone jar and sprinkle
over some of the spices; continue until all are used, laying the dill
and leaves between each layer. Put a tight, well weighted cover over
them.

No. 115—MUSTARD PICKLES.

For About 20 Pint Glasses.

2 qts. green tomatoes
2 qts. small onions
2 qts. string beans
2 heads cauliflower
20 small cucumbers
2 cups sugar
1 lb. Coleman’s mustard
1 tbsp. turmeric
1 gal. vinegar

Preparation: Slice the tomatoes, cut the cauliflower in small pieces,
and salt vegetables over night. In the morning drain thoroughly. Mix
mustard with vinegar. When the vinegar boils, put all in and boil
one-half hour. Bottle while hot.

SANDWICHES.

No. 1—EGG SANDWICHES.

Preparation: Slice white or brown bread into thin slices. Spread with
butter, mayonnaise and finely chopped eggs; press two slices together
and trim into desired shapes.

This is a wonderful improvement over the ordinary rather tasteless
sandwiches made with butter alone.

No. 2—CELERY SANDWICHES.

Preparation: Chop celery fine and add mayonnaise to taste. Spread on
buttered bread and remove crusts. Cut in narrow strips and serve
garnished with celery tips.

No. 3—OLIVE SANDWICHES.

Preparation: Mix cream cheese smooth with mayonnaise dressing, add a
dozen chopped olives and use as a filling for bread and butter
sandwiches.

No. 4—CHICKEN SANDWICHES.

Preparation: Made the same as veal sandwiches. Always remember to
prepare the bread as for bread and butter sandwiches. Put finely
chopped cucumbers on top.

No. 5—VEAL SANDWICHES.

Preparation: Spread bread with butter and mayonnaise. Place a layer of
chopped meat and a layer of chopped cucumbers or olives between the
slices.

No. 6—EGG SANDWICHES.

Preparation: Use hard-boiled eggs. Chop finely and mix with mayonnaise
dressing. To this may be added a finely chopped pickle, a little ham,
sardines mashed to a paste or shredded lettuce. Spread on bread and
butter sandwiches.

No. 7—PEANUT SANDWICHES.

Preparation: Spread butter on bread and add peanut butter; put a
lettuce leaf between.

No. 8—CORNED BEEF SANDWICHES.

Preparation: Chop cold corned beef to a fine paste; mix with a little
mayonnaise dressing. Beat the mixture until smooth and well blended
and spread evenly on buttered bread.

CHAPTER 24.

THE MENU.

Family Dinner. A Menu for one day in a Month.

JANUARY.

Oxtail soup.
Fried whitefish.
Small potato balls.
Head lettuce.
Fillet with champignons.
Asparagus.
Riced potatoes.
Mixed salad.
Vanilla ice cream with hot chocolate dressing.
Coffee and cake.

FEBRUARY.

Grape fruit.
Chicken soup.
Meat patties.
Tongue ragout with dumplings and puff paste scallops.
Tomato salad with boiled mayonnaise dressing.
Rabbit roast with apple sauce and red cabbage.
Orange cream.
Coffee.

MARCH.

Oyster soup.
Fine ragout in shells.
Asparagus with tongue.
Lamb crown roast with turnips and mashed potatoes.
Chocolate pudding with vanilla sauce.
Coffee.

APRIL.

Bouillon in cups.
Bread sticks.
Fish in red wine sauce.
Fried potatoes.
Chicken salad.
Fillet beefsteak with sliced goose liver.
Macaroni with tomato sauce.
Cold rice pudding with peaches and whipped cream.

MAY.

Vegetable soup.
Lamb roast.
Stuffed potatoes.
Spinage.
Green asparagus with salmon.
Fried pigeons with gooseberry jam.
Cheese, tart and coffee.

JUNE.

Tomato soup.
Ham noodles.
Roast beef with fried potatoes and cauliflower.
Asparagus salad.
Strawberry ice with macaroons.
Bread and butter and cheese.
Coffee.

JULY.

Bouillon with marrow dumplings.
Fish ragout in shells.
Baked ham with Burgundy sauce.
Stuffed tomatoes.
Potato chips.
Red farina pudding with cream.
Coffee.

AUGUST.

Green pea soup.
Lobster with remoulade sauce.
Veal chops with apple sauce.
Head lettuce.
Broiled spring chicken.
Fried potatoes.
Fruit salad.
Coffee and cake or tart.

SEPTEMBER.

Bouillon with egg sponge dumplings.
Chicken fricassee with dumplings and puff paste scallops.
Hamburg steak with green beans and creamed potatoes.
Champignon salad.
Chocolate cream.
Bread and butter.
Cheese.
Coffee.

OCTOBER.

Brown bouillon with rice pudding.
Lobster ragout in shells.
Fried duck with cranberries and baked cauliflower.
Mixed salad.
Strawberry cream with almond heaps.

NOVEMBER.

Green corn soup.
Duck ragout.
Lamb cutlet with kohlrabi.
Potato pudding.
Mixed jam or marmalade.
Apple strudel.

DECEMBER.

Fish soup.
Roasted chestnuts with sliced goose liver.
Turkey with jam and potatoes.
Mixed salad.
Plum pudding with vanilla sauce.

A FINE SUPPER OR BREAKFAST.

A Menu for each Season.

JANUARY to MARCH.

Bouillon with cheese wafers.
Lobster with remoulade sauce.
Caviar on toast.
Mutton chops with chestnut puree.
Truffle salad.
Spring chicken with jam.
Tutti-Frutti ice.

APRIL to JUNE.

Crab soup.
Asparagus and cutlets.
Pigeons and salad.
Strawberry cream and cake.

JULY to SEPTEMBER.

Bouillon in cups with bread sticks.
Fish with Bearnaise dressing.
Small potato balls.
Sweetbread ragout with peas.
Venison.
Tomato salad.
Fine wine ice cream.

OCTOBER to DECEMBER.

Grape fruit.
Oysters.
Fillets of sole with mushroom sauce.
Turkey with apple sauce.
Mixed salad.
Chocolate ice.

FINE DINNER.

A Menu for Each Season.

JANUARY to MARCH.

Asparagus soup, meat patties.
Venison with jam.
Trout with horse radish and mustard butter.
Pineapple ice.
Young roast goose with small potato balls.
Partridge with cucumber and tomato salad.
Asparagus with creamed butter.
Strawberry cream with almond heaps.
Crackers.
Butter.
Various kinds of cheese.
Coffee.

APRIL to JUNE.

Vegetable soup.
Timbale of crabs with herb sauce.
Lamb roast with champignons.
Whitefish with beaten egg sauce.
Chicken souffle with puff paste scallops.
Venison with vegetable salad.
Asparagus with tongue.
Strawberries and vanilla ice cream.
Coffee.
Fruit.

JULY to SEPTEMBER.

Crawfish soup.
Chicken patties with lobster, mayonnaise dressing.
Saddle of veal garnished with beef tongue and riced potatoes.
Broiled spring chicken with Bearnaise dressing.
Champignons and stuffed tomatoes.
Salmon with cucumber salad and browned butter.
Baked sweetbreads with toast.
Snipe with jam.
Truffle and artichoke salad.
Cold rice pudding with peaches and whipped cream.
Coffee.

OCTOBER to DECEMBER.

Turtle soup.
Caviar pie.
Venison with artichokes, garnished with goose liver and Madeira sauce.
Fine fish with small potato balls.
Brown champignons.
Crawfish.
Turkey with cranberries, salad.
Chocolate ice with cake.

A LARGE BUFFET.

For 30 Persons.

1 salmon with lobsters and mayonnaise dressing
1 venison roast
1 roast beef
1 saddle of veal or veal roast
1 ham
1 chicken, asparagus and crawfish jelly with herb sauce
2 chicken pies with champignons
1 macaroni pudding with tomato sauce
1 goose liver pie garnished with aspic
Fine fish salad
Lobster salad
2 dishes of vegetables, (asparagus, peas, morels with crab tails)
12 deviled eggs
6 qts. assorted ices
2 wine jellies with fruit
4 portions of cake

EVERY DAY DINNER.

No. 1.

Soup with mushrooms.
Roast stuffed chicken.
Potatoes.
Apple sauce.
Orange cream.

No. 2.

Bread soup.
Boiled fish with beaten egg gravy.
Small potato balls.
Head lettuce.
Filled pancakes.

No. 3.

Bouillon with rice.
Veal roast, sauerkraut.
Mashed potatoes.
Chocolate pudding with vanilla sauce.

No. 4.

Pea soup.
Hamburg steak, spinage.
Stuffed potatoes.
Lemon souffle.

No. 5.

Marrow dumpling soup.
Lamb crown roast with cauliflower.
Potatoes.
Apple strudel.

No. 6.

Tomato soup.
Meat pie with rice.
Tomato salad.
Omelet.

No. 7.

Pea soup.
Roast beef.
Stuffed tomatoes.
Fried potatoes.
Vanilla ice cream.

No. 8.

Wine soup.
Fish in red wine sauce, potatoes.
Macaroni with tomato sauce.
Apple sauce with cake.

No. 9.

Soup with bread sticks.
Stuffed duck.
Red cabbage.
Potato pudding.
Strawberry ice cream.

No. 10.

Asparagus soup.
Chicken pie with cold slaw.
Potatoes.
Apple strudel.

No. 11.

Vegetable soup.
Veal chops.
Kohlrabi.
Mashed potatoes.
Stuffed apples with rice pudding.

No. 12.

Oyster soup.
Goose stuffed with chestnuts.
Cranberries.
Potatoes.
Vanilla ice cream with hot chocolate sauce.

No. 13.

Potato soup.
Mock rabbit.
Mashed potatoes.
Green beans.
Wine jelly.

No. 14.

Blueberry soup.
Chicken fricassee with rice and potatoes.
Potato pancakes with apple sauce.

No. 15.

Red wine soup.
Stuffed lamb crown roast.
Turnips.
Mashed potatoes.
Rice pudding with cherry syrup.

No. 16.

Cauliflower soup.
Fried sausage.
Beets.
Potatoes.
Bread pudding with cream.

No. 17.

Lentil soup with Wieners.
Fried fish.
Head lettuce.
Fried potatoes.
Filled omelet.

No. 18.

Bouillon with farina dumplings.
Stuffed veal breast.
Asparagus.
Stuffed potatoes.
Coffee with thousand puff tart.

No. 19.

Bean soup.
Stuffed cabbage head.
Potatoes with cracker sauce.
Apple fritters.

No. 20.

Celery soup.
Sour roast.
Potato dumplings.
Noodles.
Fruit salad with whipped cream.

CHAPTER 25.

COOKERY FOR INVALIDS.

While the directions found throughout this book will be generally
adequate for the preparation of food for invalids or convalescents,
always carefully regulating and limiting the quantities of fats,
spices, condiments, etc., used, it is nevertheless deemed best to add
a separate chapter especially devoted to the enumeration of recipes
and directions intended for the sickroom. A majority of the sick and
invalids, are usually nervous and irritable, and as it is quite
essential that they receive the food prepared for them with all
possible readiness and pleasure, it becomes necessary that the manner
of presenting the meals to them should obtain great attention; even
this detail, if properly carried out, being of assistance to the
physician in successfully handling the case.

Invalids should seldom be consulted regarding their wishes as to food;
as a usual thing they are quite unable to make a decision, or at the
moment they lack the desire to determine upon anything they would like
to eat, and yet it is often observable that properly prepared and
appetizingly served dishes are eagerly received by them.

All the ingredients used in the preparation of dishes for invalids
must be faultlessly good. Meats, fish, poultry, vegetables and fruits
must be absolutely fresh and untainted. The natural fats of flesh
foods should not be used, and the very best butter only must be taken
when preparing food for invalids.

Water for cold beverages must always be boiled and artificially
cooled. Meals should never be prepared in the sickroom, because the
air becomes vitiated, the noise and activity inseparable from the work
itself is annoying to the patient, and is apt to diminish whatever
appetite he may happen to have. Never bring more victuals into the
sickroom than are necessary to supply present needs, because the air
in the room and the exhalations from the patient act deleteriously
upon the food, and may prove dangerous. All cooking utensils,
particularly in cases of contagious and severe illness, should be used
for that patient only; the most scrupulous cleanliness must, it is
perhaps needless to say, always be observed. The quality of many
dishes is impaired when they are cooked in utensils too large for the
purpose. Sick people are usually very sensitive in their taste, and
the slightest taint in an article of food prepared for them will at
once destroy all desire for it. The utensils should, as much as
possible, consist of small earthenware and enameled pots, kettles,
pans, spiders, etc.; a small bouillon pot with tightly-fitting cover
should also be provided. The dishes in which the food is served should
be adapted to the small portions given, because neatness in everything
connected with giving invalids their sustenance is certain to sharpen
the appetite; furthermore, the victuals are likely to cool too rapidly
when contained in large receptacles. For invalids who can only take
their food and beverages slowly, vessels provided with hot water
heaters are the best.

No. 1—STRONG BEEF TEA.

Ingredients for 1 pint.

½ lb. lean beef
½ lb. breast of veal
1 old pigeon
1 qt. of water
1 tsp. of salt
Small piece of carrot

Preparation: Cut the beef and veal into small pieces, clean the pigeon
carefully, remove the breast and cut up into small pieces, crush
drumsticks and bones, put everything into a very clean kettle, pour
over the required quantity of cold water and set aside for one hour;
then add salt and carrot, and cook slowly for 3 hours, rub through a
very fine sieve, take off the fat and pour the soup carefully from the
settlings. This bouillon can be served in cups, or be used in any kind
of soup, as desired.

No. 2—WEAK VEAL BOUILLON.

Ingredients for 1 pint.

½ lb. breast of veal
1 qt. of water
1 small carrot
1 tsp. of salt

Preparation: Wash the veal, cut into very small pieces, put it into
the cold water and boil very slowly for 2 hours with the carrot and 1
teaspoonful of salt, then pass through a sieve and use in soups as
desired.

No. 3—BEEF BOUILLON.

Ingredients for 1 pint.

1½ lbs. of lean beef
1 qt. of water
1 tsp. of salt
¼ small carrot

Preparation: Cut the beef into dice, put them into the required
quantity of cold water, add carrot and salt and boil in a small
covered kettle or double boiler for 3 hours; pour through a sieve and
remove all of the fat. This bouillon may be mixed with the yolk of 1
egg and served in cups.

No. 4—BEEF TEA.

Ingredients for ½ cup.

½ lb. fresh beef steak
¼ pt. boiled water, cold
1⁄10 tsp. of salt

Preparation: Chop the meat, put into a fruit jar together with the
water and salt, close top lightly, put in a kettle with water, cover
and boil very slowly for 2 hours, then pour the tea through a fine
sieve. Administer a teaspoonful at a time. Beef tea must be freshly
prepared every day.

No. 5—BEEF TEA WITH COGNAC.

Ingredients and preparation same as in No. 4. Add 1 tablespoonful of
cognac to the beef tea; the beverage must be served cold.

No. 6—POULTRY BOUILLON.

Ingredients for 1 quart.

1 chicken, either young or old
2 qts. of water
1 tsp. of salt
A piece of carrot

Preparation: Clean chicken carefully, remove breast and cut it into
small pieces. Chop drumsticks and bones, put into the water together
with carrot and salt, boil very slowly for 2 hours and strain through
a fine sieve. The pieces of the breast are added to the bouillon at
the last hour of the boiling, and the cooking finished over a very
slow fire.

The bouillon is served with the meat in it.

No. 7—PIGEON OR PARTRIDGE BOUILLON.

Prepare same as in No. 6.

No. 8—LAMB BOUILLON.

Ingredients for 1 pint.

2 qts. of water
1 lb. of lamb’s trotters
½ lb. of lean mutton
1 tsp. of salt

Preparation: The lamb’s trotters are carefully cleaned, and then
chopped into small pieces; the meat is cut up very fine, salt added
and boiled slowly in a small, tightly covered kettle for 3½ hours.
Strain through a fine sieve and take off the fat carefully. This
bouillon can be used for rice or barley soups.

No. 9—BOUILLON OF GAME.

Ingredients for 1 pint.

1½ lbs. of fresh game
½ lb. of bones
1 small fresh tomato
1 tsp. of salt
1 tsp. of finely chopped celery
1¼ qts. of water

Preparation: The meat is cut into small pieces and the bones crushed,
put into a small, tightly covered kettle with the tomato, celery, salt
and water and boiled very slowly for 2 hours; it may also be cooked
for 3 hours in a slow oven.

No. 10—NOODLE OR GRITS SOUP MADE OF CLEAR BOUILLON.

Ingredients for 1 pint.

Bouillon made as in No. 3.
½ cup of finely, cut noodles
1 pt. of bouillon
3 tbsps. of grits

Preparation: Slowly boil the noodles or the grits in the hot bouillon
for 15 minutes. Before adding the grits to the bouillon, rinse same in
cold water, stir it in 4 tablespoonfuls of the bouillon, then put it
into the rest of the bouillon and boil.

No. 11—SAGO SOUP WITH GAME BOUILLON.

Ingredients for 1 pint.

Game bouillon as in No. 9
1–3 tbsps. of sherry
¼ cupful of French sago

Preparation: Mix the sherry with the sago, add the hot bouillon and
boil for 12 minutes.

No. 12—ROLL SOUP WITH BOUILLON.

Ingredients for 1 pint.

Bouillon as in No. 1, 2, 3 or 6
½ cup of grated wheat flour rolls
1 tsp. of butter
Yolk of 1 egg
1 tsp. of cream

Preparation: Rolls must be stale, grate them, heat with the butter on
the stove, but do not get them yellow or brown in color, then add the
bouillon and boil slowly for 20 minutes. Stir yolk of egg and the
cream into the soup and rub through a sieve.

No. 13—BARLEY GRUEL.

Ingredients for 1 pint.

¼ cup of barley
Bouillon as in No. 1, 2, 3, 6 or 8
¾ pt. of water

Preparation: Rinse the barley with 1 cupful of boiling water, put over
the fire in ¾ pint of water and boil slowly for 1½ hours; then add the
bouillon, and boil slowly for another hour, rub through a sieve, heat
again and serve.

Remarks: The yolk of an egg may be stirred into this soup.

No. 14—RICE GRUEL.

Bouillon according to No. 1, 2, 3, 6 or 8
¾ pt. of water
¼ cupful of rice

Preparation: Same as No. 13, Barley Gruel.

No. 15—BARLEY SOUP WITH SWEETBREADS AND ASPARAGUS.

Ingredients for 1 pint.

Yolk of an egg
Bouillon according to No. 1, 2, 3 or 6
¼ cup of rice
1 tsp. of butter
4 tbsps. of sweetbreads cut in small pieces
1 tbsp. of flour
½ cup of asparagus cut in small pieces
1½ pts. of water

Preparation: Put the rice on the stove with 1 cup of cold water, heat
it and strain and add the required quantity of water. Boil slowly for
1 hour, add bouillon, then boil for another ½ hour. During this time,
boil the asparagus in a small quantity of salt water until tender; the
sweetbreads should also simmer in salt water for about 5 minutes.
Strain the soup, add the asparagus and sweetbreads, stir the yolk of an
egg with some asparagus liquor until smooth, heat the soup again and
stir into it the yolk of the egg.

No. 16—PLAIN BARLEY GRUEL.

Ingredients for 1 pint.

Preparation and ingredients same as in No. 15, but instead of rice use
pearl barley.

No. 17—CHICKEN PUREE SOUP.

Ingredients for 1 pint.

Chicken bouillon according to No. 6
⅛ lb. of stewed breast of chicken
1 tsp. of cream
½ cup of roll crumbs

Preparation: Boil the roll crumbs in the bouillon for 10 minutes; chop
the breast of chicken very fine, rub through a sieve and add ¼ cup of
soup into which 1 tablespoonful of cream has been stirred, stir into
the soup and let it come to a boil; serve immediately.

No. 18—VEAL PUREE SOUP.

Ingredients for 1 pint.

Ingredients and preparation the same as in No. 17, but instead of the
meat of a chicken and chicken bouillon take veal, and bouillon
according to No. 1 or 2.

No. 19—PIGEON OR PARTRIDGE PUREE SOUP.

Ingredients and preparation the same as in No. 17, but instead of the
meat of a chicken and chicken bouillon, take pigeon or partridge puree
and bouillon; cook as explained in No. 6.

No. 20—PLAIN SOUP FOR INVALIDS.

Ingredients for 1 plateful.

½ lb. of potatoes, scant
1 pt. of water
½ tsp. of salt
1 tsp. of butter
Yolk of 1 egg

Preparation: Peel and wash potatoes and cut them into small pieces,
boil until done, rub through a fine sieve, add salt, butter and the
yolk of an egg, heat the soup quickly, stirring vigorously all the
time and serve at once.

No. 21—THIN RICE SOUP.

Ingredients for 1 plateful.

⅙ cupful of rice
1 pt. of water
1 pinch of salt
2 tbsps. of sugar
1 tbsp. of lemon juice

Preparation: Put the rice over the fire in cold water, when the water
is hot pour it off, then boil the rice in 1 pint of water until it is
well done and add salt, sugar and lemon juice.

No. 22—PEARL BARLEY SOUP.

Ingredients for 1 plateful.

½ cupful of pearl barley
1 tsp. of butter
1 pint of water
¼ tsp. extract of beef
1 pinch of salt

Preparation according to Chapter 1, No. 32, Soups.

No. 23—RYE BREAD SOUP.

Ingredients for 1 plateful.

½ cupful of grated rye bread
½ pt. of water
½ pt. of boiling milk
2 tbsps. of sugar
1 pinch of salt
Yolk of an egg
2 tbsps. of cream

Preparation: Heat the bread crumbs in a clean spider until crisp, pour
over them the required quantity of water, and let it stand to one side
of the hot stove for 1 hour, but do not boil; add the hot milk, salt,
sugar and the yolk of the egg and pass the soup through a sieve.

No. 24—FRUIT SOUP.

Blueberry, Cherry, Raspberry or Strawberry Soups.

Ingredients for 1 pint.

½ lb. of fruit
1½ pts. of water
⅓ cupful of sugar
½ tbsp. of lemon juice
1 tbsp. of corn starch

Preparation: Prepare and wash the fruit thoroughly and crush it with a
potato masher, add the water and boil the soup for half an hour, put
in sugar, lemon juice and corn starch stirred up with a tablespoonful
of water, then boil the soup until it is quite smooth.

No.25—RED WINE SOUP.

Preparation is designated in Chapter 1, No. 29, Soups; take only ⅙ of
the quantities given.

No. 26—RYE FLOUR SOUP AND MILK SOUP.

Are described in Chapter 1, Nos. 53 and 54.

No. 27—MEAT PUREE FOR THE SERIOUSLY ILL No. 1.

Quantity for 1 Person.

½ lb. of veal or beef roast, medium well done
2 yolks of eggs
1 pinch of salt, if necessary
5 tbsps. of stock from the roast

Preparation: Chop the meat very finely, pass through a sieve on a
porcelain dish, stir with the yolks of eggs and the stock, from which
all fat has been removed, then put in a double boiler, and boil until
quite thick, stirring occasionally.

No. 28—PUREE OF GAME ROAST.

For a Seriously Ill Patient.

Quantity for 1 Person.

1 tbsp. of red wine
3 tbsps. of bouillon or stock
⅛ lb. game roast
Yolk of an egg
1 tbsp. of Madeira

Preparation: Chop the meat very fine, rub through a sieve, and heat in
a small porcelain dish with the Madeira, red wine, meat stock and yolk
of egg in a double boiler, stirring until it thickens.

No. 29—MINCED BEEF, VEAL OR LAMB STEAK.

Quantity for 1 Person.

⅓ lb. of good meat, free from bones or fat
½ tsp. of salt
1 tbsp. of butter
Yolk of an egg

For the Gravy.

⅛ tsp. of extract of meat
1 drop of extract of lemon
Yolk of an egg
¼ pt. of bouillon or water
1 tsp. of cream

Preparation: Chop the meat very finely and rub it through a fine
sieve, stir into it the yolk of an egg and the salt, form into a steak
about an inch thick, which is fried with brown butter in a small pan
for about 5 minutes, turning frequently, then serve on a hot plate.
Yolk of an egg, extract of meat, lemon juice, cream and bouillon are
stirred in a double boiler, boiled until thick and this gravy poured
over the steak.

No. 30—FRIED CALF’S BRAIN.

Quantity for 1 Person.

½ of a calf’s brain
Yolk of an egg
1½ tbsps. of milk
1 tbsp. of flour
White of 1 egg
1 pinch of salt
1 tbsp. of sugar

Preparation: Rinse the calf’s brain and then pour hot water over it;
drain off the water and remove all veins or blood vessels, then cut up
the brain into small pieces. Stir together yolk of egg, milk, flour
and salt, add the brain and the beaten white of egg. This mixture is
fried in the butter in two pancakes, and served on a hot dish with a
little spinage.

No. 31—CALF’S TONGUE.

Quantity for 1 Person.

1 calf’s tongue
1½ pts. of water
¼ tsp. of lemon juice
½ tsp. of extract of meat
1 tsp. of flour
1 tbsp. of Madeira, if permitted by physician

Preparation: Clean the tongue and boil slowly in the water for 1¼
hours until tender, then remove the skin and all fat. After this, stew
the tongue, gradually adding the bouillon which should be boiled down
by this time to ¾ of a pint, also add the lemon juice, extract of beef
and flour, which has been stirred with 2 tablespoonfuls of cold
bouillon and the Madeira, then stew the tongue for half an hour. It
must be very tender when given to the invalid. Tongue and gravy should
be served together.

No. 32—BREAST OF CHICKEN WITH WHITE GRAVY.

Quantity for 1 Person.

1 young chicken, weighing about 1½ lbs.
1 qt. of bouillon
1 tsp. of salt

For the Gravy.

1 tbsp. of butter
Yolks of 2 eggs
1 pinch of salt
1 tbsp. of white wine or ¼ tbsp. of lemon juice

Preparation: Clean the chicken carefully and stew slowly in a small
kettle for a little while, then pour enough hot water over it to just
cover; add a little salt, put cover on tightly and cook slowly for ½
hour. Yolk of egg, white wine or lemon juice, and ½ cup of chicken
bouillon are stirred in double boiler until thick. The chicken is
taken out and its breast cut away, skin removed and then served on a
hot plate with the hot gravy poured over it. If permitted by the
physician, serve a few asparagus tips with it.

No. 33—BREAST OF PIGEON WITH WHITE GRAVY.

Quantity for 1 Person.

Ingredients and preparation same as for No. 32, but instead of a
chicken take a young pigeon.

No. 34—BREAST OF PARTRIDGE WITH MADEIRA SAUCE.

Quantity for 1 Person.

Preparation same as in No. 32; use 2 tablespoonfuls of Madeira and ¼
teaspoonful of meat extract for the gravy.

No. 35—RAW HAM WITH EGG.

Quantity for 1 Person.

⅛ lb. of raw ham
Yolks of 2 eggs
1 tsp. of butter

Preparation: Rub the lean ham through a sieve, mix with butter and the
yolks of eggs, and then heat in a double boiler, stirring constantly.
Serve with wheat bread toast.

No. 36—FISH FOR INVALIDS.

Broiled fish for 1 Person.

½ lb. of fish

Preparation is given in Chapter 8, No. 8. However, skin and bones are
carefully removed, and a trifle of egg or butter sauce is served with
it.

No. 37—FISH CUTLET.

Quantity for 1 Person.

½ lb. of fish
½ of a roll
1 tbsp. of butter
Yolks of 2 eggs
1 tsp. of salt
½ tsp. of finely chopped parsley
1 tsp. of lemon juice
¼ cupful of roll crumbs

Preparation: Chop up the fish, remove skin and bones, mix well with
yolks of eggs, salt and soaked ½ roll. Form 2 cutlets, dredge with
crumbs and bake in the butter slowly for 8 minutes. Add some parsley
and lemon juice to the butter.

No. 38—VEGETABLES FOR INVALIDS.

Cauliflower, scorzonera, spinage, purees of young carrots, artichokes,
green peas, and macaroni may also be served to invalids. These
vegetables are listed in Chapter 12; prepare them as there described,
but for 1 person take only one-sixth the quantity of ingredients
specified in those recipes.

Sweet Dishes for Invalids.

No. 39—RICE IN MILK.

Quantity for 1 Person.

¼ cupful of good rice
¾ pt. of milk
1 pinch of salt
1 tbsp. of sugar

Preparation: Heat the rice twice in cold water, pour off the water,
add salt and milk and boil in a double boiler until very tender.
Sprinkle the sugar over the rice when serving.

Remarks: If desired, the yolk of an egg can be stirred into this dish.

No. 40—MILK JELLY.

Quantity for 1 Person.

¼ pt. of thin cream
¼ cupful of sugar
¼ grated lemon rind
2½ layers or 1 tsp. of gelatine dissolved in 5 tbsps. of water
¼ pt. of Madeira
1 tsp. of lemon juice

Preparation: The cream, sugar and lemon juice are boiled together,
then add the dissolved gelatine and let it cool. Add the wine and the
lemon juice, fill into glasses and let it get stiff.

No. 41—CHOCOLATE CREAM WITH RED WINE.

Quantity for 1 Person.

⅛ lb. of chocolate
⅕ pt. of red wine
⅕ cupful of sugar
½ cupful of water
3 layers or 1 tsp. of white gelatine
Whites of 2 eggs
¼ tsp. of vanilla

Preparation: Chocolate and sugar are dissolved in the red wine, and
the gelatine in the ½ cupful of water; pass the chocolate and gelatine
through a sieve, and mix. Beat the whites of eggs to a stiff froth,
and quickly add to the first mixture, spread a drop of good oil over
the bottom of a mold, sprinkle with a teaspoonful of sugar, fill in
the cream, and when stiff, turn it out.

No. 42—RHUBARB JELLY.

Quantity for 1 Person.

½ lb. of rhubarb
¼ pt. of water
¼ lb. of sugar
2 layers or 1 tsp. of gelatine
¼ pt. of cream

Preparation: Rinse the rhubarb carefully and cut it into small pieces,
then boil in the water with the sugar until tender, and rub through a
sieve. When this is cool, dissolve the gelatine in it, mix in the
cream, and then heat the mixture, stirring constantly. Oil the mold
with a drop of oil and sprinkle it with a teaspoonful of sugar, fill
in the jelly and after it stiffens, turn it out.

No. 43—RICE WITH RED WINE.

Quantity for 1 Person.

¼ cupful of rice
½ pt. of red wine
1 small stick of cinnamon
1 pinch of salt
¼ cupful of sugar

Preparation: Bring the rice to boil in 1 cupful of water, drain, then
take another cupful of water and boil the rice until it is about half
done; add the wine, cinnamon, salt and sugar and boil the rice until
quite tender, shaking frequently. Rinse a mold with a little wine,
sprinkle with sugar, fill in the rice and turn it out when cold. Serve
with a little cream as a sauce.

No. 44—BAKED APPLES.

Quantity for 1 Person.

2 medium-sized sweet-sour apples
2 tbsps. of sugar
4 tbsps. of water

Preparation: Take the cores out of the apples very carefully, leaving
the bottom intact to hold the filling, which is made of the sugar and
water; bake the apples in the oven for ½ hour.

No. 45—EGG FOAM.

Quantity for 1 Person.

White of an egg
1 tbsp. of cream
1 tbsp. of California brandy
1½ tsps. of sugar

Preparation: Beat the white of an egg to a stiff foam, gradually beat
in the cream, mix in the brandy and sugar and serve to the patient, a
spoonful at a time.

No. 46—BEATEN EGG.

Quantity for 1 Person.

1 fresh egg
1 pinch of salt

Preparation: Beat the egg with the salt in a tumbler until the glass
is half full of foam. The egg should be beaten in a well ventilated
room only, because the air in the room influences the nourishment
served to the invalid.

No. 47—BEATEN YOLK OF EGG.

Quantity for 1 Person.

Yolk of an egg
1 tsp. of powdered sugar

Preparation: With a teaspoon beat the yolk of egg and the sugar in a
tumbler for about 20 minutes and pour it into a clean glass, or else
wipe the first glass with a damp towel before using it to serve the egg.

Remarks: A tablespoonful of brandy or Malaga or orange juice may be
mixed with the egg, if desired.

No. 48—RED WINE FOAM.

Quantity for 1 Person.

¼ pt. of red wine
2 eggs
¼ cupful of sugar
1 tbsp. of raspberry jelly

Preparation: Beat all ingredients to a froth over the fire with an egg
beater; serve in a tumbler.

No. 49—ICE CREAM.

Ices, for instance vanilla or chocolate ice cream can often be given
to invalids without harm. Their preparation is given in Chapter 17.

No. 50—FIG SAUCE.

Quantity for 1 Person.

⅛ lb. of figs
½ pt. of water
½ wineglassful of Malaga
1 tbsp. of sugar

Preparation: Rinse the figs and cut them into small pieces, add the
water, and set them aside for 12 hours. At the expiration of this time
boil until very tender, add the other ingredients, rub through a
sieve; to those not seriously ill it can be served without straining.

No. 51—ZWIEBACK (SWEET TOAST).

Ingredients.

½ pt. of milk and water
2 cents yeast
½ lb. of flour
¼ lb. of butter
⅛ lb. of sugar
2 eggs
1 pinch of salt

Preparation: Take 2 parts of water and 1 part of milk to make ⅛ pint,
heat until lukewarm and dissolve the yeast in it; the mixture is
stirred to a smooth batter with part of the flour, then let it rise in
a warm place for about an hour. Butter, sugar, eggs, salt and the
remainder of the flour are mixed well and added to the yeast mixture.
Wrap the dough in a cloth sprinkled with flour and set aside in a warm
place over night; the next day the dough is put into oblong bread
pans, and baked in a medium hot oven. After the baking is done and
cold, cut it into strips that are of a uniform thickness of ¼ inch,
place them into a buttered pan and brown them slightly. The Zwieback
can be sprinkled with sugar before browning.

No. 52—TEAS PREPARED FROM VARIOUS MEDICINAL HERBS.

Camomile, Peppermint, Fennel, Elderberry Blossoms, Basswood Blossoms,
Sage, etc.

Quantity for 1 Person.

1 tsp. of tea
½ pt. of water

Preparation: Put the herbs into a porcelain jar, pour the boiling
water over them and after 5 minutes strain through a sieve.

No. 53—LUNG TEA WITH MALT SUGAR.

Quantity for 1 Person.

1 tbsp. of lung tea
¾ pt. of boiling water
1 tbsp. of malt sugar

Preparation: Cover all of the ingredients, boil slowly for 5 minutes
and strain through a sieve.

No. 54—IRON AND WINE.

Ingredients.

1 bottle of white wine
1⁄10 lb. of horse radish
1⁄20 lb. of iron filings
¼ tsp. of ginger

Preparation: Mix the ingredients and set aside for about 12 hours in a
warm place, strain through a sieve and fill into a bottle. The iron
filings must be rinsed in water before using. Take ½ wineglassful
twice every day. As a remedy in anaemia or stomach troubles, this
preparation will be found efficacious.

No. 55—WHEY.

Ingredients.

1 qt. of milk
1½ tsps. of lemon juice
2 tbsps. of sugar

Preparation: Put the lemon juice into the milk, warm up slowly and
when curdled, pour through a thin cloth and sweeten with sugar.

No. 56—WARM MILK WITH COGNAC.

Quantity for 1 tumblerful.

½ pt. of milk
Rind of ¼ of a lemon
Yolk of an egg
2½ tbsps. of sugar
3 tbsps. of cognac

Preparation: Warm the milk with the lemon rind, pour through a sieve,
add the yolk of an egg, sugar and cognac, put on the stove and beat to
a froth; serve while hot.

No. 57—YOLK OF EGG AND WINE.

Ingredients.

Yolk of an egg
3 tbsps. of sugar
2 tbsps. of Tokay wine
1 tbsp. of cognac

Preparation: Beat the yolk of an egg and the sugar to a foam, and mix
with the Tokay wine and the cognac.

No. 58—CREAM OF ALMONDS AS A BEVERAGE.

Ingredients.

¼ lb. of sweet almonds
1 qt. of water or milk
1⁄10 lb. of sugar
1 tbsp. of orange-flower water

Preparation: Blanch the almonds and let them lie in cold water for 24
hours, then crush them very finely and mix with the water or milk; at
the expiration of about 4 hours, pour through a fine cloth and mix
with the sugar and the orange-flower water; the latter can be omitted.

No. 59—MILK LEMONADE.

Ingredients.

½ pt. of water
¼ lb. of sugar
½ qt. of milk
3 tbsps. of lemon juice
¼ pt. of white wine

Preparation: Boil the water with the sugar, add milk, lemon juice and
white wine, bring the lemonade to a boil, then pass through a fine
sieve or cloth and set in a cold place.

No. 60—TOAST AND WATER.

Quantity for 1 Quart.

¼ lb. of rye bread
1 qt. of water
1 tbsp. of lemon juice.
3 tbsps. of sugar
1 pinch of salt

Preparation: Hold the bread over the fire with a toasting fork until
thoroughly toasted, cut into small cubes and pour boiling water over
it. When cool, pour the water through a sieve and season with lemon
juice and sugar.

No. 61—BARLEY WATER.

Ingredients.

¼ lb. of barley
1 qt. of water
1 pinch of salt

Preparation: Rinse the barley carefully, dry it thoroughly with a
cloth and put it in the oven to roast. Grind the barley after it is
roasted, put it into the water and boil for 2 hours until smooth and
thick, using an earthenware utensil for this purpose; then rub through
a fine sieve. Add a little sugar when serving. Can be mixed with any
kind of wine or fruit juice.

No. 62—APPLE DRINK.

Quantity for 1 Quart.

1½ lbs. of sweet-sour apples
¾ qt. of water
¾ pt. of white wine
1 tbsp. of lemon juice
⅛ lb. of sugar

Preparation: Clean away the bud-end of the apples, cut the fruit into
pieces and boil slowly in the ¾ quart of water until quite soft; after
cooking, rub through a thin cloth, add the white wine, sugar and lemon
juice. Serve this beverage either hot or cold.

No. 63—WATER WITH LEMON JUICE.

Quantity for 1 Quart.

1 qt. of water
Rind of 1 lemon
1 cupful of sugar
4 tbsps. of sherry wine

Preparation: Put the thinly pared rind of a lemon into boiling water
and cover. When cold, pass through a sieve and mix into it the sugar
and sherry.

_The following Recipe belongs under Chapter 8 and its an omission from
page 152:_

[Transcriber’s Note: The recipe “No. 61—SALMON STEAK” has been moved to
the specified location.]

CHAPTER 26.

MISCELLANEOUS.

Treatment of Burns.
Meat Carving.
Carving of Poultry in the Kitchen.
Time Required for Broiling, or for Frying in a Pan with Butter, Fat
or Both, Small Cuts of Meat.
Time Required for Meats on the Stove or in the Oven.
Roasting.
Roasting in the Pan
Frying.
Broiling.
Roasting in the Oven.
Flour.
Yeast.
Table of Comparison.

TREATMENT OF BURNS.

Since it often happens that you burn yourself while cooking and
baking, I shall give some methods of treating the wounds.

There are various kinds of burns:

1. When the surface is burned and a burning pain sets in, make cold
water applications or compresses of raw grated potatoes or lime water.

2. When the burn causes swelling and blisters, put on cotton batting
dipped in olive oil or the following mixture: equal parts of lime
water and linseed oil and a little thymol. Shake it well before using.

3. When the heat has destroyed the lower skin and the epidermis rises
in large blisters filled with a dark, bloody fluid. When the patient
has fever and nervous symptoms.

4. When the skin is completely destroyed and black, and the patient
has fever.

As a remedy for the last two cases use a mixture of carbolic acid and
water and apply it with cotton batting. For healing use white
vaseline, 20 grams; provence oil, 10 grams; glycerine, 50 grams; mix
well and spread on the wounds.

MEAT CARVING.

In order to carve meat properly it is necessary to know something
about the anatomy of meat, muscles, tendons and the skeleton.

The simplest carving is on meat without bones, as beef steak and roast
meat. Hold the meat with a large fork and cut across the grain or
fiber in not too thin slices. The knife must be held a little on the
slant.

Fricandeau of veal or fillet both have all the fibers running in the
same direction, so find out how they run and cut against the grain or
across the fiber.

For roast beef without bones the same must be observed. Mark carefully
that the vertebrae in the roast are chopped in two. Cut thin slices
from the whole width of the roast, fat and all, and pour a little of
the drippings over to make them juicy.

Leg of veal, mutton or game is carved on one side, first beginning at
the chump end of loin. Perpendicular and rather thick slices are carved.

The English way is to cut horizontal and very thin slices.

Venison is carved in slanting slices to keep the larded pieces together.

In carving ham you begin at the middle and cut around the bone.

To carve a saddle of lamb or veal or other meat requires some skill.
Hold the meat with the fork and make deep cuts along the backbone,
then place the knife in from below and shove it forward. In this way
you carve the meat from the ribs. Make slanting slices.

It is advisable to carve poultry in the kitchen.

CARVING OF POULTRY IN THE KITCHEN.

When poultry is the main course you cut larger pieces than if it were
served in ragout, or with vegetables or as a side dish.

Small birds, like quail or larks are served whole on toast and
are not carved.

Partridges, hazelhens, spring chickens and pigeons are cut in half
when they are the main course. With a poultry shears they are cut
lengthwise and the two halves placed together again and covered with a
hot gravy. When they are a side dish, they are quartered and the
backbones cut out. When they are fried, the breast is carved into 3
parts.

Turkeys, ducks, geese, chickens, pheasants and woodcocks when fried
are carved in the same way. The drumsticks or legs are cut around the
hip joint and then the joint separated. The wings with some breast
meat are cut off. The meat on the breast is carved from either side of
the breastbone and cut into desirable pieces. When serving, place them
together again to make the breast appear whole. The legs are also cut
into two or three pieces and replaced before serving.

TIME REQUIRED FOR BROILING, OR FOR FRYING IN A PAN WITH BUTTER, FAT OR
BOTH, SMALL CUTS OF MEAT.

Time Turn
minutes. times.
1 loin beef steak, ½ lb. 6 4
1 chopped beef steak, ¼ lb. 6 5
1 round steak, ¼ inch slices 2 2
1 round steak, 1 inch slices 7 6
1 veal steak from leg, 1 lb. in ¾ inch slices 12 6
1 Vienna schnitzel, ¼ lb., breaded 6 2
1 breaded veal cutlet, ¼ lb. 6 2
1 lamb chop, ⅕ lb. 2 2
1 breaded pork chop, ¼ lb. 8 4
1 cutlet from leg of venison, ⅛ lb. 4 4
1 breaded oyster 1 1
1 meat ball, ⅛ lb., 1 inch thick 6 4

TIME REQUIRED FOR MEATS ON THE STOVE OR IN THE OVEN.

Pounds. Hours.

Beef rib roast 4 1¼
Roast beef, rolled 4 1½
Pot roast 5 2½
Sour roast (Sauerbraten) 5 2½–3
Leg of veal 5 2
Filled breast of veal 4 1½–2
Saddle of veal 4 1
Leg of lamb 3½ 1¾
Saddle of lamb 4 1
Young chicken 2 ½
Young chicken 3–4 ¾
Older chicken 4 1½
Young turkey 10 2
Older turkey 10 3
Young capon 5½ 1½
Older capon 5½ 2
Ham 10 4
Roast pork 5 3
Pork tenderloin 1 ⅔
1 squab filled .. 1
1 duck 5 2
1 fat goose filled 10 2¼–2½
1 young goose 8 1½

ROASTING.

Roasting means the rapid confining of the meat’s juices by coagulating
the albumen in the surface tissues, the slow changing of the outer
layers into a brown palatable crust, dissolving of the natural fats of
the meat, changing the albumen gradually to a semi-fluid form and
loosening and breaking up the fibers by steam generated in the mass of
the meat. Roasting may be done on a stove in a pan, or over the open
fire on a spit, or in an oven.

ROASTING IN THE PAN—FRYING.

Heat a clean pan, put in the fat of the meat or butter and heat it;
the fat must be steaming and the butter have a light brown color
before the meat is put into the pan. Fat and butter mixed may also be
used.

Beef steak, veal, mutton or pork chops, liver, pork or veal steak,
etc., are cut into uniformly thick slices; the time for frying is
estimated according to the average weight of the pieces. Do not salt
too soon as this will draw out the juice. Breading must be done
immediately before frying, otherwise the juices of the meat will be
drawn out and the breading will not hold.

Do not leave meat on boards, as the juices will be absorbed by the
wood; it is better to put meat on china. The pieces of meat, the
largest first are placed in the hot fat with a cake turner, not with a
fork, and take note of the time when beginning. Never put so much meat
into the pan at one time as to cool the fat and stop its sizzling.
After every three pieces stop long enough to give the fat a chance to
heat up.

When several pieces, of meat are in the pan, they must be turned in
the order in which they were put in, baste frequently with the fat or
butter in the pan and turn often.

When done, the meat must be well browned but not hard on the outside,
and be reddish and tender inside. Stabbing the meat with a fork is not
advisable for two reasons. In the first place the juice will run out
and the meat will be dry, and then the meat will begin to stew in the
juice and the temperature of the fat will be reduced, the meat will
not turn brown; breaded meat loses the breading or this will be soft.
Washed meat must be well dried with a clean cloth before breading.
When fried meat is pale and colorless, it has been either fried in too
low a temperature or was stabbed with a fork or was not well dried
before frying.

BROILING.

Flat pieces of meat only are suitable for broiling, the fire must be a
fairly hot one, all coals aglowing. The broiler is greased with a bit
of bacon or suet and heated over the fire. Lay on the pounded slices
of meat and as soon as the same begins to blister, turn with a cake
turner. The meat must be rich and not too lean. The meat is seasoned
after broiling and hot butter may be poured over it before serving.

ROASTING IN THE OVEN.

In Germany roasts made in the oven are preferred on account of the
desired gravies.

Roast beef, fillet of beef, mutton, game and small birds require
comparatively little time for roasting, but a uniformly hot oven.

Veal, lamb, turkey and goose roasts require a longer time but only a
moderate heat. For roasting use only meats from full-grown, but not
old, animals. The cellular walls of the muscle tissues must be still
tender and filled with juice. In older animals the tissues become
harder and less juicy and such meat is better suited for stewing than
for roasting. Meats for roasting should be 2 to 3 days old and ought
to be slightly pounded.

FLOUR.

Good nutritive flour has a yellowish tinge on account of the nutritive
gluten contained therein; flour must not be gray, for this color
denotes impurities. The whiter the flour the larger is the proportion
of starch and smaller the proportion of albuminous substances. To test
flour, put some of it on a bluish white sheet of paper, where color,
finish and grain can be distinguished.

The finest brands of flour have less albumen than others, because this
is distributed near the outer shell, which is removed. Good flour
possesses a certain degree of cohesiveness which can be observed when
pressing some of it in the hand; poor flour acts like dust.

Flour made of grain not thoroughly seasoned is not well adapted for
gravies and baking. Adulterations and mixtures of good and poor flour
are easily detected in cooking and baking as the gravies are thinner
and cakes are liable to fall.

To keep large quantities of flour, the same must be placed high in a
covered wooden box in an airy place, so that the moisture of the floor
and air which is deleterious, may not affect it. Flour must turned and
sifted often.

YEAST.

Compressed yeast is the best to use; it must be fresh and to obtain
the best results in baking, the same must have an odor of fine brandy
or fruit and not smell cheesy or sour. Yeast must have a yellowish
white color, must be moist and break up in lumps, not like dust. To
retain activity, yeast must not be subjected to heat or great cold.

To obtain the best results in baking, the yeast needs careful
attention, drafts must be avoided and the baking room must be warm.

NOTICE.

Wherever the use of wine in recipes is prescribed and cannot be
obtained, take Ginger Ale.

Weights and Measures Most Commonly Used in the Art of Cooking.

EUROPE AND THE UNITED STATES.

COPYRIGHT 1922, BY C N. CASPAR CO . MILWAUKEE. WIS.

_Note—The Metric System is used in all civilized countries except the
United States and Great Britain and has also in the Art of Cooking
great advantages compared with the out-of-date Weights and Measures
used in the United States._

_For practical purposes, consider one kilogram 2 Pounds U.S. and one
liter = Quart U. S._

_The following conversion tables present a practical selection of
Weights and Measures most commonly used in Europe and the United
States._

The sign * means approximately.

1 Kilogram (kg.) = 1000 Gram = *2 Pounds (United States)
½ Kilogram = 500 Gram = *1 Pound (United States)
1 German Pound = 500 Gram = *1 Pound (United States)
1 Liter (l.) = 1 Quart (qt.) = *8 Jelly glasses (medium)
½ Liter = 1 Pint (pt.)
1 Deciliter (dl.) = 1 Gill (gi.) = Vol. of 1¾ Diam. by 3 in. high.

THEREFORE:

1 Kilogram or Kilo = *2 Pounds (United States)
500 Gram = *1 Pound (United States)
250 Gram = *½ Pound (United States)
125 Gram = *¼ Pound (United States)

POPULAR MEASURES

2 Gram = *1 Thimble full |
4 Gram = *1 Teaspoon struck | Rice, Farina, Barley
6 Gram = *1 Teaspoon heaped | Starch, Sugar
25 Gram = *1 Tablespoon struck |
30 Gram = *1 Tablespoon heaped |
50 to 60 Gram butter = *1 Tablespoon well-rounded (_Eidick_ = size
of an egg)

¼ Pound [Metric or Unit. States] Flour = *2 Teacups
(small cups)
¼ Pound [Metric or Unit. States] [Raisins Almonds] = *1½ Teacups
1 German Pound (Metric) = *1 Pound 1½ Ounces (United States)
1 German Pound = *1⅛ U. S. Pounds
1 United States Pound = *⅞ German Pounds = 16 Ounces

GRAM AND OUNCES COMPARED

United States Metric
1 Ounce 28 Grams
2 Ounces 57 Grams
3 Ounces 85 Grams
4 Ounces 113 Grams
5 Ounces 142 Grams
6 Ounces 170 Grams
7 Ounces 198 Grams
8 Ounces 227 Grams
9 Ounces 255 Grams
10 Ounces 283 Grams
11 Ounces 312 Grams
12 Ounces 340 Grams
13 Ounces 369 Grams
14 Ounces 397 Grams
15 Ounces 425 Grams
16 Ounces 454 Grams

Gram Ounces Dram
1 1⁄32 ½
2 1⁄16 1
3 3⁄32 1½
4 1⁄8 2
5 5⁄32 2½
6 3⁄16 3
7 7⁄32 3½
8 1⁄4 4
9 9⁄32 4½
10 5⁄16 5

Kilogram Pounds Ounces
1 2 3
2 4 7
3 6 10
4 8 13
5 11
10 22

WEIGHTS (old and new) USED PARTICULARLY IN SOUTHERN GERMANY (INCLUDING
AUSTRIA)

1 Vienna Pound = 32 _Loth_
1 Vienna Pound = 56 _Deka_ = 560 Gram
1 Vienna _Loth_ = 17½ Gram
1 Vienna _Loth_ = ⅝ Ounce
1 _Deka_ (Dekagram) = 10 Gram
1 _Deka_ = *⅜ Ounce

1 Kilogram (kg.) = 1000 Gram = 2 German Pounds (Metric)
= 1¾ Vienna Pounds
1 Vienna Pound = 560 Gram = 1⅛ German Pounds @ 500 Gram
= *1¼ Pounds (United States)
1 German Pound (Metric) = 500 Gram = ⅞ Vienna Pounds
= *1⅛ United States Pounds

1 Kilogram or Kilo = 100 _Deka_ (Dekagram)
1 Liter (l.) = 10 Deciliter
1 Deciliter (dl.) = 10 Centiliter = ¼ Pint

1 Tablespoon struck = 1 Centiliter

1 _Deka_ = *10 Gram = *3⁄8 Ounces = 6 Dram
1 _Loth_ = *17½ Gram = *5⁄8 Ounces = 10 Dram
1 Gram = = *1⁄32 Ounce = ½ Dram

GRAM AND OUNCES COMPARED

OLD METRIC United States
Loth Deka & Gram Gram Lb. Ounces
1 1 7½ 17½ ⅝
2 3 5 35 1¼
3 5 2½ 52½ 1⅞
4 7 70 2½
5 8 7½ 87½ 3⅛
6 10 5 105 3¾
7 12 2½ 122½ 4⅜
8 14 140 5
9 15 7½ 157½ 5⅝
10 17 5 175 6¼
11 19 1½ 191½ 6⅞
12 21 210 7½
13 22 7½ 227½ 8⅛
14 24 5 245 8¾
15 26 2½ 262½ 9⅜
16 28 280 10
17 29 7½ 297½ 10⅝
18 31 5 315 11¼
19 33 2½ 332½ 11⅞
20 35 350 12½
21 36 7½ 367½ 13⅛
22 38 5 385 13¾
23 40 2½ 402½ 14⅜
24 42 420 15
25 43 7½ 437½ 15⅝
26 45 5 455 1 ¼
27 47 2½ 472½ 1 ⅞
28 49 490 1 1½
29 50 7½ 507½ 1 2⅛
30 52 5 525 1 2¾
31 54 2½ 542½ 1 3⅜
32 56 560 1 4

GRAM AND OUNCES COMPARED

U.S. Metric
Ounces Gram
⅛ 4
¼ 7
⅜ 11
½ 14
⅝ 18
¾ 22
⅞ 25
1 28

DRY MEASURES

TEASPOON and TABLESPOON

1 Teaspoon Sugar—heaped = *1 Ounce
1 Tablespoon [Rice, Farina, Sugar, Flour, Starch] heaped = *1 Ounce
1 Tablespoon Butter well-rounded = *1¾ Ounces

CUP OR GLASS (medium)

1 Cup or Glass (medium) Sugar = *1 Pound
2½ Cup or Glass (medium) Sugar—pulverized = *1 Pound
3 Cup or Glass (medium) Farina = *1 Pound
3½ Cup or Glass (medium) Flour (wheat) = *1 Pound
2 Cup or Glass (medium) Butter = *1 Pound

PINT

1 Pint Sugar = *1 Pound
1½ Pint Flour (wheat) = *1 Pound

UNITED STATES MEASURES

1 Gill (gil.) = ¼ Pint = 8½ cubic inches = 0.1376 Liter
1 Pint (pt.) = ½ Quart = 33⅗ cubic inches = 0.5506 Liter
1 Quart (qt.) = 2 Pints = 67⅕ cubic inches = 1.1012 Liter
1 Peck (pk.) = 8 Quarts = 537⅝ cubic inches = 8.810 Liter
1 Bushel (bu.) = 4 Pecks = 2150 7⁄16 cubic inches = 36.3477 Liter
1 Gallon (gal.) = = 268⅘ cubic inches

NOTE:—Dry Measures are about ⅙ larger than liquid measures.

1 Bushel = 4 Pk.;
1 Bushel, heaped = 5 Pk.;
4 Bushel, heaped = 5 Bu., struck

LIQUID MEASURES

UNITED STATES MEASURES

1 Gill (gi.) = ¼ Pint = 7 1⁄32 cu. in. = 0.1183 Liter
1 Pint (pt.) = ½ Quart = 4 Gills = 28⅞ cu. in. = 0.473 Liter
1 Quart (qt.) = 2 Pints = 8 Gills = 57¾ cu. in. = 0.946 Liter
1 Gallon (gal.) = 4 Quarts = 8 Pints = 231 cu. in. = 3.785 Liter
1 Liter = 10 Deciliter = 100 Centiliter = 1000 Milliliter
1 Liter = 0.908 Dry Quart = 1.0567 Liquid Quart
1 Dry Quart = 1⅛ Liquid Quart
1 Liquid Quart = ⅞ Dry Quart

OLD GERMAN WEIGHTS AND MEASURES (After 1834)

1 _Zollpfund_ (German Pound) = 30 _Loth_ = 500 Gram
= *17½ Ounces = *1 Pound 1½ oz.
1 _Loth_ = 10 _Quentchen_ = 16.66 Gram = *½ Ounce
1 _Quentchen_ = 1.66 Gram = *1⁄20 Ounce
1 _Quentchen_ = 1 Thimblefull

Southern Germany, including Austria

1 Vienna Pound = _32 Loth_ = 560 Gram = *1¼ Pound (U.S.)
1 _Loth_ (Vienna) = 17½ Gram = *⅝ Ounce (U.S.)
1 Vienna Pound = 56 _Deka_
1 _Deka_ (Dekagram) = 10 Gram
1 _Neuloth_ = 4 Vienna _Loth_ = 7 _Deka_ = *2½ Ounces (U.S.)

1 _Unze_ (German Ounce) = 1⁄16 German Pound (Metric)
= *1⁄12 Troy Pound = *30 Gram
= *1 Ounce (U.S.)

1 German Pound (_Zollpfund_) = ⅞ Vienna Pound
1 Vienna Pound = 1⅛ German Pound
1 _Scheffel_ = 16 Metzen (Prussia, Saxony) = 6 Metzen (Bavaria)
= 53 liter = *1½ Bushels (U.S.)
1 _Metze_ = *3½ Liter = 3 Quarts (U.S.)

1 _Mass_ = 1 _Quart, Quartier_ = 15⁄16 Liter = 1 Quart (U.S.)

1 _Schoppen_ = ½ Liter = *1 Pint (U.S.)
1 _Nössel_ = 1 _Töpfchen_ = ½ _Kanne_ = ½ Liter = *1 Pint (U.S.)

INDEX.

Page.
Preface 3
Reliable Weights and Measures 4

Chapter 1, Nos. 1–68.

SOUPS.
No. Page.
Apple Soup 50 19
Asparagus Soup with Bouillon 38 15
Barley Gruel Soup 26 12
Barley Gruel Soup with Bouillon 25 11
Barley Gruel Soup with Bouillon 24 11
Bean-Puree Soup with Crab or Lobster Butter 34 14
Bean Soup with Bouillon 33 18
Beer Soup 49 19
Bouillon 1–2 5
Bouillon made of Roast Bones or Meat Remnants 6 6
Bouillon 1–6 5
Bouillon of Beef 5 5
Bouillon of Meat Extract 4 5
Bouillon Rice Soup with Tomatoes 21 10
Bread Sticks for Bouillon 16 9
Butter-Dumpling Soup 8 6
Buttermilk Soup or Sour Milk Soup 67 25
Cauliflower Soup with Bouillon 39 15
Celery Soup with Milk 41 16
Cheese sticks for Bouillon 17 9
Cheese Pastry 18 9
Chicken Bouillon to drink 59 22
Chicken Soup 62 23
Chocolate Soup 55 21
Cold Rice Soup with Apples 23 11
Crawfish or Crab Soup with Marrow Dumplings or Liver Dumplings 57 22
Curdle Soup 14 8
Dumplings for Bouillon, Marrow Dumpling Soup 7 6
Farina-Dumpling Soup 12 7
Farina Soup with Bouillon 30 13
Fish Soup with Fish Dumplings 56 21
Flour Dumplings 19 10
Flour Soup (Wheat) 52 20
Fresh Vegetable Soup with Bouillon 37 15
Green Corn Soup with Bouillon 31 13
Lentil Soup 36 14
Liver-Dumpling Soup 9 7
Marrow Strips for Soup 15 8
Meat-Dumpling Soup 10 7
Milk Soup 54 21
Mock-Turtle Soup 44 17
Oatmeal Soup 32 13
Oxtail Bouillon 3 5
Oyster Soup 58 22
Oyster plant Soup 68 26
Partridge Soup 63 24
Pea Soup with Bouillon 35 14
Pigeon Bouillon to drink 60 23
Pigeon Soup 61 23
Potato Soup 46 18
Potato Soup with Bouillon 45 18
Red Wine Soup 48 19
Red Wine Soup with Sago 65 24
Rice Soup with Bouillon 20 10
Rice Soup with Milk 22 10
Rye Bread Soup 51 20
Rye Flour Soup 53 20
Sago Soup with Bouillon 28 12
Sago Soup with Red Wine or Raspberry Juice 29 12
Sorrel Soup with Bouillon 40 16
Sponge-Dumpling Soup 11 7
Stirred Sponge Dumplings 13 8
Sweet Barley Gruel Soup 27 12
Tomato Soup 42 16
Tomato Soup with Milk 43 17
Tomato Soup with Small Meat or Potato Dumplings 66 25
White Wine Soup 47 18
Wild Game or Poultry Soup 64 24

Chapter 2, Nos. 1–36.

BEEF.
No. Page.
Beef Cutlets of Roast beef 18 36
Beef Fillet Beefsteak 4 29
Beef Fillet Roast 3 29
Beef Fillet Steaks with Champignons and fried Goose liver 5 30
Beef Gulash 16 35
Beef Hash 20 37
Beef Pot Roast 11 33
Beef Roulade 15 35
Beef Salad 24 38
Beef with Onions 22 37
Boiled Beef 19 36
Boiled Beef Slices fried with Eggs and Onions 23 37
Braised Beef Slices 12 33
Broiled Steak of Roast Beef 6 30
Chopped German Steak or Hamburg Steak 8 31
Chop Suey 36 43
Corned Beef 30 40
Corned Beef for Cooking 31 40
Cow Udder 29 40
Croquettes 25 38
Fillet Beefsteak for Breakfast 10 32
Fried Beef Liver with Breakfast Bacon 28 39
Hash with Potatoes 21 37
Königsberger Klops 27 39
Meat Pudding—How to Utilize Roast Beef Roast beef with 2 28
Rice Covering
Meat Pudding No. 2 26 39
Pickled Beef Tongue 33 41
Ragout of Ox-Tongue 35 42
Raw Beefsteak a la Tartare 9 32
Roast Beef 1 28
Roasted Rib Piece 13 33
Smoked Corned Beef 32 41
Smoked Pickled or Fresh Beef for Cooking and Frying 34 41
Sour Roast 14 34
Steak from the Beef Round 7 31
Steamed Beef-Brisket 17 35

Chapter 3, Nos. 1–42.

VEAL.
No. Page.
Breaded Veal Chops 22 55
Breaded Veal Cutlets 19 53
Breast of Veal with Beer 12 50
Calf’s Brains 15 51
Calf’s Head Ragout 13 50
Calf’s Tongue 14 51
Chopped Veal Cutlets 21 54
Croquettes from Veal Remnants 31 59
Croquettes of Sweetbreads 30 58
Stuffed Breast of Veal 11 49
Larded and Baked Calf’s Liver 36 61
Larded Braised Calf’s Liver 37 61
Leg of Veal 1 45
Liver Dumplings 34 60
Meat Balls from Veal Remnants 32 59
Puff Paste Patties filled with Sweetbread Ragout 29 58
Roasted Fricandeau of Veal 10 49
Roast Veal Loin with Kidney 9 49
Saddle of Veal 8 48
Shells filled with Veal Roast 5 47
Stewed Veal or Calf’s Tongue with Raisins 41 63
Stuffed Veal Crown Roast 42 63
Sweetbreads 27 57
Sweetbreads in Shells or other Small Molds 28 57
Unbreaded Veal Cutlets (Chops) 18 53
Veal Cutlets as a fine Side Dish 20 54
Veal Cutlets in White Wine 25 56
Veal Cutlets or Schnitzel a la Holstein 24 55
Veal Fricassee 16 52
Veal Gulash 17 52
Veal Hash from Remnants 33 60
Veal Kidneys 38 62
Veal Kidneys with Bread or Rolls 39 62
Veal or Calf’s Liver with Breakfast Bacon 35 60
Veal or Calf’s Tripe 40 62
Veal Roast Pudding 6 47
Veal Roast Ragout—Brown 4 46
Veal Roast Salad 7 48
Veal Roast with Potatoes 3 46
Veal Steak from the Leg 26 56
Vienna Veal-Schnitzel (Veal Cutlets) 23 55
Warmed up Veal Roast 2 45

Chapter 4, Nos. 1–32.

MUTTON.
No. Page.
Baked Mutton Kidneys 19 71
Breaded Lamb Roast 28 75
Broiled Breaded Mutton Chops 15 70
Irish Stew. Mutton Cutlets in all kinds of Vegetables and 18 71
Potatoes
Lamb Crown Roast 32 76
Lamb Roast 27 74
Lamb Stew 30 76
Larded Saddle of Mutton, Mock Venison 7 67
Leg of Mutton, English Style 1 65
Leg of Mutton in Milk 2 65
Leg of Mutton with Red Wine 3 66
Mutton Chops with Potatoes 16 70
Mutton Cutlets Broiled 14 69
Mutton Cutlets or Chops 13 69
Mutton Kidney Pudding 20 72
Mutton or Lamb Ragout 29 75
Mutton Pie 25 73
Mutton Prepared. Simply 26 74
Mutton Ragout 21 72
Mutton Roast Salad 24 73
Mutton Steak 12 69
Mutton Stew 6 67
Mutton Stew with White Cabbage 11 69
Mutton Tenderloin 9 68
Mutton with Pickles 23 73
Mutton with Potatoes 22 72
Plain Ragout of Mutton or Lamb 31 76
Roasted Leg of Mutton with Champignons 4 66
Saddle of Mutton a la English Style 8 68
Stewed Mutton Cutlets 17 70
Stewed Rack of Mutton 10 68
Stuffed Roasted Leg of Mutton 5 67

Chapter 5, Nos. 1–35.

PORK.
No. Page.
Boiled Ham with Macaroni 13 82
Boiled Ham with Noodles 12 82
Braised Pork Roast 4 79
Breaded Ham 14 82
Breaded Leg of Pork 3 79
Cabbage Sausages 30 89
Chopped Pork Cutlets 18 84
Fresh Young Leg of Pork for Roast 2 78
Fried Ham with Eggs 11 81
Fried Sausage 26 87
Fried Sausages 28 88
Ham in Burgundy Wine 10 81
Meat Salting and Pickling 34 90
Mock Rabbit 22 85
Pickled Ham 35 90
Pork Kidneys 20 85
Pork Ragout or Pork Pepper 21 85
Pork Ribs and Sauerkraut 24 87
Pork Stew 6 80
Pork Roast 1 78
Roasted Pork Cutlets 17 84
Roasted Pork-Fillet 15 83
Sausage 25 87
Sausages 27 88
Salt Pork or Hip-hone for stew 7 80
Smoked Ham Boiled, Breaded with Rye Bread Crumbs 9 80
Smoked Ham for Cooking 8 80
Sour Pork Roast 5 79
Spanferkel or Roast Little Pig 31 89
Spanferkel ala French Style 33 90
Stewed Pork Cutlets 19 84
Stuffed Hog’s Head 23 86
Stuffed Pork-Fillet called Mock Duck 16 83
Stuffed Spanferkel or Roast Little Pig 32 89
White Cabbage Pie with Pork 29 88

Chapter 6, Nos. 1–56.

POULTRY AND GAME BIRDS.
No. Page.
Blackbirds 43 110
Chicken Croquettes 9 95
Chicken or Pigeon Cutlet 12 96
Chicken Pie 6 94
Chicken Pie English Style 13 97
Chicken Ragout in Shells or other small Molds 8 95
Duck Ragout 56 115
Fat Goose Stuffed with Apples 21 100
Fat Goose Stuffed with Chestnuts 22 101
Fine Chicken Fricassee 10 95
Fine Ragout of Partridge 42 109
Fried Capon Ragout 51 113
Fried Duck Liver 31 105
Fried Goose Liver 23 101
Fried Old Pheasant 34 106
Fried Partridge 40 109
Fried Pheasant 33 105
Fried Pigeon 15 98
Fried Pigeons with Sweet Stuffing 17 98
Fried Snipes 45 111
Fried Woodcock 47 112
Fried Woodcock, Another Form of 48 112
Goose and Duck Schwartz-sauer 32 105
Goose Giblets 24 101
Goose Liver Pie 25 102
Goose Liver Pudding 26 102
Grouse Pie 39 108
Leipzig Larks 44 111
Old or Young Chicken with Rice 5 93
Partridge with Sauerkraut 41 109
Pheasant Patties in Shells or other Small Molds 35 106
Pheasant Pie 37 107
Pigeon Pie, English Style 14 97
Poulard Fricassee 55 115
Puff Paste Patties, Filled with Chicken Ragout 7 94
Red Grouse and Guinea Hen 38 108
Red Grouse Cutlets 53 114
Roast Capons 50 113
Roast Duck 29 104
Roast Poulard 54 114
Roast Spring Chicken 1 91
Roast Turkey 18 99
Roast Wild Duck 49 112
Roasted and Stuffed Turkey 19 99
Roast Wild Goose 27 103
Roast Young Goose 20 100
Smoked Goose Breast 28 103
Snipe on Toast 46 111
Stewed Capon 52 113
Stewed Chicken with Champignons 4 93
Stewed Pheasant 36 107
Stuffed Chicken, Another Form of 3 92
Stuffed Duck, Another Form of 30 104
Stuffed Roasted Chickens 2 92
Stuffed Fried Pigeons 16 98
Vienna Baked Chicken 11 96

Chapter 7, Nos. 1–25.

GAME.
No. Page.
Chopped Steak of Game. Deer, Doe, Boar or Wild Rabbit Meat 10 120
is used
Cold Game Pie. Made from Deer, Doe, Boar or Rabbit Meat 11 120
Deer or Doe Liver 4 118
Domestic Rabbit Roast 23 126
Game Ragout made from Remnants 12 121
Hasenpfeffer (Rabbit Pepper) 19 124
How to Skin a Rabbit 14 122
Lapins 25 127
Leg or Saddle of Wild Boar 13 121
Leg of Venison 2 117
Leg of Venison 8 119
Leg of Venison Another Form of 9 119
Rabbit Cutlets 18 123
Rabbit Liver 20 125
Rabbit Pie 22 125
Rabbit Roast 15 122
Rabbit Salad 21 125
Roast Saddle of Venison 1 116
Saddle of Venison 7 119
Stuffed Domestic Rabbit Roast 24 126
Stewed Rabbit 16 123
Stewed Rabbit Another Form of 17 123
To Carve a Leg of Venison 6 118
Venison Cutlets 3 117
Venison Ragout 5 118

Chapter 8, Nos. 1–61.

FISH.
No. Page.
Baked Eel 12 133
Baked Gurnet 36 143
Baked Lobster 52 148
Baked Red Snapper 22 138
Baked Sole 35 143
Boiled Codfish 32 142
Boiled Crawfish or Crabs 53 149
Boiled Lobster 48 147
Boiled Red Snapper 26 139
Boiled Salmon 5 131
Boiled Salmon Trout 9 132
Boiled Turbot 24 139
Codfish Hash 42 145
Codfish Ragout 33 142
Cold Eel Roulade 15 134
Cold Lobster 49 148
Crab Cutlets with Vegetables 54 149
Crab Ragout 55 150
Eel, Blue 11 133
Eel in Beer 13 133
Eel with Rice (Fricassee) 14 134
Fillet of Shellfish, Whitefish, Cabeljou, Sole, with 29 140
Dressing
Fish, Boiled 1 129
Fish Broiled or Roasted 4 130
Fish Baked 2 129
Fish Steamed or Stewed 3 130
Fish and Potato Pudding 40 144
Fish Croquettes 38 144
Fish Cutlets 39 144
Fish Fricassee from Pickerel or Whitefish 19 136
Fried Fresh. Herring 43 145
Fried Mackerel 30 141
Fried Oysters or Clams 58 150
Fried Smelt or Sparling 28 140
Fried Sole 34 142
Fried Trout 10 132
Herring Salad 47 147
Larded and Stuffed Pickerel 17 136
Larded Pickerel 16 135
Lobster Croquettes or Cutlets 50 148
Lobster Ragout in Shells or on Toast 51 148
Marinated Salt Herring 45 146
Marinated Salt Herring a Simple Way 46 146
Oysters 56 150
Oyster or Clam Pudding with Rice 60 151
Oyster or Clam Salad 59 151
Oyster Patties 57 150
Pickerel or Codfish Salad 21 138
Pickerel or Whitefish with Sauerkraut 23 138
Pickerel with Tomato Sauce 20 137
Red Snapper with Rad Wine Dressing 27 140
Rolled, Stuffed Fish Fillets 31 141
Salmon, Blue 6 131
Salmon Salad 7 131
Salmon Steak 61 385
Salted Codfish Croquettes 41 145
Sliced Salmon Broiled 8 132
Small Fish Ragouts in Shells or Small Molds; Utilizing 37 143
Remnants of Fish
Stuffed and Larded Pike 18 136
To Marinate or Pickle Herring 44 146
Turbot Fricassee 25 139

Chapter 9, Nos. 1–12.

HEAD CHEESE AND GELATINES.
No. Page.
Eel in Jelly 9 156
Fish in Jelly 8 155
Gelatine or Head Cheese from Poultry Bouillon 3 153
Goose Liver in Jelly 12 157
Head Cheese from Goose or Duck 6 154
Head Cheese from Ox-Tongue 5 154
Head Cheese from Partridge 7 155
Head Cheese from Pig’s Feet and Calf’s Tongue 4 153
How to Prepare Gelatine 1 152
Meat Gelatine for Patients 2 152
Oysters and Caviar in Jelly 11 157
Salmon in Jelly 10 156

Chapter 10, Nos. 1–58.

DRESSINGS OR GRAVIES.
No. Page.
Apricot Sauce 54 174
Arrack Sauce 46 173
Asparagus Gravy 7 161
Bacon Gravy 26 167
Brown Champignon Sauce 28 167
Burgundy or Madeira Sauce for Ham, Fish or Tongue 25 166
Cocoa Sauce 48 173
Caper Sauce 17 164
Cauliflower Gravy 6 161
Cherry, Currant, Blueberry Sauce 57 175
Cherry Sauce 52 174
Chocolate Sauce 49 173
Cold Caviar Dressing 40 171
Cold Chive Dressing for Beef 39 171
Cold Herb Dressing 37 170
Cold Mustard Dressing for Cold Lamb or Veal Roast 35 170
Cold Remoulade Dressing, very fine 38 171
Cooked Mayonnaise Dressing, very good with Lobster or 43 172
Chicken Salad
Crab or Lobster Gravy for Fish, Chicken and Fricassee 19 164
Dill, Chive or Tarragon Gravy 32 169
Dutch Gravy 2 159
Fine Bearnaise Sauce, for Fillets, Saddle of Mutton, 10 162
Mutton Cutlets
Fine Dutch Gravy for Fish or Veal 3 160
Fine Gravy, for Poultry, Meat and Fish 13 163
Fine Mustard Gravy, for Beef and Fish 8 161
Fine Tomato Dressing 12 162
Fruit Puree Sauce 58 175
Good Fish Gravy 5 160
Herb Gravy 27 167
Horse Radish Dressing, Raw 15 163
Horse Radish Gravy 14 163
Lemon Sauce 50 174
Maraschino Sauce 51 174
Mayonnaise Dressing No. 1 (Cold) 41 171
Mayonnaise Dressing No. 2 42 172
Mayonnaise Dressing No. 3 for Poultry Salad 44 172
Morel Sauce 30 168
Oil Dressing a la Tartare, for Hard-Boiled Eggs, Cold Beef 34 169
and Head Cheese
Onion Gravy, for Boiled Beef 22 165
Oyster Dressing 18 164
Parsley Gravy 31 168
Pearl Onion Gravy 23 166
Pickle Gravy 24 166
Plain Mustard Dressing, for Fish and Beef 9 161
Prune Sauce 53 174
Raspberry Sauce 56 175
Remoulade Sauce 20 165
Sardine Gravy, for Meat and Fish 16 163
Sorrel Gravy 33 169
Strawberry Sauce 55 174
Whipped Dutch Gravy, for Fish, Asparagus, Cauliflower, 4 183
Oyster Plants and Scorzonera
Tartare Dressing 36 170
Tomato Gravy 11 162
Truffle Sauce 29 168
Vanilla Sauce 47 173
Whipped Dutch Gravy, for Fish Asparagus, Cauliflower, 4 160
Oyster Plants and Scorzonera
White Fricassee Sauce, for Chicken or Veal Fricassee 21 165
White Gravy 1 159
White Wine Sauce 45 172

Chapter 11, Nos. 1–26.

POTATOES.
No. Page.
Baked Potatoes 3 176
Baked Potato Pudding 15 180
Bouillon Potatoes 18 181
Creamed Potatoes 14 180
French Fried Potatoes, Pomme Souffle 8 178
Fried Paw Potatoes 21 182
New Potatoes in their Jackets 2 176
Parsley Potatoes 7 177
Peeled Potatoes 4 177
Potato Balls, Fried 12 179
Potato Chips 9 178
Potato Croquettes 11 179
Potato Dumplings from Boiled Potatoes 23 182
Potato Dumplings, Another kind of 24 183
Potatoes in their Skins or Jackets 1 176
Potato Pancakes 17 180
Potatoes with Crackers 20 182
Raw Potato Dumplings 25 183
Sardine or Herring Potatoes 19 181
Small Potato Balls, for Fish 5 177
Sour Potatoes 13 179
Steamed Potato Pudding 16 180
Stuffed Potatoes 10 178
Sweet Potatoes 22 182
Utilizing Remnants of Potato Dumplings 26 184
Utilizing Remnants of Potato Balls, Mashed Potatoes 6 177

Chapter 12, Nos. 1–74.

VEGETABLES.
No. Page.
Asparagus 8 187
Asparagus and Cauliflower Omelet 23 192
Asparagus with Brown Butter 1 185
Asparagus with Cream Dressing 3 186
Asparagus with Creamed Butter 2 185
Artichokes with Butter 13 189
Beets 51 200
Brussels Sprouts 32 194
Brussels Sprouts Another Way of Preparing 33 194
Canned Artichokes 15 189
Canned Asparagus 4 186
Canned Green Beans 47 199
Canned Sweet-sour Beans 50 199
Canned Wax Beans 48 199
Cauliflower 9 187
Cauliflower with Butter Sauce 10 188
Cauliflower with Oran or Lobster Dressing 11 188
Champignon Puree 63 204
Champignons 62 203
Chanterelles, Another Species of Mushrooms 68 205
Chestnut Puree 73 207
Filled or Stuffed Olives with Champignons 71 206
Fried Chestnuts 74 207
French Asparagus with Cream Dressing 5 186
Fresh Green Peas 19 191
Fresh Green Peas Another Way 20 191
Fresh Green Peas and Carrots 26 192
Fresh Green Peas with Crab Meat 21 192
Fresh Wax Beans 49 199
Gardi and Finocci as Vegetables 60 203
Green Asparagus 7 187
Green String Beans, Prepared Another Way 45 198
Kale or Borecole 34 195
Kohlrabi 41 197
Lettuce 29 193
Marrow Peas 24 192
Mixed or Leipzig Vegetables 61 203
Morels 66 205
Mushrooms 67 205
Olives as Vegetables 69 206
Oyster Plants, Salsify 17 190
Pea Omelet 22 192
Preserved Asparagus with Cream 6 187
Roasted Chestnuts 72 206
Salted Green Beans 46 198
Savoy Cabbage 31 194
Scalloped Artichokes with Cheese 16 190
Scalloped Cauliflower, an gratin 12 188
Scorzonera 18 190
Sorrel 28 193
Spinach 27 193
Spinach in Individual Molds 30 193
Stewed Artichokes 14 189
Stewed Cucumbers 58 202
Stewed Green String Beans 44 198
Stewed Red Cabbage 35 195
Stewed White Cabbage 37 196
Stuffed Root Celery or Celeriac au jus 59 202
Stuffed Cucumbers 57 201
Stuffed Olives 70 206
Stuffed Onions 53 200
Stuffed Tomatoes 55 201
Teltow Turnips 43 197
Tomatoes 54 201
Tomatoes Filled with Meat 56 201
Truffle Puree 65 204
Truffles in Brown Dressing 64 234
Turnips 42 197
White Cabbage 36 195
White Cabbage Prepared like Cauliflower 38 196
White Cabbage Sausages 39 196
White Cabbage with Lamb 40 197
Young Carrots 25 192
Young Onions 52 200

Chapter 13, Nos. 1–47.

SALADS.
No. Page.
Asparagus Salad 17 212
Asparagus Salad with Mayonnaise 18 212
Bean Salad 22 213
Bean Salad 26 214
Beef Salad 33 216
Carrot Salad 21 212
Cauliflower Salad 19 212
Cauliflower with Cooked Mayonnaise 20 212
Celeriac or Root Celery Salad 23 213
Celery Salad mixed with Potato Salad with Mayonnaise 24 213
Dressing
Celery Salad with Mayonnaise Dressing 25 213
Champignon Salad 30 215
Chicken Salad 35 217
Cold Slaw 32 216
Cucumber Salad 10 210
Cucumber Salad with Sour Cream 12 210
Cucumbers and Head Lettuce Mixed 13 211
Fine Mixed Vegetable Salad 28 214
Fruit Salad No. 1 44 219
Fruit Salad No. 2 45 219
Fruit Salad No. 3 46 219
Fruit Salad No. 4 47 219
Fruit Salad Dressing 43 219
Fruit Salad as Dessert 41 218
Green Lettuce 1 208
Green Lettuce Prepared Sweet, Head Lettuce 5 209
Green Lettuce with Bacon, Head, Endive Lettuce 4 209
Green Lettuce with Egg Dressing 2 208
Green Lettuce with Mayonnaise Dressing, Head, Endive, 3 208
Escariol Lettuce
Herring Salad 36 217
Lettuce Combination Salad 42 218
Lobster Salad 40 218
Mixed Salad 27 214
Mixed Salad with Meat 29 215
Oyster or Clam Salad 39 218
Pike Salad 38 217
Potato Salad 6 209
Potato Salad with Bacon 9 210
Potato Salad with Sour Cream 8 210
Potato Salad with Spiced Dressing 7 209
Rabbit Roast Salad 34 216
Salmon Salad 37 217
Sweet Cucumber Salad 11 210
Tomato Salad 14 211
Tomato Salad with Cooked Mayonnaise 16 211
Tomato Salad with Mayonnaise Dressing 15 211
Truffle Salad 31 216

Chapter 14, Nos. 1–15.

EGGS.
No. Page.
Boiled Eggs in Brine 7 221
Brine Eggs in Cream Sauce 8 221
Fried Eggs 4 220
Fried Eggs in Tomato Sauce 6 221
Hard-Boiled Eggs 2 220
Hard-Boiled Eggs for Garnishing 3 220
Poached Eggs 5 221
Scrambled Egg Pancake 10 222
Scrambled Eggs 9 222
Scrambled Eggs English Style 11 222
Scrambled Eggs with Chives 13 222
Scrambled Eggs with Red Herring 12 222
Soft Boiled Eggs 1 220
Stuffed Eggs, (Deviled Eggs) 14 223
Stuffed Eggs Another Form of 15 223

Chapter 15, Nos. 1–58.

OMELETS, PANCAKES, WAFFLES, NOODLES AND PIE.
No. Page.
Apple Fritters 51 236
Apple Pie 17 228
Apple Pie Another kind of 18 229
Apple Strudel 49 235
Asparagus Omelet 3 224
Baked Macaroni 53 237
Chicken Patties 36 234
Chicken Pie 30 232
Chocolate Pie with Whipped Cream 58 238
Cold Game Pie, Venison, Doe, Boar, Rabbit 41 234
Cooked Noodles 45 235
Filled Pancakes 11 227
Fish Macaroni 55 237
Goose Liver Pie 38 234
Grape Pie 27 232
Ham Noodles 47 235
Lemon Pie 16 228
Macaroni Pudding 56 237
Macaroni with Ham 54 237
Macaroni with Parmesan Cheese 52 236
Mince Pie 24 231
Mince Pie Another Kind of 25 231
Muffins 57 238
Noodle Pudding with Apples as Dessert 48 235
Noodles 44 234
Omelet for Breakfast 1 224
Omelet with Meat or Champignons 6 225
Omelet with Parmesan Cheese or Oysters 5 225
Oyster Patties 43 234
Pancakes 10 226
Patty Paste 31 233
Peach Pie 21 230
Pea Omelet 4 225
Pheasant Pie 39 234
Pie made from Grouse, Hazelhen, Snowhen, Snipe, Quail, 40 234
Partridge
Pieplant Pie, Rhubarb 26 231
Pigeon Pie, English Style 37 234
Potato Pancakes 0 226
Puff Paste Scallops 33 233
Puff Paste Tarts 34 233
Pumpkin Pie 23 230
Rabbit Pie 42 234
Rolled up Apples 50 236
Sand Cake Waffles 14 227
Soup Noodles 46 235
Sour Cream Pie 28 232
Squash Pie 22 230
Strawberry or Huckleberry Pie 19 229
Strawberry Pie with Whipped Cream 20 229
Sweetbread Patties 35 233
Sweet Omelet as Dessert 2 224
Sweet Puff Paste 32 233
Vanilla Cream Pis 29 232
Waffles 12 227
Waffles Another Form of 13 227
Whipped Cream Omelet 7 225
Whipped Cream Omelet as Dessert 8 226
Whipped Cream Omelet with Frosting 9 226
Yeast Waffles 15 228

Chapter 16, Nos. 1–23.

SAUCES.
No. Page.
Apple Sauce 1 239
Apricot Sauce 12 241
Stewed Sliced Apples for Sauce 18 243
Black Mulberry Sauce 7 240
Blueberry Sauce 10 241
Cherry Sauce 2 239
Currant Sauce 5 240
Dried Apples for Sauce 19 243
Fresh Plum Sauce 8 240
Gooseberry Sauce 9 241
Greengage Sauce 14 242
Melon Sauce 16 242
Orange and Apple Sauce 17 242
Peach Sauce 11 241
Pear Sauce 22 244
Pineapple Sauce 15 242
Plum Sauce 13 241
Prunes for Sauce 20 243
Raspberry Sauce 4 240
Rhubarb Sauce 21 243
Strawberry Sauce 3 239
Tomato Sauce 23 244
Whortleberry or Huckleberry Sauce 6 240

Chapter 17, Nos. 1–128.

DESSERTS.
No. Page.
Apple Fritters or Banana Fritters 54 259
Apple Rice Pudding 2 245
Apple Strudel 55 259
Apricot Ice 120 275
Apricot Ice Cream 109 273
Apricot Rice Pudding 5 246
Arrack Cream with Whipped Cream 73 265
Baked Almond Pudding 36 254
Baked Apple and Farina Pudding 39 255
Baked Apple Stew Pudding 40 255
Baked Charlotte Pudding 35 254
Baked Cherry Pudding 31 253
Baked Chocolate Pudding 38 254
Baked Cream Pudding 27 252
Baked Cream Pudding 43 256
Baked Farina Pudding with Fruit 30 253
Baked Flour Pudding 44 256
Baked Lemon Pudding 32 253
Baked Macaroon Pudding 51 258
Baked Noodle Pudding 49 257
Baked Omelet Pudding 42 256
Baked Potato Pudding 33 253
Baked Potato Pudding to be served with Meat 34 254
Baked Quince Pudding 50 258
Baked Rice Pudding 28 252
Baked Pudding with Fruit Layers 29 252
Baked Rye Bread Pudding with Apples 48 257
Baked Sponge Pudding 45 256
Baked Sweet Pudding with Wine Frosting 47 257
Baked Veal Roast Pudding 46 256
Baked Yorkshire Pudding 37 254
Biscuit Tortoni, Macaroon Mousse 60 261
Black Pudding 25 251
Cabinet Pudding 8 247
Carthusian Dumplings with Wine Sauce 53 258
Champagne Cream 100 271
Champagne Frappe 124 276
Champagne Sherbet 123 276
Cherry Jelly 70 264
Cherry Pudding 22 250
Cherry Pudding 103 272
Cherry Rice Pudding 3 246
Chocolate Cream 88 268
Chocolate Cream Prepared Cold 87 268
Chocolate Ice Cream 112 274
Chocolate Mousse 89 268
Chocolate Pudding 11 248
Chocolate Strudel 56 259
Chocolate Strudel with Dressing 57 260
Coffee Cream Prepared Cold 86 268
Coffee Ice Cream 113 274
Coffee Mousse 91 269
Cold Apple Cream 78 266
Cold Apple Pudding 79 266
Cold Chocolate Pudding with Farina 97 270
Cold Lemon Cream 82 267
Cold Lemon Cream 85 268
Cold Rice Pudding with Peaches 98 270
Cold Rice Starch Pudding 96 270
Corn Starch Pudding 81 267
Count Pueckler or Layer Mousse 95 269
Currant and Raspberry Pudding 101 271
Farina Pudding No. 1 14 249
Farina Pudding No. 2 23 251
Fine Baked Apple Pudding 41 255
Flour Pudding 12 248
French Toast 52 258
Fried Apple Pockets 59 260
Froth or Foam Pudding 7 247
Gooseberry Pudding 102 272
Goose Liver Pudding 21 250
Hazelnut Mousse 92 269
Hill Cream 104 272
Layer Pudding 13 249
Lemon Ice Cream 110 273
Lemon Ice Garnished with Fruit 128 277
Lemon Jelly 67 263
Macaroni Pudding 15 250
Maple Syrup Ice 125 276
Meat Pudding with Rice Layers 17 250
Meat Pudding Another Form of 18 250
Mutton Kidney Pudding 19 250
Nectar 80 267
Nut Ice Cream 114 274
Orange Cream Prepared Cold 84 267
Orange Gelatine 72 264
Orange Jelly 68 263
Peach Ice 119 275
Peach Ice Cream 108 273
Peach Rice Pudding 4 246
Pineapple Cream 76 265
Pineapple Ice 121 275
Pineapple Ice Cream 111 274
Pineapple Jelly 69 264
Pineapple Mousse 93 269
Plain Cold Rice Pudding 99 271
Plain Rice Pudding 6 247
Plum Pudding 10 248
Potato Pudding 16 250
Pudding a la Brandenburg 26 252
Raspberry Cream 75 265
Raspberry Ice 118 275
Raspberry Ice Cream 107 273
Rice Pudding 1 245
Roll Dumplings 126 277
Roll Dumplings Better Kind of 127 277
Rum Cream with Cherry Sauce 61 261
Rum or Cognac Mousse 94 269
Russian Cream 83 267
Sour Cream Pudding 24 251
Steam Noodles 58 260
Strawberry Cream 74 265
Strawberry Ice 117 275
Strawberry Ice Cream 106 272
Strawberry Jelly 71 264
Tea Ice Cream 115 274
Tutti-Frutti Ice 122 276
Vanilla Cream 77 266
Vanilla Ice Cream 105 273
Vanilla Ice Cream with Fruit 116 275
Vanilla Mousse 90 269
Veal Roast Pudding 20 250
Wheat Bread Pudding 9 247
Whipped Cream Pudding 62 261
White Wine Jelly with Fruit Layers 66 263
Wine Cream 64 262
Wine Jelly with Rice Layers 65 262
Wine Pudding 63 261

Chapter 18, Nos. 1–29.

BEVERAGES.
No. Page.
Almond Milk 21 281
Bishop 9 279
Cardinal, (Cold) 10 279
Chocolate 22 282
Chocolate Iced 23 282
Cocoa 24 282
Coffee 28 283
Cold Lemonade 19 281
Cold Punch 1 278
Cream Punch 11 279
Currant Wine 17 281
Egg Punch 5 278
Fine Lemonade 20 281
Gooseberry or Currant Wine 29 283
Grog 8 279
Hot King’s Punch 3 278
Hot Punch 2 278
Hot Wine 7 279
Iced Tea 27 283
May Bowl or Woodruff Punch 16 280
Peach Punch 15 280
Pineapple Punch 12 280
President’s Punch, cold or warm 4 278
Raspberry Wine 14 280
Strawberry Punch 13 280
Tea 25 282
Tea with Vanilla 26 282
Warmbeer 18 281
Warm Burgundy Punch 6 279

Chapter 19, Nos, 1–111.

BREAD AND CAKES.
No. Page.
Apple Cake 16 288
Biscuit 7 285
Bread Sticks 6 285
Cheese Cake 19 289
Cherry Cake 17 289
Coffee Cake 8 286
Coffee Cake with Egg Cream 24 290
Currant Cake 20 289
Filled Berliner Pancakes or Stuffed Doughnuts 11 287
Health Bread or Groats Bread 5 285
Huckleberry Cake 22 290
Onion Cake 23 290
Plum Cake 18 289
Poppy Seed Cake 21 289
Round Coffee Cake No. 1 13 287
Round Coffee Cake with Raisins 14 287
Rye Bread with Leaven 3 284
Rye Bread Yeast 4 285
Schnecken (Snails) 10 286
Stollen 15 288
Streusel Coffee Cake 9 286
Wheat Bread No. 1 1 284
Wheat Bread No. 2 2 284
Wreath Cake 12 287

Baking Powder Cakes.

Almond Tart Filled with Cream 72 304
Angel Cake 111 315
Angel Food 101 312
Angel’s Food 42 295
Apple Tart 62 301
Biscuit Tart 81 307
Blitz-Kuchen 107 314
Bread Tart 65 302
Bremer Block 49 297
Brown Spice Cake No. 1 51 298
Brown Spice Cake No. 3 86 308
Caraway Cake 54 299
Cheese Tart 61 301
Cherry Tart 67 303
Chocolate Tart 91 310
Chocolate Tart No. 2 94 311
Coffee Cake with Almond Frosting 25 290
Coffee Cake with Chocolate Frosting 26 291
Cream Puffs 103 313
Cream Puffs 104 313
Date Cake with Whipped Cream 84 308
Devil’s Food 41 295
Emperor Tart 69 304
English Cake 56 299
English Bride’s Cake (Fruit Cake) 92 310
Farina Tart 85 308
Fence Tart 97 311
Fig Cake 44 296
Filled Biscuit Rolls 83 308
Filled Sand Tart 95 311
Fire Tart 74 305
Flat Cake 37 293
Fruit Cake 48 297
Fruit Cake 102 313
Fruit Tart 98 312
Gold Cake 34 293
Good Tart Dough 93 310
Heaven’s Food 77 306
Heaven’s Tart 76 306
Hunter’s Tart 73 305
Lard Cake 89 309
Layer Cake with Banana Filling 31 292
Layer Cake with Chocolate Filling 29 291
Layer Cake with Cocoanut Filling 32 292
Layer Cake with Cocoanut No. 2 45 296
Layer Cake with Jelly Filling 30 292
Lightning Cake 53 298
Love Chocolate Cake 100 313
Meringue Tart 78 307
Mouth Pockets 70 304
Natron Cake 52 298
Orange Tart 63 301
Plain Fruit Cake 50 297
Potato Tart or Cake 38 294
Puff Paste Strips 71 304
Puff Paste Tart with Cream 66 302
Rice Cake or Tart 39 294
Rice Tart with Oranges 64 302
Round Coffee Cake No. 2 27 291
Sand Tart 82 307
Scotch Tart 88 309
Sexton’s Cake 90 309
Silver Cake 35 293
Sour Cream Cake 59 300
Sour Cream Doughnuts 105 314
Spice Cake No. 2 58 300
Spice Cake No. 4 87 309
Spice Cake 108 314
Sponge Cake 33 292
Sponge Cake 79 307
Stirred Cake 28 291
Strawberry or Raspberry Puff Tart 68 303
Strawberry Short Cake 40 294
Sunshine Cake 47 297
Sunshine Cake 99 312
Tea Cake 46 296
Theater Cake 36 293
Thousand Puff Tart 60 300
Tree Tart 96 311
Walnut Cake 57 299
Walnut Cake 110 315
Walnut Tart 80 307
Whipped Cream Cake 109 315
White Almond Tart 75 305
Wit Cake 55 299
Yellow Angel’s Food 43 295

Chapter 20, Nos. 1–27.

FILLINGS AND FROSTINGS FOR CAKES.
No. Page.
Almond Filling 5 316
Almond Frosting for Fruit Tart No. 1 23 319
Almond Frosting No. 2 24 319
Banana Filling 10 317
Caramel Frosting 20 319
Chocolate Filling 8 317
Chocolate Frosting No. 1 12 317
Chocolate Frosting No. 2 13 317
Chocolate Frosting No. 3 14 318
Cocoanut Filling 9 317
Cream Frosting for Fruit Cake 26 319
Date Filling 11 317
Fruit Frosting 25 319
Glaze Frosting for Honey Cake 21 319
Lemon Filling 6 316
Lemon Frosting 16 318
Nut Filling No. 1 2 316
Nut Filling No. 2 4 316
Plain Almond Frosting 27 320
Plain Frosting 19 318
Raisin Filling 3 316
Rum Frosting 22 319
Tutti-Frutti Frosting No. 1 17 318
Tutti-Frutti Frosting No. 2 18 318
Vanilla Filling 1 316
Vanilla Frosting 15 318
Walnut Filling 7 317

Chapter 21, Nos. 1–53.

COOKIES.
No. Page.
Almond Bread 46 331
Almond Heaps 5 322
Almond Macaroons 6 322
Almond Puffs 11 323
Almond Straws No. 1 12 323
Almond Stripe No. 2 49 332
Anise Cookies 14 324
Brown Cookies No. 1 18 324
Brown Cookies No. 2 20 325
Brown Cookies No. 3 21 325
Brown Cookies No. 4 22 325
Brown Cookies No. 5 23 326
Brown Peppernuts No. 1 41 330
Brown Peppernuts No. 2 42 330
Butter Cookies 1 321
Butter Cookies 19 325
Butter Straws with Almonds 27 327
Chocolate Cookies 28 327
Butter Macaroons with Almonds 7 322
Chocolate Macaroons with Cocoanut 8 322
Cinnamon Stars 52 332
Cocoanut Kisses 51 332
Cocoanut Drop Cakes 31 328
Egg Cracknels 45 331
Flawns 10 323
Ginger Snaps 40 330
Hazelnut Cookies 2 321
Hickory Drop Cakes 32 328
Honey Cakes 50 332
Kisses 3 321
Lady Fingers 53 332
Molasses Cookies 30 327
Mother’s Cookies 35 329
Nut Chocolate Cookies 29 327
Oatmeal Cookies No. 1 16 324
Oatmeal Cookies No. 2 17 324
Peanut Drop Cakes 36 329
Peanut Straws 37 329
Plain Peppernuts 48 331
Raisin Cake 39 329
Sand Cookies 4 321
Small Hermit Cakes No. 1 33 328
Small Hermit Cakes No. 2 34 328
Small Plain Cookies 38 329
Springels 47 331
Sugar Peppernuts 43 330
Vanilla Flawns 15 324
Vanilla Stars 44 331
Vanilla Straws 13 323
Walnut Macaroons 9 322
White Cookies No. 1 24 326
White Cookies No. 2 25 326
White Cookies No. 3 26 326

Chapter 22, Nos. 1–20.

CONFECTIONERY.
No. Page.
Bon-Bons 7 334
Butter Scotch 4 333
Caramels 19 336
Chocolate Candy 8 334
Chocolate Caramels No. 1 6 334
Chocolate Caramels No. 2 12 335
Chocolate Fudge 3 333
Chocolate Fudge 18 336
Cocoanut Drops 11 335
Cracker Jack 16 336
Fudge 20 337
Ice Cream Candy 15 336
Lemon Candy 5 334
Molasses Candy 1 333
Nut Candy 9 334
Peanut Candy 13 335
Popcorn Balls 17 336
Popcorn Candy 10 335
Pulled Taffy 14 335
Vinegar Taffy 2 333

Chapter 23, Nos. 1–115.

PRESERVES.
No. Page.
Apple Jelly 44 348
Apricot Marmalade 48 349
Apricots in Jelly 6 339
Apricots or Peaches in Brandy 9 340
Asparagus 66 353
Blackberries 29 344
Blackberry Juice 64 352
Black Currant Jelly 41 348
Blueberries, Huckleberries 24 343
Blueberry Jelly 43 348
Blueberry Juice 60 352
Canned Fried Chicken, Duck or Wild Game 107 363
Canned Salmon or other Large Fish 106 363
Canned Spring Chicken 105 363
Champignons in Vinegar 89 358
Champignons or Mushrooms 88 358
Cherry Syrup 57 351
Chili Sauce 111 364
Chili Sauce 113 365
Cognac Cherries 14 341
Corn 74 355
Crab Apple Jelly 45 348
Cranberries 27 344
Currants 28 344
Currant Jelly 40 347
Currant Juice 63 352
Dill Pickles 114 365
Dried Apples 99 362
Dried Pears 98 361
English Chow Chow 112 364
Glazed Chestnuts 102 362
Gooseberries 21 343
Grapes 37 347
Grape Jelly 54 350
Green Almonds 36 346
Green Beans 69 354
Green Color for Coloring Ices or Garnished Dishes 101 362
Green Gages 25 34
Green or Small Yellow Oranges 34 346
Green Peas 73 355
Large Sweet Cherries 13 341
Melons 30 345
Mince Meat 108 363
Mirabelle Plums No. 1 15 341
Mirabelle Plums No. 2 16 341
Mustard Pickles 95 360
Mustard Pickles 115 365
Orange Juice 61 352
Parsley 84 357
Parsley Carrots, Celery and Borage for the Winter 86 357
Peaches and Apricots 4 339
Peaches in Jelly 5 339
Peach Marmalade 47 349
Pear Jam 52 350
Pearl Onions 87 358
Peeled Green Gages 26 344
Peeled Plums 18 342
Piccalilli 76 355
Pickled Apricots 8 340
Pickled Crab Apples 23 343
Pickled Peaches 7 339
Pickled Pears 22 343
Pickled Plums 20 342
Pickled Walnuts 35 346
Pine Apple 3 338
Plain Tomatoes for Soup 78 356
Plums 17 342
Plum Jam 51 350
Plum Marmalade 49 349
Plums in Red Wine 19 342
Pumpkin 33 345
Quinces 31 345
Quinces in Cognac 32 345
Quince Jelly 46 349
Quince Juice 62 352
Raspberries 2 338
Raspberries in Jelly 11 340
Raspberry Jelly 39 347
Raspberry Marmalade 50 349
Raspberry Syrup 55 351
Raspberry Wine 58 351
Red Beets 72 354
Rhubarb 81 356
Rhubarb Marmalade 82 357
Roasted Almonds 103 362
Rose Jelly 42 348
Salted Almonds 104 363
Salted Green Beans 70 354
Salt Pickles No. 1 91 359
Salt Pickles No. 2 92 359
Sauerkraut 83 357
Spiced Pickles 96 361
Spiced Green Tomatoes 109 364
Stoned Sour Cherries 12 340
Strawberries 1 338
Strawberries in Jelly 10 340
Strawberries Marmalade 38 347
Strawberries Syrup 56 351
Sugared Lemon and Orange Rind 100 362
Sweet-Sour Sliced Cucumbers 110 364
Sweet Tomatoes 79 356
To keep Red and White Cabbage 85 357
Tomato Catsup 80 356
Tomato Marmalade 77 356
Truffles 90 359
Tutti-Frutti in Arrack 65 353
Vinegar Pickles No. 1 93 360
Vinegar Pickles No. 2 94 360
Wax Beaus No. 1 67 353
Wax Beaus No. 2 68 354
Whole Tomatoes 75 355
Wild Strawberry Wine 59 351
Young Carrots 71 354

SANDWICHES.
No. Page.
Celery Sandwiches 2 366
Chicken Sandwiches 4 366
Corned Beef Sandwiches 8 366
Egg Sandwiches 1 366
Egg Sandwiches 6 366
Olive Sandwiches 3 366
Peanut Sandwiches 7 366
Veal Sandwiches 5 366

Chapter 24.

THE MENU.
Page.
Everyday Dinner 369
Family Dinner 367
Fine Dinner 368
Fine Supper 368
Large Buffet 369

Chapter 25.

For Invalids, Convalescents, etc.
No. Page.
Apple Drink 62 385
Baked Apples 44 381
Barley Gruel 13 374
Barley Soup with Sweetbreads and Asparagus 15 375
Barley Water 61 384
Beaten Egg 46 381
Beaten Yolks of Egg 47 381
Beef Bouillon 3 372
Beef Tea 4 373
Beef Tea with Cognac 5 373
Bouillon of Game 9 373
Breast of Chicken with White Gravy 32 378
Breast of Pigeon with White Gravy 33 379
Breast of Partridge with Madeira Sauce 34 379
Calf’s Tongue 31 378
Chicken Puree Soup 17 375
Chocolate Cream with Red Wine 41 380
Cream of Almonds as a Beverage 58 384
Egg Foam 45 381
Fig Sauce 50 382
Fish Cutlet 37 379
Fish for Invalids 36 379
Foam with Red Wine 48 382
Fried Calf’s Brain 30 378
Fruit Soup 24 376
Ice Cream 49 382
Iron and Wine 54 383
Lamb Bouillon 8 373
Lung Tea with Malt Sugar 53 383
Meat Puree for the Seriously Ill 27 377
Milk Jelly 40 380
Milk Lemonade 59 384
Minced Meat, Veal or Lamb Steak 29 377
Noodle or Grits Soups made of clear Bouillon 10 374
Pearl Barley Soup 22 376
Pigeon or Partridge Bouillon 7 373
Pigeon or Partridge Puree Soup 19 375
Plain Barley Gruel 16 375
Plain Soup for Invalids 20 376
Poultry Bouillon 6 373
Puree of Game Roast; for a severely ill patient 28 377
Raw Ham with Egg 35 379
Red Wine Soup 25 377
Rhubarb Jelly 42 380
Rice Gruel 14 374
Rice in Milk 39 380
Rice with Red Wine 43 381
Roll Soup with Bouillon 12 374
Rye bread Soup 23 376
Rye flour Soup and Milk Soup 26 377
Sago Soup with Game Bouillon 11 374
Strong Beef Tea 1 372
Tea from Medicinal Herbs 52 383
Thin Rice Soup 21 376
Toast and Water 60 384
Veal Puree Soup 18 375
Vegetables for Invalids 38 379
Warm Milk with Cognac 56 383
Water with Lemon Juice 63 385
Weak Veal Bouillon 2 372
Whey 55 383
Yolk of Egg and Wine 57 384
Zwieback (Sweet Toast) 51 382

Chapter 26.

MISCELLANEOUS.

Page.

Broiling 389
Bums, Treatment of 386
Carving Poultry in the Kitchen 387
Comparative Table of Weights and Measures 391
Flour 389
Meat Carving 386
Meats, Time Required for Broiling or Frying 387
Meats, Time Required on the Stove or in the Oven 388
Roasting 388
Roasting in the Pan—Frying 388
Roasting in the Oven 389
Yeast 390

MEMORANDA.

Just a Reminder.

“Lina Meier’s Genuine German Cooking and Baking,” when first
published, appeared in one volume, in English-German combined.

To meet a great demand of the public, the publishers have decided to
publish this, the second, revised and enlarged editions, in three
different volumes:

One in the English language,
One in the German language,
One in English-German combined.

The books are all bound in full cloth and either one or all of the
different editions can be secured at any time through book stores or
from the publishers, by addressing:

WETZEL BROS. PRINTING CO.,
324–328 Broadway,
Milwaukee, Wis.

Transcriber’s Notes.

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected in this text.

Hyphenation variations are standardized.

Ditto marks used to represent repeated text have been replaced with
the text that they represent.

Italic text is specified by leading and trailing underscores.

Chapter 24 menu items were originally separated by em dashes. They
have been placed on separate lines in this transcription.

Errata has been incorporated into the text.

The original book (as well as a German language edition) is available
at the HathiTrust Digital Library and Internet Archive.

Inconsistencies between the recipe ingredients and preparation text
were resolved by referring to the German edition:

Text corrections:

No. 59—SOUR CREAM CAKE.

1 cup sour cream replaced by 1 cup sour milk to match the English
text and the German edition ingredient list.

No. 16—CRACKER JACK.

Added “and peanuts” to the end of the last sentence. This matches
the German edition.

No. 15—BARLEY SOUP WITH SWEETBREADS AND ASPARAGUS.

Changed “add the parsley and sweetbreads” into “add the asparagus
and sweetbreads” per German edition.

Yeast Measurements

Both the English and German editions of this work use the term “cents”
to specify a quantity of compressed yeast cake without giving further
definition. A rough definition can be found by comparing the Wheat
Bread No. 1 recipe (8 cups unsifted flour and 1½ cents’ worth of
yeast) to current bread yeast recommendations for the same quantity of
flour.

The Red Star Yeast Company website’s “Yeast Conversion” Table (November
2020) specifies 2½ packages (¼ ounce per packet) dry yeast for 8 cups
of flour. Therefore, as a first approximation:

1 cents’ worth of yeast = 1⅔ packets or 3¾ tsp. dry yeast