_Faster Ways To Favorite Dishes
WITH THE_
New Minute Tapioca

© 1934 G. F. Corp. 612 Ptd. in U. S. A.

_H_EARD THE “GLAD NEWS” ABOUT THE NEW MINUTE TAPIOCA?

Even lighter, more delicate tapioca desserts!

Imagine a tapioca cream pudding as creamy as a Bavarian, as rich as a
custard, as light as a whip! Imagine a tapioca fruit pudding more
delicately delicious than any you ever tasted in all your days! That’s
what you get when you make puddings with the NEW Minute Tapioca!

Quicker, easier, and made with fewer dishes!

But texture is only _part_ of the story! For all these tempting Minute
Tapioca desserts can now be made in a fraction of the time, and with
much less bother, than they used to require. The New Minute Tapioca
cooks in 5 minutes, after the liquid scalds, instead of 15. It is
prepared with less work, and fewer dishes.

New help, too, for scores of difficult dishes!

The recipes in this little book bring you the good news—starting with
the best and the easiest recipe for tapioca cream you’ve ever met.
You’ll find here more than a dozen grand cream desserts, full of real
honest-to-goodness home-made nourishment ... new fruit tapiocas for
every season ... new baked tapioca puddings ... and 19 recipes in which
Minute Tapioca acts as a “precision ingredient,” giving just the desired
texture or appearance—and a real margin of safety—to a lot of favorite
but often troublesome dishes from soup to pie.

_A_ NEW QUICK RECIPE ... FOR AN OLD FAVORITE

MINUTE TAPIOCA CREAM

⅓ cup Minute Tapioca
½ cup sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
1 or 2 egg yolks
4 cups milk
1 or 2 egg whites, stiffly beaten
1 teaspoon flavoring

Combine[1] Minute Tapioca, sugar, salt, egg yolk, and milk in top of
double boiler and stir enough to break egg yolk. Place over rapidly
boiling water, bring to scalding point (allow 5 to 7 minutes), and cook
5 minutes[2], stirring frequently. Remove from boiling water. Fold a
small amount into egg white; add to remaining tapioca mixture and blend.
Cool—mixture thickens as it cools.[3] When slightly cool, add flavoring;
chill. Serve in sherbet glasses. Garnish with whipped cream and a few
berries or pieces of fruit, if desired. Serves 8.

ALL MEASUREMENTS ARE LEVEL

[Illustration: _From one recipe ... make dozens of different,
delicious desserts_
Tapioca Creams ... see recipes on page 5
Raspberry Fluff ... Peach Cream ... Chocolate Delight ... Currant
Coconut]

RASPBERRY FLUFF

Fold whipped cream and slightly crushed fresh raspberries into Minute
Tapioca Cream. Pile in sherbet glasses. Garnish with a few whole or
crushed berries, and additional whipped cream.

MARVEL CREAM

Serve Minute Tapioca in sherbet glasses. Pour Log Cabin Syrup over
tapioca; sprinkle with coarsely chopped nut meats such as pecans,
walnuts, or blanched and toasted almonds.

PEACH CREAM

Fold whipped cream into Minute Tapioca Cream. Pile in sherbet glasses.
Serve with sauce of crushed, sweetened peaches, or sweetened peach
slices. Garnish with additional cream.

CHOCOLATE DELIGHT

Fold chocolate sauce into part of Minute Tapioca Cream. Serve in parfait
glasses, in alternate layers with plain Minute Tapioca Cream. Serve with
additional chocolate sauce.

CURRANT COCONUT

Serve Minute Tapioca Cream in sherbet glasses. Top generously with plain
or toasted Baker’s Coconut and cubes of currant jelly. Cover with
whipped cream before arranging topping, if desired.

ORANGE MINT

Fold whipped cream into Minute Tapioca Cream. Pile in sherbet glasses.
Garnish with additional whipped cream, and top with sections of orange,
and cubes of mint jelly or mint leaves.

STRAWBERRY RING

Serve mounds of Minute Tapioca Cream in sherbet glasses. Pour syrup from
sweetened, canned strawberries over tapioca; arrange ring of canned
strawberries around each mound.

PEANUT TRIFLE

Fold coarsely crushed peanut brittle into Minute Tapioca Cream. Serve in
sherbet glasses. Top with additional coarsely crushed peanut brittle,
and garnish with whipped cream, if desired.

PEPPERMINT TAPIOCA CREAM

⅓ cup Minute Tapioca
¼ teaspoon salt
⅔ cup crushed peppermint candy
1 egg yolk
4 cups milk
1 egg white, stiffly beaten

Combine Minute Tapioca, salt, candy, egg yolk, and milk in top of double
boiler and stir enough to break egg yolk. Place over rapidly boiling
water, bringing to scalding point (allow 5 to 7 minutes), and cook 5
minutes, stirring frequently. Remove from boiling water. Fold a small
amount into egg white; add to remaining tapioca mixture and blend.
Chill—mixture thickens as it cools. Serve in sherbet glasses with
chocolate sauce. Serves 8.

BUTTERSCOTCH CREAM

4 tablespoons Minute Tapioca
¼ teaspoon salt
2 egg yolks
4 cups milk
4 tablespoons butter
⅔ cup brown sugar, firmly packed
2 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Combine Minute Tapioca, salt, egg yolks, and milk in top of double
boiler and stir enough to break egg yolks. Place over rapidly boiling
water, bring to scalding point (allow 5 to 7 minutes), and cook 5
minutes, stirring frequently. Remove from boiling water. Melt butter in
saucepan; add sugar and cook until sugar is completely dissolved and
mixture bubbles. Add to tapioca mixture and mix well. Fold a small
amount into egg whites; add to remaining tapioca mixture and blend.
Chill—mixture thickens as it cools. Serve plain or with cream. Serves 8.

CHOCOLATE TAPIOCA CREAM

4 tablespoons Minute Tapioca
½ cup sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
1 egg yolk
2 squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate, cut in pieces
4 cups milk
1 egg white, stiffly beaten
1 teaspoon vanilla

Combine Minute Tapioca, sugar, salt, egg yolk, chocolate, and milk in
top of double boiler and stir enough to break egg yolk. Place over
rapidly boiling water, bring to scalding point (allow 5 to 7 minutes),
and cook 5 minutes, stirring frequently. Remove from boiling water. Fold
in egg white. Cool—mixture thickens as it cools. When slightly cool, add
vanilla; chill. Serves 8.

BANANA TAPIOCA CREAM

⅓ cup Minute Tapioca
½ cup sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
1 egg yolk
4 cups milk
1 egg white, stiffly beaten
1 teaspoon vanilla
2 bananas

Combine Minute Tapioca, sugar, salt, egg yolk, and milk in top of double
boiler and stir enough to break egg yolk. Place over rapidly boiling
water, bring to scalding point (allow 5 to 7 minutes), and cook 5
minutes, stirring frequently. Remove from boiling water. Fold in egg
white. Add vanilla and chill—mixture thickens as it cools. Just before
serving, crush 1 banana and dice the other; then fold into tapioca
cream. Serves 8.

GINGER MINUTE TAPIOCA

⅓ cup Minute Tapioca
⅓ cup sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
3 thin strips orange peel
1 egg yolk
2 cups milk
¼ cup orange juice
1⅓ tablespoons ginger syrup
2 tablespoons chopped preserved ginger
1 egg white, stiffly beaten
¼ cup cream, whipped

Combine Minute Tapioca, sugar, salt, orange peel, egg yolk, and milk in
top of double boiler and stir enough to break egg yolk. Place over
rapidly boiling water, bring to scalding point (allow 3 to 5 minutes),
and cook 5 minutes, stirring frequently. Remove from boiling water and
remove peel. Add orange juice, ginger syrup, and preserved ginger. Fold
in egg white. Cool—mixture thickens as it cools. When cold, fold in
cream. Serves 6.

DATE TAPIOCA CREAM

⅓ cup Minute Tapioca
½ cup sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
2 egg yolks
4 cups milk
¾ cup finely cut dates
2 egg whites, stiffly beaten
1 teaspoon vanilla

Combine Minute Tapioca, sugar, salt, egg yolks, and milk in top of
double boiler and stir enough to break egg yolks. Place over rapidly
boiling water, bring to scalding point (allow 5 to 7 minutes), and cook
5 minutes, stirring frequently. Add dates. Remove from boiling water.
Fold in egg whites. Cool—mixture thickens as it cools. When slightly
cool, add flavoring; chill. Garnish with dates. Serves 8.

[Illustration: _Fruit tapioca puddings ... quicker to make ... more
delicate_
Chantilly Orange Tapioca ... see recipe on page 10]

_F_RESH, CANNED, OR DRIED FRUIT CAN BE USED IN THIS RECIPE ...

FRUITED MINUTE TAPIOCA

2 cups water
⅓ cup Minute Tapioca
½ cup sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
Crushed fruit
Lemon juice

Place water in top of double boiler and bring to a boil over direct
heat. Combine Minute tapioca, sugar, and salt; add gradually to water
and bring to a brisk boil, stirring constantly. Place immediately over
rapidly boiling water and cook 5 minutes,[4] stirring occasionally.
Remove from boiling water—mixture clears and thickens[5] as it cools.
When slightly cool, fold in fruit (crushed, ground, or forced through
sieve) and lemon juice, as directed on page 10.[6] Serve with cream, if
desired.

BERRY TAPIOCA

Use recipe for Fruited Minute Tapioca (page 9), folding 1½ to 2 cups
crushed, sweetened berries and 1 tablespoon lemon juice into slightly
cooled tapioca mixture. Chill. Serve in sherbet glasses. Serves 6.

APRICOT TAPIOCA

Use recipe for Fruited Minute Tapioca (page 9), folding 2 cups cooked
apricot pulp and 2 tablespoons lemon juice into slightly cooled tapioca
mixture. Chill. Serve in sherbet glasses. Serves 6.

PINEAPPLE TAPIOCA

Use recipe for Fruited Minute Tapioca (page 9), folding 2½ cups canned
crushed pineapple and 1 tablespoon lemon juice into slightly cooled
tapioca mixture. Chill. Serve in sherbet glasses. Serve with whipped
cream, if desired. Serves 8.

FIG TAPIOCA

Use recipe for Fruited Minute Tapioca (page 9), folding 2 cups cooked
figs, 2 tablespoons lemon juice, 1 teaspoon grated lemon rind, and ½
teaspoon vanilla into slightly cooled tapioca. For 2 cups cooked figs,
cut ½ pound figs in fine pieces; add 2 cups water, cover, and simmer 15
minutes. Add 4 tablespoons sugar. Cool before folding into tapioca
mixture.

CHANTILLY ORANGE TAPIOCA

1½ cups water
⅓ cup Minute Tapioca
½ cup sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
1 cup orange juice
1 tablespoon grated orange rind
½ cup cream, whipped

Place water in top of double boiler and bring to a boil over direct
heat. Combine dry ingredients; add gradually to water and bring to a
brisk boil, stirring constantly. Place immediately over rapidly boiling
water and cook 5 minutes, stirring occasionally. Remove from boiling
water—mixture clears and thickens as it cools. When slightly cool, add
orange juice and rind. Chill; fold in cream. Pile lightly in sherbet
glasses. Just before serving, garnish with very fine ¼-inch shreds of
orange rind, free from all white membrane. Serves 6.

SPRING FRUIT TAPIOCA

2 cups water
⅓ cup Minute Tapioca
1¼ cups sugar
½ teaspoon salt
2½ cups rhubarb, cut in ½-inch pieces
1 cup shredded fresh pineapple

Place water in top of double boiler and bring to a boil over direct
heat. Combine Minute Tapioca, sugar, salt, and rhubarb; add to water and
bring to a brisk boil, stirring constantly. Place immediately over
rapidly boiling water and cook 5 minutes, stirring occasionally. Remove
from boiling water—mixture clears and thickens as it cools. When
slightly cool, fold in pineapple. Chill. Serve with plain or whipped
cream. Serves 8.

BAKED APPLE TAPIOCA

3 cups water
2 tablespoons lemon juice
3 tart apples, pared and sliced
½ cup Minute Tapioca
1 cup light brown sugar, firmly packed
1 teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon mace
3 tablespoons melted butter

Combine water and lemon juice and pour over apples in greased shallow
baking dish. Cover and bake in moderate oven (375° F.) 15 minutes, or
until apples are partially cooked. Mix together Minute Tapioca, ¾ cup
sugar, salt, and mace. Sprinkle over apples, mixing thoroughly. Add
melted butter. Continue baking 10 minutes. Then stir well; sprinkle
remaining sugar over apple mixture, and bake 5 minutes longer. Serve hot
or cold with cream. Serves 6.

BAKED PEACH TAPIOCA PUDDING

⅓ cup Minute Tapioca
4 tablespoons sugar
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon nutmeg
2 cups canned sliced peaches, drained
2½ cups water and peach juice
1 tablespoon lemon juice
2 tablespoons melted butter

Combine ingredients in greased baking dish. Mix thoroughly. Bake in
moderate oven (375° F.) 30 minutes, or until done, stirring well every
10 minutes, and again when removing from oven. Serve warm or cold with
cream. Serves 8. For baked apricot tapioca pudding, substitute apricots
for peaches, and omit nutmeg.

[Illustration: _Minute Tapioca baked puddings ... easiest and best
of desserts ..._
Baked Peach Tapioca Pudding ... see recipe on page 11]

[Illustration: _19 popular dishes surer and easier ... thanks to
Minute Tapioca_
Fresh Strawberry Pie ... see recipe on page 14]

PIE CRUST

2½ cups sifted flour
¼ teaspoon Calumet Baking Powder
½ teaspoon salt
⅔ cup cold shortening
⅓ cup cold water (about)

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder and salt, and sift again.
Cut in shortening until pieces are about size of small peas. Add water
(preferably ice water), a small amount at a time, mixing lightly with
fork. Handle as little as possible. Wrap in waxed paper; chill
thoroughly. Roll out on slightly floured board. Bake pastry in hot oven
(450° F.). Makes enough pastry for one 9-inch two-crust pie, or two
9-inch pie shells. Use ½ recipe for one pie shell only.

FRESH STRAWBERRY PIE

2 tablespoons Minute Tapioca
1 cup sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon melted butter
1 quart fresh strawberries, hulled and cut in pieces
1 recipe Pie Crust (above)

Combine Minute Tapioca, sugar, salt, butter and strawberries; let stand
15 minutes, or while pastry is being made. Line a 9-inch pie plate with
pastry rolled ⅛ inch thick. Fill with berry mixture. Moisten edge of
pastry with cold water. Adjust top crust. Bake in hot oven (450° F.) 15
minutes; then decrease heat to moderate (350° F.) and bake 20 minutes
longer, or until filling is cooked.

HUCKLEBERRY OR BLUEBERRY PIE

2½ tablespoons Minute Tapioca
¾ cup granulated sugar
½ cup brown sugar, firmly packed
¼ teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon melted butter
3 tablespoons water
1 quart fresh huckleberries or blueberries
1 recipe Pie Crust (above)

Combine Minute Tapioca, sugars, salt, butter, water, and berries; let
stand 15 minutes or while pastry is being made. Line a 9-inch pie plate
with pastry rolled ⅛ inch thick. Fill with berry mixture. Adjust top
crust. Moisten edge of pastry with cold water. Press edges together.
Trim off surplus pastry. Bake in hot oven (450° F.) 15 minutes; then
decrease heat to moderate (350° F.) and bake 20 minutes longer, or until
filling is cooked.

APRICOT PIE

1½ tablespoons Minute Tapioca
⅓ cup sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon melted butter
2 cups cooked dried apricots, drained
½ cup canned crushed pineapple, drained
1 cup apricot juice
½ cup pineapple juice
1 recipe Pie Crust (page 14)

Combine Minute Tapioca, sugar, salt, butter, fruit, and fruit juices;
let stand 15 minutes, or while pastry is being made. Line a 9-inch pie
plate with pastry rolled ⅛ inch thick, allowing pastry to extend 1 inch
beyond edge. Fold edge back to form standing rim. Fill with apricot
mixture. Moisten edge of pie with cold water and arrange lattice of
pastry strips across top. Flute rim. Bake in hot oven (425° F.) 10
minutes; then decrease heat to moderate (350° F.) and bake 30 minutes
longer. Cool.

RED CHERRY PIE

2½ tablespoons Minute Tapioca
1 cup sugar
⅛ teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon melted butter
2½ cups canned seeded red cherries, drained
1 cup cherry juice
1 recipe Pie Crust (page 14)

Combine Minute Tapioca, sugar, salt, butter, cherries, and cherry juice;
let stand about 15 minutes or while pastry is being made. Line a 9-inch
pie plate with pastry rolled ⅛ inch thick. Fill with cherry mixture.
Moisten edge of pastry with cold water. Adjust top crust. Bake in hot
oven (450° F.) 15 minutes; then decrease heat to moderate (350° F.) and
bake 30 minutes longer, or until filling is cooked.

RHUBARB PIE

1½ tablespoons Minute Tapioca
1¼ cups sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon melted butter
3½ cups rhubarb, cut in ½-inch pieces
1 recipe Pie Crust (page 14)

Combine Minute Tapioca, sugar, salt, butter, and rhubarb; let stand 15
minutes, or while pastry is being made. Line a 9-inch pie plate with
pastry rolled ⅛ inch thick. Fill with rhubarb mixture. Adjust top crust.
Moisten edge of pastry with cold water. Press edges together. Trim off
surplus pastry. Bake in hot oven (450° F.) 15 minutes; then decrease
heat to moderate (350° F.) and bake 30 minutes longer, or until filling
is cooked.

[Illustration: _For soufflés and omelets that rise high and stay
high_
Apricot Omelet ... see recipe on page 17]

FLUFFY OMELET

2 tablespoons Minute Tapioca
¾ teaspoon salt
⅛ teaspoon pepper
¾ cup milk
1 tablespoon butter
4 egg yolks, beaten until thick and lemon-colored
4 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Combine Minute Tapioca, salt, pepper, and milk in top of double boiler.
Place over rapidly boiling water, bring to scalding point (allow 3 to 5
minutes), and cook 5 minutes, stirring frequently. Add butter. Remove
from boiling water; let cool slightly while beating eggs. Add egg yolks
and mix well. Fold in egg whites. Pour into hot, buttered 10-inch frying
pan. Cook over low flame 3 minutes. Then bake in moderate oven (350° F.)
15 minutes. Omelet is sufficiently cooked when a knife inserted comes
out clean. Fold carefully and serve on hot platter. Serves 6.

APRICOT OMELET

Prepare Fluffy Omelet (above). Spread apricot jam on baked omelet; then
fold and dust with confectioners’ sugar. Serve hot as main dish for
luncheon or supper. Serves 6.

ONION OMELET

2 tablespoons butter
1 cup minced onions
1 teaspoon flour
¼ cup water
¼ teaspoon salt
Dash of pepper
1 recipe Fluffy Omelet (above)

Melt butter; add onions and cook over low flame until onions are tender.
Add flour and mix well; then add water and seasoning and cook 5 minutes.
Prepare omelet. Turn out on hot platter. Place onion mixture between
folded layers. Serves 6.

DUCHESS SOUP

2 tablespoons Minute Tapioca
1 teaspoon salt
⅛ teaspoon pepper
1 tablespoon minced onion
4 cups milk
2 tablespoons butter
½ cup grated American cheese
2 tablespoons chopped parsley

Combine Minute Tapioca, salt, pepper, onion, and milk in top of double
boiler. Place over rapidly boiling water, bring to scalding point (allow
5 to 7 minutes), and cook 5 minutes, stirring frequently. Add butter,
cheese, and parsley, and cook until cheese is melted. Serves 4 to 6.

BEEF BROTH WITH TAPIOCA

1 pound beef, diced
7 cups cold water
1 cup diced carrot
¼ cup diced celery
1 slice small onion
Small piece bay leaf
1¼ teaspoons salt
2½ tablespoons Minute Tapioca

Cover meat with cold water and bring slowly to boiling point. Simmer
gently 3 hours. Add vegetables and seasonings and cook 30 minutes.
Strain. Chill; remove fat. Bring to a boil over direct heat; add Minute
Tapioca gradually and boil briskly about 1 minute, stirring constantly.
Serves 4 to 6.

CELERY SOUP

1½ cups cut celery stalks and leaves
1 cup water
3 cups rich milk and 1 cup chicken or meat broth, or 4 cups rich milk
and 2 bouillon cubes (chicken flavor)
3 tablespoons Minute Tapioca
1½ teaspoons salt
¼ teaspoon celery salt
Dash of Cayenne
¼ teaspoon scraped onion
3 tablespoons butter

Cook celery in water 10 minutes. Combine with milk mixture. Minute
Tapioca, salt, celery salt, Cayenne, and onion in top of double boiler.
Place over rapidly boiling water, bring to scalding point (allow 5 to 7
minutes), and cook 5 minutes, stirring frequently. Add butter. Serves 4
to 6.

CHEESE SOUFFLÉ

3 tablespoons Minute Tapioca
1 teaspoon salt
1 cup milk
1 cup grated American cheese
3 egg yolks, beaten until thick and lemon-colored
3 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Combine Minute Tapioca, salt, and milk in top of double boiler. Place
over rapidly boiling water, bring to scalding point (allow 3 to 5
minutes), and cook 5 minutes, stirring frequently. Add cheese and stir
until melted. Remove from boiling water; let cool slightly while beating
eggs. Add egg yolks and mix well. Fold in egg whites. Turn into greased
baking dish. Place in pan of hot water and bake in moderate oven (350°
F.) 50 minutes, or until soufflé is firm. Serves 6.

CHICKEN POT PIE

2½ tablespoons Minute Tapioca
¼ teaspoon salt
Dash of pepper
Dash of paprika
2 tablespoons melted butter
2 cups cooked chicken, cut in pieces
1¼ cups milk or chicken stock
6 to 8 unbaked baking powder biscuits, rolled ¼ inch thick

Combine ingredients in order given. Turn into greased casserole and bake
in hot oven (425° F.) 25 minutes, stirring mixture twice during first 10
minutes of baking. Place biscuits on top of chicken mixture after it has
baked 10 minutes; return to oven and bake 12 to 15 minutes longer, or
until biscuits are browned. Serve immediately. Serves 4.

LAMB CASSEROLE

1 pound breast of lamb, cut in small pieces
½ cup sliced onion
1 tablespoon butter
1 cup boiling water
1 cup diced carrot
1 cup diced potatoes
2 cups tomatoes
1½ teaspoons salt
¼ teaspoon pepper
3 tablespoons Minute Tapioca

Brown lamb and onion in butter; add water; then place in casserole.
Cover and bake in moderate oven (350° F.) 1 hour, or until meat is
tender. Add remaining vegetables and seasonings; cover, and continue
baking 30 minutes, or until vegetables are tender. Sprinkle Minute
Tapioca over top and mix carefully; bake 5 minutes longer. Serves 6.

RAMEKIN OF SALMON

3 tablespoons Minute Tapioca
½ teaspoon salt
Dash of Cayenne
2 cups flaked salmon
½ tablespoon minced parsley
1 cup milk
½ cup fine bread crumbs, buttered

Combine Minute Tapioca, salt, Cayenne, salmon, parsley, and milk. Turn
into greased ramekins or custard cups. Cover with crumbs. Bake in
moderate oven (350° F.) 35 minutes, or until done. Garnish with parsley.
Serve with or without celery, tomato, or pimiento sauce. Serves 6.

CHICKEN CROQUETTES

3 tablespoons Minute Tapioca
½ teaspoon salt
⅛ teaspoon paprika
2 tablespoons minced green pepper
2 tablespoons minced pimiento
½ cup milk
½ cup chicken stock
1½ cups chopped cooked chicken
Sifted bread or cracker crumbs
1 egg, beaten with 3 tablespoons milk and dash of salt

Combine Minute Tapioca, salt, paprika, green pepper, pimiento, milk, and
stock in top of double boiler. Place over rapidly boiling water, bring
to scalding point (allow 3 to 5 minutes), and cook 5 minutes, stirring
frequently. Add chicken and mix thoroughly. Chill—mixture thickens as it
cools. Shape into balls. Roll in crumbs, dip in egg mixture, then roll
again in crumbs. Fry in deep fat (390° F.) 1 minute, or until golden
brown. Drain on soft, unglazed paper. Serve with creamed mushrooms and
red currant jelly. Garnish with parsley. Makes 8 croquettes. Turkey may
be substituted for chicken in this recipe.

SAVORY MEAT LOAF

2 thin 2-inch slices salt pork, diced
2 tablespoons minced onion
2 pounds round beef, ground
½ cup Minute Tapioca
2½ teaspoons salt
¼ teaspoon pepper
2 cups strained canned tomatoes (juice and pulp)

Dry out salt pork, add onion, and cook until golden brown. Add pork,
onion, and drippings to other ingredients and mix thoroughly. Bake in
loaf pan in hot oven (450° F.) 15 minutes; then decrease heat to
moderate (350° F.) and bake 30 minutes longer, or until done. Serve hot
or cold. Garnish with parsley or water cress. Serves 10.

HAM LOAF

½ cup Minute Tapioca
¼ teaspoon pepper
¼ teaspoon paprika
1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
1 tablespoon minced onion
1 pound lean ham, ground
1 pound lean pork, ground
2 cups milk

Combine ingredients in order given. Bake in loaf pan in hot oven (450°
F.) 15 minutes; then decrease heat to moderate (350° F.) and bake 45
minutes longer, or until done. Rub mixing bowl with garlic before
mixing, if desired. Serve hot or cold. Garnish with parsley. Serves 10.

[Illustration: _Meat loaves and croquettes that keep their shape,
yet are moist...._
Savory Meat Loaf ... see recipe on page 20]

VANILLA ICE CREAM

3 tablespoons Minute Tapioca
2 cups milk
⅓ cup sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
3 tablespoons light corn syrup
2 tablespoons sugar
2 egg whites
1 cup cream, whipped
1 tablespoon vanilla

Add Minute Tapioca to milk in top of double boiler. Place over rapidly
boiling water, bring to scalding point (allow 3 to 5 minutes), and cook
5 minutes, stirring frequently. Strain hot mixture, stirring (not
rubbing) through very fine sieve, onto ⅓ cup sugar, salt, and corn
syrup. Stir until sugar is dissolved. Chill. Add 2 tablespoons sugar to
egg whites and beat until stiff; fold into cold tapioca mixture. Fold in
cream and vanilla. Turn into freezing tray of automatic refrigerator;
freeze as rapidly as possible—3 to 4 hours usually required. Or turn
mixture into container, cover tightly, and pack in equal parts ice and
salt 2 to 3 hours. Makes 1 quart. If desired, reduce vanilla to 1½
teaspoons; fold in 1 cup Baker’s Coconut, toasted and crumbled.

CHOCOLATE ICE CREAM

3 tablespoons Minute Tapioca
2 squares Baker’s Unsweetened Chocolate, cut in pieces
2 cups milk
½ cup sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
4 tablespoons light corn syrup
2 tablespoons sugar
2 egg whites
1 cup cream, whipped
2 teaspoons vanilla

Add Minute Tapioca and chocolate to milk in top of double boiler. Place
over rapidly boiling water, bring to scalding point (allow 3 to 5
minutes), and cook 5 minutes, stirring frequently. Beat with rotary egg
beater to blend all ingredients, if necessary. Strain hot mixture,
stirring (not rubbing) through very fine sieve, onto ½ cup sugar, salt,
and corn syrup. Stir until sugar is dissolved. Chill. Add 2 tablespoons
sugar to egg whites and beat until stiff; fold into cold tapioca
mixture. Fold in cream and vanilla. Turn into freezing tray of automatic
refrigerator and freeze as rapidly as possible—3 to 4 hours usually
required. Or turn mixture into container, cover tightly, and pack in
equal parts ice and salt 2 to 3 hours. Makes 1 quart ice cream.

_F_OOTNOTES

[1]Everything, except egg whites and flavoring, goes in together!

[2]Yes—5 minutes. It used to take 15!

[3]Remember, that it thickens to a glorious creaminess as it cools.

[4]5 minutes—that’s all the cooking this new Minute Tapioca needs.

[5]Mixture clears and thickens as it cools.

[6]A lovely looking, grand-tasting dessert. And one that you can vary
the whole year round.

_F_REE!
A COOK BOOK OF 85 RECIPES!

—Dozens of tapioca creams and fruit tapiocas!
—A score of baked tapioca desserts!
—4 ice creams that can be frozen without stirring!
—8 fruit pies that keep the juice where it belongs!
—8 soups more easily made than ever before!
—21 grand and very economical main dishes!
—New menus for all sorts of needs!

Get your copy today. Mail the coupon and learn of _all_ the wonderful
things you can make with the NEW Minute Tapioca!

GENERAL FOODS, Dept. MT, Battle Creek, Mich.

Please send me—FREE—new recipe booklet and NEW Minute Tapioca sample.

_Name_ ___________________________

_Street_ _________________________

_City_ _________ _State_ ______

FILL IN COMPLETELY—PRINT NAME AND ADDRESS
In Canada, address: General Foods, Ltd., Cobourg, Ontario

[Illustration: MINUTE TAPIOCA]

All tapioca is made from the root of the cassava plant—a plant raised in
far-off Java.

Only _Minute Tapioca_, however, is processed from tapioca flour in
_America_. Here, in a clean, sunny _American_ factory in the Berkshires,
under clean, sanitary _American_ conditions, the cassava flour is
washed, delicately cooked, and packaged.

For cleanliness’ sake, as well as easier cooking, insist on _Minute_
Tapioca.

MINUTE TAPIOCA CO., INC.
_Division of General Foods_
ORANGE, MASSACHUSETTS

Transcriber’s Notes

—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
_underscores_.

—Sidenotes are represented as headings or footnotes, as seemed
appropriate.