12 PIES
HUSBANDS LIKE BEST
AUNT JENNY’S RECIPE BOOK

Copyright 1952—Lever Brothers Company—New York, New York

_Now anyone can make pies to perfection with Spry’s ‘Water-Whip’
Method!’_

[Illustration: Aunt Jenny]

Dear Friend:

Here is my newest Spry cookbook, with 12 recipes for beautiful pies. I’m
so glad you sent for it, and I hope you’ll try every one of them!
They’re recipes you can depend on, because they’ve been tested over and
over again in the Lever Test Kitchens. What’s more, this book is
chock-full of tricks that will make pies the easiest thing you bake!
There’s the easy, quick Spry “Water-Whip” method that takes all the
guesswork out of piecrust even for beginners. There’s an improved
standard pastry recipe. There are dozens of hints for rolling,
decorating—even freezing—pies. Once you’ve tried these easy, simple
methods, you’ll feel like making pies and tarts much more often, I know.
And one member of your family is going to be especially happy—nearly
every man loves pie!

Then give him pie to his heart’s content! Any one of these recipes is
sure to be pie to his liking—they were chosen because they’re the pies
that surveys, research, letters in my mail show most men like best. So
begin anywhere—run your own popularity contest—see which pie wins with
_him_!

_Sincerely yours,_
_Aunt Jenny_

REGAL CREAM-ON-CHOCOLATE PIE

[Illustration: REGAL CREAM-ON-CHOCOLATE PIE]

Make a baked “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Soften 1 teaspoon gelatin in 2 tablespoons cold water.

Melt 1 oz. chocolate (cut in pieces) in 1¼ cups milk in top of double
boiler; blend with rotary egg beater.

Mix ½ cup sugar, 2 tablespoons cornstarch, ¼ teaspoon salt. Add to
chocolate mixture and cook until thick and smooth, then cook 15
minutes longer, stirring constantly.

Beat 3 egg yolks well. Stir small amount of chocolate mixture into egg
yolks, return to double boiler, and cook a few minutes longer.

Add 1 tablespoon butter or margarine, 1 teaspoon vanilla and gelatin
mixture; mix well. Cool.

Fold in 3 stiffly beaten egg whites.

Whip ½ cup heavy cream and fold into chocolate mixture.

Pour into baked pie shell. Chill in refrigerator several hours, or until
firm. When ready to serve, whip 1 cup heavy cream and spread over
filling.

Sprinkle 1 cup grated fresh coconut (or shredded moist coconut) over
cream and decorate with curls of shaved chocolate. Keep chilled
until all is served.

DEEP-DISH BLUEBERRY PIE

[Illustration: DEEP-DISH BLUEBERRY PIE]

Make pie dough, using recipe for “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Mix 4 cups fresh blueberries (or blackberries, raspberries,
boysenberries, or huckleberries), ¾ cup sugar, 1½ tablespoons
tapioca or flour, ⅛ teaspoon salt, 1 teaspoon lemon juice and put
in oblong baking dish, 10″ x 6″ x 2″.

Dot 1 tablespoon butter or margarine over berries.

Roll pie dough into a rectangle ⅛″ thick. Fit dough over berries, making
a crimped edge and pressing it onto edge of dish.

Cut slits for steam to escape.

Decorate top with “blueberries” and “leaves” cut from pastry trimmings.

Bake in hot oven (425°F.) 40-45 minutes.

Serve warm with a mixture of ½ cup mashed cottage cheese, ¼ cup heavy
cream, whipped, 1 tablespoon confectioners’ sugar, dash of salt,
and few drops of vanilla. Makes 6 servings.

HERITAGE PUMPKIN PIE

[Illustration: HERITAGE PUMPKIN PIE]

Make an unbaked “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Mix 1½ cups canned or cooked pumpkin (or squash), 1 cup firmly packed
brown sugar, ½ teaspoon salt, 2 teaspoons cinnamon, 1 teaspoon
ginger, 2 tablespoons molasses.

Add 3 slightly beaten eggs, 1 cup evaporated milk, and mix thoroughly.

Pour into unbaked, unpricked pie shell.

Bake in hot oven (425°F.) 40-45 minutes, or until knife inserted in
center comes out clean.

Serve with sharp cheese or with a topping of whipped cream.

“HIS FAVORITE” APPLE PIE

[Illustration: “HIS FAVORITE” APPLE PIE]

Make “Water-Whip” Piecrust, page 15. Divide dough in half and shape each
into a flat round. Roll one half about ⅛″ thick and line a 9″ pie
pan.

Prepare 6 cups pared, cored thin apple slices. Arrange half of slices in
pastry-lined pan.

Mix 1 cup sugar[1], ¾ teaspoon cinnamon, ¼ teaspoon nutmeg, ⅛ teaspoon
salt, 1 teaspoon lemon juice and sprinkle half of mixture over
apples in pan. Arrange remaining slices on top and cover with
remaining sugar mixture.

Dot 1 tablespoon butter or margarine over filling. Trim pastry even with
pan.

Roll remaining dough as before and lay over apples. Trim pastry ½″
beyond pan, fold it under bottom crust, press edges together with
fork. Cut decorative slits in top for steam to escape.

Brush pastry with slightly beaten egg white and sprinkle with sugar.

Bake in hot oven (425°F.) 45-55 minutes.

[1]_If apples are very juicy, add 1 tablespoon cornstarch to sugar
mixture and blend thoroughly._

DREAMY BANANA CREAM PIE

[Illustration: DREAMY BANANA CREAM PIE]

Make a baked “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Scald 2 cups milk in top of double boiler.

Mix 3 tablespoons flour, 2 tablespoons cornstarch, ½ cup sugar, ¼
teaspoon salt. Add gradually to scalded milk and cook until thick
and smooth, then cook 15 minutes longer, stirring constantly.

Beat 3 egg yolks slightly. Stir a small amount of hot mixture into
yolks, return to double boiler, and cook a few minutes longer.

Add 1 tablespoon butter or margarine, 1 teaspoon vanilla and blend.
Cool.

Slice 3 or 4 bananas and arrange in baked pie shell; cover at once with
cooled filling. At serving time, whip ½ cup heavy cream. Drop by
teaspoonfuls on filling around rim of pie, piling remaining cream
in center.

Decorate by inserting 2 banana slices, butterfly fashion, into cream at
tip of each serving.

OLD-SOUTH BUTTERSCOTCH PIE

[Illustration: OLD-SOUTH BUTTERSCOTCH PIE]

Make a baked “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Mix 1¼ cups firmly packed dark brown sugar, ¼ teaspoon salt, 2
tablespoons water in top of double boiler. Boil over direct heat
to a thick sirup (about 5 minutes).

Blend ¼ cup milk with 4½ tablespoons cornstarch. Add 1¾ cups milk,
combine with hot sirup and cook over hot water until thick and
smooth, then cook 15 minutes longer, stirring constantly.

Beat 3 egg yolks slightly. Stir a small amount of hot mixture into egg
yolks, return to double boiler, and cook 5 minutes longer.

Add 2 tablespoons butter or margarine, ½ teaspoon vanilla and cool.

Pour into baked pie shell. At serving time, whip 1 cup heavy cream and
arrange in a border around top of pie leaving a 3″ circle of
uncovered filling in center.

Arrange pecan halves around filling inside cream border or sprinkle
filling with coarsely cut toasted pecans. Keep refrigerated until
all is served.

CRUMBLY TOP APPLE PIE

[Illustration: CRUMBLY TOP APPLE PIE]

Make an unbaked “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Mix ¼ cup sugar, ¾ teaspoon cinnamon, ⅛ teaspoon salt, 4 cups pared,
cored thin apple slices

Arrange apple slices in pie shell

Blend ¾ cup firmly packed brown sugar, ¾ cup sifted all-purpose flour.

Cut in ⅓ cup butter or margarine with pastry blender or two knives until
crumbly. Sprinkle over apples.

Bake in moderately hot oven (400°F.) 30-35 minutes. Serve with or
without cream.

LUSCIOUS LEMON MERINGUE PIE

[Illustration: LUSCIOUS LEMON MERINGUE PIE]

Make a baked “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Mix ½ cup cold water, ¼ teaspoon salt, 7 tablespoons cornstarch.

Combine 1½ cups hot water, 1¼ cups sugar in top of double boiler and
bring to boil over direct heat. Add cornstarch mixture and cook
until thickened; place over boiling water and cook until thick and
smooth (15 minutes), stirring constantly.

Beat 3 egg yolks slightly. Stir a small amount of hot mixture into
yolks, return to double boiler, and cook a few minutes longer.

Add ⅓ cup lemon juice, grated rind of 1 lemon, 1 tablespoon butter or
margarine and blend. Cool.

Pour into baked pie shell.

Spread Meringue (page 19) lightly on filling and bake as directed.

CHERRY TRELLIS PIE

[Illustration: CHERRY TRELLIS PIE]

Make Standard Piecrust, page 16. Divide dough in half and shape each
into a flat round. Roll one half about ⅛″ thick and line a 9″ pie
pan.

Drain 3 cups canned sour red pitted cherries.

Add ⅓ cup canned cherry sirup, 1 cup sugar, 1 teaspoon lemon juice, ¼
teaspoon almond extract, 2 tablespoons tapioca or flour, ⅛
teaspoon salt.

Put cherry mixture in pastry-lined pan.

Dot 1 tablespoon butter or margarine over cherries.

Trim pastry about ½″ beyond pan and turn dough under to make a stand-up
rim.

Roll remaining dough and cut into strips ½″ wide.

Attach ends of 7 strips to rim of pie by moistening and pressing firmly.
Twist each strip across fruit and attach at opposite side of pie.
Repeat with 7 more strips, crisscrossing to form attractive
trellis top. Flute rim.

Bake in hot oven (425°F.) 50-60 minutes.

BEST COCONUT CUSTARD PIE

[Illustration: BEST COCONUT CUSTARD PIE]

Make a baked “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Beat slightly 3 eggs and 2 egg yolks or 4 eggs.

Add ⅔ cup sugar, ½ teaspoon salt, 2 cups milk, 1 teaspoon vanilla and
mix. Strain mixture.

Add ¾ cup shredded toasted coconut[2].

Pour into buttered 9″ pie pan.

Sprinkle with ¼ teaspoon nutmeg.

Place pan in larger pan of hot water.

Bake in moderate oven (350°F) 35-40 minutes.

Cool custard at room temperature. (Do not refrigerate or custard will
stick to pan.)

Loosen custard thoroughly from pan with knife (page 20). Shake gently to
loosen from bottom. Slide it quickly, but carefully, into baked
and cooled pie shell. Let settle a few minutes before serving.

[2]_To toast coconut, place in shallow pan and toast in moderate oven
(350°F.) until browned, stirring often to brown evenly._

CORONATION PEACH PIE

[Illustration: CORONATION PEACH PIE]

Make Standard Piecrust, page 16. Divide dough in half and shape each
into a flat round. Roll one half about ⅛″ thick and line a 9″ pie
pan.

Drain 3 cups canned sliced peaches.

Add ½ cup firmly packed brown sugar, ⅓ cup canned peach sirup, 2
tablespoons lemon juice, 2 tablespoons tapioca, flour, or
cornstarch, ⅛ teaspoon salt, 1 teaspoon grated orange rind, ¼
teaspoon almond extract.

Put peach mixture in pastry-lined pan.

Dot 1 tablespoon butter or margarine over peaches.

Roll remaining dough about ³/₁₆″ thick and cut into strips ½″ wide.
Arrange on filling, starting at center and twisting and winding
them about 6 times around the top. Join strips by pinching
together. Brush spiral with slightly beaten egg white and sprinkle
with sugar. Moisten rim of pie. Press end of 1 strip on rim, twist
and circle edge of pie, pressing strip against rim where it
touches. Join strips as before.

Bake in hot oven (425°F.) 45-55 minutes.

HOT N HEARTY STEAK PIE

[Illustration: HOT N HEARTY STEAK PIE]

Fry 1½ cups sliced onions slowly until yellow in ⅓ cup Homogenized Spry.
Remove onions and save for later use.

Cut 1½ pounds round steak in ½″ pieces and roll in mixture of ⅓ cup
flour, 3 teaspoons salt, ¼ teaspoon pepper. Sear in hot Spry until
richly browned.

Add 3¼ cups boiling water, 1 tablespoon Worcestershire sauce and
sprinkle in any of the flour mixture that remains. Cover and
simmer until meat is tender (about 1 hour).

Add 1 cup raw potatoes, cut in ½″ cubes. Cook 10 minutes longer.

Make Golden Egg Pastry, page 20.

Roll dough into a rectangle ¼″ thick and about 1″ larger than 10″ x 6″ x
2″ baking dish.

Pour meat mixture into dish and place cooked onions on top.

Fit pastry over top and seal edge of pie. Mark top into 6 serving
portions by cutting small Vs with knife point lengthwise and
crosswise. In center of each square make a decorative steam vent
by cutting 8 short slits in a snowflake pattern.

Bake in very hot oven (450°F.) 25-30 minutes. Makes 6 servings.

_Hints for a “Light Hand” with Pastry_

[Illustration: Aunt Jenny]

You’ve heard a woman say, admiring another cook’s handiwork. “She has
_such_ a light hand with pastry!” Tender, flaky piecrust has always been
the prize accomplishment of good cooks! And many’s the woman who has
envied it! Now, thanks to Spry and its new “Water-Whip” method, perfect
pastry—every time—is easy as child’s play. And so fast! It’s ready to
roll in seconds!

You see, the “Water-Whip” method answers right from the start that
question that has always been so confusing—“How much water shall I add?”
You simply add a definite, measured amount of liquid right to your
shortening, then whip it into a soft, creamy emulsion! Of course, any
shortening won’t do—the whole method is possible only because Spry is
homogenized, specially made to mix with liquids.

Once your pastry is mixed, the success of your pie depends a great deal
on how you handle the dough. You’ll want to read carefully the pictured
directions for each pastry method and go over the suggestions in the
pages that follow. They’re tricks from skilled pie-makers—ways to make
your pies prettier, more delicious, more certain to win you compliments
from every one who comes to your table! And now—Happy Baking!

_You can bake BETTER pies with Homogenized Spry_

Dip your spoon into Homogenized Spry—see how much lighter and fluffier
it is than other shortenings—how easy to work with. It’s pre-creamed,
easier, quicker to blend with dry ingredients. And Spry is the _only_
kind of shortening that is specially made to mix with liquids. That’s
what makes the marvelous new “Water-Whip” method possible! You can count
on Spry every time—you’re _sure_ to make flakier, more tender piecrust
than you can possibly get with any other kind of shortening ... in fact.
Lever Brothers Company guarantees just that!

[Illustration: Homogenized Spry’s Pure Vegetable Shortening]

BEST FOR ALL YOU BAKE OR FRY

_Now you can make tender, flaky pastry the Spry “Water-Whip” way!_

Experienced pie-makers like this new method because it saves time. No
cutting in of shortening ... no tedious adding of liquid. In seconds,
the pie dough is mixed! Beginners like this method because they can
“feel easy” about it. There’s no guessing about how much liquid to add
... no uncertainty about results. The dough goes together almost like
magic, rolls easily, makes tender, delicious pastry on the first try!

_To make “Water-Whip Pastry” ...
here’s all you do...._

[Illustration: Put Homogenized Spry in medium-sized mixing bowl and
pour over it the boiling water and milk. Then tilt the bowl and
break up shortening with a fork.]

[Illustration: Whip with rapid cross-the-bowl strokes until all
liquid is absorbed and mixture is thick and smooth like whipped
cream and holds soft peaks when fork is lifted.]

[Illustration: Sift flour and salt onto creamy Spry “Whip.” There’s
no tedious cutting-in of the shortening ... no guessing as to the
correct amount of liquid to add.]

[Illustration: With vigorous round-the-bowl strokes, stir all
ingredients together into a dough that clings together and “cleans”
the bowl. Takes only about 33 seconds!]

[Illustration: Take up dough in hands, work gently into a smooth,
blended dough, then shape into a flat round. This soft, pliable
dough is now ready to roll in any preferred way.]

“Water-Whip” dough, being soft and pliable, rolls beautifully between
waxed paper. No messy floured board ... no sticking ... no pastry cloth
or rolling-pin cover needed. From beginning to end, this new rolling
method is neat as a pin, easy, successful! Just follow the techniques
pictured below.

_“Water-Whip” Piecrust_

¾ cup Homogenized Spry
¼ cup boiling water
1 tablespoon milk
2 cups all-purpose flour (sifted once before measuring)
1 teaspoon salt

Put Spry in medium-sized mixing bowl.... Add boiling water and milk and
break up shortening with fork. Tilt bowl and, with rapid cross-the-bowl
strokes, whip with fork until mixture is smooth and thick like whipped
cream and holds soft peaks when fork is lifted.... Sift flour and salt
together onto Spry mixture. Stir quickly, with round-the-bowl strokes,
into a dough that clings together and “cleans” the bowl.... Pick up and
work into a smooth dough; shape into a flat round. The dough is now
ready to roll, either between waxed paper, or on a pastry cloth or
board.

This recipe makes enough pastry for a 9″ 2-crust pie or for a 9″
lattice-top pie or for 9 tart or patty shells.

EASIER ROLLING WITH “WATER-WHIP” PASTRY

[Illustration: Roll dough between 12″ squares of waxed paper from
center out into circle size of paper. If paper wrinkles, remove top
one, put on another, turn, and roll.]

[Illustration: To put pastry in pan, peel off top paper, pick up
pastry and center it over pan, pastry side down. Remove paper
gently. Such an easy way to roll out piecrust!]

STANDARD PASTRY ... _the sure Spry Way_

_Standard_ or _conventional pastry_ is made by first cutting the
shortening into the flour. In the _Spry way_ of making standard pastry,
the shortening is cut into the flour in _two steps_: first, ⅔ of the
Spry is cut in _fine_ for _tenderness_; second, the remaining Spry is
cut in _coarse_ for _flakiness_. To make standard pastry this improved
way, follow the recipe and key steps pictured below. See how easy it is
to get perfect pastry every time!

Standard Piecrust

Ingredients _Two-crust 9″ Pie_ _9″ Pie Shell_
_or Lattice Pie_ _or 6 tart shells_

sifted all-purpose 2 cups 1¼ cups
flour
salt 1 teaspoon ½ teaspoon
Homogenized Spry ¾ cup ½ cup
cold water 4 tablespoons 2½ tablespoons

Put flour and salt in mixing bowl and mix. Cut in Spry as follows:

Step 1 for Tenderness—cut in about ⅔ of the Spry with pastry blender
or 2 knives until as fine as meal.

Step 2 for Flakiness—cut in the remaining Spry to the size of large
peas.

Sprinkle _all_ the water, 1 tablespoon at a time, over different parts
of mixture. Mix thoroughly with fork until all particles cling together
and form a dough. Take up in hands and work into a smooth, blended ball
of dough. Use in making pies, tarts, turnovers, etc.

Roll standard pastry on a floured board or cloth—not between waxed
paper.

[Illustration: Cut ⅔ of the Spry into flour with pastry blender
until as fine as meal. Be sure _all_ the flour is mixed with the
Spry. This step insures _tenderness_ in the pastry.]

[Illustration: Cut in remaining Spry to size of large peas. In
baking, these pieces melt into little “pools” of fat, forming leafy
flakes. This step insures _flakiness_ in the pastry.]

[Illustration: Sprinkle water over mixture; mix thoroughly with fork
until all particles cling together. Take up in hands. Work into a
smooth, well-blended ball of dough.]

_Expert Tricks_ FOR PERFECT PIES

[Illustration: Pie crust]

Many secrets of pie success lie in the “know-how”—in the techniques and
practices that are part of a pie-maker’s skill. You’ll find many of
these pie tricks in this booklet: how to make a custard pie with a
crisp, flaky undercrust and a soft, creamy filling ... how to seal in
the juices in a berry pie ... how to make a fluffy, upstanding meringue.
There are tips for pretty tops and attractive edges, too—all designed to
give your pies a truly professional air!

KEEP FRUIT JUICES IN PIE ... _the “Rim-Seal” way_

[Illustration: To keep fruit juices from boiling out of a 2-crust
pie, trim undercrust even with pan, cut the top crust ½ inch beyond
pan, then turn it under the bottom crust.]

[Illustration: Moisten edge of undercrust with water, press upper
and lower crusts together with floured fork. Or crimp the edges
together with the thumb and forefinger.]

_Attractive Rims to Flatter Your Pies_

The eye-catching look of a handsome pie comes in large part from its
pastry rim. Clever fingers can fashion an endless variety of attractive
edges. The tines of a fork, a pointed knife, or an inverted teaspoon tip
can be used with good effect, too.

Interesting pastry designs can be made on the rims with tiny patterns or
cutters. Some pies call for a rim of the “stand-up” type, others are at
their best with a flat “lie-down” rim. Select the edge that will do the
most for the filling. You will enjoy using your own ideas and creating
new and original rims to frame your favorite pies. Here are some
attractive edges that are easy to make.

Rope Rim (_for pie shell_)

Make stand-up rim (page 18). Pinch pastry between thumb and bent
forefinger. Make the crimps sharp and distinct so they will not bake
out.

Shell or Flute Rim (_for pie shell_)

Make stand-up rim (page 18). Make shell-like flutes by placing left
index finger against inside of rim and pinching it on outside with tips
of right thumb and index finger. (See Luscious Lemon Meringue Pie, page
8.)

Thimble Rim (_for 1-crust pie_)

Trim pastry even with edge of pan. With thimble, cut tiny circles from
pastry. Moisten rim, place circles, overlapping, on rim, pressing
lightly. (See Heritage Pumpkin Pie, page 3.)

Arrow Head Rim (_for 1-crust pie_)

Cut pastry ½″ beyond pan edge, then fold under making a flat “lie-down”
rim. With knife, cut continuous Vs around rim. With right index finger,
lift up base of every other V and lay back on side of pie shell.
Continue around rim. (See Crumbly Top Apple Pie, page 7.)

Flute-and-Fork Rim (_for pie shell_)

Make stand-up rim (page 18). Make a single flute as described under
Shell or Flute, then next to it press with tines of fork. Continue
around rim, alternating flute and fork. (See Dreamy Banana Cream Pie,
page 5.)

Fork-Seal Rim (_for 2-crust pie_)

A good edge to seal in fruit juices. Press floured tines of fork down on
rim straight or diagonally. (See “His Favorite” Apple Pie, page 4.)

Ruffle Rim (_for closed pie_)

Prepare pie rim as for Fork-Seal if a 2-crust pie; if a deep-dish pie,
trim pastry 1″ beyond dish edge and turn back even with dish. Place left
index finger and thumb ½″ apart on outside of rim. Use right index
finger to pull pastry back between fingers to make ruffled effect. (See
Hot N Hearty Steak Pie, page 12.)

“Pretty-Pleat” Your Tarts and Patty Shells

[Illustration: Pleated shells]

Use recipe for “Water-Whip” Piecrust (page 15) or Standard Piecrust
(page 16), for 9 tart shells.... Roll dough ⅛″ thick and prick with
fork.... Cut out 5″ circles and fit over backs of 3″ muffin pans,
pinching into about 7 pleats.... Bake in hot oven (450°F.) 10-15
minutes.... Lift off shells, cool on rack.... Fill tart shells with
fruit or berries for a dainty dessert; or with creamed vegetables,
chicken, or fish for an appetizing main dish for luncheon or supper.

_“Water-Whip” Pie Shell_

½ cup less 1 tablespoon Homogenized Spry
3 tablespoons boiling water
1 teaspoon milk
1¼ cups all-purpose flour (sifted once before measuring)
½ teaspoon salt

Put Spry in medium-sized mixing bowl. Add boiling water and milk and
break up shortening with fork. Tilt bowl and, with rapid cross-the-bowl
strokes, whip with fork until mixture is smooth and thick like whipped
cream and holds soft peaks when fork is lifted.... Sift flour and salt
together onto Spry mixture. Stir quickly, with round-the-bowl strokes,
into a dough that clings together and “cleans” the bowl.... Pick up and
work into a smooth dough; shape into a flat round.... Put dough between
two 12″ squares of waxed paper and roll lightly into a circle about size
of paper. Peel off top paper, place pastry in 9″ pie pan, pastry next to
pan. Carefully remove paper. Fit pastry into pan, trim ½″ beyond pan,
turn back even with edge of pan, flute rim. Prick shell all over with
fork.... Bake in very hot oven (450°F.) 14-19 minutes.

Makes enough pastry for a 9″ pie shell.

MERINGUE

A handsome meringue is the final touch of flattery to a beautiful pie.
Here is a recipe with 7 success secrets written into it:

3 egg whites
6 tablespoons fine granulated sugar
1 teaspoon lemon juice or ½ teaspoon vanilla

1. Beat egg whites until stiff and dry (better volume is obtained if
whites are not too cold).

2. Add sugar gradually—1 tablespoon at a time—beating well after each
addition. Continue beating until stiff peaks form when egg beater is
lifted.

3. Add flavoring (the meringue should have flavor as well as the
filling).

4. Spread meringue lightly over cooled filling in pie shell, making
sure it touches pastry rim all around. (This helps prevent shrinkage.)

5. Make graceful swirls or peaks in the meringue with back of
tablespoon or spatula.

6. Bake in slow oven (325°F.) 25-30 minutes, or until meringue is firm
and delicately browned.

7. Let pie cool on rack away from drafts.

TO MAKE A SHAPELY PIE SHELL, FOLLOW THESE EASY TECHNIQUES

[Illustration: Fit dough into pan; trim pastry with scissors about 1
inch beyond edge of pan.]

[Illustration: Turn back pastry; then raise fold, press against pie
pan, making stand-up rim.]

[Illustration: For a rope rim, pinch with thumb and bent forefinger,
making sharp crimps.]

[Illustration: Prick shell all over with fork. Bake in very hot oven
(450°F.) 10 to 15 minutes.]

_Banbury Tarts_

2 eggs, well beaten
1 cup seeded raisins, chopped
1 cup sugar
1 tablespoon soft bread crumbs
2 tablespoons lemon juice
2 tablespoons grated lemon rind
¼ cup walnuts, chopped
¼ teaspoon salt
“Water-Whip” Piecrust, page 15

Mix first 8 ingredients.... Roll dough ⅛″ thick and cut in eight 5″
circles. Fit circles into 3″ muffin pans, pinching into fluted rims at
top. Fill with raisin mixture. Place cut-out pastry star on top of each
tart. Sprinkle stars with red sugar.... Bake in hot oven (400°F.) 30-40
minutes.... Makes 8 tarts.

_Mince Turnovers_

Use recipe for Piecrust, page 15 or 16. Roll dough ⅛″ thick and cut out
5″ circles. On one half of each circle place 2 tablespoons mincemeat.
Moisten edge, fold pastry over mincemeat, seal edge with fork. Prick
top. Bake in hot oven (425°F.) 10-15 minutes. Makes 8-10.

_Golden Egg Pastry_

Mix 1 cup sifted all-purpose flour and ½ teaspoon salt. Measure ⅓ cup
Spry.

Step 1 for Tenderness—cut in about ⅔ of the Spry until fine as meal.

Step 2 for Flakiness—cut in remaining Spry to size of large peas.

Add 1 egg, slightly beaten, and mix thoroughly into a dough. Use in
making Hot N Hearty Steak Pie, page 12.

_To Freeze Pies..._

Now the miracle of making pies weeks ahead, freezing them in a home
freezer or the freezer section of a refrigerator, and enjoying them
fresh from the oven when convenient! Favorites for freezing are
double-crust pies like apple, cherry, peach, mince, or berry, also
deep-dish fruit and berry pies.

Pies can be frozen unbaked or baked. If frozen unbaked, do not cut steam
vents in top crust; wrap in moisture-vaporproof material and seal;
label, date, and freeze. To thaw, remove wrappings and cut small steam
vents in top crust. Bake in 425°F. oven for 65-70 minutes. If pie is
frozen baked, let pie cool thoroughly at room temperature, then wrap in
moisture-vaporproof material and seal; label, date, and freeze. To thaw,
remove wrappings from frozen pie and heat in 400°F. oven for 25-35
minutes.

Pie shells can be frozen unbaked or baked and kept on hand for use as
needed. If pie is frozen unbaked, it is easier to freeze it before
wrapping, then wrap immediately in moisture-vaporproof material and
store in freezer.... To thaw, unwrap shell and bake in 450°F. oven 5
minutes; reprick shell and bake about 10 minutes longer. If pie shell is
frozen baked, let the baked shell cool thoroughly at room temperature,
then wrap in moisture-vaporproof material and seal; label, date, and
freeze.... To thaw, leave shell wrapped and let stand at room
temperature _or_ unwrap and heat in 400°F. oven 5 minutes.

_HOW TO “SLIP” A CUSTARD PIE_

[Illustration: For creamy custard and crisp crust, bake shell and
custard separately (page 10).]

[Illustration: Loosen the cooled custard, then slide it carefully
into baked, cooled pie shell.]

_Give Your Pie A Pretty Top_

A pretty top lends distinction to any pie, be it plain or fancy. A
sparkling glaze gives a touch of elegance to a two-crust fruit pie....
To make a glazed top, brush the unbaked pie with slightly beaten egg
white and sprinkle with sugar, then bake.... For an extra-brown crust,
brush the top crust before baking with milk or light cream, then
sprinkle with sugar.

_Lattice and Open Tops_

[Illustration: Lattice top]

Lattice-top fruit pies with colorful juices bubbling up through golden
strips of pastry are always a favorite.... The narrow pastry strips can
be cut with a pastry wheel or sharp-pointed knife.... For a trellis top,
the strips are twisted as they are laid across the filling (Cherry
Trellis Pie, page 9).... For a woven lattice top, weave the strips over
and under one another.... For a crisscross top, lay a first set of seven
strips across the filling, then lay a second set over them, making
diamond shapes on the filling.... For a spiral top, arrange strips on
filling in a spiral effect by starting at the center and twisting and
winding around the top six times (Coronation Peach Pie, page 11).... A
hit-and-miss top offers pleasing contrasts on a prune or raisin pie.
Just cut many little odd-shaped bits of pastry from the trimmings and
scatter them over the top of the filling before baking.... Whipped cream
makes glamorous toppings on soft pies, especially when accented with
drifts of grated fresh coconut and curls of shaved chocolate (Regal
Cream-on-Chocolate Pie, page 1).... Or make a snowy ruff of whipped
cream by dropping teaspoonfuls of cream around the rim of the pie, then
garnish as shown in Dreamy Banana Cream Pie, page 5.

_Decorative Steam Vents_

[Illustration: Decorative vents]

Small slits or other openings must be made in closed pies in order to
let steam escape during baking. These can be extremely attractive and in
harmony with the pie filling. For example, on the top crust of a fruit
pie, prick or cut the outlines of the fruit used, such as apples,
peaches, or plums.... An interesting cherry pie can be made by cutting
eight half-inch holes in the top crust to represent cherries. For stems,
cut slits.... To personalize a pie, prick the initials of the one you
wish to honor.... For a Christmas mince pie, roll the top crust, and cut
with small Christmas tree cutter, making 5 trees and pointing the tips
of the trees to the rim of the pie. The trees should not be cut out of
the dough—merely outlined. Brush the trees with egg white and sprinkle
with red sugar.

_Perky Pastry Cut-outs_

[Illustration: Pastry cut-outs]

Interesting pastry cut-outs, such as fruits, berries, leaves, chickens,
birds, and the like can be applied to pie tops with happy effects (see
the cluster of blueberries and leaves on the Deep-Dish Blueberry Pie,
page 2).... The unbaked pastry “patches” are laid on the top crust
before baking and brushed with unbeaten egg white or milk.... Tiny
pastry stars, hearts, or crescents can be baked and arranged on the top
of a chiffon pie.... For the holidays, Christmas trees or bells can be
cut out of pastry and laid atop the unbaked filling.

[Illustration: Wraparound cover image]

Transcriber’s Notes

—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
_underscores_.