THE AUXILIARY
COOK BOOK

[Illustration]

PRICE, FIFTY CENTS

[Illustration]

PUBLISHED BY
THE AUXILIARY SOCIETY OF THE HEBREW SHELTERING
GUARDIAN SOCIETY OF NEW YORK
ORPHAN ASYLUM
1909

_As the tender bud requires the sunshine, air, and water for its
development, so the child, to unfold all its powers and inborn
faculties, requires the sunshine of kindness and sympathy, an
atmosphere of love and a rich spiritual and physical nourishment. Who
can administer all these elements so essential for the blossoming of
the child’s soul more tenderly than a mother? And where an inscrutable
destiny has taken her away, those who stand in her place must be
inspired with her deep love and affection, her tender heart and her
keen vision into the child’s being._

_LUDWIG B. BERNSTEIN, PH.D._

INTRODUCTORY

This valuable Cook Book is the product of the zeal and energy of the
ladies comprising the Auxiliary of the Hebrew Sheltering Guardian
Society of New York Orphan Asylum, who have labored in a noble cause
for the benefit of their Cottage Fund. In compiling this work the
members have exercised the greatest care in contributing their best and
tried recipes, and have attached their signatures thereto.

The Household Hints will form a valuable addition to every home.

The Committee extend their sincere thanks to those who have co-operated
with them and so kindly contributed toward this work. They have
rendered their best efforts to insure the success of this undertaking,
and they trust that their patient endeavors have produced a volume
which will prove, as they are confident it will, to be of great value
in every household.

MRS. H. J. SOWER,
_Chairman of Cook Book Committee_.

“BLESSED IS HE WHO CONSIDERETH THE ORPHAN.”

CONTENTS

PAGE

SOUPS, 9

FISH, 13

POULTRY AND GAME, 20

MEATS, 24

HOUSEKEEPER’S TIME-TABLE, 28

VEGETABLES, 30

ENTRÉES, 36

SALADS, 44

SAUCES, 49

PUDDINGS, 54

DESSERTS, 59

BROMANGELON, 63

PIES AND PUFF PASTE, 66

PASSOVER DISHES, 69

BREAD, FRITTERS, ETC., 71

CAKES, 76

ICINGS AND CAKE FILLINGS, 90

ICES, 92

PICKLES, PRESERVES, ETC., 95

SANDWICHES, 100

BEVERAGES, 104

CANDY, 107

MENUS, 109

HOUSEHOLD HINTS, 113

THE AUXILIARY COOK BOOK

SOUPS

DIRECTIONS FOR SOUPS

Iron, agate, or porcelain kettles should be used for making soups.
Meats for soups should be put to cook in cold water, boiled gently, and
the required quantity of salt added at first, to extract the juices
of the meat and cause the scum to rise. Allow one quart of water,
one teaspoon salt for each pound of meat. Remove all scum carefully
before vegetables are added. All grease should be removed before the
vegetables are added. It is well to cook meat the day before the soup
is wanted, that the grease may be cooled and removed easily. Grease may
be easily removed from hot soup by adding a little cold water.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

GUMBO SOUP

Have bouillon quantity required for family. Take giblets, end of wings,
and necks of poultry. Then add sliced gumbo, also one tomato, one or
two Chili peppers. Stew all this for a few moments, then add little by
little bouillon, and let boil one and one-half hour. Serve soup with a
bowl of dry rice.

_E. L. S._

MOCK BISQUE SOUP

One good lump of butter, one big tablespoon flour; let this brown. Add
milk as much as is needed for soup. Now take one can of tomatoes; boil;
pass through a colander; season with salt and pepper, and sweeten with
a pinch of soda; before serving, mix with milk.

_E. L. S._

OX-TAIL SOUP

Two pounds of beef and two ox tails, one large onion, celery, two
carrots, one turnip and parsley; boil in one gallon of water for three
hours, slowly but steadily; season, strain. You may then add noodles,
rice, or any other thing you like, such as peas, dumplings, etc.

_Mrs. Jake Brown_

JULIENNE SOUP

Cut carrots and turnips into quarter-inch pieces the shape of dice,
also celery into thin slices, asparagus tips, peas, and string beans
cut into small uniform pieces. Cover all this with water and season
well with salt and pepper; let cook until tender. In another saucepan
have your soup stock to boiling-point, to which add the cooked
vegetables; more seasoning if necessary. Serve hot.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

RICE SOUP

May be made with either beef or mutton stock, also by adding all kinds
of vegetables. Boil one-half cup of rice in double boiler. Strain the
soup; add the rice and let boil one-half hour longer.

_Mrs. Greenberg_

TOMATO SOUP

One can tomatoes, one teaspoon celery salt, one teaspoon salt, sprig of
parsley, one pint hot water, one onion, one-fourth cup butter, one and
one-half tablespoon flour, one teaspoon sugar, cup milk. Boil tomatoes
with onion and water twenty minutes; heat butter and flour together;
add milk while hot; strain tomatoes into hot milk and flour; then add
all the other ingredients. Serve with croutons or rice.

_Mrs. Shipley_

OYSTER SOUP

Take as much milk as you want soup. Let come to a boil; stir in
one-half cup of fine cracker meal, add one quart of fresh oysters, a
lump of butter. Let come to a boil but once. Then remove from the fire;
season with salt and pepper; serve with oyster crackers.

_Mrs. Haines_

CREAM TOMATO SOUP

One-half can tomatoes, a piece of butter the size of an egg, one-half
teaspoon of saleratus or soda, two tablespoons of cracker meal, salt to
taste. Boil tomatoes one-half hour; strain; then put on the fire, add
the butter, cracker meal, and soda. Heat one cup of milk to each plate
of soup, which pour into the tomatoes; after the soda sizzles add salt
to taste.

_Mrs. Max Kohn_

NOODLE SOUP

Have your soup boiling, put in desired quantity of GOODMAN’S noodles,
and boil for ten minutes uncovered.

EGG BALLS FOR SOUP

Boil five eggs till hard, that is, about twenty minutes, and then put
them in cold water. Peel, cut the whites in rings, mash the yolks with
two raw yolks, add one-half a teaspoon of salt, a few drops of onion
juice, a dash of cayenne. Form into small balls like marbles, and drop
into boiling soup two minutes before the soup is taken off the fire;
add also the rings made from the whites of the eggs.

_Mrs. A. Herz_

SUET BALLS FOR SOUP

Have half a cup of suet finely chopped and freed from skin. To this add
one-half teaspoon of salt, pepper as you wish, and half a cup of flour.
Mix and add ice water, a few drops at a time, while you stir. When you
have a stiff paste, not wet and soggy, but merely sticking together,
form in little balls like small marbles, drop in boiling soup, and cook
from five to seven minutes before serving.

_Mrs. A. M. Solomon_

MEAT BALLS FOR SOUP

One pound fine-chopped meat; add two eggs, salt, pepper to taste, one
onion chopped fine, parsley, bread crumbs to keep together; fry; strain
soup, and put in balls before serving.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

BREAD FINGERS FOR SOUP

Cut off the crusts of stale slices of bread, cut the bread in fingers
about four inches long and three-quarters of an inch wide; lay in a
dripping-pan and toast a golden brown in a moderate oven.

_R. I. F._

FISH

THINGS WORTH KNOWING ABOUT FISH

Fish that has white flesh requires about ten minutes to the pound in
boiling and fifteen minutes in baking.

The old idea that fish is a “brain” food was long since proved to be
without foundation, but it has not yet been proved that an overdiet of
fish does not lead to skin troubles.

Never buy a fish that has dull eyes, white gills, or soft, spongy
flesh. When a fish is fresh, the eyes are bright, the gills red and
the flesh firm and odorless. Lobsters and crabs, if alive, should be
lively, or, if boiled, the lobster’s tail should be tight against the
body, not hanging limp.

The proper cooking of fish is not a simple matter; if it is underdone
it is uneatable, while overdone fish is tough and tasteless. The
cooking of a fish depends upon the size, kind, the nature of the water
from which it was taken, its character and the character of the water
in which it is cooked.

_H. J. S._

SOAKING SALT FISH

By bad soaking the fish is sometimes spoiled, made flabby and
tasteless, and voted a failure, when, if properly cooked and treated,
it would be appetizing. Use cold water or milk, and keep while soaking
in a cool place.

_Mrs. H. A. S._

BROILED MACKEREL

Follow the directions for soaking given in the foregoing recipe. Wipe
the fish dry; brush it lightly with olive oil; lay it on the broiler
with skin side up first, then broil quickly. Lay on a hot platter,
squeeze one-half lemon over it and send it to the table at once. A
few sprigs of watercress or crisp red radishes go well with broiled
mackerel.

_Mrs. E. F. Jones_

CODFISH BALL

One cup of soft boiled potatoes mashed while hot and fresh into half
a cup of shredded codfish. Fish and potatoes should be well mashed
together, seasoned with one tablespoon of butter and a beaten egg,
dropped into a pan of boiling-hot lard or fat, and fried until a
delicate brown. When lifted from fat, they should drain a moment on
brown paper and go to the table hot.

_Mrs. A. Cooper_

CODFISH SPANISH STYLE

One tablespoonful oil, onions, parsley, a little flour, tomatoes and
Chili. Fry this all together; add enough water to make as much gravy as
you wish; season to taste; add codfish and let boil until tender.

_E. L. S._

SCHARF FISH

One kitchen spoonful of lucca or olive oil. Let same get very hot; add
a chopped onion; let brown; then add two tablespoonfuls of flour; also
brown this. Now slowly stir in three cups of cold water so as not to
lump. When this is stirred smoothly add chopped parsley, one toe of
garlic, salt, pepper, and a large tomato cut in quarters. Now add your
sliced fish and let boil until tender. Serve cold.

_Mrs. H. A. S._

FISH AU GRATIN

Trout, blue, or any whole fish may be used. Have onion, garlic and
parsley chopped finely together. Line bottom of dish with cracker
crumbs, parsley, etc.; put your fish in dish and repeat the parsley,
crumbs, etc. Then pour over this one cup of white wine or sherry, one
cup of bouillon, pepper, salt, one tablespoon of Worcestershire sauce;
put small pieces of butter on top. Bake in hot oven from thirty to
forty minutes. Before serving garnish with round slices of lemon and
finely chopped parsley.

_Mrs. H. A. S._

MACKEREL WITH HACHEE SAUCE

Cut fresh mackerel in pieces about three inches square; flatten with
a wet knife; place in buttered pan, season with salt, pepper, and a
little lemon juice. Cover with buttered paper, bake ten minutes. Sauce:
Mix a teaspoon each of hashed mushrooms, small onions and parsley in
a cup of vinegar with cayenne pepper; heat until vinegar is almost
absorbed, then add four tablespoonfuls of soup stock and the chopped
mushrooms. Boil gently; add a tablespoonful capers, two chopped
gherkins; simmer until thick as rich cream, and lastly add a wine-glass
of sherry.

_Mrs. Oppenheimer_

FILET OF SOLE À LA MOUQUIN

Thoroughly wash and pick over a pound of spinach, put it over the fire
with no more water than clings to the leaves and cook for ten minutes.
At the end of that time drain the spinach and chop it fine. Have ready
thin filets of flounders, halibut, or whitefish. Cover them with
acidulated warm water--a slice of lemon in the water is all that is
wanted--and add a slice of onion, a sprig of parsley and a bit of bay
leaf. Simmer for ten minutes and drain. Put the minced spinach into the
bottom of a buttered baking dish, arrange the filets on it, cover with
a cream sauce to which a tablespoonful of grated cheese has been added,
and brown in the oven.

_Mrs. Sam Moss_

FILETS OF HADDOCK

A medium-sized fish is bought and cut in filets. Then it is washed,
dried, cut into strips, and covered for an hour with salt, pepper,
minced parsley, olive oil, and a teaspoonful of anchovy sauce. At the
end of that time the fish is rolled in flour, then is brushed with
beaten egg, dipped in bread crumbs and rolled into little rolls tied
with a thread. The rolls are then fried in deep fat. The fish is served
with slices of lemon sprinkled with parsley.

_Mrs. H. Moss_

OYSTER CANAPÉS

One cup cream, four tablespoonfuls bread crumbs, one tablespoon butter,
one pint of oysters, paprika, a little nutmeg and salt. Boil the
cream, add the bread crumbs, then the butter. Chop the oysters fine;
add oysters, then season, add a little chopped parsley. Serve hot on
buttered toast with olives and a little gherkin.

_Mrs. Joe Newman_

LOBSTER À LA AMERICAINE

Boil live lobster (that has been thoroughly washed) in the following
for forty minutes: two quarts water, parsley, onions, thyme, one bay
leaf, pepper, salt. Remove lobster, separate it, leaving meat in shell.
Chop one onion, one bay leaf, thyme, red pepper, garlic, parsley; melt
one tablespoon butter and cook the above chopped herbs until yellow;
thicken with flour, add enough water to make plenty of sauce, pepper,
and salt. Place lobster in this; cook twenty minutes. Serve on large
platter, very hot.

_Mrs. L. S. Firetag_

LOBSTER À LA NEWBURG

Three lobsters, one-half cup sherry, one cup of cream, one
tablespoonful butter, yolks of three eggs. Boil live lobsters twenty
minutes in salt water; when cool pick out the meat, put it in the wine
and butter, and let cook three minutes, always stirring; then add
cream, and let scald; add salt, pepper and yolks of the eggs.

_Mrs. D. Tim_

DEVILED CRABS (FOR TWELVE)

Pick twelve crabs or one can crab meat, one-half teaspoon salt,
one-half pint cream, one and one-half tablespoon butter, one tablespoon
flour, chopped parsley, a little cayenne. Put cream into double boiler;
when it is scalded add butter and flour after it has been rubbed
together till smooth; add parsley, then crab meat; fill shells, put
bread crumbs on top, with small piece of butter. Bake until light brown.

_Mrs. Shipley_

BROWN FRICASSEE OF OYSTERS

Melt one-fourth cup of butter; in this cook two slices of onion, a
sprig or two of parsley, three slices of carrot and one-fourth of a
green pepper pod cut in strips until browned. In the meantime scald one
quart of oysters and drain carefully; cook one-third cup flour in the
butter with the vegetables until well browned; add one cup of oyster
liquor and one-half cup of cream. Stir constantly until the sauce
thickens, then strain over the drained oysters; let heat over boiling
water. Serve hot in ramequins.

_Mrs. H. J. S._

OYSTER OR LOBSTER COCKTAIL

Cut the boiled lobster into cubes with a silver knife and for each
glass allow a tablespoonful of Chili sauce, a tablespoonful of tomato
catsup, a teaspoonful of lemon juice, two teaspoonfuls of horseradish,
and a few drops of Worcestershire sauce. Serve the lobster around the
glasses containing the sauce or in the sauce as preferred. Use low
cocktail glasses in cracked ice.

_Mrs. Baum_

DRY OYSTER STEW

Take six to twelve oysters, cook them in one-half pint of their own
liquor, season with salt and white pepper and butter; cook for five
minutes, stirring all the time. Serve in bowls or soup plates.

_Mrs. Marx_

BROILED OYSTERS

Dry a quart of oysters in a cloth; dip each oyster in melted butter
well peppered, then in beaten egg or in cracker crumbs; broil on a wire
broiler; from three to five minutes. Dip over each a little melted
butter. Serve hot with slices of lemon.

_Mrs. Blum_

ROAST CLAMS IN SHELL

Roast in a pan over a hot fire or in a hot oven. When they crack open,
empty the juice into a saucepan, add the clams, with butter, pepper,
and a little salt.

_Mrs. Hirsch_

SOFT-SHELL CRABS

Take out the sand-bags and pull out the spongy substance from the
sides. Wash and wipe dry; roll in cracker meal which has been seasoned,
then dip in a beaten egg. Then have a deep frying-pan ready filled with
seething hot butter, and fry brown. Serve very hot and garnish.

_Mrs. Greenberg_

POULTRY AND GAME

ROAST SNIPE

After drawing and cleaning the birds fill each one with a piece of
well-buttered bread; season with salt and pepper. Fasten a piece of
bacon around each bird, catching it together. Place the birds in a
shallow pan, and almost cover with port wine. To this add a tablespoon
of butter. Baste every ten minutes. Bake one-half hour in a steady oven.

_Mrs. Erlanger_

BROILED QUAIL

Dress and rinse the quail in cold water; wipe dry. Open them down the
back. Lay on a wire frame in shallow pan, with breast turned down.
Cook slowly in gas stove under the flame. Dissolve three tablespoons
butter in one-half cup water in a pie plate. When the quail are cooking
turn them in this butter every five minutes in order to baste and make
juicy. When cooked through turn the birds over and brown the breasts.
When finished pour melted butter over them, and season with salt and
pepper. Serve hot on buttered toast.

_Mrs. Bauman_

CHICKEN WITH RICE

Procure a young fowl, prepare it as for fricasseeing and put it into a
pot, with a sliced onion, a red pepper cut into pieces and salt and hot
water enough to keep it from burning. Simmer the fowl slowly for about
an hour. Then turn in two cupfuls of canned tomatoes and cook very
slowly for another hour. At the end of that time add a cupful of rice
and cook slowly for three-quarters of an hour longer, until the chicken
is very tender and the rice done. Season with parsley minced very fine
and serve with the meat in the centre of a platter and the rice as a
border. Care must be taken to keep the rice from burning. Properly
seasoned, the dish is a very appetizing one.

_Mrs. Silverman_

CHICKEN CURRY

Chop two large onions, fry in butter till brown; add a young chicken
which has been cut in small pieces, one tablespoon curry, three fresh
tomatoes or one cup canned tomatoes, salt and pepper to taste. Cover
and let simmer for one hour. Then add one cup milk; let boil up once.
Bank the rim of a platter with boiled rice and pour the curry in the
centre.

_Mrs. Buxbaum_

ROAST TURKEY

Select a fat turkey, draw, singe, and wash it. Save the giblets; wash
and clean them and put them on in water to boil. Dress the turkey,
season with salt and pepper, and before placing in the oven pour over
it hot melted butter to close the skin. Pour in a little water and
roast about two and a half hours, basting frequently.

Chop the giblets when tender. Brown a little butter and flour, add
salt, pepper, the chopped giblets and the water in which they have been
cooked. To this add the gravy in the roasting-pan and serve the whole
as a gravy.

ROAST GOOSE

A goose should be prepared the same as turkey, only no butter should
be used as there is always a great deal of fat, most of which must be
removed from the pan before the water is added.

ROAST DUCK

Ducks require the same treatment as geese.

POULTRY DRESSING

Bread crumbs broken fine and seasoned with salt and pepper, onion
juice, and chopped parsley. For ducks and geese add a little sage.
Butter should be added to give smoothness. Add two well-beaten eggs and
mix thoroughly.

CHICKEN CASSEROLE

Cut up the chicken in portions, using liver, gizzard, and heart also.
Have a stone casserole with a cover (or a good-sized covered saucepan).
Place in the bottom of the casserole a good-sized piece of butter,
with this add an onion or two cut in small pieces, one carrot, half a
turnip, a bit of parsley, a bit of celery top, which give a delicious
flavor. First put in butter, a few bits of the onion, and the pieces
of chicken; cook flat on the bottom of casserole for five minutes to
become a golden brown. After all the pieces are thus browned in turn,
add all the rest of the cut-up onion, carrot, turnip, etc., and let
cook for twenty-five minutes over a very slow fire. The slow fire
makes it tender, cook it in its own juices; pepper and salt each piece
of chicken before placing in casserole. Before serving add a glass of
white wine or sherry. Serve in the casserole.

_Mrs. H. A. Siegel_

PRESSED CHICKEN

Cook a fowl in just water enough to keep it from burning until the
meat loosens from the bones. After it has cooled pick it to pieces and
mix the light and dark meat. Boil till hard two eggs; slice thin and
add to the picked up chicken. Boil down the water in which the chicken
was cooked till it fills a small teacup; add a little pepper, butter
and salt. Mix all with the picked up chicken; put in a mould or bowl;
put on a weight to press, and set in a cool place. When time to serve
tip the chicken on a platter and garnish with hard-boiled eggs and
watercress.

_Mrs. Elizabeth Sower_

MEATS

CROWN ROAST OF MUTTON

In the centre of your crown roast lay chopped mutton or lamb well
seasoned and mixed with bread crumbs, one-third crumbs, two-thirds
meat; salt the roast and bake, basting often and allowing an hour and
a quarter to one and one-half hour. Serve with green peas and mashed
potatoes.

_Mrs. Haines_

BEEFSTEAK EN CASSEROLE

Use two pounds of round steak cut one and one-half inches thick. Heat a
frying-pan, rub over the surface with fat from the meat. Fry steak on
both sides. Put the meat into the casserole; put in also twelve or more
each of carrots and turnips cut into shapes of marbles or balls; also
add one dozen small onions, nicely peeled, a tablespoonful of kitchen
bouquet, a generous pint of soup stock; cover and let cook gently for
one and one-half hours. After cooking one hour salt and add a little
more stock if needed. The vegetables may be browned in fat or butter
before putting in the casserole.

_Mrs. H. A. S._

FRICASSEE TRIPE

To one pint of boiling milk or cream add one pound of boiled tripe
which has been cut into pieces one inch square, season with chopped
onion, one teaspoonful minced parsley, one-half teaspoon salt, pepper,
a little cayenne, three pieces of mace. Let simmer for fifteen minutes;
thicken with two tablespoonfuls of flour stirred into one tablespoon of
butter. Serve on thin toast.

_Mrs. M. Steinberg_

BAKED CALF’S LIVER

Dust with flour two pounds of liver; leave liver whole. Lay in a deep
pan, season with pepper, salt, and chopped onion. Lay across the top
several slices of bacon, add two cups of tomatoes juice, with which
baste the liver while it is baking. Bake in a moderate oven until liver
is tender enough to pierce with a fork. Before serving squeeze the
juice of a lemon over the whole.

_Mrs. H. Lang_

KIDNEY STEW

Wash very thoroughly two beef kidneys, remove the skin and fat. Cut in
thin slices and put in a quart of cold water. Parboil, throw out the
water, put in fresh water, and boil gently for two hours. Then season
with salt and pepper and thicken with flour to form a smooth gravy.
Serve on a platter surrounded by a wall of mashed potatoes or on pieces
of toast.

_Mrs. Jonas_

POT ROAST

Rib, sirloin, or rump can be used. Have bone removed and meat rolled.
Put meat into a round-bottom pot. Brown the beef on one side, then on
the other. Then add one pint of boiling water, and a piece of suet;
salt when half done. Cover tight, cook tender. When done pour out the
liquor, and thicken with browned flour, a tablespoon or more stirred
into the gravy to which you may have to add more water. When thickened,
strain and add a little pepper.

_Mrs. Roose_

BROILED CHOP FOR INVALID

French a rib chop by scraping the long part of the bone until all the
fat is removed. Lay on clean buttered paper the shape of the chop and
cut double, fold the paper over so as to form a case; place on a pan
and broil for six minutes. Serve at once.

_Mrs. Sontheim_

BURGEAU (FRENCH)

With lamb, veal, or chicken, cut into small pieces all vegetables in
season, take potatoes, cut same as meat, put into pot and cover with
water, let boil three or four hours, then add can of tomatoes and same
of green peas, then let simmer one hour more. Thicken with a little
brown flour.

_Mrs. Fragner_

BEEF TONGUE WITH OLIVES

Wash clean a tongue and let stand in boiling water for ten minutes.
Then put in a casserole without peeling, add different vegetables and
small pieces of salt pork. This may be left out if not desired. Salt
and cover with water, and one glass of white wine. Let cook gently for
two hours; now peel tongue, strain the sauce and thicken with flour;
return tongue to the gravy and ten minutes before serving add one pint
of pitted olives.

_Mrs. H. A. S._

BOILED TONGUE

Wash a tongue well, rub with salt, then put on to boil; after boiling
ten minutes remove from fire, and take off the skin, put on again in
clear water and let boil slowly until tender. Season tongue with whole
allspice, pepper, also onions, a little vinegar to taste. When boiled
soft add thin slices of lemon and thicken with ginger snaps.

_Mrs. Max Kohn_

When breading chops, cutlets or frying fish use A. Goodman & Son’s
Matzoth Meal.

HOUSEKEEPER’S TIME-TABLE

MEATS

ROASTING OR BAKING

Time.
Beef, ribs or sirloin, rare per pound 10 minutes
“ “ “ “ well done “ 12 “
“ “ “ “ boned and rolled “ 12 “
Round of beef “ 15 “
Mutton, leg, rare “ 10 “
Mutton, leg, well done “ 15 “
“ loin, rare “ 10 “
“ shoulder, stuffed “ 15 “
“ saddle, rare “ 10 “
Lamb, well done “ 15 “
Veal, “ “ 20 “
Pork, “ “ 30 “
Turkey “ 15 “
Fowls “ 20 “
Chicken “ 15 “
Goose “ 18 “
Venison “ 15 “
Filet, hot oven “ 30 “
Ducks, tame entire time 45 to 60 “
Ducks, wild, very hot oven “ 15 to 30 “
Partridge “ 30 to 40 “
Grouse “ 30 “
Pigeons “ 30 “
Braised meats “ 3 to 4 hours
Liver, whole “ 2 “

BOILING

Mutton per pound 15 minutes
Potted beef “ 30 to 35 “
Corned beef “ 30 “
Ham “ 18 to 20 “
Turkey “ 15 “
Chicken “ 15 “
Fowl “ 20 to 30 “
Tripe “ 3 to 5 hours

BROILING

Steak, 1 inch thick 8 to 10 minutes
Steak, 1½ inch thick 10 to 15 “
Mutton chops, French 8 “
Mutton chops, English 10 “
Spring chicken 20 “
Quail 8 to 10 “
Grouse 15 “
Squabs 10 to 15 “
Shad, bluefish, trout 15 to 25 “
Small fish 5 to 10 “

FISH

BOIL

Halibut and salmon per pound 15 minutes
Bluefish and bass “ 10 “
Cod and haddock “ 8 “

BAKE

Halibut, salmon, bass, bluefish, shad, etc., for one hour.

Trout, pickerel, whitefish, etc., for one-half hour.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

VEGETABLES

MASHED POTATOES

Peel potatoes of uniform size, cover with boiling water, and cook
until tender, salting the water in which they are cooked when the
potatoes are about half done. Drain off the water, then with a fork
or wire potato-masher beat to a fluff in the same saucepan in which
they have been cooked. When entirely free from lumps add for every
pint of potatoes about one-third of a cup of hot milk, a tablespoonful
of butter, and salt and pepper to season. Whip until as light as a
feather. Heap in a hot dish, but do not smooth the top; leave it
piled lightly. If necessary to keep hot for some time, set the pan
containing the potato in a saucepan of hot water, but leave uncovered
or cover lightly with a single fold of cheesecloth. Mashed potatoes
left over may be utilized in a variety of ways. To make potato pompon
take the potato up by spoonfuls and make into balls. Roll in beaten
egg, then in bread or cracker crumbs and fry like doughnuts in hot
fat. A little minced onion, parsley, or nutmeg may be mixed with the
potato if desired; or make a potato omelet by adding to a cupful of
mashed potatoes one cup of sweet milk, three eggs well beaten, a
tablespoonful of flour, and a little salt. Mix until smooth, turn into
a heated frying-pan, with a tablespoonful melted butter, and fry both
sides, turning when brown. Mashed potatoes left over may also be added
to shredded codfish for codfish balls, may be mixed with well-beaten
egg yolks made into flat cakes and fried in butter, or baked in a
buttered tin in the oven, or mixed with a little grated cheese, put
into ramequins or a buttered pudding-dish with a layer of cheese on top
and baked until brown.

_Mrs. M. Harris_

SCALLOPED TOMATOES

Season one can tomatoes with one teaspoonful onions, chopped; two
dashes pepper, one teaspoonful salt. Begin by covering bottom of
baking dish with bread crumbs, spread with bits of butter and a layer
of tomatoes. Follow with a second layer of bread crumbs and tomatoes.
Cover the top with buttered crumbs and bake in oven until a light brown.

_Mrs. Niprut_

HASHED BROWN POTATOES

Chop cold boiled potatoes and season them to taste with salt, pepper,
and a little onion juice. Put a couple of tablespoonfuls of drippings
in the frying-pan, turn in the potatoes, press them into a solid cake,
and cook them very slowly until they are covered on the under side with
a brown crust. Turn them out onto a plate with the brown side upward.

_Mrs. Israel_

SUCCOTASH

Cut from the cob enough green corn to fill a pint measure; then take
two-thirds of a pint of Lima beans; let them stew in enough water to
cover them. When tender season with butter, pepper, and salt; if too
thin, thicken with flour.

_Mrs. Solomon_

SPINACH

Pick over your spinach carefully and wash in several waters. Let boil
for fifteen minutes. Drain, then chop very fine; season with salt. Put
on a pan, add a little fat or butter, rub a teaspoonful flour in same,
add the spinach, also a little soup stock. Just before serving add the
beaten egg; garnish with hard-boiled eggs.

_Mrs. Hirsch_

GREEN PEAS

If canned peas are used, heat, add a teaspoonful of sugar, some chopped
parsley and a teaspoonful flour to thicken, a piece of fresh butter.

_Mrs. Frank_

OYSTER PLANT

Scrape the roots and lay in cold water at once; cut in thin slices;
put into a stew-pan with enough salt water to cover them. Stew until
tender. Pour off the water, add milk and let boil for ten minutes, add
butter, salt, and pepper, and thicken with flour.

_Mrs. Ball_

ROAST SWEET POTATOES

Pare, cut lengthwise, salt, and put them around roast meat or poultry
of any kind. Roast three-quarters of an hour or until brown.

_Mrs. Freedman_

STEWED TOMATOES

Let tomatoes cook slowly for ten minutes. Season with salt, pepper, a
lump of butter, and a teaspoonful of brown sugar. Do not allow them to
cook but a few minutes longer; if the sauce is too thin, thicken with a
little corn starch.

_Mrs. Goodman_

STEWED BEETS

Boil first, then scrape and slice them. Put beets into a stewing-pan
with a piece of butter rolled in flour, some boiled onion and parsley
chopped fine, a little vinegar, salt, and pepper. Let stew one-quarter
of an hour.

_Mrs. M. Cohen_

BAKED BEETS

Beets retain their sugar if baked instead of boiled. Turn with a knife
frequently, as fork allows juice to run out. Remove skin, slice, and
serve with butter, salt, and pepper on slices.

_Mrs. M. Cohen_

RICE AND OKRA

Wash one quart of okra pods and slice. Then strain three-fourths of a
cup of canned tomatoes, pressing the pulp through a sieve. Put this all
into a pot with two cupfuls of meat stock, a large onion sliced, a red
pepper cut fine (remove the seeds), salt and white pepper. Let simmer
for three-quarters of an hour. In the meantime boil one cup of rice;
drain and dry the rice in the oven with the door open; add last one
tablespoon of powdered gumbo to the okra, turn around the rice, which
is heaped in a mound in the centre of a dish.

_Mrs. Holtzman_

MACARONI

To cook GOODMAN’S macaroni properly have plenty of salted water
boiling, then boil the macaroni rapidly (uncovered) until tender, which
generally takes twenty to twenty-five minutes. Always put the macaroni
in boiling water and never add cold water while boiling.

BOILED MACARONI

Break the package of GOODMAN’S macaroni in convenient lengths into a
deep vessel, nearly filled with boiled salted water. Boil till tender,
stirring occasionally from the bottom. When cooked, drain off the water
through a colander, then add one-half cup milk; place on the fire till
it boils, then stir in a little flour, add a piece of butter and serve.

MACARONI WITH MILK

Boil GOODMAN’S macaroni in salted water for ten minutes, then drain and
blanch in cold water. Boil some milk and water in equal proportion,
then put in the macaroni, which should be just covered. If in boiling,
the liquid should diminish, add some warm milk. When done put in
saucepan with a little butter on top and put in the oven to brown.

_Mrs. Grunthal_

ITALIAN SPAGHETTI

One tablespoonful of butter, one of flour, one teaspoonful of salt,
and one-quarter teaspoonful of pepper. When melted and mixed add
three-quarters cup of strained tomatoes and stir until smooth; add one
tablespoonful of meat juice and stir until dissolved. Put layer of
GOODMAN’S boiled macaroni (one-half pound in all), the sauce and grated
cheese in a heated dish and stand in open oven for five minutes.

_Mrs. B. Smidth_

NOODLES

Have boiling water ready; put in the desired quantity of GOODMAN’S
noodles; allow to boil uncovered for ten minutes; drain through
colander. Shake well to allow all water to escape; then place in baking
dish, over top sprinkle matzoth meal and lumps of butter put in oven,
and slightly brown. Serve.

_Mrs. F. Levy_

Rice should be boiled 30 minutes
Barley “ “ “ 2 hours
Asparagus “ “ “ ½ “
Peas (in summer) “ “ “ ½ “
Beans to stew “ “ “ 3 “
Cabbage “ “ “ ½ “
Potatoes “ “ “ ½ “
Spinach “ “ “ 10 minutes

_Miss Ray Mayer_

ENTRÉES

MUSHROOM FRICASSEE

Sauté three pounds of fresh mushrooms, a few at a time, in butter until
half done. Then cook a tablespoonful of flour in a tablespoonful of
butter, then add a cup of cream; when this comes to a boil, add the
mushrooms. Cook slowly for fifteen minutes; flavor with a tablespoon or
two of sherry or Madeira wine.

_Mrs. Solomon_

EGGS AU GRATIN

Butter individual ramequins and put a layer of sliced hard-boiled eggs
into the bottom of each. Dot the top with dabs of butter and sprinkle
with grated cheese. Add another layer of eggs, butter, and cheese, and
so on, until the dish is filled. Sprinkle the top with buttered crumbs
and bake until they are brown--about ten minutes.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

CELERY AND OYSTERS ON TOAST

Three stalks celery, one quart oysters (drain off some liquor). Cut
celery in small pieces, boil till tender in salt water. Let oysters
come to a boil; season to taste. Make a rich cream sauce, quite thick.
Mix all together, oysters, celery, and cream sauce (season). Fry slices
of bread in hot butter and serve on same.

_E. L._

CALVES’ BRAINS À LA VINAIGRETTE

Wash the brains carefully in lukewarm water, rejecting all the small
membranes, then soak for an hour in cold water to which a tablespoonful
of vinegar and a good pinch of salt have been added. Then drop into
boiling water or veal broth, seasoned with a little onion and a blade
of mace. Simmer about eighteen minutes, drain, and serve with sauce
vinaigrette. This consists of the yolks of two hard-boiled eggs chopped
and pressed through a sieve, a tablespoonful chopped parsley, and a
tablespoonful chopped pickles, a teaspoonful shallot pressed through
a sieve, two tablespoonfuls Tarragon vinegar, four tablespoonfuls
olive oil, a teaspoonful salt, a teaspoonful dry mustard stirred in a
tablespoonful cold water, and a dash of pepper. Mix thoroughly in a
bowl and serve in a sauce-boat with the brains.

_Mrs. Frank_

MINCED CHICKEN ON TOAST

Have ready slices of hot toast spread with butter and covered with a
well-seasoned mixture of minced chicken and mushrooms moistened with
a little white sauce. Cut the slices in rounds with a biscuit-cutter,
and on each place a poached egg that has also been cut round. Over
the whole turn a cream sauce thickened mainly with the yolks of eggs.
For the sauce cook together a level tablespoonful of flour and a
tablespoonful of butter, and add a cupful of hot milk. When the sauce
is limpid stir in the yolks of two eggs. Season with salt and pepper.

_Mrs. Leon E. Weill_

CHICKEN TIMBALES

Take the white meat of a chicken and chop very fine; use a little cream
to dampen. Heat one pint of milk, add to this a small piece of butter,
thicken with flour, add the chicken, take from the fire, add cream,
a little bread crumbs, pepper, salt. Line the forms with truffles or
mushrooms, and fill with the mixture. Bake one-half hour. Serve with
either cream or tomato sauce.

_Mrs. H. A. S._

STUFFED PEPPERS

One roasted chicken, one and one-half cup of cracker crumbs, one cup of
Edam cheese grated, one onion, six tomatoes, slice of butter, one can
mushrooms, one pint olives; chop all fine; season. Remove seeds from
twelve large peppers, then stuff. Bake slowly for one hour; serve hot
with potato chips.

_Mrs. H. A. S._

ENTRÉE SURPRISE

Make a puff paste; roll out thin; fill with brains, oysters, shrimps,
or sweetbreads; fry in hot fat until a light brown; season meats first
before filling dough. Serve hot with slices of lemon.

_Mrs. H. A. S._

SCALLOPED TOMATOES

Pare and slice some large tomatoes. Put in a pudding-dish, a layer of
bread crumbs, season with bits of butter, pepper, salt, and a little
sugar. Put on this a layer of tomatoes. Repeat the process until the
dish is nearly full with tomatoes on top. Strew with bread crumbs,
cover, and bake one and one-half hour. Remove cover and brown before
serving.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

TO CHOOSE AND PREPARE SWEETBREADS

In picking out sweetbreads choose the larger, plumper, and fleshier.
Be careful that they are perfectly fresh; of all meats they stand
keeping least well. Rinse and put them in lukewarm water to lie fifteen
minutes, then cover with slightly salted cold water. The sudden change
of temperature blanches them. Cut the sweetbreads apart, cut out the
pipe, and take off the skin. They are now ready for creaming or other
cooking.

_Mrs. J. I. Asch_

CREAMED SWEETBREADS

Carefully choose a pair of fresh sweetbreads, trim off their fat, and
follow the above directions for parboiling. Cut them in small pieces,
and simmer twenty minutes in only enough water to make a steam.
Then add a cup of rich milk, rub smooth a tablespoon of flour and a
tablespoon of butter; moisten with some of the milk from the saucepan,
add a pinch of salt; stir all together over a moderate fire until the
flour thickens. Serve with French peas.

_Mrs. Sig. Sondheim_

SWEETBREADS WITH OYSTERS

Wash free from skin and pipes; blanch them according to directions in
foregoing recipe. Take three dozen oysters, three pair of sweetbreads.
Put the sweetbreads in a saucepan, add the liquor from the oysters, add
also two tablespoons of butter, and set to simmer till the sweetbreads
are done. When done pour in half a cup of cream into which a tablespoon
of flour has been stirred. Bring to a boil, drop in the oysters, and
heat through or until the edges curl.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

SWEETBREADS WITH TOMATOES

Stew a quart of tomatoes. When they are cooked put through a sieve; you
will then have a thick sauce. Have your sweetbreads prepared according
to foregoing directions. Lay them in the tomato sauce, add salt,
pepper, and nutmeg to taste, and set over fire. As the sauce heats add
half a cup of butter into which you have stirred a tablespoon of flour.
Let the sweetbreads cook in a gentle simmer in the tomatoes about forty
minutes. Serve on buttered toast or without, as you prefer.

_Mrs. M. Lichtenstein_

FRICASSEED SWEETBREADS

Cut sweetbreads into slices and let them simmer in rich gravy for
three-quarters of an hour. Add one well-beaten egg, two tablespoonfuls
of cream, and one teaspoonful of chopped parsley. Stir all together for
a few minutes and serve immediately.

_Mrs. M. Cohen_

WELSH RABBIT

Put one pound of fresh American cheese cut in small pieces in the
chafing-dish over flame or hot-water pan. As it melts press and stir
with the back of a spoon. When nearly soft add two tablespoons of
butter, red pepper, salt, and mustard to taste; then add half a cup of
cream; stir until smooth. Add two well-beaten eggs, stir hard for a
moment. Put cover on the dish. Let mixture rest with flame turned on
for two or three seconds, then put out the flame; leave a few seconds
longer without stirring. Serve on buttered toast. Beer or ale may be
used instead of cream or eggs.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

FONDUE

Mix together seven ounces of cheese cut fine, two ounces of rolled
cracker or bread crumbs, two ounces of softened butter. Pour over this
one pint of sweet milk which has come to a boil, and stir. Next add
yolks of three eggs beaten and a little salt. Keep warm till dissolved,
then add beaten whites of eggs stirred in lightly with a fork. Grease
a pudding-dish, pour the mixture into this. Bake twenty minutes in an
upper oven. Serve at once.

_Mrs. J. Bauman_

RAMEQUINS

Beat three eggs into an ounce of melted butter, that is, butter should
be soft, not brown. Then add two ounces of grated American cheese. Bake
in small individuals and serve hot in ramequins.

_Mrs. R. De Lue_

SPANISH OMELET

Add a little finely chopped onion, squares of tomatoes, and Chili
peppers cut in small pieces. Use as many eggs as wanted. Season to
taste.

_Mrs. H. H. Dittenhoefer_

JELLY OMELET

Omelets spread with jelly, currant, grape, or crab apple are all tasty
and wholesome.

_Mrs. F. Hurtig_

STUFFED EGGS

Boil six eggs hard; when cold cut in halves. Remove yolks. Cut a small
piece from the bottom so they will stand; put the yolks in a bowl,
mash into a paste, and season with salt, a pinch of cayenne, a little
mustard, a little sugar, vinegar, cream, and olive oil. Be careful not
to add too much vinegar. Fill the whites and pile on top. Serve on
crisp lettuce leaves with mayonnaise.

_Miss H. Asch_

EGGS À LA FRANÇAISE

Make a cream sauce with a small piece of butter, a little flour, and
milk. Season well. Break an egg in a custard cup, pour the sauce over
the egg and sprinkle the top with grated Swiss cheese. Bake au bain
Marie in an even oven until a light brown.

_Mrs. D. Strauss_

EGGS WITH TOMATO SAUCE

Melt three tablespoonfuls of butter. Cook in this two slices of onion,
a little parsley, and a small piece of green pepper. When browned
slightly add two tablespoons of flour. Cook until frothy. Add a cup of
tomatoes (cooked). Stir until it boils, then strain. Put one or two
tablespoonfuls of sauce in each ramequin. Break an egg over the sauce.
Cook in a hot oven for five minutes, or until the egg is set. Put a
little of the sauce kept hot over the eggs and serve at once.

_Mrs. H. A. S._

CHICKEN AND MUSHROOMS

Melt two tablespoons butter. When hot add two tablespoons of chopped
onion and one-half can of mushrooms finely chopped. Let cook five
minutes, add one cup of milk into which one and one-half tablespoon of
flour has been stirred. Cook all together. When thick and smooth add
one cup of chicken meat, cut into small pieces or dice. Heat through,
season with salt and pepper. Serve on buttered toast or in ramequins.

_Mrs. Strauss_

SALADS

SUGGESTIONS FOR SALADS

To keep the salad-oil cruet clear and sweet add a tablespoonful of salt
to a quart of oil. The oil will not taste of the salt, as the latter
will not dissolve but will sink to and settle at the bottom of the
cruet.

In mixing salads the oil should be added first and thoroughly spread
before adding the other ingredients and mixing.

Salads which are very moist and cooling--particularly cucumber--should
have an extra pinch of pepper added to counteract the chilling effect
on the eater’s stomach.

Cold string-bean salad should have a double dose of vinegar, as beans
possess in great degree the nutritious and healthful food salts which
develop to perfection in acid.

Whenever it is possible pure lemon juice should be substituted for
vinegar as being far more wholesome than the latter.

Endive--the pale, cool, succulent, curly chiccory--salad should be
scalded and then chilled to make it more digestible for elderly folk,
children, or weak-digestioned invalids.

LOBSTER SALAD

Remove the meat of a lobster, reserving the creamy fat adhering to
the body shell and coral. Shred the lobster with a silver fork. Cut
the tender white part of celery into pieces the same size, allowing
one-third as much as the amount of meat. Arrange the crisp leaves
of lettuce in an oval platter with the larger green on the outer
edge decorated with the claws. Mix the meat and celery with enough
mayonnaise to moisten and heap in the centre the coral, pounded and
passed through a sieve and mixed with remaining mayonnaise. Pile this
red dressing on top and put on ice.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

VEGETABLE SALAD

Take cold vegetables which have been boiled, such as cauliflower,
asparagus, beans, peas, and potatoes; cut into small pieces, season
well with salt, paprika, and a little mayonnaise; serve on lettuce
leaves with mayonnaise; garnish with hard-boiled eggs; cut into
quarters and olives.

_Mrs. M. Wolff_

SARDINE SALAD

Boil one-half a dozen eggs for half hour. Take from fire and let stand
in cold water until cold. Remove shells and cut in half; remove yolks,
put into a bowl, and rub to a cream; add one-fourth teaspoonful dry
mustard, dash of cayenne, salt, and a little lemon juice and twelve
sardines scraped fine, after removing skin and bone. Mix smooth and
fill empty shells or halves of eggs. Cover sides and bottom of salad
dish with crisp lettuce leaves and lay the half eggs on top with
mayonnaise in the centre.

_Violet Sondheim_

WALNUT SALAD

With a silver fork rub a cream cheese and a tablespoonful of butter
to a paste, add salt and cayenne; if not soft enough, a little sweet
cream. Make into small flat balls; on each press the two halves of an
English walnut; lay on the white heart leaves of lettuce and put on
ice. On the instant of serving pour over French dressing and serve with
thin buttered bread which has been put in the oven and crisped.

_Edna Asch_

HERRING SALAD

Two herring; skin and soak until salt is out; take meat off the bones;
cut into small pieces, with one cold boiled potato, one pickle,
one-half onion, one small apple, and a little chopped almonds. Mix well
one tablespoonful vinegar, a little water, sugar, pepper; pour into
salad and mix well. Dressing of salad: beat the milcher with a little
pepper, vinegar, and very little sugar; chop two hard-boiled eggs, the
white and yellow separate, and a little parsley.

_Mrs. S. F. Breslauer_

OYSTER SALAD

Cook the oysters in their own liquor, allowing them to boil up but
once; then let get very cold, cut into small pieces (do not chop). Cut
up bits of celery and about one-half cup of capers; add same to the
cut-up oysters; mix all with mayonnaise. Serve on lettuce leaves with
mayonnaise spread on top; garnish with olives.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

OYSTERS IN GRAPE-FRUIT BASKETS

Cut grape-fruit so as to form a basket with handle on one side. Scoop
out the pulp and clip edge into points with scissors. Place eight
small oysters in each basket and cover them with a sauce made of equal
portions of lemon juice, grated horseradish, tomato catsup, and speck
mustard. Place on shaved ice on plate and serve.

_Mrs. M. Mathias_

CABBAGE SALAD

One head white cabbage chopped very fine, three hard-boiled eggs; add
two tablespoons salad oil, two teaspoons white sugar, one teaspoon salt
and one of pepper, one tablespoon made mustard, one teacup vinegar.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

COLD SLAW

Cut out core of head of cabbage and chop it quite fine. For dressing
break two eggs into small saucepan. Put into them one heaping teaspoon
salt, one heaping teaspoon sugar, one small teaspoon mustard, two
dashes of pepper. Stir this together and beat the egg a little. Add
gradually (stirring all the time) a little less than one-half cupful of
vinegar. Stir all together. Put in double boiler and let come gradually
to a boil. Stir constantly; cook until quite thick. Take from stove.
Add dash of cayenne, pepper and one scant tablespoon olive oil, one
teaspoon butter, and one and one-half tablespoon rich milk or cream.
Stir all together. Pour over two full teacups of chopped cabbage and
mix. Celery makes a nice addition when sliced thin and mixed with
cabbage. Let stand few hours before serving.

TOMATO SALAD

Strain one pint of tomato juice. Add one teaspoon salt, saltspoon
pepper, one teaspoon onion juice. To this add one-fourth box gelatine.
Put aside for half an hour to dissolve. Stir all together, put on
stove, let come to a boil, take off, and pour into small cups. Set it
in a cold place to harden. Arrange two or three small lettuce leaves
on a plate, turn the tomato jelly in the centre of the leaves, and use
French or any other dressing.

WALDORF SALAD

Sour crisp apples cut in thin slices, finely chopped celery, blend
lightly with a fine oil mayonnaise; garnish with feathery tops of
celery and scatter with halves of English walnuts.

SAUCES

EGG SAUCE

Boil two eggs from eight to ten minutes; lay in cold water. Now
chop egg very fine. Beat two heaping tablespoons of butter into one
tablespoon of flour and one teaspoon salt. When butter and flour are
well mixed pour over them a cup of boiling water. Cook two or three
minutes until flour thickens, stir in the chopped eggs, and serve.

_Mrs. Stern_

MAÎTRE D’HÔTEL SAUCE

Beat three tablespoons of butter till it creams; add the juice of a
small lemon, salt, a dash of cayenne, three tablespoons of minced
parsley. This sauce is nice with either broiled chicken or fish.

_Mrs. Jenny Lichtenstein_

HOT HORSERADISH SAUCE

In an earthen dish put four tablespoons of fresh grated horseradish,
four tablespoons of finely powdered cracker crumbs, add half a cup of
cream, a teaspoon each of sugar and salt, two dashes of pepper, two
teaspoons of vinegar, and one teaspoon of made mustard. Set over a
kettle of boiling water when you have stirred all together. Heat and
serve hot with plain boiled beef.

_Mrs. Jonas_

MAYONNAISE DRESSING

Six eggs, one cup vinegar, juice of two lemons, two tablespoons of
mustard meal, one-half tablespoon of flour, two teaspoons sugar,
one-half teaspoon salt, one-fourth teaspoonful cayenne pepper, one cup
cream. Boil in double boiler, put in a mason jar. It will keep for
months.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

JELLY SAUCE FOR MEATS

In an earthen saucepan melt over a slow fire a tumbler of some jelly,
either currant or grape. When it is melted and warm, stir in a
tablespoon of butter. Let all come to a boil, pour into a hot dish, in
which it is to be served, add a tablespoon of claret or red wine and
serve at once. This sauce goes well with mutton or lamb.

_Mrs. Katz_

SAUCE TARTARE

After you have made a mayonnaise add a tablespoonful of chopped
cucumber pickles, a few capers, a few chopped olives. Stir or beat; if
too thick thin with a little vinegar, or lemon juice.

_Mrs. I. Harris_

BOILED MAYONNAISE

Two eggs, ten tablespoons vinegar, one tablespoon water, two pinches
of salt, one-half scant teaspoon mustard, one and one-half teaspoons
sugar, one tablespoon oil; mix yolks with oil and other ingredients;
let boil; beat whites of eggs and mix.

_Mrs. Shipley_

TOMATO SAUCE

Take one pint of canned tomatoes, add an onion well minced, one-half a
teaspoon of salt, a little pepper. Put together in a saucepan over the
fire. After cooking gently for twenty minutes add two tablespoons of
butter into which you have worked a heaping tablespoon of flour until
it has become smooth. Let it cook gently for a few minutes; rub through
a sieve or fine colander, and serve hot; nice for meats or fish.

_Mrs. H. Kline_

RUM SAUCE

Boil one cup milk with one cup sugar; add one teaspoonful cornstarch
wet with cold milk. Just before removing from fire add one teaspoonful
rum. Serve hot.

_Mrs. Wolff_

FRENCH PUDDING SAUCE

Four ounces of butter, one-fourth ounce brown sugar, yolk of one egg,
one gill of wine, nutmeg. Beat butter to a cream, stir in sugar, add
yolk and wine. Place on stove, stirring until it simmers. Grate nutmeg
over sauce before sending to table.

_Mrs. Goldberg_

FOAMING SAUCE

Beat one-half cup of butter to a cream; add one cup of granulated sugar
and stir until it is white and foaming; just before serving pour over
it one cup of boiling water or milk; stir one minute; flavor to taste.

_Mrs. Wolff_

VANILLA SAUCE

The whites of two eggs and yolk of one, one-half a cup of powdered
sugar, one teaspoonful of vanilla, three tablespoonfuls of milk.
Beat the whites of eggs to a stiff froth, next beat in the sugar and
then the yolk of the egg and the flavor. Serve immediately for light
puddings.

_Mrs. A. Brown_

CREAM SAUCE

One-half a cup of butter beaten until very light, one cup of powdered
sugar, one-half a cup of cream. Set the dish in hot water and stir
until it is all creamy. It will only take a minute or two; flavor to
taste.

_Miss Eva Sternberg_

EGG SAUCE

The whites of two eggs beaten to a stiff froth, one and one-half
cupfuls of sugar, four tablespoonfuls of sweet milk; flavor with
vanilla.

_Mrs. Sternberg_

CREAM SAUCE (COLD)

Stir to a cream one cup of sugar and one-half cup butter, add one cup
cream (cold); flavor to taste. Stir well and set in a cool place.

_Mrs. M. Cohen_

LEMON SAUCE

One cup sugar, one-half cup butter, one egg (beaten light), one lemon
(juice and grated rind), one-half cup boiling water. Cook in double
boiler until it thickens.

FRUIT SAUCE

Two-thirds cup of sugar, one pint raspberries or strawberries, one
tablespoonful melted butter, one cup hot water. Boil all together,
slowly removing the scum as fast as it rises. Strain through a sieve.
To be eaten with dumplings or apple pudding.

_Mrs. M. Cohen_

CHEESE-SALAD DRESSING

Work two tablespoonfuls of soft grated cheese until it is smooth.
Season with salt, paprika, and moisten thoroughly with vinegar and oil.
This is delicious on egg or lettuce salad.

_Mrs. Goldberg_

PUDDINGS

CARROT PUDDING

One cup grated carrots, one cup grated potatoes, one-half cup butter,
one and one-half cup flour, two cups raisins or part currants, one
teaspoon cinnamon, one of cloves, one-half teaspoon nutmeg, one and
one-half teacup sugar, one teaspoon soda dissolved in the potatoes. Mix
above together, and put in a greased covered can to steam in hot water
for three hours. Serve with wine sauce.

_F. Baron_

PLUM PUDDING

Three-fourths of a pound of chopped suet, one pound flour, one pound
dark brown sugar, one pound of raisins, one pound currants, one-half
pound citron cut fine, six eggs, tablespoon of allspice (ground), one
whole nutmeg (ground), one wine-glass of brandy or whiskey. Steam six
hours. This is large enough to serve for ten. Serve with hard or soft
sauce.

_Mrs. M. N. Heckscher_

DATE PUDDING

One cup of brown sugar, one cup of suet minced finely, one cup of
fine bread crumbs, three eggs, one teaspoon salt, three-fourths
pound of dates chopped fine, one-half tumbler brandy or whiskey, two
teaspoonfuls cinnamon. Steam in a buttered mould for two hours.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

MACAROON PUDDING

Two glasses of milk, one-fourth box of Cox gelatine. Boil together,
stirring yolks of two eggs beaten together with one-half cup of sugar.
Mix with the above. Boil ten minutes, stirring constantly. Take from
fire and add one teaspoon vanilla and the whites of two eggs beaten
stiff. Put in mould and drop in ten cents’ worth of macaroons (broken).
Serve with whipped cream.

_Mrs. J. Levy_

DELICIOUS PUDDING

Take stale sponge-cake; slice. Put a layer of the cake in a
pudding-dish and put a teaspoonful of jelly or preserves on each piece
of cake, then another layer of cake. Repeat until dish is full, then
pour fresh berries of any kind over same. Make the following custard
and pour overall. Bake in a hot oven until light brown. Custard: Three
eggs, one-half cup of sugar, beat well; add one teaspoon vanilla, two
cups or more of milk.

_Mrs. K. L. Simon_

MARROW PUDDING

Extract one-fourth pound marrow from marrow bones. Take this, add one
pound flour, a little water, one pinch salt, form a batter, which
divide into four very thin layers. Each layer to be separated by
fine-chopped apples, raisins, citron, cinnamon, chopped walnut, or
almonds, sugar, preserves, and juice of a lemon, according to taste.
Then bake in a moderate oven. If desirable, a chocolate icing may be
used on the top layer.

_Mrs. M. Harris_

STEAMED PUDDING

One cup molasses, one cup suet, one cup brown sugar, one cup raisins,
one cup milk, one egg, one teaspoonful each of cinnamon, cloves, and
allspice, three cups of flour, two teaspoonfuls of baking powder, a
little salt. Steam three hours. Sauce: ten tablespoons milk, one-half
cup sugar, yolks of two eggs; put this in double boiler, and let boil
until it thickens. Beat whites of eggs and stir in custard just before
using; add two tablespoons brandy or any flavor you prefer.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

CABINET PUDDING

Ten cents candied cherries, one cup chopped almonds, one tumbler claret
wine, one dozen macaroons, seven eggs, two tablespoons gelatine, sugar
to taste. Put claret on to boil; stir in yolks of eggs and sugar. Soak
gelatine in cold water about ten minutes and add all ingredients to
wine; add lastly beaten whites. Line dish with macaroons and cherries
and pour mixture over them.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

COTTAGE PUDDING

One cup sugar, one cup of milk, one egg, a lump of butter the size
of an egg, one pint flour, salt, one heaping teaspoon of Royal
baking powder. Bake in hot oven. Sauce: one cup sugar, one egg, one
teaspoonful flour, a small piece of butter; mix, add boiling water, and
let come to a boil; flavor with vanilla.

_Mrs. S. Newburger_

STEAMED SUET PUDDING

One-fourth of a loaf of stale bread soaked in water and squeezed dry,
one-fourth of a loaf crumbed, one-fourth pound suet chopped fine, one
cup seedless raisins, one cup of currants, one-half wine-glass whiskey,
two eggs, one-half pound brown sugar, one-fourth cup molasses, one
teaspoon cinnamon, one of allspice, enough flour to make it like a
ginger-cake dough; add teaspoon Royal baking powder, add fruits last,
dredged with flour. Boil three hours. Can serve with hard sauce or
brandy sauce.

_Hattie Bondy_

PLUM PUDDING

One pound bread crumbs grated, one pound carrots grated, one pound
flour, one pound suet chopped fine, one pound raisins, one pound
currants, one pound brown sugar, one-half pound citron, one cup
molasses, one teaspoonful of all kinds of spices; mix with brandy and
water; salt to taste. Boil eight hours.

_Eva Bernstein_

APPLE TAPIOCA

DURKEE’S FLAKE TAPIOCA.

Soak one cup tapioca in one quart water over night. Cut up greening
apples into quarters and halves, fill dish; one cup sugar, flavor with
nutmeg or vanilla, one pinch of salt, mix in tapioca with this, and put
little bits of butter on top. Bake; serve with sugar and cream.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

FROZEN PUDDING

Beat the yolks of three eggs with three-fourths cup of powdered sugar
to a cream; add the three whites stiffly beaten, one-half pint of sweet
cream whipped, two tablespoonfuls of rum, one-fourth pound of grated
macaroons; mix all together, put in a mould, and freeze.

_Mrs. J. Muhlfelder_

MOCHA ICE-CREAM PUDDING

Yolks of two eggs, three-fourths cup of powdered sugar, one pint cream
whipped, five cents’ worth each of preserved cherries and pineapple
cut-up, one tablespoon of mocha essence; grate four macaroons, and
after the mixture is in form sprinkle same over top. Beat the eggs,
sugar, and mocha essence up light, stir in whipped cream and fruit;
freeze four hours. This is enough for a two-quart melon.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

ROTHE GRÜTZE

Raspberries, currants; boil together, then strain through cheesecloth;
put back to boil with sugar to sweeten; thicken with cornstarch and let
stand to harden.

_Mrs. Fragner_

DESSERTS

SHERRY DESSERT

Four eggs, powdered sugar to taste, three-fourths tumbler of sherry
wine, one-half pint of cream whipped, one-half pound macaroons. Beat
eggs, yolks and whites separately. To beaten yolks add sugar and
sherry. Cook this in a double boiler until thick, stirring constantly;
when thick let cool. Add whites of eggs beaten stiff, mix with yolks,
sugar and sherry, break macaroons and mix with above; flavor with
vanilla, sweeten to taste. Serve with whipped cream, flavored, on top.
This may be served in punch glasses with a cherry added to each glass.
Very rich dessert.

_E. L._

BLOW BALLS

One pint of milk; when boiling stir in one cup of flour to thicken,
take from the fire; when cool add one tablespoon sugar, a little salt,
and five eggs to thin to a batter. Drop with teaspoon into hot fat or
butter; fry until a light brown. Serve with vanilla sauce or cream.

_Mrs. H. A. S._

STRAWBERRY CHARLOTTE

Take eight lady-fingers, one quart strawberries, one-half pint
cream, two cups of sugar; mash one cupful of the berries, split the
lady-fingers, moisten with the juice of the crushed berries, and use
to line a serving-dish; place in the bottom of dish a layer of berries,
season with fine sugar. Whip cream to a froth, add a layer of it, then
another of the fruit and sugar, and so on, until all the fruit and
cream is used. Place on ice and serve very cold.

_Mrs. S. F. Breslauer_

FRUIT TAPIOCA

Soak over night in cold water two tablespoons of small tapioca; next
morning drain and cook in a double boiler with four cups of boiling
water. Let boil until tapioca is transparent. Then add one-half
teaspoonful of salt, one pound of dates stoned, one cup of raisins
seeded, one-half pound figs, and one cup of sugar. Cook one hour and
fifteen minutes; lastly add one teaspoon vanilla; pour in a mould. Let
cool; serve with whipped cream.

_Miss Violet Sondheim_

RICE CREAM

Boil ten ounces of rice for ten minutes, pour off the water, add one
quart and a half of fresh milk; cook slowly until rice is tender.
Reduce the rice to a pulp by beating or pass through a press. Dissolve
an ounce of gelatine in a little water, add to the rice; stir all
together. Place on fire, sweeten carefully. When mixed set to cool.
Then stir the beaten whites of two eggs, flavor with vanilla, sherry or
brandy; pour in a mould and chill for eating.

_Mrs. M. Mathias_

BAKED BANANAS

Remove one side of peel from each banana and lay lengthwise in an
earthen dish, the exposed side up. Stick fruit with a fork; squeeze
over each banana a little lemon juice, and on each place one teaspoon
of sugar, a lump of butter, and a little grated nutmeg. Add a little
water in the bottom of pan to keep from burning, add one teaspoon
sherry to each banana. Bake half an hour in a moderate oven.

_Mrs. J. Ottenberg_

RASPBERRY SAGO

Wash one-half pint of sago, cover with one and one-half pint cold
water; soak one hour. Cook in double boiler until sago is clear and
transparent. Have carefully picked red raspberries half filling a glass
dish. When the sago is cool pour over the raspberries. Set away to
cool. Serve with sugar and cream. Other fruits, such as strawberries,
peaches, etc., may be used in place of raspberries.

_Mrs. F. L. Levy_

ITALIAN CREAM

Soak one-half box of gelatine in cold milk for one-half hour. Let one
quart milk come to a boil in double boiler. Beat yolks of eight eggs
and one and one-half cup of sugar together. When milk boils pour same
on eggs, sugar, and gelatine; return to boiler and let boil until it
begins to thicken; then pour this on the beaten whites.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

A DELICIOUS COMPOTE

Make a rich syrup of sugar and water and add one spoonful of port wine,
and a few thin slices of lemon with the rind on; drop in pears that
have been peeled and quartered. When soft remove fruit, then add in
same syrup plums, when soft remove them, then add peaches, and when
soft turn all over fruit that had previously been cooked. Cool and
serve together.

_Mrs. A. Kiersky_

JUNKET

Take two quarts of new milk and warm it until it is about blood heat.
Pour into a glass or china bowl. Stir into it two tablespoonfuls of
prepared rennet, two tablespoonfuls powdered loaf sugar, one small
wine-glass pale brandy. Let it stand until cold and eat with sugar and
rich cream. Half the quantity can be made.

_Mrs. M. Cohen_

BROMANGELON

FRUIT SALAD

Dissolve one package of orange bromangelon in one pint boiling water.
Let cool to a thin syrup. Cut oranges shapes of tiny baskets. Scrape
out pulp of orange and use in salad, also one-half cup nuts and figs,
candied cherries, bananas, and pineapple if desired, all cut fine. Stir
all into the bromangelon, which has been partly congealed; place in
baskets. Serve with whipped cream.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

PINEAPPLE FRAPPÉ

Dissolve one package lemon bromangelon in one pint boiling water. Let
cool to a consistency of a syrup, then whip with an egg-beater to a
consistency of whipped cream, add one teacup shredded pineapple and one
teacup candied cherries cut fine. Stir all together and congeal on ice
in mould; serve with macaroons.

_Mrs. K. F. Soloman_

MINT JELLY

Dissolve one package of lemon bromangelon and juice of one or two
lemons to taste in one pint boiling water. Cool to consistency of
syrup. Add the strong tea of one cup of fresh mint, pour in individual
moulds, and set on ice to congeal. Serve with roast lamb.

_Mrs. L. S. Rosenberg_

CELERY SALAD

Dissolve one package lemon bromangelon in one pint of boiling water;
when cool place on ice. Chop fine one cup of celery and one cup of
walnuts together. When bromangelon is of syrup thickness, pour into a
square pan the depth of one-half inch; on this place a layer of celery
and nuts. Fill the pan, alternating, having the bromangelon on top. Set
on ice to congeal. Serve with mayonnaise dressing.

_Mrs. M. Levy_

WINE BROMANGELON

One package lemon bromangelon, one package orange bromangelon, one
pint boiling water, one pint Rhine wine, one pony glass cognac,
one-half pony glass fine Jamaica rum, a little cinnamon bark. Boil the
bark; with the water in which the bark has been boiled dissolve the
bromangelon. When perfectly dissolved add the wine, brandy, rum. Set
away to cool.

_Mrs. H. Frauenthal_

CHOCOLATE BROMANGELON WITH RICE

Cook one teacup rice in steam cooker, sweeten, and season well; add
small piece of butter. Pour in mould or dish and let cool. Dissolve one
package chocolate bromangelon in one pint boiling water according to
directions on package; pour over rice when same begins to thicken. When
congealed serve with whipped or plain cream. The rice receives a very
delicious flavor from the chocolate.

_Mrs. J. Silvester_

CHOCOLATE BROMANGELON PIE

One package of bromangelon (chocolate) dissolved in one pint of boiling
water. Cool, add one-half pint cream; whip with egg-beater; pour into a
baked pie crust and cover with whipped cream.

_Mrs. E. F. Cohen_

CHERRY HILL FRUTTI

Dissolve one package of cherry bromangelon in one pint of boiling
water. When cooled to a thick syrup whip to a consistency of whipped
cream and add one cup of nut meats, figs and cherries cut fine. Stir
all together. Set on ice to congeal. Serve with cream and lady-fingers.

_Mrs. D. Baum_

PIES AND PUFF PASTE

PUFF PASTE

One cup flour; mix in water with knife until about the consistency
of a soft pie dough; roll out; take suet and spread on with a knife;
fold dough, but first sprinkle with flour. Roll again, and spread with
butter quite thick; sprinkle flour, fold again and roll; then a fourth
time roll, and spread with butter; then roll and put in dish.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

PUFF PASTE

One-half pound butter, one-half pound flour. Blend half the butter with
flour and mix thoroughly. Add one-half cup ice water. Dredge board with
flour and roll out mixture. When rolled add remainder of butter in
little pieces; fold and roll lightly and thin. Fold again and place on
ice four hours.

_R. L. S._

PIE CRUST

One cup fat or butter, four cups flour; work fat well into the flour
until fine as sand; sprinkle over a teaspoonful salt, and bind together
with ice water. Water should be poured in slowly and carefully, and in
quantity only enough to work flour into a stiff paste. Handle lightly,
and when mixed roll out to a one-fourth inch thickness.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

PREPARING FRUITS FOR PIE

Apples should be peeled, sliced thin, and sugared to taste before
being put in pie crust. Peaches should also be peeled and sugared.
Raspberries, strawberries, blackberries, cherries, and currants should
be dusted with flour as well as sweetened before being put in the
crust. Gooseberries and cranberries should be stewed and sweetened
before being put in the crust. To all fruits one to two tablespoonfuls
of water should be added. In the fruit pie use fruit generously; that
is, have plenty of the fruit filling, which wholesomely serves as an
antidote to the rich pastry.

_Mrs. O. Newman_

ORANGE PIE

Grate two good-sized oranges (yellow pulp, all except the leathery
centre skin); add to this a cup of sugar, the yolks of three eggs, and
three tablespoons of thick cream. Bake with only one crust. Make a
meringue of the whites of the eggs beaten stiff with a little sugar;
spread over the pie and set in a moderate oven for a few minutes.

_Mrs. Israel_

PUMPKIN PIE

One heaping cup pumpkin strained, one cup milk, one egg, a pinch of
salt, three-fourths teaspoon ginger, three tablespoons molasses,
three-fourths cup brown sugar. Mix ingredients and pour on partially
baked crust, then bake.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

LEMON MERINGUE PIE

Stir one heaping teaspoon of flour into one cup of sugar. Into the
yolks of three eggs stir the juice and grated rind of a lemon; then
add the lemon and sugar and half a cup of cold water. Put in the crust
and bake. When baked cover with a meringue made of whites of the eggs
beaten with a little sugar. After putting on the meringue let the pie
stand a few minutes in a moderate oven.

_Mrs. R. Kohn_

COCOANUT PIE

One-half cup desiccated cocoanut soaked in one cupful of milk, two
eggs, one small cupful of sugar, butter size of egg. This quantity
makes enough for one small pie. Nice with a meringue on top.

_Mrs. M. Cohen_

PASSOVER DISHES

DISHES TO BE MADE OF A. GOODMAN & SON’S MATZOTH AND MATZOTH MEAL

MATZOTH SHALET

Soak two matzoths, squeeze out, add one cup of sugar, cinnamon, sliced
apples, a few raisins, almonds, four eggs, one-half cup of matzoth
meal. Mix well, grease pan well, and on top of shalet put small pieces
of butter. Bake until light brown.

_Mrs. A. Herz_

MATZOTH BALLS

Soak one or more matzoths according to amount of balls wanted; when
soft squeeze out. Now cut into small pieces or chop one small onion.
Let brown in one large spoonful of fat; then add your matzoths, which
have been squeezed out; remove from fire; add salt, pepper, two eggs,
and one-fourth cup meal. Mix well; when cold make into balls.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

MATZOTH CAKE

Twelve eggs, separate them; take yolks of eggs, beat with one
tablespoon powdered sugar to each egg, one cup matzoth meal, one-half
cup chopped almonds, grated rind and juice of one lemon. After mixing
well, add the beaten whites of the eggs. Bake in a slow oven.

_Mrs. S. Neuburger_

MATZOTH PANCAKE

Soak two matzoths in milk until soft, a little salt, four eggs. Mix
well. Fry in butter.

PANCAKE NO. 2

Take one cupful matzoth flour, mix with boiling water, four eggs, a
little salt. Fry in butter.

_Mrs. Albert Soloman_

FILLED MATZOTH KLOESSE

Prepare a dough as for soup balls. Make round flat cakes with your
hands and fill with seeded prunes; place one flat cake over the filled
one; press edges firmly together and roll until perfectly round. Boil
them in salt water. Let water boil hard before putting in kloesse. Heat
goose fat, cut up an onion, and let brown; pour this over the kloesse
and serve hot. The kloesse are nice without any filling.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

MATZOTH FRITTERS

Soak two or three matzoths in water, when soft squeeze out, add four
eggs, a pinch of salt, one-half cup sugar, one-half teaspoonful
cinnamon and one apple sliced very fine. Have your fat or butter very
hot and drop in a tablespoonful at a time to brown. They are very nice
served with any stewed fruits.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

BREAD, FRITTERS, ETC.

BOSTON BROWN BREAD

One cake Fleischmann’s yeast, one and three-fourths pint water, two
cups graham flour, one-half cup sifted rye flour, two and one-half
cups sifted wheat flour, one and one-half cup sifted corn meal, one
tablespoonful butter, one teaspoonful salt, three-fourths cup molasses.
Heat one pint of the water to boiling, and pour it over the corn meal
and salt; let stand to scald a few minutes. Then add the butter,
melted, one cup of water (cold), molasses, graham, rye, and wheat
flours, and lastly the yeast, previously dissolved in the remaining
half cup of lukewarm water; mix thoroughly; half fill well-greased
baking-tins having covers, and set to rise for about two hours, or
until within an inch of the top. Then grease and put on covers, and
bake in moderate oven for three hours and a half; take off covers and
bake for another half hour. This recipe, carefully followed, makes the
original Boston brown bread. An ordinary three-pound lard-pail makes a
good baking-tin for this purpose. This recipe makes sufficient for two
pails. The entire process takes about six hours.

_Mrs. Shipley_

ENTIRE-WHEAT BREAD

One cake Fleischmann’s yeast, one cup lukewarm water, one cup lukewarm
milk, three pints entire-wheat flour, two teaspoonfuls sugar, one
teaspoonful salt. Put milk, salt, and sugar into bowl; add to it water
in which the yeast has previously been dissolved. Then add the flour
gradually, reserving a little for use in kneading. This dough should
be kneaded thoroughly, but must be kept soft. After kneading set in a
warm place to rise for from two to two and one-half hours. When light,
turn out on a floured kneading-board, divide into two equal parts and
knead again thoroughly. Place in well-greased pans and set to rise for
from three-quarters of an hour to an hour. When well risen bake for one
hour in a slower oven than is required for white bread. After bread is
baked, remove from pans, and cool by contact with the air on all sides.
One tablespoonful of butter may be added with the sugar, if desired. If
set over night, use one-half cake of yeast. In summer, use the liquid
cold; in winter, tepid. The entire process takes four hours.

NOTE.--Entire-wheat bread may be made by following any good bread
recipe and substituting whole-wheat flour for the ordinary wheat flour.

_Mrs. Shipley_

WHITE BREAD--QUICK METHOD

Two cakes Fleischmann’s yeast, three and one-half quarts sifted flour
(equal to three pounds unsifted flour), one quart lukewarm water, one
teaspoonful salt, two tablespoonfuls sugar, one tablespoonful lard or
butter. Dissolve the yeast in half of the water, and in the other half
dissolve the salt and sugar. Mix thoroughly the water containing the
yeast, salt, and sugar, then stir in gradually three quarts of the
flour. Now work in the lard or butter, and make a moderately stiff
dough. Knead well for ten or fifteen minutes; then set aside in a warm
place, free from draught, to rise until light, which will be in from
two to two and a half hours. Cover with cloth or paper to prevent crust
forming on top. When light, make into loaves with the hand, place in
well-greased pans and set to rise again for forty-five minutes. When
light, bake in a hot oven for from three-quarters of an hour to an
hour. The extra pint of flour will be needed to keep kneading-board
well floured while kneading and forming into loaves. This makes three
one-and-one-half pound loaves. The whole process takes about four
hours. Half milk and half water may be used instead of all water, if
a richer loaf is desired. Young housekeepers who have never done any
baking have been eminently successful by following this recipe.

_Mrs. Shipley_

ORANGE, APPLE, OR BANANA FRITTERS

Yolks of four eggs, beaten with four tablespoons of sugar. Stir into
this the juice of half a lemon; add enough flour to thicken like a
batter; add beaten whites. Dip in one slice of fruit at a time. Take
up with a large spoon and lay in hot fat. Fry a nice brown. Sprinkle
pulverized sugar on top, and serve with a vanilla sauce.

_Mrs. Sig. Sondheim_

POPOVERS

One egg well beaten, one cup of sweet milk, one cup of sifted flour,
one teaspoonful baking powder, one teaspoon salt; beat all lightly.
Drop in buttered gem pans, and bake quickly in a hot oven.

_Mrs. H. A. S._

WAFFLES

Two cups flour, two cups milk, one-half cup melted butter, two
teaspoons sugar, two teaspoonfuls baking powder, one teaspoon salt, two
eggs with whites and yolks beaten separately. Have iron hot and well
buttered.

_Mrs. Joe Newman_

CREAM WAFFLES

Three tablespoonfuls of cornstarch and one cup of flour stirred
smoothly, then add one teaspoon salt. Gradually mix in one pint of sour
cream, one well-beaten egg, and a small teaspoon of soda dissolved in
water; pour on buttered irons.

_Mrs. J. Newman_

CORN FRITTERS

One pint grated green corn, one egg, small cup of flour, one-half cup
butter, salt and pepper to taste. Bake on a griddle.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

POTATO PANCAKES

Six raw potatoes grated, two slices of bread soaked in milk and let
boil one minute; two eggs, salt, thicken with flour. Fry in hot butter.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

QUICK BISCUITS

Two cups of flour, two teaspoonfuls baking powder, butter the size of a
walnut, pinch of salt, enough milk to make a soft dough to drop off of
spoon on buttered pan. Hot oven.

_Mrs. H. A. S._

DOUGHNUTS

Two eggs, one cup of sugar, one cup of milk, flour, two teaspoonfuls
baking powder, and salt. Beat eggs and sugar well, add the milk and
flour alternately and enough of the latter to make a light biscuit
dough. Roll out and shape. Fry in plenty of butter or lard.

_Mrs. Mack_

PLAIN MUFFINS

Four cups flour, four teaspoonfuls baking powder, two teaspoonfuls
salt, four tablespoonfuls butter, two cups milk. Sift flour, salt,
and baking powder into a bowl; add butter, and knead with the back of
a fork until it becomes mealy. Add milk and stir until it becomes a
batter. Bake in greased pans in a hot oven twenty-five minutes.

_Adele J. Strauss_

SIMPLE HOT CAKES

One cup of flour, one egg beaten very light, milk enough to make the
flour light, one-half teaspoonful salt, one and one-half teaspoon
baking powder, one tablespoon sugar.

_Mrs. Preston_

CAKES

_It is recommended that Royal baking powder be used where any is
required._

FRUIT CAKE

Brown one pound flour; cream together one pound of sugar and one of
butter, then add eight beaten eggs and one cup of molasses, one-half
cup whiskey, one cup sour cream, a tablespoon each of mace, cinnamon,
cloves, allspice and grated nutmeg. Stir in one pound of browned flour
and one-half teaspoon of soda dissolved; gradually add one pound of
seeded raisins, one pound of washed and dried currants, one pound
citron cut in small pieces, all fruit being lightly dredged with flour.
Bake in well-buttered paper laid in deep pans. This cake should be
baked in large loaves. Be careful your oven is not too hot. Bake three
to four hours.

_Mrs. S. Bornstein_

PLUM CAKE

One pound powdered sugar, one pound butter, one pound flour, five
pounds raisins, one pound currants, one pound citron, ten eggs, two
teaspoonfuls cloves, one teaspoonful mace, one-half glass brandy
or whiskey, one-half glass cider, wine-glass curaçoa, one-half cup
molasses (small). Cream butter and sugar together; beat yolks and
whites separately. Line pans with buttered paper.

_R. L. S._

DELICATE CAKE

Mix well together two cups of sugar and three-fourths cup of butter,
stir in one cup of milk and the whites of eight eggs beaten to a stiff
froth. Stir together three cups of flour and two teaspoonfuls of baking
powder. Flavor with vanilla. Beat ten minutes after putting all the
ingredients in. Pour in a loaf tin in which you have laid buttered
paper. Bake one hour in a carefully heated oven.

_Mrs. E. M. Loeb_

POTATO CAKE

Mix one cup of butter and two cups of sugar and one of cold mashed
unseasoned potatoes; add one-half cup of grated chocolate, four eggs,
one cup of chopped walnuts, one-half cup milk, teaspoonful each of
nutmeg, cinnamon and cloves. Sift two teaspoons of baking powder with
two and one-half cups of flour. Stir all together. Bake the cake in
square tins.

_Mrs. B. Manheimer_

CHEESE CAKE

The dough to be made the same as pie crust. Two cups of flour, one
teaspoon baking powder, a pinch of salt (sift), butter the size of an
egg, one egg, one-half cup powdered sugar, little milk; all of the
above beaten together, which will form the dough. One pound pot cheese,
one cup of cream, one tablespoon melted butter, one cup granulated
sugar, one tablespoon flavor; separate yolks and whites of four eggs,
dropping each yolk separately in the ingredients, stirring; beat
whites and add last; stir in a little cinnamon and a few currants. Bake
three-quarters of an hour in a moderate oven.

_Mrs. D. Sine_

JELLY ROLL OR LAYER CAKE

Take eight eggs and two cups of sugar; beat for half an hour, then add
two cups of sifted flour, with one-half teaspoon baking powder; also
add two tablespoonfuls of cold water. Bake in large tins, spread with
jelly while hot and roll; or bake in jelly tins and spread with jelly.
Cover with sugar or boiled icing.

_Miss L. Mayer_

POUND CAKE

Rub one pound of butter and one pound of powdered sugar to a cream. Add
the grated peel of a lemon, a wine-glass of brandy, and the yolks of
nine eggs, one at a time. And last one and one-fourth pound of sifted
flour and the beaten whites of the nine eggs. Bake slowly.

_Mrs. I. O. Stern_

QUICK CINNAMON CAKE

Two tablespoons butter, pinch salt, one and one-eighth cup granulated
sugar, three eggs beaten lightly, one-half cup milk, one and
three-fourths cups flour, teaspoon vanilla, one teaspoon baking powder.
Before putting in oven mix some butter and cracker crumbs together;
sugar, cinnamon and chopped nuts may be added. Bake in flat roasting
pan.

_E. L._

DEVIL’S CAKE

One tablespoon butter, one scant cup sugar; mix together. Yolks of two
eggs, two squares of chocolate dissolved in one-half cup hot water;
add to the above. Mix two cups of flour with two scant teaspoons
baking powder, one-half teaspoonful soda dissolved in one-half cup
sour milk or one-half cup hot water, one-half teaspoon vanilla; mix
well. Frosting: whites of two eggs, one teaspoonful cold water, one
teaspoon lemon extract; whip together; add enough confectioner’s sugar
(not powdered) to spread over cake while cake is still in pan, although
cooled.

_Minnie A. Lardan_

SPONGE CAKE

Four eggs, one full cup sugar mixed; one cup milk, let come to a boil;
two cups flour mixed with four teaspoons baking powder added, with eggs
and sugar; then add hot milk and vanilla flavoring. Chocolate filling
is fine if cake is baked in layers.

_Minnie A. Lardan_

CHOCOLATE CAKE

Cream one-half cup butter with one and one-half cup sugar, then add
gradually yolks of four eggs, one at a time. Beat mixture thoroughly,
then add one-half cup milk, beating all the time. Next two squares
Baker’s bitter chocolate in five tablespoons boiling water, when
dissolved add to the batter, stirring constantly. Now add slowly one
and three-fourths cup of sifted flour; give, all a vigorous beating,
add beaten whites of four eggs; stir carefully into mixture, then
teaspoon vanilla, and lastly one heaping teaspoon baking powder. Bake
in moderate oven one hour. This cake should be baked with one flame,
and do not light oven until cake is almost ready for baking. It should
rise slowly.

_Mrs. S. F. Breslauer_

CHOCOLATE CAKE

One-fourth cup butter, one and one-half cup granulated sugar, four eggs
beaten quite a while before mixing with sugar, three-fourths cup milk,
one cup cocoa and sugar mixed, two cups flour, two teaspoonfuls baking
powder, one teaspoon vanilla.

_Mrs. L. S. Firetag_

GINGERBREAD

One cup dark cooking molasses, one cup sour cream, one egg, one
teaspoonful soda dissolved in a little warm water; one teaspoonful
salt, one heaping teaspoonful ginger. Use enough flour to make about as
thick as cup cake. To be eaten warm.

_Mrs. M. Cohen_

MOCHA CAKE

Four eggs separated, beat yolks well with one cup powdered sugar, beat
in whipped whites, one cup flour, one teaspoon baking powder, two
tablespoon coffee extract. This makes two layers. Filling: one-half
pint cream flavored with coffee extract and sweetened, to which add
chopped nuts.

_F. B._

ANGEL CAKE

The whites of eleven eggs beaten to a stiff froth, nine and one-fourth
ounces sugar, five and three-fourths ounces flour, one teaspoonful
cream tartar sifted with the flour. Don’t butter the cake-form. Bake
about forty minutes.

_Mrs. D. Sine_

SCHLOSSER CAKE

One-half cup butter, one cup sugar, three eggs, two teaspoons baking
powder, two cups of flour, flavor with vanilla and bitter almonds.
This makes a very stiff dough. Flatten out, then take a quart of
blueberries, cherries, apples, or any fruit is nice. Heat fruit and
thicken with cornstarch. Place half of the dough in a pan, then spread
with the fruit, then dough and fruit, etc.; lastly, add chopped almonds.

_Mrs. F. C. Mock_

ALMOND CAKE

Four eggs, beat whites to snow; one cup of grated almonds,
three-fourths cup matzoth meal sifted, three-fourths teaspoon baking
powder, rind and juice of one lemon. Bake in slow oven one-half hour.
Serve with whipped cream.

_H. M._

FRENCH CRACKERS

Six eggs, twelve tablespoonfuls sweet milk, six tablespoonfuls butter,
one-half teaspoonful soda. Mould with flour, pounding and working half
an hour. Roll thin, bake in rather quick oven.

COFFEE CAKE (BLACK)

One cup brown sugar, one-half cup strong cold coffee, two cups of
flour, one cup of raisins, one-fourth cup nuts, one teaspoonful
cinnamon, one-half cup molasses, one-half cup butter, one cup currants,
one-half cup citron, one teaspoonful soda, two eggs, and a little
brandy. Mix well all together.

_Mrs. M. Wolff_

CHOCOLATE LAYER CAKE

Beat together the yolks of four eggs with two cups of powdered sugar.
Then take one-fourth pound of grated chocolate and one cup of milk;
boil this together. When cool mix with the egg and sugar, add one cup
of sifted flour, one teaspoon baking powder, flavor with vanilla. Beat
the four whites and mix all together. This makes two layers. Filling:
One cup of chopped walnuts, one whole egg, one cup of milk, one
tablespoon of granulated sugar; boil together until thick, when cool
spread between layers.

_Mrs. J. Muhlfelder_

BREAD TORTE

Yolks of eight eggs, two cups of granulated sugar, one-fourth pound
grated almonds, one wineglassful wine and brandy mixed, one teaspoonful
cinnamon, one teaspoonful cloves, one cup of grated bread crumbs, two
teaspoonfuls baking powder, eight whites beaten very stiff. Grease pan
or oil paper. Bake slowly.

_Mrs. G. B._

CRACKER TORTE

One cup powdered sugar, one tablespoon melted butter, three yolks of
eggs, whites of six beaten to a froth, one-fourth teaspoon cloves, one
of cinnamon, one cake of sweet chocolate, one cup of chopped almonds,
one cup of cracker meal, one teaspoon baking powder. Bake in layers.
Filling: one tablespoon flour, two of sugar, yolks of three eggs,
one-half pint sweet cream; beat eggs with flour, stir into it cream;
boil up, add one-half cup chopped almonds. Bake day before using and
cover closely.

_Mrs. M. Kohn_

NUT TORTE

One cupful nuts grated, six eggs, six tablespoons powdered sugar, not
quite one-half cup grated bread crumbs, one-half teaspoonful baking
powder, one teaspoonful vanilla. Beat yolks of eggs with sugar until
light; add nuts, then crumbs, then beaten whites and vanilla. Bake in
spring form. Spread with whipped cream.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

ALMOND TORTE

Yolks of eight eggs, eight tablespoons of powdered sugar; beat for
about one-half hour; one-half pound almonds blanched and grated, rind
of a lemon, juice of one-half lemon, two tablespoons of cracker meal
sifted; add one teaspoonful Royal baking powder, add whites stiffly
beaten, pinch of salt. Bake in moderate oven in a spring form. This can
be cut in half and filled with whipped cream.

_Mrs. S. M. Bondy_

SACHENTORT

One-fourth pound sugar, one-fourth pound sweet butter, one-fourth pound
grated almonds (with peel), yolks of six eggs beaten for one-half hour;
then add four cakes of Huyler’s sweet chocolate grated, and last the
six whites beaten. Frosting: one-fourth pound granulated sugar, small
lump of butter, four cakes chocolate, four tablespoons water. Let it
boil well.

_Mrs. R. L. Dannenberg_

NUT TART

Nine eggs; beat whites and yolks separately. Beat yolks with one
tumbler of sugar, add rind and juice of one-half lemon, also of one
small orange; add one-half pound ground almonds, add whites and almonds
alternately a little at a time. Put in a well-buttered spring form.
When finished cover with a chocolate icing. Icing: three tablespoons
cocoa, one cup sugar, seven tablespoons milk, a few drops vanilla, one
teaspoon butter, put on fire in double boiler, stirring constantly for
ten minutes. Then put on cake. This quantity makes a large cake.

_Mrs. S. Brown_

LEMON TART

Make a sponge of two eggs, one-half cup of sugar, one-half cup of
flour, one-half teaspoon baking powder, one of vanilla; bake in a
spring form. Filling: the juice of three lemons, one cup sugar.
Let boil to a syrup, separate eight eggs; mix yolks well with two
tablespoonfuls of cold water. Beat whites stiff; now stir yolks into
the boiling syrup, stirring until it thickens. Remove from the fire
and add the syrup to the beaten whites; pour over the cake and put in a
hot oven until a light brown.

_Mrs. H. A. S._

FIG TARTS

Put one pint figs in one pint hot water; let stew gently for three
hours. Use porcelain-lined dish. If water boils down, add enough to
keep figs stewing; when nearly cooked add one cup of sugar; remove from
fire; add juice of a good-sized lemon. Have ready some tiny shells of
puff paste and fill with the figs. A teaspoonful of whipped cream added
to each tart makes it very rich.

_Mrs. B. Sondheim_

ALMOND STRAWS OR TARTS

Sift together and thoroughly mix one pound of pastry flour, one
teaspoon of salt, one teaspoonful baking powder, blanch and pulverize
one-half pound of almonds; mix the almonds with the flour ingredients
and work in one-half cup of butter and lard mixed. Mix with ice water
as in making pastry; cut in the shapes you wish and bake in a hot oven.

_Mrs. E. G. R._

SCHAUM TORTE

Whites of six eggs, two cups of sugar; stir one-half hour; one teaspoon
vanilla, one tablespoon vinegar. Bake in very moderate oven. Whip cream
very stiff for top or cut cake, put cream between layers.

_Mrs. F. C. Mock_

POTATO TORTE

One and a half cups of sugar, nine to ten eggs, one cup of potato
flour, one-half a lemon; beat whites of eggs very stiff.

_Mrs. F. C. Mock_

DAINTY FINGERS

Beat together one-half a pound of sugar and one-half a pound butter;
add five eggs, the whites and yokes beaten separately; one teaspoon of
mace, one-half wine-glass of brandy, and one-half pound flour. Stir
well together and drop in lady-finger pans for baking to a delicate
brown. When done and while warm fasten the fingers together, painting
with the white of an egg upon the flat side.

_H. A. O._

OATMEAL COOKIES

Stir one cup of butter in one cup of sugar; add a beaten egg, one
teaspoon of salt. Stir in gradually two cups of white flour, two
cups of oatmeal, adding also one teaspoon of soda dissolved in two
tablespoons of milk. When you have the dough well mixed, roll it thin,
cut into shapes, and bake in a moderate oven.

_Mrs. J. J. Asch_

HONEY CAKES

One cup of honey, one cup sugar, four pieces of chocolate grated, five
eggs, one-half teaspoonful each of cloves, allspice, and cinnamon.
Thicken dough with three cups of flour and three teaspoons of baking
powder. Bake in a moderate oven.

_Mrs. M. Wolff_

CINNAMON DROPS

Stir one-half pound of brown sugar with two eggs till well beaten;
add one ounce of cinnamon, quarter teaspoon of salt, and then flour
very finely sifted; enough flour to make the dough stand. Stir all
thoroughly and drop from a small spoon upon a pan which you have
dredged with flour. Bake a few minutes in a well-heated oven.

_Mrs. A. Monheim_

SUGAR COOKIES

One-half pound butter, one cup sugar, four cups flour, four teaspoons
baking powder, two eggs. Mix butter, sugar, and the flour with baking
powder, and add one egg at a time. Beat two eggs, spread thinly on top
of cookies, and sprinkle with sugar and cinnamon.

_Mrs. L. S. Firetag_

GINGER WAFERS

One-half cup of butter, one-half cup of sugar, one-half cup molasses,
one-half cup cold coffee, one teaspoonful soda dissolved in a little
water, one tablespoonful ginger, flour enough to make a stiff dough.
Roll out thin; bake in quick oven.

_Mrs. A. Ottenheimer_

WALNUT COOKIES

One cup of brown sugar, two eggs, one cup of chopped walnuts, one cup
of flour, one-half teaspoonful baking powder. Drop with a teaspoon in a
buttered pan.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

MANDELHAUFCHEN

One-half pound almonds cut lengthwise, not blanched, fifteen dates
cut lengthwise (remove pits), whites of three eggs beaten to snow,
one cup powdered sugar, vanilla to taste. Mix all well together.
Bake in a moderate oven on tins which have been well buttered, and
cracker-dusted. Drop dough with a teaspoon about one inch apart.

_A. G._

LEBKUCHEN

Four eggs, one large cup of granulated sugar; cream well together.
One-half pound almonds cut fine, not blanched; one-half teaspoon each
of cinnamon, cloves and allspice; vanilla to taste, one-half pound
citron cut fine, one and one-half cup of flour, one-half teaspoon
baking powder. Bake in a moderate oven.

_A. G._

DATE AND ALMOND CAKES

One-half pound dates, one-half pound almonds cut lengthwise, whites of
four eggs, one cup of granulated sugar. Beat whites of eggs very stiff,
add sugar, dates, and almonds. Grease pan with butter, sprinkle with
cracker dust, drop with teaspoon. Bake in a very slow oven.

_Mrs. Langstadter_

CITRON SQUARES

One-fourth pound raisins, one-half pound almonds, one-half pound citron
chopped fine; four whole eggs, one large cup granulated sugar, ground
allspice and cinnamon, flour enough to make stiff batter. Beat eggs
and sugar together, add almonds, citron, raisins, spices, last of all
flour. Grease pan with butter, spread batter rather thin, bake in slow
oven. When finished and while hot cut in diamond shape.

_Mrs. Langstadter_

CHOCOLATE DROPS

Two cakes (one-half pound) sweet chocolate, whites of four eggs,
one-half pound almonds. Beat whites of eggs very stiff, add chocolate
(which has been grated) and almonds chopped fine. Grease pan with
butter, sprinkle with cracker dust and drop with teaspoon. Bake in slow
oven.

_Mrs. Langstadter_

COOKIES

Rub to a cream one-half pound sweet butter and one glass sugar, add
two eggs, one tablespoon whiskey, two heaping tumblers flour, one-half
teaspoon baking powder. Mix well, and leave on ice over night. In the
morning roll out dough very thin, cut into shapes and place in buttered
tins. Brush the top of each with yolk of egg and place a blanched
almond in the centre. Bake light brown.

_Mrs. R. Paris_

ICINGS AND CAKE FILLINGS

TUTTI-FRUTTI ICING

Boil one pound of sugar in a gill of water until the syrup hairs.
Take from the fire, add slowly the beaten whites of two eggs; beat
all together, adding also one-half pound of blanched chopped almonds,
quarter of a pound of fine raisins swelled in hot water, and quarter of
a pound of citron cut in little pieces.

_Mrs. J. I. Jonas_

MAPLE FILLING

Boil a cup of maple syrup until it threads from the spoon. Then beat
until cool, beating in the white of an egg.

NUT FILLING

Boil together one cup of water and one cup of sugar until it makes a
heavy thread. Take from the fire and add little by little and with
constant stirring the whites of two eggs. Beat till cool, stirring in
one cup of chopped nuts, walnuts, hickory, or mixed nuts.

_Mrs. A. M. Soloman_

CARAMEL FILLING

Mix two cups of heavy brown sugar with three-fourths cup of butter,
then add one-half cup of cream. Boil until it becomes ropy, then add
one tablespoonful vanilla. Put the pan in cold water and stir until the
filling thickens. Spread between layers of cold cake.

_Mrs. Cohen_

CHOCOLATE ICING

Mix the yolks of four eggs with one square of chocolate grated, one
tablespoonful of cream or milk, and one cup sugar. Boil until it grows
hard.

_Mrs. N. Greenabaum_

CLEAR ICING

Stir together one-half pound of powdered sugar, the whites of two eggs,
then add the juice of one-half a lemon. Stir till clear; use at once.

_Mrs. A. J. F._

SOUR-CREAM FILLING

Add the white of one egg to a cup of thick sour cream; to keep the
cream from turning to butter while whipping. Whip, sweeten to taste,
and flavor with vanilla, spread upon cool layers of cake. Chopped nuts,
as butternuts, pecans, or hickory, are nice mixed with the filling.

_Mrs. Hyman_

LEMON FILLING

Yolk of one egg, small cup of sugar, rind and juice of one lemon,
half cup of shredded cocoanut, a little milk. Boil about ten minutes,
stirring constantly. Spread between layers after it has cooled.

_R. L. S._

FILLING FOR ORANGE SHORTCAKE

Peel and seed two large oranges and chop fine; add one-half peeled
lemon, one cup sugar. Spread between layers of shortcake while it is
hot.

_Mrs. M. Cohen_

ICES

FROZEN LADY-FINGER PUDDING

Beat together three heaping tablespoonfuls of granulated sugar and
yolks of six eggs. When beaten to a froth beat in one pint of cream,
add one dozen lady-fingers cut in pieces half an inch long sprinkled
with or dipped rapidly in some wine like sherry. When all are stirred
together put in a mould, cover tight, and freeze.

_Mrs. Sondheim_

PEACH CUSTARD FROZEN

In a double boiler heat one and one-half quarts of rich milk; when hot
stir in one and one-half cups of sugar, the beaten yolks of six eggs.
When the custard thickens, set aside to cool. From a quart of fine ripe
peaches take the skins and stones; crush with sugar to sweeten to your
taste, stir into the cool custard and freeze.

_Miss Edna Asch_

BURNED-ALMOND ICE-CREAM

Sweeten to your taste a custard of four eggs and one pint of milk. Take
half a pound of blanched almonds and brown them in a saucepan with six
tablespoons of sugar. Pound to a paste, and add little by little one
quart of cream. Mix with the custard and put in a freezer. After it is
frozen pack in a mould or serve without moulding.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

CHOCOLATE PARFAIT

Add one cup of thick boiled chocolate and half a cup of sugar to one
quart of thick cream. Whip to a froth, pour into a mould, and freeze.

_Mrs. W. Reinstein_

CAFÉ FRAPPÉ

Strain a quart of strong black coffee into one quart of cream,
sweetened to taste, and freeze half stiff. Serve in glasses with a
tablespoon of whipped cream on each glass.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

BISCUIT GLACÉ

One-half pint cream, whipped, six eggs; beat whites to a stiff froth;
five scant tablespoons sugar boiled in same amount of water slowly for
twenty-five minutes. Stir hot syrup into stiff froth, then beat yolks
well and mix; then boil in double boiler for ten minutes, stirring all
the time, and doing the same while cooling by placing pot in basin of
cold water. When cool add one teaspoon of vanilla, mix with cream;
place in freezer and pack with salt and ice. Let stand from five to six
hours before serving.

_Mrs. Shipley_

CREAMED ICE

One pint cream whipped, one pint milk boiled with a pinch Irish moss
and one cup of sugar. Let this stand until cold, then strain and mix
together and freeze; flavor with one teaspoon vanilla. Freeze slowly at
first.

_Mrs. R. L. Dannenberg_

CHOCOLATE ICE-CREAM

Add four ounces of grated chocolate to one cupful of sweet milk. Mix
it thoroughly with a quart of thick sweet cream. Flavor with vanilla;
sweeten with a cupful of sugar. Beat again and freeze.

_Mrs. M. Cohen_

MOCHA BISQUE

One pint of cream whipped to a stiff froth, add yolks of two eggs and
half a cup of powdered sugar, flavor with one tablespoon mocha essence.
Mix into the above grated macaroons. Sprinkle a few grated macaroons
into the bottom of a buttered melon mould, and freeze.

MAPLE MOUSSE

One cup maple syrup, yolks of two eggs beaten. Boil eggs and syrup
together and stand over night. Beat one-half pint cream with whites of
two eggs, add to cold mixture and pack in ice and salt for four hours.
Chopped nuts may be added.

_R. L. S._

PICKLES, PRESERVES, ETC.

MUSTARD PICKLES

For six gallons: one hundred large pickles, cut two hundred small ones,
three heads cauliflower, one peck white onions peeled, two quarts
beans, one-half dozen corn, two red peppers; put each in salt water
over night separately; dry all, put in layers. Two pounds best mustard,
four ounces mixed spices, two gallons vinegar; let boil twenty minutes
with spices and pour over the vegetables. Next morning pour over a
little salad oil and cover with cloth and cover.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

CHILI SAUCE

Thirty large ripe tomatoes peeled and cut, ten onions cut, six red
peppers, seven tablespoons sugar, three tablespoons salt, ten cups of
vinegar. Boil two hours.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

INDIAN CHUTNEY

Put together two quarts of chopped apples, two quarts of green
tomatoes, one pound of raisins, three cups brown sugar, one cup lemon
juice, one small onion chopped, three cups vinegar, one-half a cup
salt, one teaspoon cayenne, one tablespoon ginger. Mix and let stand in
an earthen dish over night; next morning boil till tender.

_Mrs. Freeman_

CHOW-CHOW PICKLES

Have four large cabbage-heads, one peck of green tomatoes, one quart
of onions, one dozen cucumbers, and three green peppers. Chop fine,
mix in two handfuls of salt, tie in a strong cheesecloth bag, and
drain over night; next morning add one ounce of celery seed, one ounce
of mustard seed, half a box of mustard, one pound of sugar. Put in a
preserving-kettle, cover with cider vinegar, put over fire, and cook
slowly till the pickles are tender, but not till they lose form. If
needed, add more vinegar while cooking.

_Mrs. I. Lesser_

SWEET BEET PICKLES

Cook the beets till tender, slip off the skins, and cut into slices;
place in glass jars, fill up with spiced syrup boiling hot, and seal.

_Mrs. Silverman_

CITRON-MELON PRESERVES

Peel and slice the melon thin or in small quarters and remove the
seeds. To every pound of citron allow one pound of sugar and one-fourth
of a pound of ginger-root. Put the melon in water enough to cover; add
to this two teaspoons of soda, boil until tender, set to cool. When
cold soak in a strong alum water one hour. Make a syrup of one pint of
water and two pounds of sugar. Beat the white of one egg to a stiff
froth; add this to the sugar and water, stir, let boil, and skim off
the egg. As the egg clears the sugar and water, add the ginger-root and
melon and cook in this syrup till clear. Put in glass jars (not too
full) and cover with the syrup.

_Mrs. I. J. Gordon_

TOMATO CATSUP

Wipe with a damp cloth and core one bushel of ripe tomatoes. Place
over the fire with three pints of water, two handfuls of peach leaves,
and one dozen onions cut fine. Boil two hours. Strain; add one-half
gallon of vinegar, two ounces each of ground allspice, black pepper,
and mustard, one ounce of ground cloves, two grated nutmegs, two pounds
brown sugar, and one pint of salt. Boil two hours longer, stirring all
the time. Bottle when cold.

_Mrs. J. T. Asch_

CRANBERRY CATSUP

Cook together ten pounds of berries, one quart of vinegar, five pounds
of brown sugar, three tablespoons of cinnamon, two of allspice, one
tablespoon each of salt and cloves, and one-fourth of a teaspoon of
cayenne. Boil slowly till thick, then strain and bottle.

_Mrs. M. S._

CUCUMBER CATSUP

Peel and chop three dozen cucumbers and half as many onions very fine,
add one teacup of mustard seed a quarter of a teacup of black pepper,
and one ounce each of cloves and allspice. Mix well and cover with
vinegar.

_Mrs. A. Rosenthal_

PICKLED CAULIFLOWER

Wash, soak, and take off the leaves of the cauliflower. Break the
flowers into small twigs. Parboil the twigs in brine, drain, lay in a
crock, and pour over boiling spiced vinegar.

_Mrs. Kaufman_

BRANDIED CHERRIES

Have perfectly ripe and sound sweet cherries. Keep stems by cutting
short. Drop the cherries a few at a time in a boiling syrup made of one
pint of water and one-half pound of sugar. When they have boiled three
to five minutes, lift out and lay on plates; allow to cool and dry as
they cool. They should be perfect in form. Make a second syrup twice as
sweet as the first; use a pound of sugar to a pint of water. When syrup
boils clear, set aside to cool. Carefully pack the cherries in glass
jars. To the cool second syrup add the same amount of the best brandy.
Pour the mixed syrup and brandy over the cherries in the jars, seal,
set in cool fruit-closet. Other fruits may be brandied by this recipe.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

MIXED MARMALADE

Crush two and one-half pounds of currants and pitted cherries, add two
pounds of seeded raisins, the yellow peel of four oranges chopped fine,
and three pounds of sugar. Cook gently till the fruit is a marmalade,
adding a little water if needed; add the juice of the oranges just
before the marmalade is ready to leave the stove. Cook ten minutes
after putting in the juice.

_Miss E. Asch_

CRANBERRY JELLY

Two quarts cranberries. Soak over night, then take water to cover; boil
and strain; to each pint of juice one pound of sugar, let boil down,
put in wet moulds, and let stand twenty-four hours.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

SPICED PEARS

Take two teaspoons of whole cloves, one tablespoon of allspice, one
tablespoon of cinnamon. Crush them slightly and boil one minute in a
quart of vinegar and a pint of sugar mixed. Take a fine variety of
pear, halve, take out seeds, boil in water until tender, finish the
cooking in the spiced syrup, cooking not too soft. Place in small
stone jars and cover well with syrup. Tie a cover over the jar. Spiced
peaches are made the same, except do not cook first in water. The syrup
will cook them sufficiently.

_Mrs. B. B. L._

BOILED CHESTNUTS WITH PRUNES

Scald the chestnuts. Heat a little goose-grease, put in the chestnuts
with a few prunes and an onion, a little cinnamon, considerable water,
and let boil until tender, then stir in a little sugar, flour, and
vinegar, and let boil.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

TUTTI-FRUTTI

One quart best alcohol, equal amount fruit and sugar; that is, one
pineapple cut in small pieces, four large oranges, four lemons (both
peeled). These cut into slices or small pieces; weigh, and the
same amount of sugar, add alcohol. Uncooked other fruits, such as
strawberries, cherries (pitted), plums, apricots, peaches, may be
added; always use as much fruit as sugar. Put in a large stone jar.
Mix as different fruits are added. By Christmas it will be fine. This
is fine added to grape-fruit during the winter, and as a rich dessert
served over ice-cream.

_E. L._

SANDWICHES

CREAM CHEESE AND RIPE OLIVES

Stone and chop the olives fine and beat in with a little cream or
Neufchâtel cheese, adding sweet cream to moisten and salt and paprika
to season. Green olives or pimentoes may be used in the same way.
Spread on slices of whole-wheat or brown bread and press together.

NUT-AND-CHEESE SANDWICHES

Mix with a half roll cream or Neufchâtel cheese a quarter cup chopped
or pounded nuts. Add salt and pepper to season and spread.

CREAM CHEESE, CURRANT JELLY, AND NUTS

Blend cream cheese with a spoonful currant jelly and spread one slice
of bread with this. Spread a second slice with chopped nuts, and press
together.

OTHER CREAM CHEESE COMBINATIONS

Among those frequently noticed and used are cream cheese and crisp
lettuce leaves, cream cheese and sliced tomatoes, cheese and chopped
dates or figs, cheese and chopped spinach, seasoned with lemon juice
and mayonnaise, cheese and the yolks of hard-boiled eggs rubbed through
a sieve, cheese and sliced cucumber, cheese and minced preserved
pineapple, cheese and preserved ginger.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

PRESERVED-GINGER SANDWICHES

Chop preserved ginger very fine, moisten with some of the syrup of
cream to a consistency for spreading and put between small rounds of
bread.

EGG SANDWICHES

Remove the yolks of two hard-boiled eggs and rub smooth. Season with a
little salt, paprika, mustard, and lemon juice or vinegar to stiffen.
Mayonnaise is still better. Add the chopped whites and spread between
slices of buttered bread.

TONGUE-AND-TOMATO SANDWICHES

Cut tongue in delicate slices, or mince fine, and place with thin
slices of raw tomato seasoned with salt and pepper, between thin rounds
of buttered bread.

OYSTER SANDWICHES

Cook the oysters in their liquor about two minutes, stir into a stiff
mayonnaise and spread between slices of sandwich bread. Another way
to make these hearty yet dainty sandwiches is to fry large oysters,
placing one between bread slices.

SANDWICH À LA MARS

Take equal quantities of almonds and walnuts and chop them fine.
Moisten with a little French dressing, then spread on thin slices of
buttered bread. Add a crisp leaf of lettuce to each slice, cover with
the other buttered slice, press together gently, trim off the brown
crust and cut diagonally in two.

_Mrs. William Reinstein_

CELERY SANDWICH

Chop and then pound to a paste the yolks of five hard-boiled eggs, a
small piece of butter, a little salt, a teaspoonful of anchovy sauce,
a teaspoonful of curry powder, a teaspoonful of bread crumbs, and a
tablespoonful of French dressing. The paste should have the consistency
of butter. Spread it between thin slices of buttered bread, placing a
lettuce leaf in each sandwich. Trim and cut in the usual manner.

FISH SANDWICHES

Any cooked fresh fish picked into bits, well seasoned with salt and
pepper and moistened with mayonnaise, makes an excellent filling for a
sandwich. A little chopped pickle is also an addition.

NASTURTIUM SANDWICHES

These are dainty and appetizing. Cut your bread in thin slices, and
butter. Take nasturtium leaves or blossoms that have been laid in cold
water a few moments to crisp, sprinkle with salt, bruise lightly with a
wooden spoon, and place between the slices of buttered bread.

LETTUCE SANDWICHES

An entire leaf of lettuce is seldom used nowadays in a sandwich.
Instead the leaf is cut into ribbons with scissors, put between thin
slices of white bread, well buttered, and seasoned with mayonnaise,
French dressing or salt only as preferred. Lettuce should be crisp
before using.

_Mrs. William Reinstein_

A delicious sandwich is made by creaming together equal parts of
American cheese and butter, seasoning it well with paprika, spreading
it on bread, and sprinkling the layer with minced watercress.

A tasty picnic sandwich is spread with cress, a few thin slivers
of Spanish onion, and a trace of horseradish for zest. Carry these
sandwiches in a box by themselves or they will flavor the entire
luncheon.

For tasty sandwiches, rub the green part of Roquefort cheese to a cream
with butter; add salt and a dash of paprika, moisten with olive oil and
spread between very thin slices of bread. Serve on lettuce leaves.

Cold-lamb sandwiches--very thin slices of the meat nicely salted
between thin slices of bread--are appetizing for a picnic luncheon. If
a glass of currant jelly goes along they will be more popular, however.

Cucumber, green pepper, and lettuce minced and moistened with
mayonnaise make a delicious sandwich filling.

Cream cheese and sliced olives moistened with mayonnaise are an
excellent filling for thin-brown-bread sandwiches.

_Mrs. William Reinstein_

BEVERAGES

GRAPE WINE

Pick grapes from stems, wash, and put through sieve. Then take pulps
and skins, pour on as much water as you wish wine, and let stand a few
days to ferment; then strain. Pour this water on juice and let stand
ten to twelve days to work. Then remove the foam. Take to one gallon
two pounds sugar. Place in jug and let ferment.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

CHERRY SYRUP

Have ripe, juicy, acid cherries; stone them and pound and break
one-eighth of the stones. Cook all together until cherries are soft
and juice free. Squeeze through a bag. To every pint of juice add one
heaping cup of sugar; let boil fifteen minutes. Put in bottles or jars;
seal for use. Keep in a cool place.

_Mrs. P. Levy_

CIDER CUP

One quart of cider, two bottles of soda water, one bottle of lemonade,
one heaping tablespoonful of granulated sugar, a sprig of mint, and
two inches of cucumber. Cut the cucumber into slices without peeling
it. Place it in a pitcher with the sugar, cider, and mint. Allow it to
stand, on ice if possible, for two hours. Then add the lemonade and
soda water and a few pieces of ice, removing the mint.

_H. J. S._

CIDER CUP

Have in a pitcher cracked ice. Over the ice pour a quart of sweet cider
and a bottle of club soda; drop in a few pieces of mint, and, if you
have them, a few thin slices of such fruits as bananas, apples, pears,
etc. Serve at once.

_Mrs. E. O. G._

EGG-NOG

Beat the yolk of one egg very light; add one wine-glass of whiskey drop
by drop until the egg is cooked; next put in one tablespoonful of rum,
one glass of rich milk or cream, and last the white of the egg beaten
to a stiff froth. Nutmeg to taste.

_Mrs. H. J. Sower_

GINGER PUNCH

Chop one pound of ginger, then add two cups of sugar, and one pint of
water. Boil together fifteen minutes. When cool add one cup of orange
juice and strain. This will flavor eight or ten cups of water.

_Mrs. A. Horwich_

STRAWBERRY PUNCH

Stem one quart of ripe strawberries, crush them with half a pint of
raspberries, and strain the juice through a sieve. Make a syrup with
two cupfuls of sugar and one and a half cupfuls of water. Mix with the
juice and syrup a large glass of port wine and keep on ice for several
hours. Serve in small glasses with lady-fingers.

_H. J. S._

MILK PUNCH

To a pint of new milk add two tablespoonfuls of sugar. Stir and
dissolve the sugar; lastly add two tablespoons of wine.

_Mrs. M. Soloman_

CURRANT WATER

One pound of ripe red currants, half a pound of lump sugar, half a
pound of granulated sugar, and six cupfuls of water. Stalk and pick
over the currants, then mash them with a wooden spoon, adding as you do
so one cupful of water. Now put the fruit into a preserving-pan with
the granulated sugar. Stir it over the fire until it begins to simmer,
then rub it through a sieve. Put the lump sugar into a saucepan with
one and a half cupfuls of boiling water; let the sugar dissolve slowly,
then boil it to a syrup; pour this onto the fruit juice, adding one and
a half pints more water. Serve cold.

_Mrs. Max Freid_

CANDY

TAFFY

One cup molasses, one cup granulated sugar, piece of butter size of an
egg, teaspoon vinegar, pinch bi-carbonate soda, peanuts, cocoanuts, or
nuts of any kind may be added to this. Boil molasses, sugar, butter,
and vinegar together until same cracks in cold water. When nearly
finished, add soda and nuts; pour in buttered pan.

_E. L._

BUTTER TAFFY

Two cups of white sugar, three-fourths cup of vinegar (not too strong),
three-fourths cup of butter. Boil until brittle; pour into buttered pan.

_Miss Ray Mayer_

CHOCOLATE CREAMS

Dip plain creams shaped from fondant into melted sweet chocolate and
they become chocolate creams. This dipping must be done quickly.
Nothing is better for holding the creams while dipping than a long
hat-pin. Place on oiled paper to harden.

_Mrs. H. Goodman_

RAW FONDANT

The white of one egg, add an equal quantity of ice water (this may be
exactly ascertained if the white of egg is first measured in a glass);
one teaspoon of extract. Beat until the mixture is light, then add
gradually one pound or more of confectioner’s XXX sugar. Work with a
spoon until smooth and firm.

_Mrs. Hirschberg_

COOKED FONDANT

Place over the fire four cups of XXX sugar, one cup of water. Stir
with a wooden spatula until the sugar is dissolved--no longer. Boil
ten minutes or until it threads. Remove saucepan. Test the fondant
by rubbing a little between the fingers. If it balls, turn into a
bowl. When partly cooked, add flavoring; then beat until stiff enough
to knead with the hands like bread. The fondant may be shaped into
balls, squares, or any form. A little experience will enable one to
do this readily. If vegetable colorings, which are harmless, be used,
the French candies may be more perfectly imitated. For flavoring use
extracts or fruit juice.

_Mrs. M. Soloman_

NOUGAT

To make the most delectable of candies, melt over the fire in a
porcelain-lined dish one pound of fine white sugar with two tablespoons
of water. Have ready one-half a pound of almonds blanched and chopped.
When the syrup begins to turn yellow, add the nuts. Stir for five
minutes; add a little grated lemon peel and pour at once into a
well-oiled flat pan. When partly cooled, mark with a greased knife into
bars.

_Mrs. J. H. Sower_

PEANUT CANDY

Melt slowly in a saucepan one pound of heavy wet brown sugar; add no
water. Shell one quart of freshly roasted peanuts and chop them a
little. When the sugar is cooked to a thick syrup, shake a little salt
over the peanuts, and stir them in. Pour in shallow buttered tins, and
let cool.

_Mrs. A. Cohen_

MENUS

MENUS FOR DINNER

GRAPE-FRUIT RELISHES
CREAM OF ASPARAGUS SOUP
BAKED BLUEFISH--SAUCE HOLLANDAISE
ROMAN PUNCH
TURKEY--CRANBERRY JELLY
POTATOES SPINACH
LETTUCE SALAD
CHARLOTTE GLACÉ CAKES
FRUITS BLACK COFFEE

_E. F. S._

OYSTERS ON HALF SHELL
SALTED ALMONDS OLIVES
BOUILLON EN TASSE
STUFFED TOMATOES ON LETTUCE LEAVES
DRESSED SQUAB
POTATOES PARISIENNE CAULIFLOWER
ASPARAGUS--MAYONNAISE
NUTS SMALL CAKES ICES FRUITS
BLACK COFFEE CLARET OR WHITE WINE

_Mrs. H. J. S._

HORS-D’ŒUVRE
RADISHES OLIVES CELERY SAUTERNE
FISH TIMBALES POTATO BALLS CLARET
SWEETBREADS WITH MUSHROOMS
FILET DE BŒUF
PETIT POIS LETTUCE SALAD
NESSELRODE PUDDING
FRUITS
COFFEE TOASTED CRACKERS FROMAGE

_Mrs. H. Siegel_

MENUS FOR LUNCH

LAMB CHOPS BAKED POTATOES
SALAD CHEESE CRACKERS
NUT CAKE TEA

_E. F. S._

FRIED FISH POTATO BALLS OMELET
FRUIT CAKE, JELLY, OR JAM
TEA OR COFFEE

_E. F. S._

COLD MEATS OR POULTRY
PICKLES FRIED POTATOES
PRESERVES COOKIES
TEA OR COFFEE

_E. F. S._

BREAKFAST MENUS

FRUIT
OATMEAL BOILED EGGS
BREAD BUTTER COFFEE

_Mrs. Joe N._

FRUIT OMELET
ROLLS BUTTER COFFEE

_Mrs. Joe N._

FRUITS
HOT CAKES FRIED FISH TOAST
COFFEE

_Mrs. Joe N._

MENUS FOR RESTRICTED WHIST

CREAM CHEESE ON LETTUCE LEAVES
FRENCH ROLLS BUTTER BALLS
FRUIT CAKE COFFEE

_H. I. S._

TONGUE SANDWICHES OLIVES
FANCY CAKES COFFEE

_H. I. S._

LOBSTER À LA NEWBURG IN RAMEQUINS
HARD-BOILED EGGS SERVED IN LETTUCE NEST
CHEESE STRAWS SALTED ALMONDS
ORANGE LAYER CAKE COFFEE

_H. I. S._

HOUSEHOLD HINTS

ITEMS OF INTEREST AND VALUE

There is nothing like spring sunshine for bringing out scratches and
blemishes on the furniture and marks of wear and tear on carpets and
upholstery. Possibly the housekeeper’s eye is quickened by the approach
of housecleaning paraphernalia, but certain it is that the room that
has worn a respectable air through the winter with the first ardent
glance of old Sol will suddenly reveal no end of defects. For restoring
furniture there are several excellent preparations to be found in the
market, and nearly every housekeeper has her own preference among them.
With one of the good oil polishes, a soft cloth, and plenty of what
is popularly known as “elbow-grease,” very obstinate scratches will
disappear. A vigorous rubbing with a clean flannel cloth should follow
the application of the preparation in all cases.

A mixture of oil and turpentine is the best of restoratives for wood
that has become grimy and dull. The usual formula is three parts
of paraffine oil to one part of turpentine. Be sure that all dust
is removed before the work begins. Moisten a flannel cloth in the
mixture, and apply it to all parts of the wood. In obstinate cases
let the preparation remain on the wood for a time then dust with
rottenstone, moisten again with oil and rub quickly after the oil
is applied. Do not let the rottenstone become dry, or it will still
further blemish the wood. When the work with the rottenstone and oil is
over, follow it up with rubbings with a clean, soft cloth and then with
a polishing with the oil and turpentine described above. There is no
objection to mixing the rottenstone and oil in a dish before the work
begins.

To clean furniture that may have come from the second-hand store or
store-room, where it has been badly soiled, make a mixture of beeswax
and kitchen soap--an ounce of the wax to a quarter of a pound of the
soap. Dissolve the two together over the fire and then stir in half an
ounce of sal-soda. Stir the mixture until it is cold and then mix with
it an equal part of turpentine. A little of this on a soft cloth will
work wonders with old furniture.

The dark fumed oak of the Mission and other popular furniture shapes
sometimes gets marred below its stain. In such cases common oil paints
sold to amateurs for 10 cents and 5 cents a tube may be rung into
service. Burnt umber and lampblack will give the fumed-oak shade. Drop
the umber in a saucer and mix to the desired shade with lampblack,
thinning with linseed oil. Burnt sienna and lampblack toned with yellow
ochre will give mahogany color. Burnt sienna, burnt umber, lampblack,
and yellow ochre mixed in the right proportions give black-walnut
tone. Burnt sienna is about the color of cherry. Raw umber will answer
for most light woods such as ash, oak, and maple. Use brush or cloth in
putting on the colors, according to convenience.

* * * * *

Natural finished willow furniture may be cleaned with soapsuds in which
borax has been dissolved. It should be applied with a scrubbing-brush.
The pieces should be dried very speedily in the sun. Before the
cleaning with water begins, the piece should be thoroughly dusted. This
rule holds good with any article at all that is being washed. All loose
dust should be shaken or brushed off or out before water is applied.

* * * * *

Natural wood should be freed from all loose dust before cleaning and
then may be wiped off with a woollen cloth moistened with oil and
turpentine or with wood alcohol. This treatment should be followed by
a rubbing with a dry woollen cloth to bring out the polish. A woman
who found several dents in the hardwood of her dining-room wainscoting
restored it by laying over each dent a thick pad of wet brown paper, a
wet cloth folded several times over that, and then applying a hot iron
over all. When the pad was about dry it was removed, and if the place
still showed a mar the treatment was repeated.

* * * * *

One housekeeper who is successful in keeping her furniture in polish
washes the varnished-wood frames twice a year with potato water and
then rubs them dry and bright with woollen cloths. The piano receives
the same treatment. The potato water is prepared by soaking uncooked
potatoes sliced thin in cold water for two or three hours and then
straining the water.

* * * * *

An old housekeeper who has several choice Oriental rugs, some of light
color, sees to the cleaning of them herself. They are first swept
thoroughly on both sides on the grass of the back yard. Then, if they
are light-colored, they are covered with cornstarch which has a small
mixture of prepared chalk, and are left for several hours. At the end
of that time they are brushed free from the powder, shaken well and
beaten carefully. Dark ones are covered with hardwood sawdust and left
over night. The next day they are swept with a stiff clean broom, and
then wiped off with a towel wrung out of hot water.

* * * * *

The silver desk furnishings, vases, etc., will retain their gloss with
little extra cleaning if they are polished with a piece of soft silk
several times a week.

* * * * *

Silver should always be thoroughly washed after any cleansing powder or
liquid is used on it.

* * * * *

To clean copper kettles, rub the kettle with a cut lemon dipped in
powdered bath brick. When all stains are removed, wash in warm soapy
water; then dry and polish with powdered bath brick and a soft cloth.

* * * * *

To polish brass trimmings, such as hinges, handles, and other ornaments
of furniture, without marring the wood during the work requires that
the polish shall be beneficial to the wood as well as to the metal. A
mixture of half as much naphtha as paraffine oil and enough powdered
rottenstone to make a soft, thick cream will accomplish the purpose.
It should be applied with wool and should be followed by a rubbing
with a soft cloth. Before polishing the last time it is well to make
an application of dry rottenstone powder to remove all traces of the
naphtha. Unless this is done, the brass will tarnish soon.

* * * * *

White wax packed with white silk or satin will keep the material from
yellowing. It is an old custom to put away the wedding gown in this way.

* * * * *

To take out a blood-stain, cover the spot with cold raw starch, just
wet enough to make a paste, and leave it until it is dry.

* * * * *

To remove wine-stains, spread the blemished fabric over a bowl and pour
boiling salt water through it from a height.

* * * * *

Machine oil should be washed out in cold water before the article
stained with it goes to the laundress.

* * * * *

Javelle water is an antidote for iron rust.

* * * * *

Valuable plaster casts are best cleaned by professional
plaster-workers. Small pieces that have become soiled may be made more
sightly by covering them with whiting and fuller’s earth, wrapping them
in a cloth and leaving them for two or three days. When the powder is
brushed off much of the grime will go with it.

TO PREVENT BREAKING GLASS

In opening a jar of fruit with a knife always insert the blade between
jar and rubber. Prying against the thin edge of the cover bends it out
of shape, perhaps ruining it for future use, and is likely to break the
glass.

TO CUT PLATE GLASS

To cut a piece of plate glass it is thought a diamond-cutter is
necessary, but it is not. If the glass is not very thick it can be cut
with a pair of scissors, a large pair being preferable. While cutting
hold the glass beneath half a foot or more of water, and it can be
readily cut any shape desired. A round piece of glass has been cut out
of a good-sized pane in just this manner. The scissors do not have to
be extra sharp.

“_Success._”

TO REMOVE FRUIT-STAINS

Stained table linen follows the return of the fresh-fruit season as
surely “as night follows day.” For removing such stains there is
nothing more effective than the sulphur bleach. Lay a spoonful of
sulphur on a plate, and sprinkle with a few drops of alcohol. Over this
place a tin funnel with the point upward. Touch a lighted match to
the alcohol; wet the stained linen, and hold the spot over the opening
in the point of the funnel. The sulphur fumes will remove the most
obstinate stain, seldom requiring more than one application. Rinse and
wash the linen at once, to prevent rotting the material.

_“Woman’s Home Companion” for September._

SICKLY PLANTS

Nitrate of soda will rapidly improve the appearance of house plants
that have become sickly. A piece about the size of a marble is enough
for a plant taking a twelve-inch pot.

TO KILL INSECTS

A good solution to kill all insects is to take two pounds of alum and
dissolve it in three or four quarts of boiling water; let it stand on
the stove until the alum is all melted, then apply it with a brush
while very hot to the wainscoting and floor and wherever the vermin
abound.

It is also good to use on pantry shelves and bedsteads, and is a sure
cure for the pests of fleas that are apt to swarm a closed house after
a damp spell in the summer time.

FINE DARNING

In darning a shirtwaist or other garment where it is important that the
place shall not be seen, do the work without putting a piece under the
hole and use very fine thread. If the darning is done well, the spot
will be as strong as the fabric around it and when it is ironed will
be scarcely noticeable. The edges of the material, of course, must be
drawn together in their original position. In mending any fabric, the
direction of the threads should follow, as much as possible, the lines
of the warp and woof. It is advisable sometimes to ravel a thread from
the fabric itself and use it in darning. At other times, when silk is
to be used, it is well to split silk in order to have a flat thread
instead of a round one. It is an old-fashioned idea worth remembering
to use a hair in darning fine wool.

THE SAND-BAG AS A WARMER

A sand-bag as a warmer is said to be greatly superior to a hot-water
bottle, which many people prize so highly. Get some clean, fine sand;
dry it thoroughly; make a bag about eight inches square of flannel,
fill it with dry sand, sew the opening carefully together, and cover
the bag with cotton or linen cloth. This will prevent the sand from
sifting out, and also enable any one to heat the bag quickly by placing
it in an oven or on top of a stove. The sand holds the heat for a long
time.

“_Health._”

USES FOR TURPENTINE

There are few housekeepers who are not familiar with some of the
numerous uses of turpentine, and as its odor is clean and wholesome it
has the advantage over many remedies whose odors are offensive.

Turpentine and soap will remove ink-stains from linen.

A few drops added to water in which clothes are boiled will whiten them.

It will exterminate roaches if sprinkled in their haunts.

Turpentine will remove wheel-grease, pitch, and tar.

A few drops on a woollen cloth will clean tan shoes nicely.

Clean gilt frames with a cloth moistened in turpentine.

Carpets can be cleaned and colors restored by going over occasionally
with a broom dipped in warm water in which a little turpentine is added.

An equal mixture of turpentine and linseed oil will remove white marks
from furniture caused by water.

THINGS TO AVOID

Avoid biting the thread; it is harmful to the teeth.

Never leave matches where rats can get at them.

To remove ink-stains from clothing, soak the spot in sour milk.

Salt and vinegar will be found excellent for scouring copper kettles.

Keep an oyster shell in your tea kettle to prevent the forming of crust.

Delicate glass can be safely washed in very hot water if slipped in
edgewise.

Fill vases one-fourth full of sand to prevent them from being knocked
over and broken.

A little powdered charcoal put in the sink occasionally will keep it
clean and free from odors.

Rubbing chilblains thoroughly with paraffine oil every night for a week
is said to effect a cure.

A little kerosene added to the water with which you wash your windows
will make them much brighter.

A few drops of oil of lavender poured into a glass of hot water and set
in the sick-room will purify it greatly.

Soaking new brooms in strong hot salt water before using them is said
to toughen the bristles, making the brooms more durable.

IN CASE OF FIRE

If smoke is seen pouring out from under a door, do not rush and open
that door. Remember that by so doing you cause a draught which will
fan smouldering timbers into flame. Shut and keep shut all doors and
windows, or other air-channels.

If you have not a hand pump or fire grenades handy, collect as many
pails or jugs of water as possible outside the closed door of the room
which is afire.

Meantime, remember that smoke is almost as dangerous to life as fire. A
soaking-wet towel knotted round the face and nostrils is an excellent
rough-and-ready protection against breathing smoke. So is a wet sponge.

Remember also that smoke rises. Therefore, it is least thick near the
floor. If the smoke be very thick, crawl with your face close against
the floor.

The commonest cause of fire is the upsetting of an oil lamp. Water
will only spread the flames of burning oil, but a hearth-rug will
extinguish them promptly, says “Home Chat.”

Milk will also extinguish burning oil.

Sand or earth or common salt are useful aids to fire-fighting. The
contents of an ordinary flower-pot will stop the spread of the flames
of oil.

WOMAN

It takes a hundred men to make an encampment, but one woman can make a
home. I not only admire woman as the most beautiful creature that was
ever created, but I reverence her as the redeeming glory of humanity,
the sanctuary of all the virtues, the pledge of all perfect qualities
of heart and head. It is not just nor right to lay the sins of men
at the feet of woman. It is because women are so much better than
men, that their faults are considered greater. A man’s desire is the
foundation of his love, but a woman’s desire is born of her love. The
one thing in this world that is constant, the one peak that arises
above all clouds, the one window in which the light forever burns, the
one star that darkness cannot quench, is woman’s love. It rises to
the greatest height, it sinks to the lowest depths, it forgives the
most injuries. It is perennial of life and grows in every climate.
Neither coldness nor neglect, harshness nor cruelty, can extinguish
it. A woman’s love is the perfume of the heart. This is the real
love that subdues the earth; the love that has wrought all miracles
of art; that gives us music all the way from the cradle song to the
grand closing symphony that bears the soul away on wings of fire. A
love that is greater than power, sweeter than life, and stronger than
death.--_Robert G. Ingersoll._

A WOMAN’S HOUSEWORK AS A PHYSICAL-CULTURE SCHOOL

America possesses thousands of girls who find a large part of their
physical culture to perfection in “helping mother,” and they are not
blushing because they do so. For them the vista of possibilities is
long and alluring.

For the arms, fingers, and wrists, they find washing and wiping dishes
admirable; perhaps water helps to make supple the joints, which is an
advantage that dish-washing has over the drying. However, there is a
fine elbow movement in the wiping, too.

Bed-making is still taught in the homely physical economics and cannot
be too highly recommended. With the folding of the counterpane and
sheets, the arms are stretched to their utmost, and while standing
erect, with chest thrown out, breathing is bound to be correct.

Shoulder, torso, and limbs are developed in mattress-lifting, but it
requires a strong woman to do this easily; any hint of spinal affection
is an embargo on the exercise.

Sweeping gives much the same motion as is used in handling golf-clubs.
For perfection of arms and shoulders there is nothing better.

Scrubbing, like lawn tennis, is rather violent and not to be attempted
unless one is sure of the heart. In the beginning it will be as severe
on the knees as is paddling a canoe, but so soon as one becomes
familiar with the work it affords a subtle satisfaction all its own.

Running up and down stairs when mother needs anything is a first-class
exercise; and an interesting diversion, as well as an upper-arm
developer, may be found in egg-beating.

Dusting should have a chapter by itself. First you are down on all
fours, then on tiptoe to see how far the cloth will reach. The
tiptoeing for calf-development is superb.

You twist yourself into all sorts of positions to get at the corners
of the carved furniture. You are on one knee, then on the other. Every
muscle, every tendon is brought into service before you have finished.

KEEP YOUNG

A beautiful woman, who combines in her person a greater number of
charms than do most fascinating women, gives her formula for keeping
young and handsome in spite of a life of constant study, hard work,
and comparatively no play: “Vigilance and determination and perhaps
a little self-sacrifice are the price I pay for being considered a
good-looking woman,” she says.

Remember, this beauty can act and is entitled to be called a star of
the first magnitude. “I am ever on the alert and when I discover
traces of fatigue or any destroying symptoms, I set about at once to
eradicate them. During the theatrical season I don’t attempt to be
anything but a professional woman. I don’t receive, nor do I go to
other people’s houses. I simply haven’t the time and I don’t make it.

“My mode of life is very simple. As a rule I sleep nine or ten hours
out of the twenty-four, never less than eight. I eat regularly
and avoid everything that will give me indigestion. You know that
indigestion is one of beauty’s most powerful foes, a greater enemy than
age, as great even as worry.

“I walk every day, rain or shine, wear a short skirt and low-heeled
shoes. I keep the French heels for the stage. I try not to worry, no
matter what happens, and never tire myself unnecessarily. My method has
no frills or isms; perhaps few women would care to try it. As Turkish
baths agree with me, I am devoted to them, and I consider a good
complexion cream as important, almost, as cold water.”

On Sunday, she explained, she was not obliged to go to the theatre.
“Yet I do not spend that day in idleness nor in receiving visitors.
When one’s hair is five feet long and very thick, it is not an easy
task to have it shampooed, so I am almost ashamed to confess the entire
day is quite given over to self-preservation.

“How do I keep the same weight all the time? Why, by vigilance,
determination, and a good pair of scales frequently consulted. If I
gain a pound I immediately stop drinking at meals and give up sugar and
sweets absolutely. Yes, even water is tabooed. This all sounds very
simple, but, of course, it precludes much pleasure and relaxation.”

There, mesdames, you have the beauty régime of a woman who always
pleases her public and who possesses the love and admiration of
countless friends. She is no longer in her girlhood, yet gives not the
faintest indication of maturity. Her figure is slender and svelte, a
succession of soft curves, with not a bone to disfigure its surface.
Her skin is fresh and pink as a small child’s and her hair shows
vigorous health.

While all women may not be beautiful, cleanliness and fine grooming
and an ordinary amount of exercise will render them most attractive.
Stout women should bathe oftener than lean ones, but let them avoid
the use of hot water; it has a tendency to produce headache with the
full-blooded individual. Always follow a warm bath with a dash of cold
water--it contracts the pores and inspires circulation. For persons
with weak nerves, sponging is better than tubbing or the shock of the
shower. Cold water must be used with judgment.

A hot foot bath accompanied by vigorous rubbing is often beneficial in
cases of insomnia. In bathing be careful to “go beneath the upper layer
of the skin, get down to the underlying tissues,” and give them the
benefit of the friction. The mere exercise attendant upon rubbing the
body is salutary and helps in a great measure to keep circulation at
top notch.

Laxity or downright laziness in home bathing is one of the sins of the
age, though one may not deny that this century is the apotheosis of
cleanliness as compared to the methods adopted by the beauties of long
ago. A flick of the wash rag constituted their daily ablution, and the
weekly bath was looked upon as a function.

Lean persons should be wary of the Turkish bath, while the victim of
corpulency must avoid the Russian. The Roman bath, in reality an oil
bath, is productive of flesh, therefore beneficial to badly nourished
bodies. Bathing should never be indulged in directly after eating and
never carried to the point of over-exertion.

After a fatiguing day a woman can do nothing which will more quickly
restore tone to throbbing nerves, rob strained, tense muscles of
their aching weariness, and refit her for the duties of housekeeper
and hostess, than to take some kind of aromatic bath or to follow the
ordinary warm bath by spraying the whole body with eau de cologne.

If the head aches, bathe the face in hot, perfumed water, do it
slowly, rubbing the forehead and temples in a rotary motion and let
the hot cloth linger behind the ears and on the nape of the neck. This
treatment will do as much for you as an hour’s sleep.

A salt rub is also a tonic and should be taken in the morning, after a
tepid bath; take a handful of damp sea salt and rub it vigorously upon
the body. Follow this with a rapid sponging of the stinging spray.

Oatmeal bags are pleasant and easily prepared. At home you can make a
dozen for the price of one. They whiten the skin and give it a velvety
softness, besides imparting a delicate fragrance.

Make the bags of cheesecloth, about four inches square, and fill them
loosely with the following mixture: Five pounds of oatmeal, one pound
of powdered Florentine orris, one pound of almond meal and half a pound
of pure castile soap scraped to a powder. One bag will be sufficient
for a bath.

THE CARE OF THE HANDS

Many a woman who gives time and thought to the art of pleasing, who
bemoans natural shortcomings or physical defects, is unconscious of the
power and fascination that a well-developed and well-cared-for hand
wields in a most subtle fashion. Very often the soul speaks through the
hand when a halting tongue refuses speech. Conceal natural instincts as
you will, the hands ofttimes betray them. Hide them, transform them,
the hand, still true to nature, defies your efforts.

Lavater says: “The hand, whether in motion or repose, has an expression
of its own that is not to be mistaken. When in perfect rest it shows
what are our traits of character; its flexions betray what are our
actions and our passions.” In all ages homage has been paid to the
hand, and its study was held in honor by the wisest philosophers of
ancient Greece. Italy’s great poet Petrarch confessed that Laura’s
“beautiful hand made captive his heart.”

To the student or one blessed with natural discernment, the shape,
texture, and color of the hand reveal the secrets of the soul. Good
blood and breeding are to be discovered, and, though the poise of head
and grace of carriage be acquired, the contour of wrist, palm, and
finger remains obstinately natural.

What the mind conceives the hands put into execution, and what the
heart wills the hand makes possible. Upon the palm are found more or
less indications of the physical and mental attitudes of men--their
appetites, instincts, and ambitions. A narrow palm suggests feeble
temperament, lacking force of imagination, while too broad a one
denotes egotism and sensuality. A nature capable of great enjoyment
and the possessor of a lively imagination develops a supple and fairly
generous expanse of palm; but the hard, thick hand ofttimes lacks
intelligence.

Knotty fingers, when not the result of gout, indicate originality; the
smooth taper finger means love of art and a predominance of sentiment
over reason. Square fingers denote method, and the spatulate show
ability, tact, and action. Very rare is the psychic hand with its
slim tapering fingers, its snowy texture and wonderful softness. Well
for the world that it is uncommon, lacking as it does usefulness and
industry.

That the hands are capable of improvement, so far as texture is
concerned, is demonstrated by the secrets of my lady’s boudoir. There
are different exercises for relaxing and contracting the muscles, which
unite in imparting suppleness and expression. Given over to contact
with everything that can spoil, soil, and deform them, how shall one
keep their beauty? Cleanliness is the first and most important factor,
and pure castile soap is always reliable, but frequent washings are
unnecessary for softening the skin. The hands should be washed only
when necessary, in neither very hot nor very cold water. Avoid all
extremes of temperature. Soft water is imperative, however, and wheat,
bran, or almond meal thrown in the basin will be found beneficial;
after which rub the skin with almond oil, cold cream, or some simple
lotion. There is an old-fashioned but safe method of whitening the
hands. Take some horse chestnuts, peel, dry, and then pound them in a
mortar until they become a fine powder. A pinch of this flour thrown
into a pint of water and stirred will make it white and milky, a
delicious substitute for soap on a cold day, when the skin is apt to
chap unless great care be given to drying the hands.

Milk is also marvelous for bleaching, but it is a luxury not suited to
all purses. Lemon juice may be used to remove stains from the hands.
Tomatoes will produce the same effect. For a stubborn mark, rub gently
with a piece of fine toilet pumice; but beware of injuring the texture
of the skin.

After a thorough cleansing comes the manicuring of the nails, which
with a little experience may be accomplished at home with excellent
results. The flesh surrounding the nails should be pressed back very
gently to its proper place. Be careful not to tear or bruise it, else
a jagged appearance will result, necessitating clipping, which always
encourages growth. An orange stick is a necessary adjunct to the
toilet; by its aid the nails can be probed and cleaned without fear of
injury. A white crescent at the base, a rosy tint in the middle, and a
white transparent border with a polished (not too highly) surface are
the marks of well-cared-for nails.

Do not have them too long, else they are liable to break; curve on
either side, with the deepest portion projecting just far enough to
protect the ball of the finger. Do not scrape with pointed instruments
of steel. It takes a long time for a bruised surface to resume normal
conditions. Gloves, worn when unpleasant work is necessary, should be
loose. Before putting them on it is a good idea to cover the hands
with a light layer of oil of sweet almonds or vaseline. This prevents
callous spots, and the process of softening will be in progress during
the occupation.

YOUR “LAUGH” LINES

It was long the popular belief that wrinkles are caused chiefly
by sorrow and care. Up pops somebody in this twentieth century to
denounce that theory and to declare that the merry folk are far oftener
afflicted than the sorrowful and that laughter more frequently furrows
the face than tears.

It is a rather happy suggestion; not that wrinkles are welcome, but
that cheerfulness is a heaven-sent gift and should be received with
grateful hearts. Let laughter ring out loud and long. It is infectious.
It uplifts those who hear it. If it brings wrinkles, you may be sure it
displaces more hideous lines.

If home were made more cheerful, the law would clutch less often at
the throats of criminals and the institutions would open their doors
to fewer refugees. We know, when night comes, mothers are tired and
husbands fractious with bile and business. The good woman would like
to sit down to an interesting book and the man to his newspaper and
silence, each feeling the comfort is well deserved from duties well
performed.

But have they the right and is it safe to follow the natural bent? Boys
and girls will have fun; they will have room and place for noise and
laughter and the irresponsible bubbling of youthful spirits. If these
be not accorded to them in their home they will surely seek and find
diversion outside.

She is the wise mother who, in addition to her deeper anxieties and
solicitude, draws and holds with her own largeness of spirit the
expanding natures of her laughing girl and rollicking boy. To do this
she must be as quick to laugh as to cry with them, recognizing the
drollery of their wit and giving it welcome.

There is the cheerful woman who puts herself out to be pleasant to
her friends. Meet her on the street and she will treat you to a
cheery smile and a soft greeting that has a sweet little melody all
its own. Such a woman makes the nightingales sing in one’s heart. She
doesn’t send souls into deep mourning as does the whiny woman or the
grouchy person or the suffering sister with woes that bury you like an
avalanche.

Plenty of persons have troubles, but they don’t shake them out and
beat the dust out of them and hang them up in the air all the time and
display them for the entertainment of their acquaintances. There is no
such thing as being without troubles, and when you run across a woman
who gives you a smile and a bright little word don’t tell yourself that
it is easy for her, that she hasn’t anything to worry about.

One never knows. She may have, all buried in the depths of her heart,
more trouble to the square inch than you have ever heard about. It
doesn’t pay to be grumpy. Not a bit of it. It doesn’t pay to be a
member of the Tearful Society, either. The only thing that counts is a
brave heart filled to the roof with simple, honest charity.

You have seen those awful parlors, haven’t you, in the country
districts, where the shades are always drawn and Mme. Moth has garden
parties in every corner of the carpet and funereal pictures hang from
the wall, and when you open the door you are struck deaf, dumb, blind,
and senseless with the frightful mustiness that finally chases you out
in the free air?

Some persons shut up their hearts just the same way. Open up the
windows. Let sunshine fairies mob the place. Scatter the moths of
mortal mind helter-skelter and dig out the bad-conscience corners.
You will have a nice, clean, hygienic feeling after your heart
housecleaning.

Suddenly you will find you are having a garden party there; you will
find yourself entertaining beautiful thoughts, and you will wonder
how you ever lived under the old régime when you displayed so little
hospitality. It is a fine thing to know how to welcome the big feelings
of life. Don’t forget that laughter is a good tonic and a near-panacea
for many ills.

LOTION FOR THAT “TIRED” FEELING

Take one-quarter pint of alcohol--the recipe can be doubled or tripled
if desired--one ounce each of spirits of camphor and ammonia, two and a
half ounces of sea salt and one pint of boiling water; mix thoroughly
and always shake before using. If a woman comes in tired from a day’s
shopping, a long walk, or any other wearying exertion, apply the tonic
to the face and arms, and it will magically remove all of that “tired”
feeling and put one in fine condition for the evening.

Another delightful and refreshing bath water, which is said to come
from Portugal, is made from two and one-half ounces each of eau de
rose and eau fleur d’orange, one and a quarter ounces of eau de myrte,
one-half drachm of essence of ambergris and one-quarter drachm of
essence of musk. After thoroughly commingling the ingredients, keep
closely corked in a bottle for a week in the dark--it were better if
it remained even two weeks--then pour off the clear liquid. A little
poured into the basin of water in which the face is washed will revive
and freshen the complexion wonderfully.

ONE SIDE OF THE FINANCIAL QUESTION BETWEEN MAN AND WIFE

The philosophy of clothes is a serious study, and instead of
being frowned upon by men, who invariably associate it with wild
extravagance, it should be incorporated as first among the bylaws
of home life. Women in many cases are largely responsible for the
troubles and misunderstandings which arise, brought about, as they
often are, on the very threshold of married life.

When a husband admires the stylish appearance of his bride’s traveling
gown she is apt to be tempted by the irresponsible imp of mischief
to answer, “It cost but a trifle.” In fact, she may burst out with
the fiction that she “never spends money on gowns.” This small and
unnecessary explosion may win her a tithe of praise at the moment; but
it also paves the way for an embarrassing future if she proposes to
live up to the fairy tale.

It is curious that the most honest, frank, and truthful women will
often hesitate or even fib when asking for domestic expenses, and the
most generous and loyal fellow in the world, who lives to spend his
dollars like the farmer sows his wheat, looks “concerned,” to be mild
in our expression, when the woman whom he loves and trusts looks to him
for the weekly stipend.

The wife of a millionaire, who never made anything but her own
complexion, boasted that her husband was under the impression that
she designed and made her own gowns and bonnets. This she had told
him on their wedding journey, and she could never pluck up courage to
undeceive him.

A little honesty at the start would make the financial side of
matrimony much more pleasant; hence it is difficult to understand why
a woman prevaricates when the broad way of truth is easier--unless,
indeed, she be tied to a man who “rows” every time money is mentioned.

Perhaps he doesn’t mean it. So few of them understand that the very
need of asking hurts and humiliates, even grieves, a proud woman.

A fine, jolly man rallied his wife once on her diffidence in this
manner: “Ashamed to come to me for anything? Nonsense! You can come to
me as you go to God.” And he never realized the supreme egotism of his
speech. So long as she did not smile over it, all went well.

Women hesitate to discuss unpleasant matters with their husbands, and
at an early stage they are made to feel that money is an extremely
unpleasant subject. Hence they resort to all sorts of foolish
subterfuges to obtain possession without open speech. This does not
class them among deceivers. A woman is simply more careful than a man
in her methods, fearing she will give offence.

Nature sets us an example for “all things new.” She never wears the
castaway leaves of past seasons. There is no remade foliage on the
trees, no flaunting of spring colors in November. The late skies are
veiled in tints the summer never saw and the earth in her old age is as
changeful as a merry maid in her teens.

The influence of dress is greater than we will acknowledge. We feel
better, act better and bring more honor to those who love us when we
are properly gowned. An ill-dressed woman may possess the wisdom of a
sage, or the beauty of a goddess; but among her sisters she is at a
tremendous disadvantage unless she is like unto them in the glory of
her raiment.

SHOULD HE MARRY?

The Man--

Who goes home to grumble and growl;

Who thinks he can keep house much better than his wife;

Who cannot remember his wife’s birthday nor the anniversary of their
marriage;

Who believes that no one below the status of an angel should be his
helpmate;

Who decides his wife is “fixed” for the season if she has one new gown;

Who imagines a woman’s bonnet should cost about $1.95;

Who fancies that his wife exists for the comfort and convenience of his
mother and sisters;

Who provides himself with a family and trusts in providence to produce
a home and something to eat;

Who labors under the delusion that his wife’s money belongs to him;

Who advises his sick wife to be up and doing and she will feel ever so
much better;

Who doesn’t know what a woman wants with ready cash when she has credit
at a dry-goods store;

Who forgets his manners as soon as he steps across his own threshold;

Who thinks a dining-room carpet should last a lifetime;

Who constantly talks about supporting a wife, when she is working
fourteen hours a day, including Sunday;

Who declares it all nonsense for a woman to want a ten-cent bunch of
violets when she hasn’t seen a flower for five months;

Who quotes the Apostle Paul on the “woman question” and firmly believes
the mantle of the holy man has fallen upon his shoulders;

Who looks upon his wife as a mental waste-paper basket into which he
dumps the chips of ideas he has collected during the day.

SHOULD SHE MARRY?

The Woman--

Who buys for the mere pleasure of buying;

Who expects a declaration of love three times a day;

Who anticipates in married life a good easy snap;

Who thinks it cheaper to buy bread than bake it;

Who would rather die than wear the same bonnet the second season;

Who wants to refurnish her house every spring;

Who stays at home only because she has no other place to visit;

Who would rather nurse a pug dog than a baby;

Who thinks she can get $5,000 worth of style out of a $1,000 salary;

Who does not realize how many pennies, nickels, dimes, quarters, and
halves there are in $1;

Who marries in order to have some one pay her bills;

Who thinks embroidered centre-pieces and doylies are of more importance
than sheets, pillow-cases, and blankets;

Who buys bric-à-brac for her drawing-room and borrows kitchen utensils
from her neighbors;

Who cares more for the style of her winter furs than she does for the
health and comfort of her family;

Who thinks the cook and nursemaid can run the house;

Who weeps over the woes of the heroine in a trashy novel while ignoring
domestic tragedies directly under her own nose.

DON’TS UP TO DATE

FOLLOW RULES AND BE HEALTHY AND WISE, IF NOT OTHERWISE

Don’t exercise after you feel exhausted.

Don’t fail to laugh at your husband’s jokes.

Don’t treat your family to a morning view of hair-curlers.

Don’t neglect the daily bath if you want a radiant complexion.

Don’t forget that diet, quiet, and sleep are the hand-maidens of beauty.

Don’t be afraid of sunshine and fresh air; they give bloom and color.

Don’t wear the high collar. It ruins the line and curve of the neck and
hardens the flesh and often leaves its mark.

Don’t talk when you are hoarse. Your voice may be permanently lost or
difficulties of the throat result.

Don’t ride in an open carriage or near the open window of a car after
playing golf or exercising in a vigorous way.

Don’t exercise one part of the body too much and another not at all.
Let the development be symmetrical.

Don’t become so burdened with the accumulation of knowledge that you
cannot spare time for a good hearty laugh.

Don’t think any “old dress will do for home.” Always wear a pretty and
becoming gown.

Don’t tell your husband you wish you hadn’t married him. The chances
are that you don’t wish it any more than he does.

Don’t believe you can get rid of wrinkles by filling in the crevices
with powder. Instead, give your face a warm bath and good scrub, night
and morning.

Don’t take a long walk or undertake much household work before
breakfast. Vitality is not at its best early in the morning. Strength
increases as the sun rises and one is stronger about midday.

TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:

Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.