Transcriber’s Notes

Text printed in italics in the source document have been transcribed
_between underscores_; small capitals have been replaced with ALL
CAPITALS.

The language used is that of the source document; inconsistencies
have not been addressed.

Table of Contents: the chapter title for chapter VI does not agree
with the headings (_Suggestions_ and _Receipts_) in the text.

THE CHOCOLATE-PLANT
(THEOBROMA CACAO)
AND
ITS PRODUCTS.

[Illustration: THE FRUITING-STEM OF A CHOCOLATE-PLANT, THE FLOWERS,
YOUNG FRUIT, AND RIPENED POD ALL SPRINGING FROM THE OLDER WOOD.]

DORCHESTER, MASS.:
WALTER BAKER AND COMPANY.
1891.

_Copyright, 1890_,
BY WALTER BAKER AND COMPANY.

University Press:
JOHN WILSON AND SON, CAMBRIDGE.

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER PAGE

INTRODUCTORY 5

I. OUTLINE OF THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE CHOCOLATE PLANT. -- ITS
PRIMITIVE CULTIVATION. -- EARLY METHODS OF UTILIZING THE
SEEDS. -- INTRODUCTION OF THE BEVERAGE INTO EUROPE 7

II. THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE CHOCOLATE PLANT. -- THE PRESENT
RANGE OF THE PLANT UNDER MODERN METHODS OF CULTIVATION. --
COMMERCIAL RELATIONS 16

III. THE SEEDS OF THE CHOCOLATE PLANT, AS THEY APPEAR IN COMMERCE.
-- THEIR MICROSCOPIC AND CHEMICAL CHARACTER 23

IV. MANUFACTURE OF CHOCOLATE, AND BREAKFAST COCOA 26

V. SOME PHYSIOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF CHOCOLATE SEEDS. -- VALUE OF
CHOCOLATE AS AN ARTICLE OF FOOD. -- APPLICATIONS OF
COCOA-BUTTER 32

VI. A FEW CULINARY RELATIONS OF CHOCOLATE AND BREAKFAST COCOA, BY
MRS. ELLEN H. RICHARDS AND MISS PARLOA 35

INTRODUCTORY.

Four years ago, a convenient handbook on the production and use of
various preparations of the chocolate plant was published by our firm.
The present work is designed to give, with considerably more detail,
some of the interesting facts relative to the early history and
cultivation of the chocolate tree, as well as a fuller account of its
botany and the chemistry of its products. Since this _brochure_ will
doubtless fall into the hands of some who do not have access to the
earlier work, we have used with freedom some of the material employed
in that; but we hope that these necessary repetitions will increase
instead of impair the value of the pages now before the reader.

We trust that this second treatise may be acceptable to our many
friends who gave so warm a welcome to the first.

WALTER BAKER AND COMPANY.

DORCHESTER, MASSACHUSETTS,
1891.

THE CHOCOLATE-PLANT.

I.

OUTLINE OF THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE CHOCOLATE-PLANT.

At the discovery of America, the natives of the narrower portion of
the continent bordering on the Caribbean Sea, were found in possession
of two luxuries which have been everywhere recognized as worthy of
extensive cultivation; namely, tobacco and chocolate. The former
of these has made its way into climates totally unlike that of its
early home; the other of these plants, since it cannot bear the low
temperature occasionally experienced in our subtropics, is more
restricted in its range. The chocolate-plant is confined to the warmer
regions of the globe, where it finds the congenial climatic conditions
which it enjoyed and still enjoys in its earliest home in America.

The first references to the chocolate-plant and its products are found
in the accounts of the explorers and conquerors who followed Columbus.
These first descriptions of this singular tree, of its fruits and
seeds, of its uses and the methods of cultivation, are remarkably
accurate in all essential particulars.

[Illustration]

One of the earliest, if not indeed the very earliest, delineations of
the chocolate-tree is in a rare volume by Bontekoe. The engraving,
which is here reproduced with fidelity, represents the chocolate-tree
with its comparatively large fruits or pods borne on the main stem.
This might be thought at first to be an error of the artist, but it is
in fact a rude expression of one of the most remarkable peculiarities
of the plant. As will be shown presently, when a fuller description
of the plant is given, the fruits are, as a rule, formed on the older
parts. Another interesting feature is shown in the engraving:[1] the
chocolate-tree is sheltered by a larger tree of some other kind near
it. We shall see shortly, that this practice of planting a sheltering
tree to shade the young chocolate plants for a time, is still kept
up wherever the plant is successfully cultivated. It is certainly
interesting that this point in cultivation, which might easily have
been thought to be accidental or local, was delineated more than three
centuries ago. By the natives of tropical America, the seeds of the
chocolate-plant, which will be more particularly described in a later
chapter, were first roasted and then rudely ground. For this purpose
they employed the flat or curved surface of the sort of stone used by
them to grind their maize, or Indian corn. In the engraving, one of the
most simple mills or flat mortars is seen with its roller. The roller
was merely a short thick stone of a cylindrical shape, which could be
used with one or both hands somewhat after the manner of the common
rolling-pin everywhere used in kitchens. By this simple appliance, the
crushed seeds were mixed with various ingredients, among which may be
mentioned spices of different kinds. A modification of this was later
used in Spain. See page 15.

[1] The figure in the left of the foreground is said by Bontekoe to
represent the native method of procuring fire by rapidly twirling a
pointed stick in a groove of a piece of wood placed on the ground.

[Illustration: FROM A PHOTOGRAPH OF A STONE MILL, OR FLAT MORTAR.]

The drinks made from this coarse chocolate were frequently very
complex, but the chocolate itself was the chief constituent. It was the
custom to beat the mixture into a froth or foam, by means of stirrers,
of mallet-like forms; in fact, it is said by some writers that the very
name chocolate, is derived from a native word indicating the noise made
by the stirring of the beverage.

Thus, Thomas Gage, in his “New Survey of the West Indies,” says
(under date of 1648), “The name chocolatte is an Indian name, and is
compounded from _atte_, as some say, or as others, _atle_, which in the
Mexican language signifieth water, and from the sound which the water
(wherein is put the chocolatte) makes, as _choco_, _choco_, _choco_,
when it is stirred in a cup by an instrument called a ‘molinet,’ or
‘molinillo,’ until it bubble and rise unto a froath.”

[Illustration: SOME OF THE FORMS OF CHOCOLATE STIRRERS (“MOLINETS”).

_From a treatise published in the Seventeenth Century._]

The same writer gives us an interesting account of the native method of
preparing the drink. From the extract, which is copied without change
of the quaint spelling, it will be seen how wide the use of chocolate
was in Europe towards the middle of the seventeenth century:--

“Now, for the making or compounding of this drink, I shall set down
here the method. The cacao and the other ingredients must be beaten
in a morter of stone, or (as the Indians use) ground upon a broad
stone, which they call _Metate_, and is only made for that use. But
first the ingredients are all to be dried, except the _Achiotte_,
with care that they be beaten to powder, keeping them still in
stirring that they be not burnt, or become black; for if they be
overdried, they will be bitter and lose their virtue. The cinnamon
and the long red pepper are to be first beaten with the anniseed, and
then the cacao, which must be beaten by little and little till it
be all powdered, and in the beating it must be turned round that it
may mix the better. Every one of these ingredients must be beaten by
itself, and then all be put into the vessel where the cacao is, which
you must stir together with a spoon, and then take out that paste,
and put it into the morter, under which there must be a little fire,
after the confection is made; but if more fire be put under than will
only warm it, then the unctuous part will dry away. The _Achiotte_
also must be put in in the beating, that it may the better take the
colour. All the ingredients must be searced, save only the cacao,
and if from the cacao the dry shell be taken, it will be the better.
When it is well beaten and incorporated (which will be known by the
shortnesse of it), then with a spoon (so in the Indias is used) is
taken up some of the paste, which will be almost liquid, and made
into tablets, or else without a spoon put into boxes, and when it is
cold it will be hard.

“Those that make it into tablets put a spoonful of the paste upon
a piece of paper (the Indians put it upon the leaf of a plaintin
tree), where, being put into the shade (for in the sun it melts and
dissolves), it grows hard; and then bowing the paper or leaf, the
tablet fals off by reason of the fatnesse of the paste. But if it be
put into anything of earth or wood, it stickes fast, and will not
come off but with scraping or breaking. The manner of drinking it
is diverse; the one (being the way most used in Mexico) is to take
it hot with Atolle, dissolving a tablet in hot water, and stirring
and beating it in the cup, when it is to be drunk, with a Molinet,
and when it is well stirred to a scumme, or froth, then to fill the
cup with hot Atolle, and so drink it sup by sup. Another way is that
the chocolate, being dissolved with cold water and stirred with
the Molinet, and the scumme being taken off and put into another
vessel, the remainder be set upon the fire, with as much sugar as
will sweeten it, and when it is warme, then to powre it upon the
scumme which was taken off before, and so to drink it. But the most
ordinary way is to warme the water very hot, and then to powre out
half the cup full that you mean to drink; and to put into it a tablet
or two, or as much as will thicken reasonably the water, and then
grinde it well with the Molinet, and when it is well ground and risen
to a scumme, to fill the cup with hot water, and so drink it by
sups (having sweetened it with sugar), and to eat it with a little
conserve or maple bred, steeped into the chocolatte.

“Besides these ways there is another way (which is much used in
the Island of Santo Domingo), which is to put the chocolatte into
a pipkin with a little water, and to let it boyle well till it be
dissolved, and then to put in sufficient water and sugar according
to the quantity of the chocolatte, and then to boyle it again untill
there comes an oily scumme upon it, and then to drink it.

“There is another way yet to drink chocolatte, which is cold, which
the Indians use at feasts to refresh themselves, and it is made after
this manner: The chocolatte (which is made with none, or very few,
ingredients) being dissolved in cold water with the Molinet, they
take off the scumme or crassy part, which riseth in great quantity,
especially when the cacao is older and more putrefied. The scumme
they lay aside in a little dish by itself, and then put sugar into
that part from whence was taken the scumme, and then powre it from
on high into the scumme, and so drink it cold. And this drink is so
cold that it agreeth not with all men’s stomachs; for by experience
it hath been found that it doth hurt by causing pains in the stomach,
especially to women.

“The third way of taking it is the most used, and thus certainly
it doth no hurt, neither know I why it may not be used as well in
England as in other parts, both hot and cold; for where it is so
much used, the most, if not all, as well in the Indias as in Spain,
Italy, Flanders (which is a cold countrey), find that it agreeth
well with them. True it is, it is used more in the Indias than in
the European parts, because there the stomachs are more apt to faint
than here, and a cup of chocolatte well confectioned comforts and
strengthens the stomach. For myself I must say, I used it twelve
years constantly, drinking one cup in the morning, another yet before
dinner between nine or ten of the clock; another within an hour or
two after dinner, and another between four and five in the afternoon;
and when I was purposed to sit up late to study, I would take another
cup about seven or eight at night, which would keep me waking
till about midnight. And if by chance I did neglect any of these
accustomed houres, I presently found my stomach fainty. And with this
custome I lived twelve years in those parts healthy, without any
obstructions, or oppilations, not knowing what either ague or feaver
was.”

After its introduction into Europe from America, chocolate was used at
first only as a luxury, but it has steadily advanced in popular esteem
until it is now recognized as one of the necessaries of life.

[Illustration: FRONTISPIECE OF ONE OF THE EARLIEST WORKS ON CHOCOLATE.]

It would be interesting to speculate as to the accidents which led to
the original use of such beverages as coffee, tea, and chocolate. The
earliest employment of the two former is veiled in as deep a mystery
as that which surrounds the chocolate-plant. All were used at the
outset by what we have been accustomed to call the uncultivated races
of mankind, but we cannot surmise what first attracted their attention
to these plants. One can only say that by the natives of lands
where the plants grow naturally, they have all been used from time
immemorial, and that all three are welcome gifts from a rude state of
civilization to the highest which exists to-day. By the savages and the
Aztecs of America, by the roving tribes of Arabia, and by the dwellers
in the farther East, the virtues of these three plants were recognized
long before any one of them was introduced into Europe.

There is reason to believe that long before the discovery of America,
Tea and Coffee had been vaguely known to travellers in the Orient,
as curiosities, much as we to-day regard the Kola-nut and Maté, but
neither Tea nor Coffee was then employed as a beverage anywhere in
Western Europe. In fact, all trustworthy evidence in the case leads us
to a surprising conclusion, namely, That _Chocolate was the first of
these beverages to attract the attention of Europeans_. This beverage
rapidly made its way throughout Europe, beginning from Spain and
Portugal, whither its discoverers had brought it. The other beverages,
Tea and Coffee, soon followed, and after a short time became associated
together in popular regard.

In a duodecimo work published in 1685, and now very rare, the beverages
derived from these three plants are described in a clear and forcible
manner. The reproduction of the frontispiece of this book, given above,
shows how intimate the association of these beverages was regarded
even two centuries ago. It is interesting to observe the distinction
made by the artist in the receptacles and cups for holding these three
different drinks. On the floor, near the vase, is seen one of the
chocolate-stirrers described on page 10.

At the outset the manufacture of chocolate in Europe was carried on
with substantially the same appliances as those used by the natives. A
curious indication of this is afforded by the engraving, which shows
that the Portuguese mill was to all intents modelled after that used by
the Mexicans.

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE-GRINDING IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.

_From an early engraving._]

II.

THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE CHOCOLATE-PLANT.

[Illustration: THEOBROMA CACAO.]

The chocolate plant is known to botanists as _Theobroma Cacao_. The
first or generic word in this name means _food of the gods_. The genus
contains six species, only one of which is generally cultivated. It is
probable, however, that some of the seeds which find their way into
commerce are yielded by other and wild species. It is, moreover, more
than likely that among the numerous varieties of Theobroma Cacao now
cultivated there may be some hybrids between the different forms.

[Illustration: FLOWERS, FRUIT, AND SEEDS OF THEOBROMA.

_From an old engraving._]

The plant belongs to the Sterculiaceæ, a natural order containing
forty-one genera and five hundred and twenty species. The general habit
of the tree is well shown in the engraving.

[Illustration: FLOWERS, FRUIT, AND SEEDS OF THEOBROMA.

_From a recent drawing._]

The seeds of the plant are borne in pods, represented in the
illustrations on pages 17 and 18, the former taken from one of the
early works on the subject. No. 1 in the first engraving exhibits the
ripened pod, 5 and 6 the fruits in different stages of growth. No. 2
shows the pod cut open and displays some of the seeds, while 3 and 4
are the seeds themselves,--the former in its natural state, the latter
with the seed-coats removed.

The pod is irregular and angular, much like some forms of cucumbers,
but more pointed at the lower extremity, and more distinctly grooved.
It measures in length nine inches to a foot, or even more, and about
half as much in diameter. The color, when young, is green, becoming
later dark yellow or yellowish brown. The rind is thick and tough. The
pod is filled with closely packed “beans,” or seeds, imbedded in a mass
of cellular tissue, sometimes of pleasant subacid taste. The seeds
are about as large as ordinary almonds, whitish when fresh, and of a
disagreeable bitter taste. When dried they become brown.

The fruits are about four months in ripening; but they appear and
mature the whole year through. In point of fact, however, there are
chief harvests, usually in early spring, but this is different for
different countries.

The following extract from a comparatively recent consular report gives
a clear idea of the modern method of cultivating the plant in some
parts of South America. The extract was given in our former edition,
but it is thought best to transcribe it here.

“The tree grows to the average height of thirteen feet, and from
five to eight inches in diameter, is of spreading habit and healthy
growth, and although requiring much more care and attention than the
coffee-tree, yet its equally reliable crops require comparatively
little labor in properly preparing for the market.

“... There are two varieties of the cocoa-tree cultivated in
Venezuela, known as El Criollo and El Trinitario, respectively, the
former of which, though not so prolific, nor as early fruiting as
the latter, is yet superior to it in size, color, sweetness, and
oleaginous properties of the fruit, and in the fact that it always
finds ready sale, while the latter is often dull or neglected. The
difference in price of the two varieties is also marked, the former
being quoted at $28 to $30 per fanega (110 pounds), while the latter
commands approximately half that price.

“While coffee can be successfully cultivated under a temperature
of 60 degrees F., the cocoa-tree, for proper development and
remunerative crops, requires a temperature of 80 degrees F.; hence
the area of the cocoa belt is comparatively restricted, and the
cocoa-planter presumably has not to fear the fierce competition that
he has encountered in the cultivation of cotton and coffee. Besides
the condition of temperature above stated, this crop needs a moist
soil and humid atmosphere; and so the lands along the coast of the
Caribbean sea, sloping from the mountain-tops to the shore, bedewed
by the exhalations of the sea and irrigated by the numerous rivulets
that course down the valleys, are found to be, in all respects, well
adapted to the profitable cultivation of cocoa. And while the lands
in the interior possessing facilities for irrigation may be said to
be equally as good for the purpose, yet the absence of roads, and
the consequently difficult transportation of produce on the backs of
donkeys over rugged mountain paths, materially reduce the profits on
the crop before it reaches the market.

“A cocoa plantation is set in quite the same manner as an
apple-orchard, except that the young stalks may be transplanted from
the nursery after two months’ growth. No preparation of the soil is
deemed necessary, and no manures are applied. The young trees are
planted about fifteen feet equidistant, which will accommodate two
hundred trees to the acre. Between rows, and at like spaces, are
planted rows of the Bucare, a tree of rapid growth, that serves to
shade the soil as well as to shield the young trees from the torrid
sun. Small permanent trenches must be maintained from tree to tree
throughout the entire length of the rows, so that, at least once in
the week, the stream, descending from the mountains, may be turned
into these little channels and bear needful moisture to trees and
soil. At the age of five years the plantation begins to bear fruit,
and annually yields two crops, that ripening in June being termed the
crop of San Juan, and that maturing at Christmas being known as the
crop of La Navidad. The average age to which the trees attain, under
proper care, may be estimated at forty years, during which period
it will give fair to full crops of fruit; but of course it must be
understood that, as in our fruit orchards, a new tree must be set
from time to time to replace one that may be decayed or blighted.
After careful inquiry it may be safely stated that the average crop
of the cocoa plantation at ten years of age, and under a proper state
of cultivation, will amount to five hundred or six hundred pounds per
acre.”

The method of preparing the fruit for shipment is thus described in the
“Encyclopædia Britannica”:--

“In gathering, the workman is careful to cut down only fully ripened
pods, which he adroitly accomplishes with a long pole armed with two
prongs, or a knife at its extremity. The pods are left in a heap on
the ground for about twenty-four hours; they are then cut open and
the seeds are taken out and carried in baskets to the place where
they undergo the operation of sweating or curing. There the acid
juice which accompanies the seeds is first drained off, after which
they are placed in a sweating-box, in which they are enclosed and
allowed to ferment for some time, great care being taken to keep
the temperature from rising too high. The fermenting process is, in
some cases, affected by throwing the seeds into holes or trenches in
the ground, and covering them with earth or clay. The seeds in this
process, which is called “claying,” are occasionally stirred to keep
the fermentation from proceeding too violently. The sweating is a
process which requires the very greatest attention and experience,
as on it, to a great extent, depends the flavor of the seeds and
their fitness for preservation. The operation varies according to the
state of the weather, but a period of about two days yields the best
results. Thereafter the seeds are exposed to the sun for drying, and
those of a fine quality should then assume a warm, reddish tint,
which characterizes beans of a superior quality.”

Cocoa-beans are derived chiefly from the following sources, here
arranged alphabetically. A recent author has classified them under
two heads, unfermented and fermented; but this classification is
very misleading, since it happens that from a few of the places
mentioned variable proportions of both sorts are brought to market.
Ariba (Ecuador), Bahia (Brazil), Caracas (Venezuela), Cayenne (French
Guiana), Ceylon, Guatemala, Haiti, or Port au Prince, Java, Machala, or
ordinary Guayaquil (Ecuador), Maracaiba (Colombia), Mararion (Brazil),
St. Domingo, Surinam (Dutch Guiana), Trinidad (W. I.), from Africa, the
Seychelles, Martinique, and Bourbon, variable amounts are beginning
to appear as regular products. It is generally understood that some
of the best sorts of South American cocoa are consumed at home and do
not find their way, in definite quantities, or as a stated supply, to
any foreign ports. Among these are Soconusco and Esmeraldas. At the
last French exposition these and other very fine sorts from Venezuela
and Ecuador were exhibited. New fields are being opened up in many
directions to meet the increasing demand for the product.

III.

THE SEEDS OF THE CHOCOLATE-PLANT AS THEY APPEAR IN COMMERCE. THEIR
MICROSCOPIC AND CHEMICAL CHARACTERS.

The seeds of the chocolate-plant are brought into the market in their
crude state, as almond-shaped “beans,” which differ in color and
somewhat in texture. It is not uncommon to find the external surface of
the bean more or less covered with a thin irregular layer of attached
earth, but this is generally pretty well cleared off during the
transportation.

Upon the color of shell and kernel, the relative brittleness, the
flavor, and the odor, depends the market value of the seeds.

The dried seeds have a papery, brittle shell, which is very smooth
on the inside, but on the outside exhibits, under the microscope, a
few short hairs and round excrescences. But these are mostly lost
by the rough handling and by the attrition of the seeds with one
another during transportation. The kernel consists of two large
cotyledons or seed-leaves, reddish-gray or reddish-brown, with a
shining, oily surface; the whole crushing rather easily into a loose
mass of fragments. The kernel, when dry, has a minute, tough, almost
stony radicle which separates easily from the cotyledons. Microscopic
examination shows that the cells of the seed-leaves contain albumen,
oily matters,--sometimes in a crystalline condition,--crystals of
an entirely different shape, starch, coloring substances in special
receptacles known as pigment-cells, and ducts with spiral markings.
The starch grains do not have any very characteristic form or markings:
they are generally spherical and simple. The only peculiarity worth
mentioning, is the relative slowness with which they are acted on
by hot water and by iodine. The coloring substances are mainly of a
carmine or violet color, and are distinguished by the change of shade
when an alkali is added, becoming thereby darker.

These are the only structural elements which a pure powder or paste of
chocolate should show under the microscope. Any other substances must
be recognized as accidental or intentional additions.

All seeds of whatever kind contain, as a part of their substance, the
matter of which cell-walls are made; namely, cellulose. The percentage
differs in different seeds, in those of the chocolate-plant being about
three in the hundred. Cellulose has the same chemical composition
as starch; but its physical properties are not the same as those of
starch, among which may be mentioned its entire insolubility in boiling
water.

Starch forms, on an average, eight to ten per cent of chocolate-seeds.
It consists of minute spherical grains, not distinguishable from that
found in many other kinds of seeds. Traces of gum and of other allied
bodies are also present in the seeds.

Albuminoids, or substances resembling, in a general way, the albumin
of egg, occur in chocolate-seeds as they do in other seeds, and in a
somewhat higher amount than in certain other cases in which the seeds
are used as food. The percentage ranges from about fifteen to twenty,
depending on the variety. These albuminoids are compounds of nitrogen,
and are extremely nutritious. In the seeds they occur in a readily
assimilable form, fit for digestion. Their peculiar relations as
flesh-formers are referred to in the section treating of the physiology
of chocolate-seeds.

Cacao-red occurs as a coloring matter in small amount. It is rendered
dark by alkalies.

Theobromine, the active principle of the cocoa-bean, constitutes less
than one per cent of the weight of the seeds, but it varies greatly in
amount in different seeds, ranging from ³⁰⁄₁₀₀ of one per cent in some,
to a trifle over one per cent in others.

The ash left on completely burning cocoa-beans is not far from four
per cent. Its composition is substantially that of the ash of seeds of
other plants.

Cocoa-butter, or oil, constitutes not far from fifty per cent of good
cocoa-beans. The oil is remarkable for its freedom from rancidity and
its very bland character. Its uses are innumerable.

The following averages of many analyses by a leading recent authority
may be of interest:--

UNROASTED.

Moisture 7.11
Oil 51.78
Theobromine .35
Starch 5.78
Cellulose 3.1
Other carbohydrates, glucosides, etc. 10.05
Protein matters 15.61
Ash 3.60

ROASTED.

Moisture 6.51
Oil 49.24
Theobromine .43
Starch 10.43
Cellulose 3.1
Other carbohydrates, glucosides, etc. 7.78
Protein matters 18.33
Ash 3.92

IV.

MANUFACTURE OF CHOCOLATE AND BREAKFAST COCOA.

We have already called attention to the simple process by which the
natives of Central America prepared a nutritious beverage from the
seeds of the chocolate-plant. The essential features of this process,
modified and greatly improved by modern science, are worthy of
consideration at this time.

The selected cocoa-beans are first cleaned from the dust and attached
particles which have come from various sources during the fermentation
of the seeds. The machines for cleaning the beans are very ingenious
and effective, removing from the seed-coat every trace of foreign
matter.

The cleaned seeds are next roasted in the most careful manner, every
precaution being taken to secure a uniform effect through the whole
mass. During the roasting the seeds change color somewhat and become
more or less modified in taste. In under-roasted seeds the flavor is
not fully developed, while in over-roasted seeds the pleasant taste is
likely to become greatly impaired, or it may even be wholly replaced by
a bitter and harsh flavor. These relations of color and taste to the
roasting of the seeds make this portion of the manufacture one of the
most delicate processes from beginning to end.

By the roasting the shell becomes more readily detachable, and its
complete removal is the next step. The crushing of the seeds into small
fragments is easily accomplished; and this is followed by a thorough
winnowing, by which the lighter shells are carried away by themselves,
leaving the clean fragments of the roasted seeds ready for further
manipulation.

Among the fragments can be detected minute and very tough bits of
tissue. These bits are the hardened germs, or rather portions of the
germs, and these are separated from the rest by an apparatus of much
simplicity and efficiency.

The clean shells are usually placed at once in packages for
transportation. They are extensively used for the domestic preparation
of a wholesome and very low-priced drink. This beverage contains a fair
proportion of the active principle of the chocolate-seeds themselves,
and the flavor is suggestive of chocolate.

The cleaned fragments constitute the so-called “cocoa-nibs” of some
foreign markets, and in this state they are used for the preparation of
a simple decoction. But in this form they require to be boiled a good
while for the development of flavor, and it is therefore better to have
them treated beforehand in order to reduce the time of boiling; and
this is all the more necessary, since during the long boiling a part
of the more delicate aroma peculiar to chocolate-seeds is apt to be
dissipated.

We are next to trace these fragments, through the chocolate-mill, and
afterwards follow similar fragments through the cocoa-factory.

In the preparation of chocolate, the fragments are ground by a
complicated mechanism until they attain the greatest degree of
fineness, and constitute a perfectly homogeneous mass or paste. If the
chocolate is to be a plain chocolate, it is to receive its delicate
flavoring and then go directly into the moulds for shaping it. Every
step of the process has to be watched with the most assiduous care.
When the chocolate is formed and properly cooled, it is wrapped and
packed for the market.

But if the chocolate is to be sweetened, a definite amount of the
purest sugar, previously pulverized, is to be added, the whole ground
and commingled, the proper flavoring of pure vanilla added, and the
semi-solid mass formed in moulds as before. After being moulded it is
sent to the packing-room and wrapped.

The variations in the process are innumerable, but all of them
are comparatively unimportant when taken singly; the skill in the
manufacture requires that each of these slight changes should be made
at just the right time and in the right way. In the manufacture of
Walter Baker and Co.’s chocolate, this skill has become developed to a
very high degree during the hundred years of success. That the firm is
ready to avail itself of every appliance known in modern manufacture,
is seen by their adoption of the complicated machinery illustrated on
page 29. This chocolate-machine has a capacity of five tons of pure
chocolate daily. It is accessible to visitors, who may apply at the
office in Dorchester for permission to see it in operation.

It is unnecessary to detail the steps of manufacture of many of the
chocolate specialties of the firm.

We turn now to the consideration of breakfast cocoa.

The manufacture of breakfast cocoa is based upon two important factors:
first, the removal of a definite portion of the cocoa-oil from the
roasted seeds; and second, increasing the miscibility of the powdered
seeds by securing the greatest practicable degree of fineness.

[Illustration: ONE OF THE CHOCOLATE-MACHINES AT THE MANUFACTORY OF
WALTER BAKER & CO.

CAPACITY, FIVE TONS OF CHOCOLATE DAILY.]

While the oil of the chocolate-seed is perfectly wholesome, there are
some persons who find in the percentage natural to the seeds a too
large amount for easy digestion. The removal of a part of this, which
might with propriety be called an excess of the oil, was practised even
in very early days, as is seen in the cut herewith given, taken from an
old work on the subject. The present method of extracting the oil is
not essentially different, save in a few particulars, from that here
figured, and therefore need not be described in detail.

[Illustration]

The method of manufacture is substantially as follows: the ground
fragments of roasted seeds are subjected to pressure, and with the
result of withdrawing just as much oil as the manufacturers desire to
abstract. The pressed mass is, in the most successful process, treated
mechanically in such a manner as to divide and subdivide the minute
particles until they are capable of passing through a sieve having
several thousand meshes to the square inch. But such pulverization as
this would, under ordinary circumstances, reduce the mass to a dull
and unattractive powder. In the process devised by the firm of Walter
Baker and Co., this high degree of fineness is secured without any
loss of brilliancy in the powder,--the color being of the bright-red
which is not only attractive in appearance, but when conjoined with the
natural chocolate odor and flavor is characteristic of absolutely pure
cocoa of the highest grade.

It is instructive to compare such cocoa with the cocoas prepared by
what is known in chemical technology as the chemical process. The
latter are prepared by treatment with alkaline matters which act
on the coloring substances in the seeds, increasing the apparent
effect of hot water when the latter is added. In chemically prepared
cocoas, the exquisite natural odor and flavor of pure cocoa-seeds have
been diminished or wholly lost by the severe treatment to which the
materials have been subjected. In some cases the loss of the natural
flavor is sought to be partially supplied by the use of fragrant gums,
wholly foreign to the natural product.

The detection of these admixtures is generally easy. Comparison with
the well-known pure breakfast cocoa of Walter Baker and Co. will reveal
at once the vast superiority of a product which has not been treated
by chemicals, but which contains only the finest possible powder of
the best chocolate-seeds freed from the excess of oil. The exquisite
flavor and odor of the pure product are due wholly to the seeds
themselves, since absolutely no foreign matter is added from first to
last. Walter Baker and Co.’s breakfast cocoa can be used by students of
the microscope and of chemistry as a perfect type of the highest order
of excellence in manufacture. The enormous increase in consumption of
Baker’s cocoa and chocolate indicates that our discriminating public
appreciate a thoroughly good article when they see it.

V.

SOME PHYSIOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF CHOCOLATE-SEEDS.--VALUE OF CHOCOLATE AS
AN ARTICLE OF FOOD.

The seeds of plants contain a germ, or embryo, together with a certain
amount of food. As soon as the germ sprouts, the food, or a good part
of it, is consumed by the seedling, being used by it in the formation
of new parts, such as roots and leaves by which the materials for more
food can be obtained from the soil and air. Now it happens that the
food of plants is pretty much the same as the food of animals, although
there is this marked difference in the manner of procuring it: plants
can construct their own food from inorganic or mineral matters taken
from the earth and atmosphere, while animals, even those which are most
like plants, must have their supply of food from organic nature.

Since, then, plants prepare the food which animals are to use (of
course flesh-eating animals use their plants, so to speak, at
second-hand), it comes to pass very naturally that the food in a good
many seeds has been recognized from early times as very useful food
for man. Thus the cereals--wheat, maize, oats, barley, and rice--are
the seeds of grasses; and there are many other seeds, such as beans,
peas, buckwheat, and so on, which have been appropriated as food by man
from remote antiquity. But the seeds of some plants are unfit for human
food, owing to disagreeable properties which they possess; while there
are a few which stand on the very edge of the limit of foods, and have
been used in time of scarcity.

The seeds of at least two plants are used as important adjuncts to
our list of foods, and can be enumerated among foods without any
impropriety. These are coffee and cocoa. They contain nutritive
properties,--the latter in very much higher degree than the
former,--and they possess also peculiar constituents which entitle them
to rank as luxuries. These peculiar constituents are (1) flavoring
matters, and (2) an active principle. But, either from its constitution
or from its association in the seed, the active principle of coffee,
although it has nearly or quite the same ultimate composition as the
active principle of cocoa, is unlike it in its effects. The active
principle of cocoa is substantially free, as used in its preparations,
from any undesirable effects on the nervous system. This active
principle of cocoa is _Theobromine_.

The essentials of a perfect food are (1) a certain amount of
carbohydrates, (2) of albuminoids, and (3) certain mineral matters,
these latter being substantially the same in all seeds used as
food. In cocoa these three groups are combined in proper proportion
to constitute a complete food, but there is superadded the active
principle, _Theobromine_, which places it at once in the class of
luxuries as well as of necessary foods.

When cocoa-seeds are prepared properly for food, without doing violence
to the chemical relations of the different components, a comforting
nutritive article of the highest value is obtained. This ideal method
of preparation is not a chemical torturing by the addition of foreign
ingredients, as in the alkali process, but it consists in the complete
unlocking, by perfectly natural, mechanical means, of all the virtues
of the seeds. We do not try to render the albuminoids of wheat and
other grains soluble by means of ammonia, soda, or potash, nor do we
think it desirable to increase the solubility of the albuminoids of
egg and meat by adding caustic or carbonated alkalies to them before
they are used. And yet chemical processes analogous to these have been
devised and are sometimes used with regard to cocoa. In most cases
these added substances are detected in the increased amount of mineral
matters found in the ash after burning the preparation. The amount of
ash in pure cocoa is about four per cent. Any appreciable amount above
this may be attributed to the admixture of mineral matters used in the
preparation.

The oil in pure chocolate-seeds is about fifty per cent of the whole
weight. Although the oil is exceedingly bland and free from rancidity,
it has been found expedient in some cases to withdraw a part of this
oil, leaving a smaller amount in the product. This is the method
pursued in the manufacture of the powdered cocoas. With this reduction
in the quantity of oil, the resultant beverage is less likely to
disagree with delicate digestion.

It is in all cases of the first importance to obtain only pure cocoa of
the highest quality, free from any admixture of foreign matter, such as
the alkalies or their carbonates; and further, the product ought to be
of the greatest degree of fineness. With regard to the flavors added
to chocolate, it is perhaps needless to say that they should be of the
utmost degree of purity. This is especially true of vanilla, which
owing to its high cost is frequently replaced by artificial flavors.
There is, in one respect, a notable difference between sweet chocolate
and cocoa: the former may be flavored, the latter should never be. A
pure cocoa must be absolutely dependent on its own delicious, natural
odor and flavor. No addition of any substance of any kind is admissible.

SUGGESTIONS
RELATIVE TO
THE COOKING OF CHOCOLATE AND COCOA.

BY MRS. ELLEN H. RICHARDS,

_Of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology_.

The flavor of the cocoa-bean seems to be almost universally liked,
and the use of the various preparations made from it is constantly
increasing. From the sweet chocolate with which the traveller now
provides himself in all journeys in which the supply of food is
doubtful either in quantity or quality, to delicate coloring and
flavoring of cakes and ices, nearly all kinds of culinary preparations
have benefited by the abundance of this favorite substance.

In these forms, chocolate is used in a semi-raw state, the bean having
been simply roasted at a gentle heat, ground, and mixed with sugar,
which holds the fat. By varying the quantity of the chocolate to be
mixed with the ingredients of the cake or ice, an unlimited variety of
flavors can be obtained.

In preparing it as a beverage for the table a mistake has been
frequently made in considering chocolate merely as a flavor, an adjunct
to the rest of the meal, instead of giving it its due prominence as a
real food, containing all of the necessary nutritive principles. A cup
of chocolate made with sugar and milk is in itself a fair breakfast.

There is much to be said in favor of preparations of the whole bean
which secure all of the valuable nutrition contained in this “food
for the gods,” and rightly understood, it is possible to make them
more important articles of diet than they now are. But since the large
percentage of fat seems to require correspondingly large quantities of
sugar to render the beverage palatable, and this very rich, sweet drink
soon cloys if made strong enough to be nutritious, it is, fortunately,
possible to extract the larger part of the fat without injury to the
flavor so characteristic of chocolate. In this form, called cocoa, less
sugar and more milk are needed, and the resulting beverage suits even
delicate stomachs, and is yet of high food value.

It is the object of all cooking to render raw material more palatable
and more nutritious, and therefore more digestible. The cooking
of cocoa and chocolate is no exception to this rule. Certain
extractive principles are soluble only in water which has reached the
boiling-point; and the starch, which the seed contains, is swollen only
at this temperature.

Chocolate or cocoa is not properly cooked by having boiling water
poured over it. It is true that as the whole powder is in suspension
and is swallowed, its food material can be assimilated as it is when
the prepared chocolate is eaten raw; but in order to bring out the
full, fine flavor and to secure the most complete digestibility, the
preparation, whatever it be, should be subjected to the boiling-point
for a few minutes. In this all connoisseurs are agreed.

RECEIPTS.

BY MISS PARLOA.

PLAIN CHOCOLATE.

For six people, use one quart of milk, two ounces of W. Baker & Co.’s
No. 1 chocolate, one tablespoonful of corn-starch, three tablespoonfuls
of sugar, and two tablespoonfuls of hot water.

Mix the corn-starch with one gill of the milk. Put the remainder of
the milk on to heat in the double-boiler. When the milk comes to the
boiling-point stir in the corn-starch, and cook for ten minutes.
Have the chocolate cut in fine bits and put it in a small iron or
granite-ware pan; add the sugar and water, and place the pan over a hot
fire. Stir constantly until the mixture is smooth and glossy. Add this
to the hot milk and beat the mixture with a whisk until it is frothy.
Or the chocolate may be poured back and forth from the boiler to a
pitcher, holding high the vessel from which you pour. This will give a
thick froth. Serve at once.

If you prefer not to have the chocolate thick, omit the corn-starch.

CHOCOLATE MADE WITH CONDENSED MILK.

Follow the rule for plain chocolate, substituting water for the milk,
and adding three tablespoonfuls of condensed milk when the chocolate is
added.

CHOCOLATE; VIENNA STYLE.

Use four ounces of vanilla chocolate, one quart of milk, three
tablespoonfuls of hot water, and one tablespoonful of sugar.

Cut the chocolate in fine bits. Put the milk on the stove in the
double-boiler, and when it has been heated to the boiling-point, put
the chocolate, sugar, and water in a small iron or granite-ware pan
and stir over a hot fire until smooth and glossy. Stir this mixture
into the hot milk, and beat well with a whisk. Serve at once, putting a
tablespoonful of whipped cream in each cup and then filling up with the
chocolate.

The plain chocolate may be used instead of the vanilla, but in
that case use a teaspoonful of vanilla extract and three generous
tablespoonfuls of sugar instead of one.

BREAKFAST COCOA.

Breakfast cocoa is powdered so fine that it can be dissolved by pouring
boiling water on it. For this reason it is often prepared at the table.
A small teaspoonful of the powder is put in the cup with a teaspoonful
of sugar; on this is poured two-thirds of a cupful of boiling water,
and milk or cream is added to suit the individual taste. This is very
convenient; but cocoa is not nearly so good when prepared in this
manner as when it is boiled.

For six cupfuls of cocoa use two tablespoonfuls of the powder, two
tablespoonfuls of sugar, half a pint of boiling water, and a pint and a
half of milk. Put the milk on the stove in the double-boiler. Put the
cocoa and sugar in a saucepan and gradually pour the hot water upon
them, stirring all the time. Place the saucepan on the fire and stir
until the contents boil. Let this mixture boil for five minutes; then
add the boiling milk, and serve.

A gill of cream is a great addition to this cocoa.

CHOCOLATE CAKE.

For two sheets of cake use three ounces of W. Baker & Co.’s No. 1
chocolate, three eggs, one cupful and three-fourths of sifted pastry
flour, one cupful and three-fourths of sugar, half a cupful of butter,
half a cupful of milk, half a teaspoonful of vanilla extract, one
teaspoonful and a half of baking powder.

Grate the chocolate. Beat the butter to a cream and gradually beat in
the sugar. Beat in the milk and vanilla, then the eggs (already well
beaten), next the chocolate, and finally the flour, in which the baking
powder should be mixed. Pour into two well-buttered shallow cake-pans.
Bake for twenty-five minutes in a moderate oven. Frost or not, as you
like.

VANILLA FROSTING.

Break the white of one large egg into a bowl, and gradually beat into
it one cupful of confectioner’s sugar. Beat for three minutes, add half
a teaspoonful of vanilla extract, and spread thinly on the cakes.

CHOCOLATE ICING.

Make a vanilla icing and add one tablespoonful of cold water to it.
Scrape fine one ounce of No. 1 chocolate and put it in a small iron or
granite-ware saucepan with two tablespoonfuls of confectioner’s sugar
and one tablespoonful of hot water. Stir over a hot fire until smooth
and glossy, then add another tablespoonful of hot water. Stir the
dissolved chocolate into the vanilla icing.

CHOCOLATE ICE-CREAM.

For about two quarts and a half of cream use a pint and a half of
milk, a quart of thin cream, two cupfuls of sugar, two ounces of No. 1
chocolate, two eggs, and two heaping tablespoonfuls of flour.

Put the milk on to boil in the double-boiler. Put the flour and one
cupful of the sugar in a bowl; add the eggs, and beat the mixture until
light. Stir this into the boiling milk and cook for twenty minutes,
stirring often.

Scrape the chocolate and put it in a small saucepan. Add four
tablespoonfuls of sugar (which should be taken from the second cupful)
and two tablespoonfuls of hot water. Stir over a hot fire until smooth
and glossy. Add this to the cooking mixture.

When the preparation has cooked for twenty minutes take it from the
fire and add the remainder of the sugar and the cream, which should be
gradually beaten into the hot mixture. Set away to cool, and when cold,
freeze.

CHOCOLATE PUDDING.

For a small pudding use one pint of milk, two tablespoonfuls and a half
of corn-starch, one ounce of chocolate, two eggs, five tablespoonfuls
of powdered sugar, one-fourth of a teaspoonful of salt, and half a
teaspoonful of vanilla extract.

Mix the corn-starch with one gill of the milk. Put the remainder of
the milk on to boil in the double-boiler. Scrape the chocolate. When
the milk boils, add the corn-starch, salt, and chocolate, and cook
for ten minutes. Beat the yolks of the eggs with three tablespoonfuls
of the sugar. Pour the hot mixture on this and beat well. Turn into a
pudding-dish that will hold about a quart, and bake for twenty minutes
in a moderate oven.

Beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff, dry froth, and gradually beat
in the remaining two tablespoonfuls of sugar and the vanilla. Spread
this on the pudding and return to the oven. Cook for fifteen minutes
longer, but with the oven-door open. Serve either cold or hot.

BAVARIAN CHOCOLATE CREAM.

For one large mould of cream, use half a package of gelatine, one gill
of milk, two quarts of whipped cream, one gill of sugar, and one ounce
of chocolate.

Soak the gelatine in the cold water for two hours. Whip and drain the
cream, scrape the chocolate, and put the milk on to boil. Put the
chocolate, two tablespoonfuls of sugar, and one of hot water, in a
small saucepan, and stir on a hot fire until smooth and glossy. Stir
this into the hot milk. Now add the soaked gelatine and the remainder
of the sugar. Strain this mixture into a basin that will hold two
quarts or more. Place the basin in a pan of ice-water and stir until
the mixture is cold, when it will begin to thicken. Instantly begin to
stir in the whipped cream, adding half the amount at first. When all
the cream has been added, dip the mould in cold water and then turn the
cream into it. Place in the ice-chest for an hour or more.

At serving-time dip the mould in tepid water. See that the cream will
come from the sides of the mould, and turn out on a flat dish. Serve
with whipped cream.