Transcriber’s Note
Italic text displayed as: _italic_

THE SHIPS AND SAILORS
OF OLD SALEM

[Illustration: The _Panay_, one of the last of the Salem fleet bound
out from Boston to Manila twenty-five years ago]

THE SHIPS AND SAILORS

OF

OLD SALEM

_THE RECORD OF A BRILLIANT ERA OF
AMERICAN ACHIEVEMENT_

BY

RALPH D. PAINE

_Author of “The Greater America,”
“The Romance of an Old-Time Shipmaster,” etc._

NEW EDITION

_ILLUSTRATED_

[Illustration: A·C·M^cCLURG & CO]

CHICAGO
A. C. McCLURG & CO.
1912

Copyright, 1908, by
THE OUTING PUBLISHING COMPANY

Copyright, 1912, by
A. C. McCLURG & CO., CHICAGO

_All Rights Reserved_

The Lakeside Press
R. R. DONNELLEY & SONS COMPANY
CHICAGO

“THE MERCHANTMEN”

“Beyond all outer charting
We sailed where none have sailed,
And saw the land-lights burning
On islands none have hailed;
Our hair stood up for wonder,
But when the night was done,
There danced the deep to windward
Blue-empty ’neath the sun.”

RUDYARD KIPLING.

“We’re outward bound this very day,
Good-bye, fare you well,
Good-bye, fare you well.
We’re outward bound this very day,
Hurrah, my boys, we’re outward bound.”

(_From a chantey sung while sheeting home topsails._)

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

The Panama Canal has strongly revived interest in the American merchant
marine. A nation, long indifferent to the fact that it had lost its
prestige on blue water, now discovers that after digging a ditch
between two oceans at a cost of hundred of millions, there are almost
no American ships to use it.

In other days, Yankee ships and sailors were able to win the commerce
of the world against the competition of foreign flags because of native
enterprise, brains, and seamanship. Nor is it impossible that such an
era shall come again. It was not so much the lack of subsidies and the
lower cost of foreign ships and crews that drove the American ensign
from the high seas as the greater attraction which drew capital and
energy to the tasks of building cities and railroads and opening to
civilization the inland areas of the West.

If these records of maritime Salem hold any lessons for to-day, if
they are worth while as something more than stirring tales of bygone
generations, it is because those seafarers achieved success without
counting the odds. They were enormously hampered by the policy of
England which deliberately endeavored to crush Colonial shipping by
means of numberless tonnage, customs, and neutrality regulations.
It was a merciless jealousy that sought to confiscate every Yankee
merchant vessel and ruin her owners.

There were the risks of the sea, of uncharted, unlighted coasts and
reefs and islands, and a plague of ferocious pirates and lawless
privateers who haunted the trade routes from the Spanish Main to
Madagascar. The vessel lucky enough to escape all these perils might
run afoul of another menace in the cruiser or customs officer of the
King, and many an American merchantmen, hundreds of them, were seized
in their own harbors and carried off before the eyes of their owners
who could only stand by in speechless rage and sorrow at the loss of
their labor and investment.

Notwithstanding all these grievous handicaps, American ships and
sailors prospered and multiplied, nor did they stay at home and whine
that they could not compete with the more favored merchant navies of
England and the Continent. They took and held their commanding share of
the world’s trade because they had to have it. They wanted it earnestly
enough to go out and get it.

Whenever the United States shall really desire to regain her proud
place among the maritime nations, the minds of her captains of industry
will find a way to achieve it and her legislators will solve their
share of the problem. And our people will cease paying over to English
and German shipowners enough money in freight and passage bills every
year to defray the cost of building a Panama Canal.

From log books, sea journals and other manuscripts hitherto unpublished
(most of them written during the years between the Revolution and the
War of 1812), are herein gathered such narratives as those of the first
American voyages to Japan, India, the Philippines, Guam, the Cape of
Good Hope, Sumatra, Arabia and the South Seas. These and other records,
as written by the seamen who made Salem the most famous port of the New
World a century ago, are much more than local annals. They comprise a
unique and brilliant chapter of American history and they speak for
themselves.

This era, vanished this closed chapter of American achievement which
reached its zenith a full century ago, belongs not alone to Salem, but
also to the nation. East and west, north and south, runs the love of
the stars and stripes, and the desire to do honor to those who have
helped win for this flag prestige and respect among other peoples in
other climes. The seamen of this old port were traders, it is true, but
they lent to commerce an epic quality, and because they steered so many
brave ships to ports where no other American topsails had ever gleamed,
they deserve to be remembered among those whose work left its imprint
far beyond the limits of the town or coast they called home.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER PAGE

I A PORT OF VANISHED FLEETS. 3

II PHILIP ENGLISH AND HIS ERA. (1680-1750.) 21

III SOME EARLY EIGHTEENTH CENTURY PIRATES.
(1670-1725.) 39

IV THE PRIVATEERSMEN OF ’76. 58

V JONATHAN HARADEN, PRIVATEERSMAN. (1776-1782.) 78

VI CAPTAIN LUTHER LITTLE’S OWN STORY. (1771-1799.) 98

VII THE JOURNAL OF WILLIAM RUSSELL. (1776-1783.) 117

VIII THE JOURNAL OF WILLIAM RUSSELL (_concluded_).
(1779-1783.) 134

IX RICHARD DERBY AND HIS SON JOHN. (1774-1792.) 149

X ELIAS HASKET DERBY AND HIS TIMES. (1770-1800.) 173

XI PIONEERS IN DISTANT SEAS. (1775-1817.) 197

XII THE BUILDING OF THE _ESSEX_. (1799.) 228

XIII THE FIRST AMERICAN VOYAGERS TO JAPAN.
(1799-1801.) 250

XIV THE FIRST YANKEE SHIP AT GUAM. (1801.) 270

XV NATHANIEL BOWDITCH AND HIS “PRACTICAL
NAVIGATOR.” (1802.) 288

XVI THE VOYAGES OF NATHANIEL SILSBEE. (1792-1800.) 310

XVII THE VOYAGES OF RICHARD CLEVELAND. (1791-1820.) 329

XVIII THE PRIVATEERS OF 1812. 353

XIX THE TRAGEDY OF THE _FRIENDSHIP_. (1831.) 378

XX EARLY SOUTH SEA VOYAGES. (1832.) 406

XXI THE LAST PIRATES OF THE SPANISH MAIN.
(1832.) 431

XXII GENERAL FREDERICK TOWNSEND WARD. (1859-1862.) 451

XXIII THE EBBING OF THE TIDE. 482

APPENDIX. 499

ILLUSTRATIONS

The _Panay_, one of the last of the Salem fleet bound out
from Boston to Manila twenty-five years ago _Frontispiece_

FACING
PAGE

Custom House document with signature of Nathaniel
Hawthorne as surveyor 6

Page from the illustrated log of the _Eolus_ 6

A corner in the Marine Room of the Peabody Museum 14

The Marine Room, Peabody Museum 14

Certificate of Membership in the Salem Marine Society 18

Title page of the log of Capt Nathaniel Hawthorne 18

The Roger Williams house 24

The Philip English “Great House” 30

A bill of lading of the time of Philip English, dated 1716 36

The log of a Salem whaler 36

A page from Falconer’s Marine Dictionary (18th Century) 44

Agreement by which a Revolutionary privateer seaman
sold his share of the booty in advance of his cruise 66

Proclamation posted in Salem during the Revolution calling
for volunteers aboard Paul Jones’ _Ranger_ 70

Schooner _Baltic_ 76

Derby Wharf, Salem, Mass., as it appears to-day 86

Captain Luther Little 108

The East India Marine Society’s hall, now the home of
the Peabody Museum 120

Page from the records of the East India Marine Society 120

The Salem Custom House, built in 1818 140

Richard Derby 152

“Leslie’s Retreat” 158

The _Grand Turk_, first American ship to pass the Cape of
Good Hope 176

Nathaniel West 180

William Gray 188

Elias Hasket Derby 188

The Ship _Mount Vernon_ 192

Elias Hasket Derby mansion (1790-1816) 194

Prince House. Home of Richard Derby. Built about 1750 194

Joseph Peabody 200

Hon. Jacob Crowninshield 204

Benjamin Crowninshield 208

Ship _Ulysses_ 212

Yacht _Cleopatra’s Barge_ 212

Log of the good ship _Rubicon_ 214

The frigate _Essex_ 230

Broadside ballad published in Salem after the news was
received of the loss of the _Essex_ 248

Page from the log of the _Margaret_ 252

The good ship _Franklin_ 252

View of Nagasaki before Japan was opened to commerce 260

Salem Harbor as it is to-day 274

The old-time sailors used to have their vessels painted on
pitchers and punch bowls 284

Title page from the journal of the _Lydia_ 284

Nathaniel Bowditch, author of “The Practical Navigator” 294

Nathaniel Bowditch’s chart of Salem harbor 304

Captain Benjamin Carpenter of the _Hercules_, 1792 306

From the log of the _Hercules_ 308

Pages from the log of the ship _Hercules_, 1792 312

Captain Nathaniel Silsbee 318

Captain Richard Cleveland 334

Captain James W. Chever 358

The privateer _America_ under full sail 358

Captain Holten J. Breed 370

The privateer _Grand Turk_ 370

An old broadside, relating the incidents of the battle of
Qualah Battoo 380

The _Glide_ 390

The _Friendship_ 390

Captain Driver 408

Letter to Captain Driver from the “Bounty” Colonists 408

Captain Thomas Fuller 432

The brig _Mexican_ attacked by pirates, 1832 432

Frederick T. Ward 454

Captain John Bertram 486

Ship _Sooloo_ 494

THE SHIPS AND SAILORS
OF OLD SALEM

The Ships and Sailors of Old Salem

CHAPTER I

A PORT OF VANISHED FLEETS

American ships and sailors have almost vanished from the seas that lie
beyond their own coasts. The twentieth century has forgotten the era
when Yankee topsails, like flying clouds, flecked every ocean, when
tall spars forested every Atlantic port from Portland to Charleston,
and when the American spirit of adventurous enterprise and rivalry
was in its finest flower on the decks of our merchant squadrons. The
last great chapter of the nation’s life on blue water was written in
the days of the matchless clippers which swept round the Horn to San
Francisco or fled homeward from the Orient in the van of the tea fleets.

The Cape Horn clipper was able to survive the coming of the Age of
Steam a few years longer than the Atlantic packet ships, such as the
_Dreadnought_, but her glory departed with the Civil War and thereafter
the story of the American merchant marine is one of swift and sorrowful
decay. The boys of the Atlantic coast, whose fathers had followed the
sea in legions, turned inland to find their careers, and the sterling
qualities which had been bred in the bone by generations of salty
ancestry now helped to conquer the western wilderness.

It is all in the past, this noble and thrilling history of American
achievement on the deep sea, and a country with thousands of miles
of seacoast has turned its back toward the spray-swept scenes of its
ancient greatness to seek the fulfillment of its destiny in peopling
the prairie, reclaiming the desert and feeding its mills and factories
with the resources of forest, mine and farm.

For more than two centuries, however, we Americans were a maritime
race, in peace and war, and the most significant deeds and spectacular
triumphs of our seafaring annals were wrought long before the era of
the clipper ship. The fastest and most beautiful fabric ever driven by
the winds, the sky-sail clipper was handled with a superb quality of
seamanship which made the mariners of other nations doff their caps to
the ruddy Yankee masters of the _Sovereign of the Seas_, the _Flying
Cloud_, the _Comet_, the _Westward Ho_, or the _Swordfish_. Her routes
were well traveled, however, and her voyages hardly more eventful than
those of the liner of to-day. Islands were charted, headlands lighted,
and the instruments and science of navigation so far perfected as
to make ocean pathfinding no longer a matter of blind reckoning and
guesswork. Pirates and privateers had ceased to harry the merchantmen
and to make every voyage a hazard of life and death from the Bahama
Banks to the South Seas.

Through the vista of fifty years the Yankee clipper has a glamour of
singularly picturesque romance, but it is often forgotten that two
hundred years of battling against desperate odds and seven generations
of seafaring stock had been required to evolve her type and to breed
the men who sailed her in the nineteenth century. It is to this much
older race of American seamen and the stout ships they built and manned
that we of to-day should be grateful for many of the finest pages in
the history of our country’s progress. The most adventurous age of
our merchant mariners had reached its climax at the time of the War of
1812, and its glory was waning almost a hundred years ago. For the most
part its records are buried in sea-stained log books and in the annals
and traditions of certain ancient New England coastwise towns,[1] of
which Salem was the most illustrious.

This port of Salem is chiefly known beyond New England as the scene
of a wicked witchcraft delusion which caused the death of a score
of poor innocents in 1692, and in later days as the birthplace of
Nathaniel Hawthorne. It is not so commonly known that this old town
of Salem, nestled in a bight of the Massachusetts coast, was once the
most important seat of maritime enterprise in the New World. Nor when
its population of a century ago is taken into consideration can any
foreign port surpass for adventure, romance and daring the history of
Salem during the era of its astonishing activity. Even as recently as
1854, when the fleets of Salem were fast dwindling, the _London Daily
News_, in a belated eulogy of our American ships and sailors, was moved
to compare the spirit of this port with that of Venice and the old
Hanse towns and to say: “We owe a cordial admiration of the spirit of
American commerce in its adventurous aspects. To watch it is to witness
some of the finest romance of our time.”

Nathaniel Hawthorne was Surveyor in the Custom House of Salem in
1848-49, after the prestige of the port had been well-nigh lost.
He was descended from a race of Salem shipmasters and he saw daily
in the streets of his native town the survivors of the generations
of incomparable seamen who had first carried the American flag to
Hindoostan, Java, Sumatra, and Japan, who were first to trade with the
Fiji Islands and with Madagascar, who had led the way to the west coast
of Africa and to St. Petersburg, who had been pioneers in opening the
commerce of South America and China to Yankee ships. They had “sailed
where no other ships dared to go, they had anchored where no one
else dreamed of looking for trade.” They had fought pirates and the
privateers of a dozen races around the world, stamping themselves as
the Drakes and the Raleighs and Gilberts of American commercial daring.

In the Salem of his time, however, Hawthorne perceived little more than
a melancholy process of decay, and a dusky background for romances
of a century more remote. It would seem as if he found no compelling
charm in the thickly clustered memories that linked the port with its
former greatness on the sea. Some of the old shipmasters were in the
Custom House service with him and he wrote of them as derelicts “who
after being tost on every sea and standing sturdily against life’s
tempestuous blast had finally drifted into this quiet nook where with
little to disturb them except the periodical terrors of a Presidential
election, they one and all acquired a new lease of life.”

They were simple, brave, elemental men, hiding no tortuous problems of
conscience, very easy to analyze and catalogue, and perhaps not apt,
for this reason, to make a strong appeal to the genius of the author of
“The Scarlet Letter.”

[Illustration: Custom House document with signature of Nathaniel
Hawthorne as surveyor]

[Illustration: Page from the illustrated log of the _Eolus_. Her
captain drew such pictures as these of the ships he sighted at sea]

“They spent a good deal of time asleep in their accustomed corners,” he
also wrote of them, “with their chairs tilted back against the wall;
awaking, however, once or twice in a forenoon to bore one another
with the several thousandth repetition of old sea stories and mouldy
jokes that had grown to be passwords and counter-signs among them.”

One of the sea journals or logs of Captain Nathaniel Hathorne,[2]
father of the author, possesses a literary interest in that its title
page was lettered by the son when a lad of sixteen. With many an
ornamental flourish the inscription runs:

Nathaniel Hathorne’s
Book—1820—Salem.
A Journal of a Passage from Bengall to America
In the Ship _America_ of
Salem, 1798.

This is almost the only volume of salty flavored narrative to which
Nathaniel Hawthorne may be said to have contributed, although he was
moved to pay this tribute to his stout-hearted forebears:

“From father to son, for above a hundred years, they followed the
sea; a gray-headed shipmaster in each generation retiring from the
quarterdeck to the homestead, while a boy of fourteen took the
hereditary place before the mast, confronting the salt spray and the
gale which had blustered against his sire and grandsire.”

Even to-day there survive old shipmasters and merchants of Salem who
in their own boyhood heard from the lips of the actors their stories
of shipwrecks on uncharted coasts; of captivity among the Algerians
and in the prisons of France, England and Spain; of hairbreadth
escapes from pirates on the Spanish Main and along Sumatran shores; of
ship’s companies overwhelmed by South Sea cannibals when Salem barks
were pioneers in the wake of Captain Cook; of deadly actions fought
alongside British men-of-war and private armed ships, and of steering
across far-distant seas when “India was a new region and only Salem
knew the way thither.”

Such men as these were trained in a stern school to fight for their
own. When the time came they were also ready to fight for their
country. Salem sent to sea one hundred and fifty-eight privateers
during the Revolution. They carried two thousand guns and were
manned by more than six thousand men, a force equal in numbers to
the population of the town. These vessels captured four hundred and
forty-four prizes, or more than one-half the total number taken by all
the Colonies during the war.

In the War of 1812 Salem manned and equipped forty privateers and
her people paid for and built the frigate _Essex_ which under the
command of David Porter swept the Pacific clean of British commerce
and met a glorious end in her battle with the _Phoebe_ and _Cherub_
off the harbor of Valparaiso. Nor among the sea fights of both wars
are there to be found more thrilling ship actions than were fought
by Salem privateersmen who were as ready to exchange broadsides or
measure boarding pikes with a “king’s ship” as to snap up a tempting
merchantman.

But even beyond these fighting merchant sailors lay a previous century
of such stress and hazard in ocean traffic as this age cannot imagine.
One generation after another of honest shipmasters had been the prey of
a great company of lawless rovers under many flags or no flag at all.
The distinction between privateers and pirates was not clearly drawn in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and the tiny American brigs
and sloops which bravely fared to the West Indies and Europe were fair
marks for the polyglot freebooters that laughed at England’s feeble
protection of her colonial trade.

The story of the struggles and heroisms of the western pioneers has
been told over and over again. Every American schoolboy is acquainted
with the story of the beginnings of the New England Colonies and of
their union. But the work of the seafaring breed of Americans has
been somewhat suffered to remain in the background. Their astonishing
adventures were all in the day’s work and were commonplace matters to
their actors. The material for the plot of a modern novel of adventure
may be found condensed into a three-line entry of many an ancient
log-book.

High on the front of a massive stone building in Essex Street, Salem,
is chiseled the inscription, “East India Marine Hall.” Beneath this are
the obsolete legends, “Asiatic Bank,” and “Oriental Insurance Office.”
Built by the East India Marine Society eighty-four years ago, this
structure is now the home of the Peabody Museum and a storehouse for
the unique collections which Salem seafarers brought home from strange
lands when their ships traded in every ocean. The East India Marine
Society still exists. The handful of surviving members meet now and
then and spin yarns of the vanished days when they were masters of
stately square-riggers in the deep-water trade. All of them are gray
and some of them quite feeble and every little while another of this
company slips his cable for the last long voyage.

The sight-seeing visitor in Salem is fascinated by its quaint and
picturesque streets, recalling as they do no fewer than three centuries
of American life, and by its noble mansions set beneath the elms in
an atmosphere of immemorial traditions. But the visitor is not likely
to seek the story of Salem as it is written in the records left by
the men who made it great. For those heroic seafarers not only made
history but they also wrote it while they lived it. The East India
Marine Society was organized in 1799 “to assist the widows and children
of deceased members; to collect such facts and observations as tended
to the improvement and security of navigation, and to form a museum
of natural and artificial curiosities, particularly such as are to be
found beyond the Cape of Good Hope or Cape Horn.”[3]

The by-laws provided that “any person shall be eligible as a member of
this society who shall have actually navigated the seas near the Cape
of Good Hope or Cape Horn, either as master or commander or as factor
or supercargo in any vessel belonging to Salem.”

From its foundation until the time when the collections of the Society
were given in charge of the Peabody Academy of Science in 1867, three
hundred and fifty masters and supercargoes of Salem had qualified for
membership as having sailed beyond Cape Horn or the Cape of Good Hope.

More than a century ago, therefore, these mariners of Salem began
to write detailed journals of their voyages, to be deposited with
this Society in order that their fellow shipmasters might glean from
them such facts as might “tend to the improvement and security of
navigation.” Few seas were charted, and Salem ships were venturing
along unknown shores. The journal of one of these pioneer voyages
was a valuable aid to the next shipmaster who went that way. These
journals were often expanded from the ship’s logs, and written after
the captains came home. The habit of carefully noting all incidents of
trade, discovery, and dealings with primitive races taught these seamen
to make their logs something more than routine accounts of wind and
weather. Thus, year after year and generation after generation, there
was accumulating a library of adventurous first-hand narrative, written
in stout manuscript volumes.

It was discovered that a pen and ink drawing of the landfall of
some almost unknown island would help the next captain passing that
coast to identify its headlands. Therefore many of these quarterdeck
chroniclers developed an astonishing aptitude for sketching coast
line, mountains and bays. Some of them even made pictures in water
color of the ships they saw or spoke, and their logs were illustrated
descriptions of voyages to the South Seas or Mauritius or China. In
this manner the tradition was cherished that a shipmaster of Salem owed
it to his fellow mariners and townspeople to bring home not only all
the knowledge he could gather but also every kind of curious trophy to
add to the collections of the East India Marine Society. And as the
commerce over seas began to diminish in the nineteenth century, this
tradition laid fast hold upon many Salem men and women whose fathers
had been shipmasters. They took pride in gathering together all the old
log books they could find in cobwebby attics and battered seachests and
in increasing this unique library of blue water.

Older than the East India Marine Society is the Salem Marine Society,
which was founded in 1766 by eighteen shipmasters, and which
still maintains its organization in its own building. Its Act of
Incorporation, dated 1772, stated that “whereas a considerable number
of persons who are or have been Masters of ships or other vessels,
have for several years past associated themselves in the town of
Salem; and the principal end of said Society being to improve the
knowledge of this coast, by the several members, upon their arrival
from sea communicating their observations, inwards and outwards, of
the variation of the needle, soundings, courses and distances, and
all other remarkable things about it, in writing, to be lodged with
the Society, for the making of the navigation more safe; and also to
relieve one another and their families in poverty or other adverse
accidents of life, which they are more particularly liable to,” etc.

Most of these records, together with those belonging to the East
India Marine Society and many others rescued from oblivion, have been
assembled and given in care of the Essex Institute of Salem as the
choicest treasure of its notable historical library. It has come to
pass that a thousand of these logs and sea-journals are stored in one
room of the Essex Institute, comprising many more than this number of
voyages made between 1750 and 1890, a period of a century and a half,
which included the most brilliant era of American sea life. Privateer,
sealer, whaler, and merchantman, there they rest, row after row of
canvas-covered books, filled with the day’s work of as fine a race of
seamen as ever sailed; from the log of the tiny schooner _Hopewell_
on a voyage to the West Indies amid perils of swarming pirates and
privateers a generation before the Revolution, down to the log of the
white-winged _Mindoro_ of the Manila fleet which squared away her yards
for the last time only fifteen years ago.

There is no other collection of _Americana_ which can so vividly recall
a vanished epoch and make it live again as these hundreds upon hundreds
of ancient log books. They are complete, final, embracing as they do
the rise, the high-tide and the ebb of the commerce of Salem, the
whole story of those vikings of deep-water enterprise who dazzled the
maritime world. These journals reflect in intimate and sharply focused
detail that little world which Harriet Martineau discerned when she
visited Salem seventy-five years ago and related:

“Salem, Mass., is a remarkable place. This ‘city of peace’ will be
better known hereafter for its commerce than for it’s witch tragedy.
It has a population of fourteen thousand and more wealth in proportion
to its population than perhaps any town in the world. Its commerce is
speculative but vast and successful. It is a frequent circumstance that
a ship goes out without a cargo for a voyage around the world. In such
a case the captain puts his elder children to school, takes his wife
and younger children and starts for some semi-barbarous place where
he procures some odd kind of cargo which he exchanges with advantage
for another somewhere else; and so goes trafficking around the world,
bringing home a freight of the highest value.

“These enterprising merchants of Salem are hoping to appropriate a
large share of the whale fishery and their ships are penetrating the
northern ice. They speak of Fayal and the Azores as if they were close
at hand. The fruits of the Mediterranean are on every table. They
have a large acquaintance at Cairo. They know Napoleon’s grave at St.
Helena, and have wild tales to tell of Mozambique and Madagascar, and
stores of ivory to show from there. They speak of the power of the king
of Muscat, and are sensible of the riches of the southeast coast of
Arabia. Anybody will give you anecdotes from Canton and descriptions of
the Society and Sandwich Islands. They often slip up the western coast
of their two continents, bringing furs from the back regions of their
own wide land, glance up at the Andes on their return; double Cape
Horn, touch at the ports of Brazil and Guiana, look about them in the
West Indies, feeling almost at home there, and land some fair morning
in Salem and walk home as if they had done nothing remarkable.”

Within sight of this Essex Institute is the imposing building of the
Peabody Academy of Science and Marine Museum, already mentioned. Here
the loyal sons of Salem, aided by the generous endowment of George
Peabody, the banker and philanthropist, have created a notable memorial
to the sea-born genius of the old town. One hall is filled with models
and paintings of the stout ships which made Salem rich and famous.
These models were built and rigged with the most painstaking accuracy
of detail, most of them the work of mariners of the olden time, and
many of them made on shipboard during long voyages. Scores of the
paintings of ships were made when they were afloat, their cannon and
checkered ports telling of the dangers which merchantmen dared in those
times; their hulls and rigging wearing a quaint and archaic aspect.

Beneath them are displayed the tools of the seaman’s trade long ere
steam made of him a paint-swabber and mechanic. Here are the ancient
quadrants, “half-circles,” and hand log lines, timed with sandglasses,
with which our forefathers found their way around the world. Beside
them repose the “colt” and the “cat-o’-nine-tails” with which those
tough tars were flogged by their skippers and mates. Cutlasses such as
were wielded in sea fights with Spanish, French and English, boarding
axes and naval tomahawks, are flanked by carved whales-teeth, whose
intricate designs of ships, cupids and mermaids whiled away the
dogwatches under the Southern Cross. Over yonder is a notched limb of
a sea-washed tree on which a sailor tallied the days and weeks of five
months’ solitary waiting on a desert island where he had been cast by
shipwreck.

[Illustration: A corner in the Marine Room of the Peabody Museum,
showing portraits of the shipmasters and merchants of Salem]

[Illustration: The Marine Room, Peabody Museum, showing the ships of
Salem during a period of one hundred and fifty years]

Portraits of famous shipping merchants and masters gaze at portraits
of Sultans of Zanzibar, Indian Rajahs and hong merchants of Canton
whose names were household words in the Salem of long ago. In
other spacious halls of this museum are unique displays of the
tools, weapons, garments and adornments of primitive races, gathered
generations before their countries and islands were ransacked by the
tourist and the ethnologist. They portray the native arts and habits
of life before they were corrupted by European influences. Some of
the tribes which fashioned these things have become extinct, but
their vanquished handiwork is preserved in these collections made
with devoted loyalty by the old shipmasters who were proud of their
home town and of their Marine Society. From the Fiji and Gilbert and
Hawaiian Islands, from Samoa, Arabia, India, China, Africa and Japan,
and every other foreign shore where ships could go, these trophies were
brought home to lay the foundation of collections which to-day are
visited by scientists from abroad in order to study many rare objects
which can be no longer obtained.[4]

The catalogue of ports from which the deep-laden argosies rolled home
to Salem is astonishing in its scope. From 1810 to 1830, for example,
Salem ships flew the American flag in these ports:

Sumatra, Malaga, Naples, Liverpool, St. Domingo, Baracoa, Cadiz,
Cayenne, Gothenburg, La Guayra, Havana, Canton, Smyrna, Matanzas,
Valencia, Turk’s Island, Pernambuco, Rio Janeiro, Messina, St.
Pierre’s, Point Petre, Cronstadt, Archangel, St. Lucia, Trinidad,
Surinam, St. Petersburg, Calcutta, Porto Rico, Palermo, Algeciras,
Constantinople, Cumana, Kiel, Angostura, Jacquemel, Gustavia, Malta,
Exuma, Buenos Ayres, Christiana, Stralsund, Guadaloupe, Nevis, Riga,
Madras, St. Vincent’s, Pillau, Amsterdam, Maranham, Para, Leghorn,
Manila, Samarang, Java, Mocha, South Sea Islands, Africa, Padang, Cape
de Verde, Zanzibar and Madagascar.

In these days of huge ships and cavernous holds in which freight is
stowed to the amount of thousands of tons, we are apt to think that
those early mariners carried on their commerce over seas in a small
way. But the records of old Salem contain scores of entries for the
early years of the last century in which the duties paid on cargoes
of pepper, sugar, indigo, and other Oriental wares swelled the custom
receipts from twenty-five thousand to sixty thousand dollars. In ten
years, from 1800 to 1810, when the maritime prosperity of the port was
at flood-tide, the foreign entries numbered more than one thousand
and the total amount of duties more than seven million dollars. And
from the beginning of the nineteenth century until the ships of Salem
vanished from blue water, a period of seventy years, roughly speaking,
more than twenty million dollars poured into the Custom House as duties
on foreign cargoes.

Old men now living remember when the old warehouses along the wharves
were full of “hemp from Luzon; pepper from Sumatra; coffee from Arabia;
palm oil from the west coast of Africa; cotton from Bombay; duck and
iron from the Baltic; tallow from Madagascar; salt from Cadiz; wine
from Portugal and the Madeiras; figs, raisins and almonds from the
Mediterranean; teas and silks from China; sugar, rum and molasses from
the West Indies; ivory and gum-copal from Zanzibar; rubber, hides and
wool from South America; whale oil from the Arctic and Antarctic, and
sperm from the South Seas.”

In 1812 one hundred and twenty-six Salem ships were in the deep-water
trade, and of these fifty-eight were East Indiamen. Twenty years
later this noble fleet numbered one hundred and eleven. They had been
pioneers in opening new routes of commerce, but the vessels of the
larger ports were flocking in their wake. Boston, with the development
of railway transportation, New York with the opening of the Erie Canal,
Philadelphia and Baltimore with their more advantageous situations for
building up a commerce with the great and growing hinterland of the
young United States, were creating their ocean commerce at the expense
of old Salem. Bigger ships were building and deeper harbors were needed
and Salem shipowners dispatched their vessels from Boston instead of
the home port. Then came the Age of Steam on the sea, and the era of
the sailing vessel was foredoomed.

The Custom House which looks down at crumbling Derby Wharf where the
stately East Indiamen once lay three deep, awakes from its drowsy
idleness to record the entries of a few lumber-laden schooners from
Nova Scotia. Built in 1819, when the tide of Salem commerce had already
begun to ebb, its classic and pillared bulk recalls the comment of its
famous officer, Nathaniel Hawthorne: “It was intended to accommodate
an hoped for increase in the commercial prosperity of the place, hopes
destined never to be realized, and was built a world too large for any
necessary purpose.”

Yet in the records left by these vanished generations of seamen; in the
aspect of the stately mansions built from the fortunes won by their
ships; in the atmosphere of the old wharves and streets, there has been
preserved, as if caught in amber, the finished story of one of the most
romantic and high-hearted periods of American achievement.

Salem was a small city during her maritime career, numbering hardly
more than ten thousand souls at a time when her trade had made her
famous in every port of the world. Her achievements were the work of
an exceedingly bold and vigorous population in whom the pioneering
instinct was fostered and guided by a few merchants of rare sagacity,
daring and imagination. It must not be forgotten that from the early
part of the seventeenth century to the latter year of the eighteenth
century when this seafaring genius reached its highest development, the
men of Salem had been trained and bred to wrest a livelihood from salt
water. During this period of one hundred and fifty years before the
Revolution the sea was the highway of the Colonists whose settlements
fringed the rugged coast line of New England. At their backs lay
a hostile wilderness and a great part of the population toiled at
fishing, trading and shipbuilding.

Roger Conant, who, in 1626, founded the settlement later called Salem,
had left his fellow Pilgrims at Plymouth because he would not agree
to “separate” from the Church of England. Pushing along the coast to
Nantasket, where Captain Miles Standish had built an outpost, Roger
Conant was asked by the Dorchester Company of England to take charge
of a newly established fishing station on Cape Ann. This enterprise
was unsuccessful and Conant aspired to better his fortunes by founding
a colony or plantation on the shore of the sheltered harbor of the
Naumkeag Peninsula. This was the beginning of the town of Salem, so
named by the first governor, John Endicott, who ousted Roger Conant in
1629, when this property of the Dorchester Company passed by purchase
into the hands of the New England Company.

[Illustration: Certificate of Membership in the Salem Marine Society,
used in 1790, showing wharves and harbor]

[Illustration: Title page of the log of Captain Nathaniel Hathorne,
father of Nathaniel Hawthorne. This lettering at the top of the page
was done by the author when a boy]

The first settlers who had fought famine, pestilence and red men
were not consulted in the transaction but were transferred along
with the land. They had established a refuge for those oppressed for
conscience’s sake, and Roger Conant, brave, resolute and patient, had
fought the good fight with them. But although they held meetings
and protested against being treated as “slaves,” they could make no
opposition to the iron-handed zealot and aristocrat, John Endicott, who
came to rule over them. Eighty settlers perished of hunger and disease
during Governor Endicott’s first winter among them, and when Winthrop,
Saltonstall, Dudley and Johnson brought over a thousand people in
seventeen ships in the year of 1629, they passed by afflicted Salem and
made their settlements at Boston, Charlestown and Watertown.

“The homes, labors and successes of the first colonists of Salem would
be unworthy of our attention were they associated with the lives of
ordinary settlers in a new country. But small though the beginnings
were these men were beginning to store up and to train the energy which
was afterward to expand with tremendous force in the opening of the
whole world to commerce and civilization, and in the establishment
of the best things in American life.”[5] They were the picked men of
England, yeomanry for the most part, seeking to better their condition,
interested in the great problems of religion and government. Dwelling
along the harbor front, or on the banks of small rivers near at hand,
they at once busied themselves cutting down trees and hewing planks
to fashion pinnaces and shallops for traversing these waterways. Fish
was a staple diet and the chief commodity of trade, and often averted
famine while the scanty crops were being wrested from the first
clearings. Thus these early sixteenth century men of Salem were more
at home upon the water than upon the less friendly land, and it was
inevitable that they should build larger craft for coastwise voyaging
as fast as other settlements sprang into being to the north and south
of them.

No more than ten years after the arrival of John Endicott,
shipbuilding was a thriving industry of Salem, and her seamen had begun
to talk of sending their ventures as far away as the West Indies.
In 1640 the West Indiaman _Desire_ brought home cotton, tobacco and
negroes from the Bahamas and salt from Tortugas. This ship _Desire_ was
a credit to her builders, for after opening the trade with the West
Indies she made a passage to England in the amazingly brief time of
twenty-three days, which would have been considered rapid sailing for
a packet ship two hundred years later. In 1664 a local historian was
able to record that “in this town are some very rich merchants.” These
merchants, most of them shipmasters as well, were destined to build
up for their seaport a peculiar fame by reason of their genius for
discovering new markets for their trading ventures and staking their
lives and fortunes on the chance of finding rich cargoes where no other
American ships had dreamed of venturing.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] In 1810 Newburyport merchants owned forty-one ships, forty-nine
brigs and fifty schooners, and was the seat of extensive commerce with
the East Indies and other ports of the Orient. Twenty-one deep-water
sailing ships for foreign trade were built on the Merrimac River in
that one year. The fame of Newburyport as a shipbuilding and shipowning
port was carried far into the last century and culminated in the
building of the Atlantic packet _Dreadnought_, the fastest and most
celebrated sailing ship that ever flew the American flag. She made a
passage from New York to Queenstown in nine days and thirteen hours in
1860. Her famous commander, the late Captain Samuel Samuels, wrote of
the _Dreadnought_:

“She was never passed in anything over a four-knot breeze. She was what
might be termed a semi-clipper and possessed the merit of being able to
bear driving as long as her sails and spars would stand. By the sailors
she was called the ‘Wild Boat of the Atlantic,’ while others called her
‘The Flying Dutchman.’”

[2] Nathaniel Hawthorne, the author, chose to insert a “w” in the
family name of _Hathorne_ borne by his father.

“The four years had lapsed quietly and quickly by, and Hawthorne,
who now adopted the fanciful spelling of his name after his personal
whim, was man grown.” (Nathaniel Hawthorne, by George E. Woodberry, in
American Men of Letters Series.)

[3] (1799) “Oct. 22. It is proposed by the new marine society, called
the East India Marine Society, to make a cabinet. This society has been
lately thought of. Captain Gibant first mentioned the plan to me this
summer and desired me to give him some plan of articles or a sketch.
The first friends of the institution met and chose a committee to
compare and digest articles from the sketches given to them. Last week
was informed that in the preceding week the members met and signed the
articles chosen by the committee.

“Nov. 7. Captain Carnes has presented his curiosities to the new-formed
East India Marine Society and they are providing a museum and
cabinet.... Rooms were obtained for their meetings and a place for the
deposit of books, charts, etc., and in July of the following year glass
cases were provided to arrange therein the specimens that had been
accumulated.” (Diary of Rev. William Bentley.)

[4] A costly new hall has been recently added to the Museum to contain
the Japanese and Chinese collections. This building was the gift of
Dr. Charles G. Weld of Boston. Its Japanese floor contains the most
complete and valuable ethnological collections, portraying the life of
the Japanese people of the feudal age, that exists to-day. Japanese
scientists and students have visited Salem in order to examine many
objects of this unique collection which are no longer to be found in
their own country. Professor Edward S. Morse, director of the Museum,
and curator of the Japanese pottery section of the Boston Museum of
Fine Arts, has sifted and arranged these collections with singular
patience, expert knowledge, and brilliantly successful results. The
South Sea collections are also unequaled in many important particulars,
especially in the field of weapons and ornaments from the Fiji and
Marquesas Islands.

[5] History of Essex County.

CHAPTER II

PHILIP ENGLISH AND HIS ERA

(1680-1750)

In the decade from 1685 to 1695 the infant commerce of Salem was
fighting for its life. This period was called “the dark time when ye
merchants looked for ye vessells with fear and trembling.” Besides the
common dangers of the sea, they had to contend with savage Indians who
attacked the fishing fleet, with the heavy restrictions imposed by the
Royal Acts of Trade, with the witchcraft delusion which turned every
man’s hand against his neighbor, and with French privateers which so
ravaged the ventures of the Salem traders to the West Indies that the
shipping annals of the time are thickly strewn with such incidents as
these:

(1690)—“The ketch _Fellowship_, Captain Robert Glanville, _via_ the
Vineyard for Berwick on the Tweed, was taken by two French privateers
and carried to Dunkirk.”

(1695)—“The ship _Essex_ of Salem, Captain John Beal, from Bilboa in
Spain, had a battle at sea and loses John Samson, boatswain. This man
and Thomas Roads, the gunner, had previously contracted that whoever
of the two survived the other he should have all the property of the
deceased.”

Soon after this the tables were turned by the _Salem Packet_ which
captured a French ship off the Banks of Newfoundland. In the same year
the ketch _Exchange_, Captain Thomas Marston, was taken by a French
ship off Block Island. She was ransomed for two hundred and fifty
pounds and brought into Salem. “The son of the owner was carried to
Placentia as a hostage for the payment of the ransom.”

The ancient records of the First Church of Salem contain this quaint
entry under date of July 25, 1677:

“The Lord having given a Comission to the Indians to take no less
than 13 of the Fishing Ketches of Salem and Captivate the men (though
divers of them cleared themselves and came home) it struck a great
consternation into all the people here. The Pastor moved on the Lord’s
Day, and the whole people readily consented, to keep the Lecture Day
following as a fast day; which was accordingly done and the work
carried on by the Pastor, Mr. Hale, Mr. Chevers, and Mr. Gerrish, the
higher ministers helping in prayer. The Lord was pleased to send in
some of the Ketches on the Fast day which was looked on as a gracious
smile of Providence. Also there had been 19 wounded men sent into Salem
a little while before; also, a ketch with 40 men sent out from Salem
as a man-of-war to recover the rest of the Ketches. The Lord give them
Good Success.”

In those very early and troublous times the Barbary pirates or Corsairs
had begun to vex the New England skippers who boldly crossed the
Atlantic in vessels that were much smaller than a modern canal boat
or brick barge. These “Sallee rovers” hovered from the Mediterranean
to the chops of the English Channel. Many a luckless seaman of Salem
was held prisoner in the cities of Algiers while his friends at home
endeavored to gather funds for his ransom. It was stated in 1661 that
“for a long time previous the commerce of Massachusetts was much
annoyed by Barbary Corsairs and that many of its seamen were held in
bondage. One Captain Cakebread or Breadcake had two guns to cruise
in search of Turkish pirates.” In 1700 Benjamin Alford of Boston and
William Bowditch of Salem related that “their friend Robert Carver of
the latter port was taken nine years before, a captive into Sally;
that contributions had been made for his redemption; that the money was
in the hands of a person here; that if they had the disposal of it,
they could release Carver.”

The end of the seventeenth century found the wilderness settlement
of Salem rapidly expanding into a seaport whose commercial interests
were faring to distant oceans. The town had grown along the water’s
edge beside which its merchants were beginning to build their spacious
and gabled mansions. Their countinghouses overlooked the harbor, and
their spyglasses were alert to sweep the distant sea line for the
homecoming of their ventures to Virginia, the West Indies and Europe.
Their vessels were forty and sixty tons burden, mere cockleshells
for deep-water voyaging, but they risked storm and capture while
they pushed farther and farther away from Salem as the prospect of
profitable trade lured them on.

The sailmaker, the rigger, the ship chandler, and the shipwright had
begun to populate the harbor front, and among them swarmed the rough
and headlong seamen from Heaven knew where, who shocked the godly
Puritans of the older régime. Jack ashore was a bull in a china shop
then as now, and history has recorded the lamentable but deserved fate
of “one Henry Bull and companions in a vessel in our harbor who derided
the Church of Christ and were afterward cast away among savage Indians
by whom they were slain.”

Now there came into prominence the first of a long line of illustrious
shipping merchants of Salem, Philip English, who makes a commanding
figure in the seafaring history of his time. A native of the Isle
of Jersey, he came to Salem before 1670. He made voyages in his own
vessels, commanded the ketch[6] _Speedwell_ in 1676, and ten years
later had so swiftly advanced his fortunes that he built him a mansion
house on Essex Street, a solid, square-sided structure with many
projecting porches and with upper stories overhanging the street. It
stood for a hundred and fifty years, long known as “English’s Great
House,” and linked the nineteenth century with the very early chapters
of American history. In 1692, Philip English was perhaps the richest
man of the New England Colonies, owning twenty-one vessels which
traded with Bilboa, Barbados, St. Christopher’s, the Isle of Jersey
and the ports of France. He owned a wharf and warehouses, and fourteen
buildings in the town.

One of his bills of lading, dated 1707, shows the pious imprint of his
generation and the kind of commerce in which he was engaged. It reads
in part:

“Shipped by the Grace of God, in good order and well conditioned, by
Sam’ll Browne, Phillip English, Capt. Wm. Bowditch, Wm. Pickering, and
Sam’ll Wakefield, in and upon the Good sloop called the _Mayflower_
whereof is master under God for this present voyage Jno. Swasey, and
now riding at anchor in the harbor of Salem, and by God’s Grace bound
for Virginia or Merriland. To say, twenty hogshats of Salt.... In
witness whereof the Master or Purser of the said Sloop has affirmed to
Two Bills of Lading ... and so God send the Good Sloop to her desired
port in Safety. Amen.”

Another merchant of Philip English’s time wrote in 1700 of the foreign
commerce of Salem:

“Dry Merchantable codfish for the Markets of Spain and Portugal and
the Straits. Refuse fish, lumber, horses and provisions for the West
Indies. Returns made directly hence to England are sugar, molasses,
cotton, wool and logwood for which we depend on the West Indies. Our
own produce, a considerable quantity of whale and fish oil, whalebone,
furs, deer, elk and bear skins are annually sent to England. We have
much Shipping here and freights are low.”

[Illustration: The Roger Williams house, built before 1635. Tradition
asserts that preliminary examinations of those accused of witchcraft in
1692 were held here.

(This photograph was made before a drug store was built in front of
the house, and shows an old “town pump”)]

To Virginia the clumsy, little sloops and ketches of Philip English
carried “Molasses, Rum, Salt, Cider, Mackerel, Wooden Bowls, Platters,
Pails, Kegs, Muscavado Sugar, and Codfish and brought back to Salem
Wheat, Pork, Tobacco, Furs, Hides, old Pewter, Old Iron, Brass, Copper,
Indian Corn and English Goods.” The craft which crossed the Atlantic
and made the West Indies in safety to pile up wealth for Philip English
were no larger than those sloops and schooners which ply up and down
the Hudson River to-day. Their masters made their way without sextant
or “Practical Navigator,” and as an old writer has described in a
somewhat exaggerated vein:

“Their skippers kept their reckoning with chalk on a shingle, which
they stowed away in the binnacle; and by way of observation they held
up a hand to the sun. When they got him over four fingers they knew
they were straight for Hole-in-the-Wall; three fingers gave them their
course to the Double-headed Shop Key and two carried them down to
Barbados.”

The witchcraft frenzy invaded even the stately home of Philip
English, the greatest shipowner of early Salem. His wife, a proud
and aristocratic lady, was “cried against,” examined and committed
to prison in Salem. It is said that she was considered haughty and
overbearing in her manner toward the poor, and that her husband’s
staunch adherence to the Church of England had something to do with her
plight. At any rate, Mary English was arrested in her bedchamber and
refused to rise, wherefore “guards were placed around the house and
in the morning she attended the devotions of her family, kissed her
children with great composure, proposed her plan for their education,
took leave of them and then told the officer she was ready to die.”
Alas, poor woman, she had reason to be “persuaded that accusation
was equal to condemnation.” She lay in prison six weeks where “her
firmness was memorable. But being visited by a fond husband, her
husband was also accused and confined in prison.” The intercession
of friends and the plea that the prison was overcrowded caused their
removal to Arnold’s jail in Boston until the time of trial. It brings
to mind certain episodes of the French Reign of Terror to learn that
they were taken to Boston on the same day with Giles Corey, George
Jacobs, Alice Parker, Ann Pudeator, and Bridget Bishop, all of whom
perished except Philip and Mary English. Both would have been executed
had they not escaped death by flight from the Boston jail and seeking
refuge in New York.

In his diary, under date of May 21, 1793, Rev. William Bentley, of
Salem, pastor of the East Church from 1783 to 1819, wrote of the
witchcraft persecution of this notable shipping merchant and his wife:

“May 21st, 1793. Substance of Madam Susannah Harthorne’s account of
her grandfather English, etc. Mr. English was a Jerseyman, came young
to America and lived with Mr. W. Hollingsworth, whose only child he
married. He owned above twenty sail of vessels. His wife had the best
education of her times. Wrote with great ease, and has left a specimen
of her needlework in her infancy or youth. She had already owned her
Covenant and was baptised with her children and now intended to be
received at the Communion on the next Lord’s Day. On Saturday night
she was cried out upon. The Officers, High Sheriff, and Deputy with
attendants came at eleven at night. When the servant came up Mr.
English imagined it was upon business, not having had the least notice
of the suspicions respecting his wife. They were to bed together in
the western chamber of their new house raised in 1690, and had a large
family of servants.

“The Officers came in soon after the servant who so alarmed Mr. English
that with difficulty he found his cloathes which he could not put
on without help. The Officers came into the chamber, following the
servant, and opening the curtains read the Mittimus. She was then
ordered to rise but absolutely refused. Her husband continued walking
the chamber all night, but the Officers contented themselves with a
guard upon the House till morning. In the morning they required of her
to rise, but she refused to rise before her usual hour. After breakfast
with her husband and children, and seeing all the servants, of whom
there were twenty in the House, she concluded to go with the officers
and she was conducted to the Cat and Wheel, a public house east of the
present Centre Meeting House on the opposite side of the way. Six weeks
she was confined in the front chamber, in which she received the visits
of her husband three times a day and as the floor was single she kept
a journal of the examinations held below which she constantly sent to
Boston.

“After six weeks her husband was accused, and their friends obtained
that they should be sent on to Boston till their Trial should come
on. In Arnold’s custody they had bail and liberty of the town, only
lodging in the Gaol. The Rev. Moody and Williard of Boston visited
them and invited them to the public worship on the day before they
were to return to Salem for Trial. Their text was that they that are
persecuted in one city, let them flee to another. After Meeting the
Ministers visited them at the Gaol, and asked them whether they took
notice of the discourse, and told them their danger and urged them to
escape since so many had suffered. Mr. English replied, ‘God will not
permit them to touch me.’ Mrs. English said: ‘Do you not think the
sufferers innocent?’ He (Moody) said ‘Yes.’ She then added, ‘Why may we
not suffer also?’ The Ministers then told him if he would not carry his
wife away they would.

“The gentlemen of the town took care to provide at midnight a
conveyance, encouraged by the Governor, Gaoler, etc., and Mr. and Mrs.
English with their eldest child and daughter, were conveyed away, and
the Governor gave letters to Governor Fletcher of New York who came out
and received them, accompanied by twenty private gentlemen, and carried
them to his house.

“They remained twelve months in the city. While there they heard of the
wants of the poor in Salem and sent a vessel of corn for their relief,
a bushel for each child. Great advantages were proposed to detain them
at New York, but the attachment of the wife to Salem was not lost by
all her sufferings, and she urged a return. They were received with
joy upon their return and the Town had a thanksgiving on the occasion.
Noyes, the prosecutor, dined with him on that day in his own house.”

That a man of such solid station should have so narrowly escaped death
in the witchcraft fury indicates that no class was spared. While his
sturdy seamen were fiddling and drinking in the taverns of the Salem
waterfront, or making sail to the roaring chorus of old-time chanties,
their employer, a prince of commerce for his time, was dreading a
miserable death for himself and that high-spirited dame, his wife, on
Gallows Hill, at the hands of the stern-faced young sheriff of Salem.

Philip English returned to Salem after the frenzy had passed and
rounded out a shipping career of fifty years, living until 1736. His
instructions to one of his captains may help to picture the American
commerce of two centuries ago. In 1722 he wrote to “Mr. John Tauzel”:

“Sir, you being appointed Master of my sloop _Sarah_, now Riding in ye
Harbor of Salem, and Ready to Saile, my Order is to you that you take
ye first opportunity of wind and Weather to Saile and make ye best of
yr. way for Barbadoes or Leew’d Island, and there Enter and Clear yr
vessel and Deliver yr Cargo according to Orders and Bill of Lading and
Make Saile of my twelve Hogsh’d of fish to my best advantage, and make
Returne in yr Vessel or any other for Salem in such Goods as you shall
see best, and if you see Cause to take a freight to any port or hire
her I lieve it with your Best Conduct, Managem’t or Care for my best
advantage. So please God to give you a prosperous voyage, I remain yr
Friend and Owner.

“PHILIP ENGLISH.”

England had become already jealous of the flourishing maritime commerce
of the Colonies and was devising one restrictive Act of Parliament
after another to hamper what was viewed as a dangerous rivalry. In
1668, Sir Joshua Child, once chairman of the East India Company,
delivered himself of this choleric and short-sighted opinion:

“Of all the American plantations His Majesty has none so apt for the
building of ships as New England, nor none comparably so qualified for
the breeding of seamen, not only by reason of the natural industry
of the people, but principally by reason of their cod and mackerel
fisheries, and in my opinion there is nothing more prejudicial and in
prospect more dangerous to any mother kingdom than the increase of
shipping in her colonies, plantations or provinces.”

This selfish view-point sought not only to prevent American shipowners
from conducting a direct trade with Europe but tried also to cripple
the prosperous commerce between the Colonies and the West Indies.
The narrow-minded politicians who sacrificed both the Colonies and
the Mother country could not kill American shipping even by the most
ingenious restrictive acts, and the hardy merchants of New England
violated or evaded these unjust edicts after the manner indicated in
the following letter of instructions given to Captain Richard Derby of
Salem, for a voyage to the West Indies as master and part owner of the
schooner _Volante_ in 1741:

“If you should go among the French endeavour to get salt at St.
Martins, but if you should fall so low as Statia, and any Frenchman
should make you a good Offer with good security, or by making your
Vessel a Dutch bottom, or by any other means practicable in order to
your getting among ye Frenchmen, embrace it. Among whom if you should
ever arrive, be sure to give strict orders amongst your men not to sell
the least trifle unto them on any terms, lest they should make your
Vessel liable to a seizure. Also secure a permit so as for you to trade
there next voyage, which you may undoubtedly do through your factor or
by a _little greasing_ some others. Also make a proper Protest at any
port you stop at.”

This means that if needs be, Captain Derby is to procure a Dutch
registry and make the _Volante_ a Dutch vessel for the time being, and
thus not subject to the British Navigation Acts. It was easy to buy
such registries for temporary use and to masquerade under English,
French, Spanish or Dutch colors, if a “little greasing” was applied to
the customs officers in the West Indies.

On the margin of Captain Derby’s sailing orders is scrawled the
following memorandum:

“Capt. Derby: If you trade at Barbadoes buy me a negroe boy about
siventeen years old, which if you do, advise Mr. Clarke of yt so he
may not send one.

(Signed) BENJ. GERRISH, JR.”

[Illustration:

By permission of the Essex Institute

The Philip English “Great House,” built in 1685 and torn down in 1833.
The home of the first great shipping merchant of the colonies]

Such voyages as these were risky ventures for the eighteenth century
insurance companies, whose courage is to be admired for daring to
underwrite these vessels at all. For a voyage of the _Lydia_ from Salem
to Madeira in 1761, the premium rate was 11 per cent., and in the
following year 14 per cent. was demanded for a voyage to Jamaica.
The _Three Sisters_, bound to Santo Domingo, was compelled to pay 23
per cent. premium, and 14 per cent. for the return voyage. The lowest
rate recorded for this era was 8 per cent. on the schooner _Friendship_
of Salem to Quebec in 1760. For a Madeira voyage from Salem to-day the
insurance rate would be 1¾ per cent. as compared with 11 per cent.
then; to Jamaica 1½ per cent. instead of 14 per cent. in the days when
the underwriters had to risk confiscation, violation of the British
Navigation Acts, and capture by privateers, or pirates, in addition to
the usual dangers of the deep.

Among the biographical sketches in the records of the Salem Marine
Society is that of Captain Michael Driver. It is a concise yet crowded
narrative and may serve to show why insurance rates were high. “In the
year 1759, he commanded the schooner _Three Brothers_, bound to the
West Indies,” runs the account. “He was taken by a privateer under
English colors, called the _King of Russia_, commanded by Captain James
Inclicto, of nine guns, and sent into Antigua. Her cargo was value at
£550. Finding no redress he came home. He sailed again in the schooner
_Betsey_ for Guadaloupe; while on his passage was taken by a French
frigate and sent into above port. He ransomed the vessel for four
thousand livres and left three hostages and sailed for home November,
1761, and took command of schooner _Mary_, under a flag of truce, to go
and pay the ransom and bring home the hostages.

“He was again captured, contrary to the laws of nations, by the English
privateer _Revenge_, James McDonald, master, sent to New Providence,
Bahama. He made protest before the authorities and was set at liberty
with vessel and cargo. He pursued his voyage to Cape Francois, redeemed
the hostages, and Sept. 6, 1762, was ready to return, but Monsieur
Blanch, commanding a French frigate, seized the vessel, took out
hostages and crew and put them on board the frigate bound to St.
Jago, Cuba. He was detained till December, and vessel returned. Worn
out and foodless he was obliged to go to Jamaica for repairs. On his
arrival home his case was represented to the Colonial Government and
transmitted to Governor Shirley at New Providence, but no redress was
made.”

Many of these small vessels with crews of four to six men were lost
by shipwreck and now and then one can read between the lines of some
scanty chronicle of disaster astonishing romances of maritime suffering
and adventure. For example in 1677, “a vessel arrived at Salem which
took Captain Ephriam How of New Haven, the survivor of his crew, from a
desolate island where _eight months_ he suffered exceedingly from cold
and hunger.”

In the seventeenth century Cape Cod was as remote as and even more
inaccessible than Europe. A bark of thirty tons burden, Anthony Dike
master, was wrecked near the end of the Cape and three of the crew were
frozen to death. The two survivors “got some fire and lived there by
such food as they had saved for _seven weeks_ until an Indian found
them. Dike was of the number who perished.”

Robinson Crusoe could have mastered difficulties no more courageously
than the seamen of the ketch _Providence_, wrecked on a voyage to the
West Indies. “Six of her crew were drowned, but the Master, mate and
a sailor, who was badly wounded, reached an island half a mile off
where they found another of the company. They remained there eight
days, living on salt fish and cakes made from a barrel of flour washed
ashore. They found a piece of touch wood after four days which the
mate had in his chest and a piece of flint with which, having a small
knife they struck a fire. They framed a boat with a tarred mainsail and
some hoops and then fastened pieces of board to them. With a boat so
constructed they sailed ten leagues to Anquila and St. Martins where
they were kindly received.”

There was also Captain Jones of the brig _Adventure_ which foundered
at sea while coming home from Trinidad. All hands were lost except the
skipper, who got astride a wooden or “Quaker” gun which had broken
adrift from the harmless battery with which he had hoped to intimidate
pirates. “He fought off the sharks with his feet” and clung to his
buoyant ordnance until he was picked up and carried into Havana.

In 1759 young Samuel Gardner of Salem, just graduated from Harvard
College, made a voyage to Gibraltar with Captain Richard Derby.
The lad’s diary[7] contains some interesting references to the
warlike hazards of a routine trading voyage, besides revealing, in
an attractive way, the ingenuous nature of this nineteen-year-old
youngster of the eighteenth century. His daily entries read in part:

1759. Oct. 19—Sailed from Salem. Very sick.

20—I prodigious sick, no comfort at all.

21—I remain very sick, the first Sabbath I have spent from Church this
long time. Little Sleep this Night.

24—A little better contented, but a Sailor’s life is a poor life.

31—Fair pleasant weather, if it was always so, a sea life would be
tolerable.

... Nov. 11—This makes the fourth Sunday I have been out. Read Dr.
Beveridge’s “Serious Thoughts.”

12—Saw a sail standing to S.W. I am quartered at the aftermost gun and
its opposite with Captain Clifford. We fired a shot at her and she
hoisted Dutch colors.

13—I have entertained myself with a Romance, _viz._, “The History of
the Parish Girl.”

14—Quite pleasant. Here we may behold the Works of God in the Mighty
Deep. Happy he who beholds aright.

15—Between 2 and 3 this morning we saw two sail which chased us, the
ship fired 3 shots at us which we returned. They came up with us by
reason of a breeze which she took before we did. She proved to be the
ship _Cornwall_ from Bristol.

21—Bishop Beveridge employed my time.

23—We now begin to approach to land. May we have a good sight of it. At
eight o’clock two Teriffa (Barbary) boats came out after us, they fired
at us which we returned as merrily. They were glad to get away as well
as they could. We stood after one, but it is almost impossible to come
up with the piratical dogs.

28—Gibraltar—Went on shore. Saw the soldiers in the Garrison
exercise. They had a cruel fellow for an officer for he whipt them
barbarously.... After dinner we went out and saw the poor soldiers
lickt again.

... Dec. 10—Benj. Moses, a Jew, was on board. I had some discourse
with him about his religion.... Poor creature, he errs greatly. I
endeavored to set him right, but he said for a conclusion that his
Father and Grandfather were Jews and if they were gone to Hell he would
go there, too, by choice, which I exposed as a great piece of Folly and
Stupidity. In the morning we heard a firing and looked out in the Gut
and there was a snow attacked by 3 of the piratical Teriffa boats. Two
cutters in the Government service soon got under sail, 3 men-of-war
that lay in the Roads manned their barges and sent them out as did a
Privateer. We could now perceive her (the snow) to have struck, but
they soon retook her. She had only four swivels and 6 or 8 men.... They
got some prisoners (of the pirates) but how many I cannot learn, which
it is to be hoped will meet with their just reward which I think would
be nothing short of hanging.... Just at dusk came on board of us two
Gentlemen, one of which is an Officer on board a man-of-war, the other
belongs to the _Granada_ in the King’s Service. The former (our people
say) was in the skirmish in some of the barges. He could have given us
a relation of it, but we, not knowing of it, prevented what would have
been very agreeable to me.... It is now between 9 and 10 o’clock at
night which is the latest I have set up since I left Salem.”

This Samuel Gardner was a typical Salem boy of his time, well brought
up, sent to college, and eager to go to sea and experience adventures
such as his elders had described. Of a kindred spirit in the very human
quality of the documents he left for us was Francis Boardman, a seaman,
who rose to a considerable position as a Salem merchant. His ancient
log books contain between their battered and discolored canvas covers
the records of his voyages between 1767 and 1774. Among the earliest
are the logs of the ship _Vaughan_ in which Francis Boardman sailed
as mate. He kept the log and having a bent for scribbling on whatever
blank paper his quill could find, he filled the fly-leaves of these sea
journals with more interesting material than the routine entries of
wind, weather and ship’s daily business. Scrawled on one ragged leaf in
what appears to be the preliminary draft of a letter:

“Dear Polly—thes lines comes with My Love to you. Hoping thes will find
you in as good Health as they Leave me at this Time, Blessed be God for
so Great a Massey (mercy).”

Young Francis Boardman was equipped with epistolary ammunition for all
weathers and conditions, it would seem, for in another log of a hundred
and fifty years ago, he carefully wrote on a leaf opposite his personal
expense account:

“Madam:

“Your Late Behavour towards me, you are sensible cannot have escaped
my Ear. I must own you was once the person of whom I could Not have
formed such an Opinion. For my part, at present I freely forgive you
and only blame myself for putting so much confidence in a person so
undeserving. I have now conquered my pashun so much (though I must
confess at first it was with great difficulty), that I never think of
you, nor I believe never shall without despising the Name of a person
who dared to use me in so ungrateful a manner. I shall now conclude
myself, though badley used, not your Enemy.”

It may be fairly suspected that Francis Boardman owned a copy of some
early “Complete Letter Writer,” for on another page he begins but does
not finish. “A Letter from One Sister to Another to Enquire of Health.”
Also he takes pains several times to draft these dutiful but far from
newsy lines:

“Honored Father and Mother—Thes lines comes with my Deuty to you.
Hoping They will find you in as good Health as they Leave me at this
Time. Blessed be God for so Great a Massey—Honored Father and Mother.”

In a log labeled “From London Toward Cadiz, Spain, in the good ship
_Vaughan_, Benj. Davis, Master, 1767,” Francis Boardman became mightily
busy with his quill and the season being spring, he began to scrawl
poetry between the leaves which were covered with such dry entries as
“Modt. Gales and fair weather. Set the jibb. Bent topmast stay sail.”
One of these pages of verse begins in this fashion:

“One Morning, one Morning in May,
The fields were adorning with Costlay Array.
I Chanced for To hear as I walked By a Grove
A Shepyard Laymenting for the Loss of his Love.”

But the most moving and ambitious relic of the poetic taste of this
long vanished Yankee seaman is a ballad preserved in the same log of
the _Vaughan_. Its spelling is as filled with fresh surprises as its
sentiment is profoundly tragic. It runs as follows:

1 “In Gosport[8] of Late there a Damsil Did Dwell,
for Wit and for Beuty Did she maney Exsel.
2 A Young man he Corted hir to be his Dear
And By his Trade was a Ship Carpentir.
3 he ses “My Dear Molly if you will agrea
And Will then Conscent for to Marey me
4 Your Love it will Eas me of Sorro and Care
If you will But Marey a ship Carpentir.”
5 With blushes mor Charming then Roses in June,
She ans’red (“) Sweet William for to Wed I am to young.
6 Young Men thay are fickle and so Very Vain,
If a Maid she is Kind thay will quickly Disdane.
7 the Most Beutyfullyst Woman that ever was Born,
When a man has insnared hir, hir Beuty he scorns. (”)
8 (He) (“) O, My Dear Molly, what Makes you Say so?
Thi Beuty is the Haven to wich I will go.
9 If you Will consent for the Church for to Stear
there I will Cast anchor and stay with my Dear.
10 I ne’re Shall be Cloyedd with the Charms of thy Love,
this Love is as True as the tru Turtle Dove.
11 All that I do Crave is to marey my Dear
And arter we are maried no Dangers we will fear. (”)
12 (She) “The Life of a Virgen, Sweet William, I Prize
for marrying Brings Trouble and sorro Like-wise. (”)
13 But all was in Vane tho His Sute she did Denie,
yet he did Purswade hir for Love to Comeply.
14 And by his Cunneng hir Hart Did Betray
and with Too lude Desire he led hir Astray.
15 This Past on a while and at Length you will hear,
the King wanted Sailors and to Sea he must Stear.
16 This Greved the fare Damsil allmost to the Hart
To think of Hir True Love so soon she must Part.
17 She ses (“) my Dear Will as you go to sea
Remember the Vows that you made unto me. (”)
18 With the Kindest Expresens he to hir Did Say
(“) I will marey my Molly air I go away.
19 That means to-morrow to me you will Come.
then we will be maried and our Love Carried on. (”)
20 With the Kindest Embraces they Parted that Nite
She went for to meet him next Morning by Lite.
21 he ses (“) my Dear Charmer, you must go with me
Before we are married a friend for to see. (”)
22 he Led hir thru Groves and Valleys so deep
That this fare Damsil Began for to Weep.
23 She ses (“) My Dear William, you Lead me Astray
on Purpos my innocent Life to be BeTray. (”)
24 (He) (“) Those are true Words and none can you save, (”)
for all this hole Nite I have Been digging your grave.”
25 A Spade Standing By and a Grave thare she See,
(She) (“) O, Must this Grave Be a Bride Bed to Me? (”)

[Illustration: A bill of lading of the time of Philip English, dated
1716]

[Illustration: The log of a Salem whaler, showing how he recorded the
number of whales he took]

In 1774 we find Francis Boardman as captain of the sloop _Adventure_,
evidently making his first voyage as master. He was bound for the West
Indies, and while off the port of St. Pierre in Martinique he penned
these gloomy remarks in his log:

“This Morning I Drempt that 2 of my upper teeth and one Lower Dropt out
and another Next the Lower one wore away as thin as a wafer and Sundry
other fritful Dreams. What will be the Event of it I can’t tell.”

Other superstitions seem to have vexed his mind, for in the same log he
wrote as follows:

“this Blot I found the 17th. I can’t tell but Something Very bad is
going to Hapen to me this Voyage. I am afeard but God onley Noes What
may hapen on board the Sloop _Adventure_—the first Voyage of being
Master.”

Sailing “From Guardalopa Toward Boston,” Captain Francis Boardman made
this final entry in his log:

“The End of this Voyage for wich I am Very thankfull on Acct. of a
Grate Deal of Truble by a bad mate. His name is William Robson of
Salem. He was Drunk most Part of the Voyage.”

FOOTNOTES:

[6] The ketch of the eighteenth century was two-masted with square
sails on her foremast, and a fore-and-aft sail on the mainmast, which
was shorter than the foremast. The schooner rig was not used until
1720 and is said to have been originated by Captain Andrew Robinson of
Gloucester.

[7] Historical Collections of the Essex Institute.

[8] Gosport Navy Yard, England.

CHAPTER III

SOME EARLY EIGHTEENTH CENTURY PIRATES

(1670-1725)

The pirates of the Spanish Main and the southern coasts of this country
have enjoyed almost a monopoly of popular interest in fact and fiction.
As early as 1632, however, the New England coast was plagued by pirates
and the doughty merchant seamen of Salem and other ports were sallying
forth to fight them for a hundred years on end.

In 1670 the General Court published in Boston, “by beat of drum,” a
proclamation against a ship at the Isle of Shoals suspected of being
a pirate, and three years later another official broadside was hurled
against “piracy and mutiny.” The report of an expedition sent out from
Boston in 1689, in the sloop _Mary_, against notorious pirates named
Thomas Hawkins and Thomas Pound, has all the dramatic elements and
properties of a tale of pure adventure. It relates that “being off of
Wood’s Hole, we were informed there was a Pirate at Tarpolin Cove, and
soon after we espyed a Sloop on head of us which we supposed to be
the Sloop wherein sd. Pound and his Company were. We made what Sayle
we could and soon came near up with her, spread our King’s Jack and
fired a shot athwart her forefoot, upon which a red fflag was put out
on the head of the sd. Sloop’s mast. Our Capn. ordered another shot to
be fired athwart her forefoot, but they not striking, we came up with
them. Our Capn. commanded us to fire at them which we accordingly did
and called to them to strike to the King of England.

“Pound, standing on the Quarter deck with his naked Sword flourishing
in his hand, said; ‘Come on Board you Doggs, I will strike you
presently,’ or words to that purpose, his men standing by him upon
the deck with guns in their hands, and he taking up his Gun, they
discharged a Volley at us and we at them again, and so continued firing
one at the other for some space of time.

“In which engagement our Capn. Samuel Pease was wounded in the Arme,
in the side and in the thigh; but at length bringing them under our
power, wee made Sayle towards Roade Island and on Saturday the fifth
of sd. October gut our wounded men on shore and procured Surgeons to
dress them. Our said Captaine lost much blood by his wounds and was
brought very low, but on friday after, being the eleventh day of the
said October, being brought on board the vessell intending to come away
to Boston, was taken with bleeding afresh, so that we were forced to
carry him on Shore again to Road Island, and was followed with bleeding
at his Wounds, and fell into fitts, but remained alive until Saturday
morning the twelfth of Octbr. aforesaid when he departed this Life.”

This admirably brief narrative shows that Thomas Pounds, strutting his
quarter deck under his red “fflagg” and flourishing his naked sword
and crying “Come on, you doggs,” was a proper figure of a seventeenth
century pirate, and that poor Captain Pease of the sloop _Mary_ was
a gallant seaman who won his victory after being wounded unto death.
Pirates received short shift and this crew was probably hanged in
Boston as were scores of their fellows in that era.

Puritan wives and sweethearts waited months and years for missing ships
which never again dropped anchor in the landlocked harbor of Salem, and
perhaps if any tidings ever came it was no more than this:

“May 21 (1697)—The ketch _Margaret_ of Salem, Captain Peter Henderson
was chased ashore near Funshal, Madeira, by pirates and lost. Of what
became of the officers and crew the account says nothing.”

In July of 1703, the brigantine _Charles_, Capt. Daniel Plowman, was
fitted out at Boston as a privateer to cruise against the French and
Spanish with whom Great Britain was at war. When the vessel had been
a few days at sea, Captain Plowman was taken very ill. Thereupon the
crew locked him in the cabin and left him to die while they conspired
to run off with the brigantine and turn pirates. The luckless master
conveniently died, his body was tossed overboard and one John Quelch
assumed the command. The crew seem to have agreed that he was the
man for their purpose and they unanimously invited him to “sail on a
private cruise to the coast of Brazil.” In those waters they plundered
several Portuguese ships, and having collected sufficient booty or
becoming homesick, they determined to seek their native land. With
striking boldness Quelch navigated the brigantine back to Marblehead
and primed his men with a story of the voyage which should cover up
their career as pirates.

Suspicion was turned against them, however, the vessel was searched,
and much plunder revealed. The pirates tried to escape along shore, but
most of them, Quelch included, were captured at Gloucester, the Isle of
Shoals, and Marblehead.

One of the old Salem records has preserved the following information
concerning the fate of these rascals:

(1704)—“Major Stephen Sewall, Captain John Turner and 40 volunteers
embark in a shallop and Fort Pinnace after Sun Set to go in Search of
some Pirates who sailed from Gloucester in the morning. Major Sewall
brought into Salem a Galley, Captain Thomas Lowrimore, on board of
which he had captured some pirates and some of their Gold at the Isle
of Shoals. Major Sewall carries the Pirates to Boston under a strong
guard. Captain Quelch and five of his crew are hung. About 13 of the
ship’s company remain under sentence of death and several more are
cleared.”

Tradition records that a Salem poet of that time was moved to write of
the foregoing episode:

“Ye pirates who against God’s laws did fight,
Have all been taken which is very right.
Some of them were old and others young
And on the flats of Boston they were hung.”

There is a vivacious and entertaining flavor in the following chronicle
and comment:

“May 1, 1718, several of the ship _Hopewell’s_ crew can testify that
near Hispaniola they met with pirates who robbed and abused their crew
and compelled their mate, James Logun of Charlestown to go with them,
as they had no artist; having lost several of their company in an
engagement. As to what sort of an artist these gentlemen rovers were
deficient in, whether dancing, swimming or writing master, or a master
of the mechanical arts, we have no authority for stating.”

The official account of the foregoing misfortune is to be found among
the notarial records of Essex county and reads as follows:

“Depositions of Richard Manning, John Crowell, and Aaron Crowell,
all of Salem, and belonging to the crew of Captain Thomas Ellis,
commander of the ship _Hopewell_, bound from Island of Barbadoes to
Saltatuda. Missing of that Island and falling to Leeward we shaped our
course for some of the Bahama Islands in hopes to get salt there, but
nigh ye Island of Hispaniola we unhappily met with a pirate, being a
sloop of between thirty and forty men, one Capt. Charles, commander,
his sirname we could not learn. They took us, boarded us and abused
several of us shamefully, and took what small matters we had, even
our very cloathes and particularly beat and abused our Mate, whose
name was James Logun of Charlestown, and him they forcibly carried
away with them and threatened his life if he would not go, which they
were ye more in earnest for insomuch as they had no artist on board,
as we understood, having a little before that time had an Engagem’t.
with a ship of force which had killed several of them as we were
Informed by some of them. Ye said James Logun was very unwilling to
go with them and informed some of us that he knew not whether he had
best to dye or go with them, these Deponents knowing of him to be an
Ingenious sober man. To ye truth of all we have hereunto sett our hand
having fresh Remembrance thereof, being but ye fifth day of March last
past, when we were taken.

Salem, May 1, 1718.”

In the following year Captain John Shattuck entered his protest at
Salem against capture by pirates. He sailed from Jamaica for New
England and in sight of Long Island (West Indies) was captured by a
“Pyrat” of 12 guns and 120 men, under the command of Captain Charles
Vain, who took him to Crooked Island (Bahamas), plundered him of
various articles, stripped the brig, abused some of his men and finally
let him go. “Coming, however, on a winter coast, his vessel stripped of
needed sails, he was blown off to the West Indies and did not arrive in
Salem until the next spring.”

In 1724 two notorious sea rogues, Nutt and Phillip, were cruising off
Cape Ann, their topsails in sight of Salem harbor mouth. They took a
sloop commanded by one Andrew Harradine of Salem and thereby caught a
Tartar. Harradine and his crew rose upon their captors, killed both
Nutt and Phillip and their officers, put the pirate crew under hatches,
and sailed the vessel to Boston where the pirates were turned over to
the authorities to be fitted with hempen kerchiefs.

On the first of May, 1725, a Salem brigantine commanded by Captain Dove
sailed into her home harbor having on board one Philip Ashton, a lad
from Marblehead who had been given up as dead for almost three years.
He had been captured by pirates, and after escaping from them lived
alone for a year and more on a desert island off the coast of Honduras.
Philip Ashton wrote a journal of his adventures which was first
published many years ago. His story is perhaps the most entertaining
narrative of eighteenth century piracy that has come down to present
times. Little is known of the career of this lad of Marblehead before
or after his adventures and misfortunes in the company of pirates.
It is recorded that when he hurried to his home from the ship which
had fetched him into Salem harbor there was great rejoicing. On the
following Sunday Rev. John Barnard preached a sermon concerning the
miraculous escape of Philip Ashton. His text was taken from the third
chapter of Daniel, seventeenth verse: “If it be so our God whom we
serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and He will
deliver us out of thy hands, O King.”

It is also known that at about the same time that Philip Ashton
was captured by pirates his cousin, Nicholas Merritt, met with a
like misfortune at sea. He made his escape after several months of
captivity and returned to his home a year later when there was another
thanksgiving for a wanderer returned.

What the early shipmasters of Salem and nearby ports had to fear in the
eighteenth century may be more clearly comprehended if a part of the
journal of Philip Ashton is presented as he is said to have written it
upon his return home. It begins as follows:

[Illustration: A page from Falconer’s Marine Dictionary (18th Century)

Figure 4: a snow, (5) a ketch, (6) a brig or brigantine, (7) a
bilander, (8) a xebec, (9) a schooner, (10) a galliot, (11) a dogger,
(12 and 13) two gallies, one under sail, the other rowing, (14) a sloop]

“On Friday, the 15th of June, 1722, after being out some time in a
schooner with four men and a boy, off Cape Sable, I stood in for Port
Rossaway, designing to lie there all Sunday. Having arrived about
four in the afternoon, we saw, among other vessels which had reached
the port before us, a brigantine supposed to be inward bound from the
West Indies. After remaining three or four hours at anchor, a boat
from the brigantine came alongside, with four hands, who leapt on
deck, and suddenly drawing out pistols, and brandishing cutlasses,
demanded the surrender both of ourselves and our vessel. All
remonstrance was vain; nor indeed, had we known who they were before
boarding us could we have made any effectual resistance, being only
five men and a boy, and were thus under the necessity of submitting at
discretion. We were not single in misfortune, as thirteen or fourteen
fishing vessels were in like manner surprised the same evening.

“When carried on board the brigantine, I found myself in the hands of
Ned Low, an infamous pirate, whose vessel had two great guns, four
swivels, and about forty-two men. I was strongly urged to sign the
articles of agreement among the pirates and to join their number,
which I steadily refused and suffered much bad usage in consequence.
At length being conducted, along with five of the prisoners, to the
quarterdeck, Low came up to us with pistols in his hand, and loudly
demanded: ‘Are any of you married men?’

“This unexpected question, added to the sight of the pistols, struck
us all speechless; we were alarmed lest there was some secret meaning
in his words, and that he would proceed to extremities, therefore none
could reply. In a violent passion he cocked a pistol, and clapping
it to my head, cried out: ‘You dog, why don’t you answer?’ swearing
vehemently at the same time that he would shoot me through the head. I
was sufficiently terrified by his threats and fierceness, but rather
than lose my life in so trifling a matter, I ventured to pronounce, as
loud as I durst speak, that I was not married. Hereupon he seemed to
be somewhat pacified, and turned away.

“It appeared that Low was resolved to take no married men whatever,
which often seemed surprising to me until I had been a considerable
time with him. But his own wife had died lately before he became a
pirate; and he had a young child at Boston, for whom he entertained
such tenderness, on every lucid interval from drinking and revelling,
that on mentioning it, I have seen him sit down and weep plentifully.
Thus I concluded that his reason for taking only single men, was
probably that they might have no ties, such as wives and children, to
divert them from his service, and render them desirous of returning
home.

“The pirates finding force of no avail in compelling us to join them,
began to use persuasion instead of it. They tried to flatter me into
compliance, by setting before me the share I should have in their
spoils, and the riches which I should become master of; and all the
time eagerly importuned me to drink along with them. But I still
continued to resist their proposals, whereupon Low, with equal fury
as before, threatened to shoot me through the head, and though I
earnestly entreated my release, he and his people wrote my name, and
that of my companions, in their books.

“On the 19th of June, the pirates changed the privateer, as they
called their vessel, and went into a new schooner belonging to
Marblehead, which they had captured. They then put all the prisoners
whom they designed sending home on board of the brigantine, and sent
her to Boston, which induced me to make another unsuccessful attempt
for liberty; but though I fell on my knees to Low, he refused to let
me go; thus I saw the brigantine depart, with the whole captives,
excepting myself and seven more.

“A very short time before she departed, I had nearly effected my
escape; for a dog belonging to Low being accidentally left on shore,
he ordered some hands into a boat to bring it off. Thereupon two
young men, captives, both belonging to Marblehead, readily leapt
into the boat, and I considering that if I could once get on shore,
means might be found of effecting my escape, endeavored to go along
with them. But the quartermaster, called Russell, catching hold of my
shoulder, drew me back. As the young men did not return he thought I
was privy to their plot, and, with the most outrageous oaths, snapped
his pistol, on my denying all knowledge of it. The pistol missing
fire, however, only served to enrage him the more; he snapped it
three times again, and as often it missed fire; on which he held it
overboard, and then it went off. Russell on this drew his cutlass, and
was about to attack me in the utmost fury, when I leapt down into the
hold and saved myself.

“Off St. Michael’s the pirates took a large Portuguese pink, laden
with wheat, coming out of the road; and being a good sailor, and
carrying fourteen guns, transferred their company into her. It
afterwards became necessary to careen her, whence they made three
islands called Triangles lying about forty leagues to the eastward of
Surinam.

“In heaving down the pink, Low had ordered so many men to the shrouds
and yards that the ports, by her heeling, got under water, and the sea
rushing in, she overset; he and the doctor were then in the cabin,
and as soon as he observed the water gushing in, he leaped out of the
stern port while the doctor attempted to follow him. But the violence
of the sea repulsed the latter, and he was forced back into the cabin.
Low, however, contrived to thrust his arm into the port, and dragging
him out, saved his life. Meanwhile, the vessel completely overset. Her
keel turned out of the water; but as the hull filled she sunk in the
depth of about six fathoms.

“The yardarms striking the ground, forced the masts somewhat above
the water; as the ship overset, the people, got from the shrouds and
yards, upon the hull, and as the hull went down, they again resorted
to the rigging, rising a little out of the sea.

“Being an indifferent swimmer, I was reduced to great extremity; for
along with other light lads, I had been sent up to the main-topgallant
yard; and the people of a boat who were now occupied in preserving
the men refusing to take me in, I was compelled to attempt reaching
the buoy. This I luckily accomplished, and as it was large secured
myself there until the boat approached. I once more requested the
people to take me in, but they still refused, as the boat was full.
I was uncertain whether they designed leaving me to perish in this
situation; however, the boat being deeply laden made way very slowly,
and one of my comrades, captured at the same time with myself, calling
to me to forsake the buoy and swim toward her, I assented, and
reaching the boat, he drew me on board. Two men, John Bell, and Zana
Gourdon, were lost in the pink.

“Though the schooner in company was very near at hand, her people were
employed mending their sails under an awning and knew nothing of the
accident until the boat full of men got alongside.

“The pirates having thus lost their principal vessel, and the greatest
part of their provisions and water, were reduced to great extremities
for want of the latter. They were unable to get a supply at the
Triangles, nor on account of calms and currents, could they make the
island of Tobago. Thus they were forced to stand for Grenada, which
they reached after being on short allowance for sixteen days together.

“Grenada was a French settlement, and Low, on arriving, after having
sent all his men below, except a sufficient number to maneuver the
vessel, said he was from Barbadoes; that he had lost the water on
board, and was obliged to put in here for a supply.

“The people entertained no suspicion of his being a pirate, but
afterward supposing him a smuggler, thought it a good opportunity
to make a prize of his vessel. Next day, therefore, they equipped a
large sloop of seventy tons and four guns with about thirty hands, as
sufficient for the capture, and came alongside while Low was quite
unsuspicious of their design. But this being evidently betrayed by
their number and actions, he quickly called ninety men on deck, and,
having eight guns mounted, the French sloop became an easy prey.

“Provided with these two vessels, the pirates cruised about in the
West Indies, taking seven or eight prizes, and at length arrived at
the island of Santa Cruz, where they captured two more. While lying
there Low thought he stood in need of a medicine chest, and, in order
to procure one sent four Frenchmen in a vessel he had taken to St.
Thomas’s, about twelve leagues distant, with money to purchase it;
promising them liberty, and the return of all their vessels for the
service. But he declared at the same time if it proved otherwise, he
would kill the rest of the men, and burn the vessels. In little more
than twenty-four hours, the Frenchmen returned with the object of
their mission, and Low punctually performed his promise by restoring
the vessels.

“Having sailed for the Spanish-American settlements, the pirates
descried two large ships about half way between Carthagena and
Portobello, which proved to be the _Mermaid_, an English man-of-war,
and a Guineaman. They approached in chase until discovering the
man-of-war’s great range of teeth, when they immediately put about
and made the best of their way off. The man-of-war then commenced the
pursuit and gained upon them apace, and I confess that my terrors were
now equal to any that I had previously suffered; for I concluded that
we should certainly be taken, and that I should not less be hanged
for company’s sake; so true are the words of Solomon: ‘A companion
of fools shall be destroyed.’ But the two pirate vessels finding
themselves outsailed, separated, and Farrington Spriggs, who commanded
the schooner in which I was stood in for the shore. The _Mermaid_
observing the sloop with Low himself to be the larger of the two,
crowded all sail, and continued gaining still more, indeed until her
shot flew over; but one of the sloop’s crew showed Low a shoal, which
he could pass, and in the pursuit the man-of-war grounded. Thus the
pirates escaped hanging on this occasion.

“Spriggs and one of his chosen companions dreading the consequences of
being captured and brought to justice, laid their pistols beside them
in the interval, and pledging a mutual oath in a bumper of liquor,
swore if they saw no possibility of escape, to set foot to foot and
blow out each other’s brains. But standing toward the shore, they made
Pickeroon Bay, and escaped the danger.

“Next we repaired to a small island called Utilla, about seven or
eight leagues to leeward of the island of Roatan, in the Bay of
Honduras, where the bottom of the schooner was cleaned. There were
now twenty-two persons on board, and eight of us engaged in a plot to
overpower our masters, and make our escape. Spriggs proposed sailing
for New England, in quest of provisions and to increase his company;
and we intended on approaching the coast, when the rest had indulged
freely in liquor and fallen sound asleep, to secure them under the
hatches, and then deliver ourselves up to government.

“Although our plot was carried on with all possible privacy,
Spriggs had somehow or other got intelligence of it; and having
fallen in with Low on the voyage, went on board his ship to make a
furious declaration against us. But Low made little account of his
information, otherwise it might have been fatal to most of our number.
Spriggs, however, returned raging to the schooner, exclaiming that
four of us should go forward to be shot, and to me in particular he
said: ‘You dog Ashton, you deserve to be hanged up at the yardarm
for designing to cut us off.’ I replied that I had no intention of
injuring any man on board; but I should be glad if they would allow me
to go away quietly. At length this flame was quenched, and, through
the goodness of God, I escaped destruction.

“Roatan harbor, as all about the Bay of Honduras, is full of small
islands, which pass under the general name of Keys; and having got in
here, Low, with some of his chief men, landed on a small island, which
they called Port Royal Key. There they erected huts, and continued
carousing, drinking, and firing, while the different vessels, of which
they now had possession, were repairing.

“On Saturday, the 9th of March, 1723, the cooper, with six hands, in
the long-boat, was going ashore for water; and coming alongside of the
schooner, I requested to be of the party. Seeing him hesitate, I urged
that I had never hitherto been ashore, and thought it hard to be so
closely confined when every one besides had the liberty of landing as
there was occasion. Low had before told me, on requesting to be sent
away in some of the captured vessels which he dismissed that I should
go home when he did, and swore that I should never previously set my
foot on land. But now I considered if I could possibly once get on
terra firma, though in ever such bad circumstances, I should account
it a happy deliverance and resolved never to embark again.

“The cooper at length took me into the long-boat, while Low and
his chief people were on a different island from Roatan, where the
watering place lay; my only clothing was an Osnaburgh frock and
trowsers, a milled cap, but neither shirt, shoes, stockings, nor
anything else.

“When we first landed I was very active in assisting to get the casks
out of the boat, and in rolling them to the watering place. Then
taking a hearty draught of water I strolled along the beach, picking
up stones and shells; but on reaching the distance of a musket-shot
from the party I began to withdraw toward the skirts of the woods. In
answer to a question by the cooper of whither I was going I replied,
‘for cocoanuts,’ as some cocoa trees were just before me; and as soon
as I was out of sight of my companions I took to my heels, running as
fast as the thickness of the bushes and my naked feet would admit.
Notwithstanding I had got a considerable way into the woods, I was
still so near as to hear the voices of the party if they spoke loud,
and I lay close in a thicket where I knew they could not find me.

“After my comrades had filled their casks and were about to depart,
the cooper called on me to accompany them; however, I lay snug in
the thicket, and gave him no answer, though his words were plain
enough. At length, after hallooing loudly, I could hear them say to
one another: ‘The dog is lost in the woods, and cannot find the way
out again’; then they hallooed once more, and cried ‘He has run away
and won’t come to us’; and the cooper observed that had he known my
intention he would not have brought me ashore. Satisfied of their
inability to find me among the trees and bushes, the cooper at last,
to show his kindness, exclaimed: ‘If you do not come away presently, I
shall go off and leave you alone.’ Nothing, however, could induce me
to discover myself; and my comrades seeing it vain to wait any longer,
put off without me.

“Thus I was left on a desolate island, destitute of all help, and
remote from the track of navigators; but compared with the state and
society I had quitted, I considered the wilderness hospitable, and the
solitude interesting.

“When I thought the whole was gone, I emerged from my thicket, and
came down to a small run of water, about a mile from the place where
our casks were filled, and there sat down to observe the proceedings
of the pirates. To my great joy in five days their vessels sailed, and
I saw the schooner part from them to shape a different course.

“I then began to reflect on myself and my present condition; I was on
an island which I had no means of leaving; I knew of no human being
within many miles; my clothing was scanty, and it was impossible to
procure a supply. I was altogether destitute of provision, nor could
tell how my life was to be supported. This melancholy prospect drew
a copious flood of tears from my eyes; but as it had pleased God to
grant my wishes in being liberated from those whose occupation was
devising mischief against their neighbors, I resolved to account every
hardship light. Yet Low would never suffer his men to work on the
Sabbath, which was more devoted to play; and I have even seen some of
them sit down to read in a good book.

“In order to ascertain how I was to live in time to come, I began
to range over the island, which proved ten or eleven leagues long,
and lay in about sixteen degrees north latitude. But I soon found
that my only companions would be the beasts of the earth, and fowls
of the air; for there were no indications of any habitations on the
island, though every now and then I found some shreds of earthen ware
scattered in a lime walk, said by some to be the remains of Indians
formerly dwelling here.

“The island was well watered, full of high hills and deep valleys.
Numerous fruit trees, such as figs, vines, and cocoanuts are found
in the latter; and I found a kind larger than an orange, oval-shaped
of a brownish color without, and red within. Though many of these
had fallen under the trees, I could not venture to take them until
I saw the wild hogs feeding with safety, and then I found them very
delicious fruit.

“Stores of provisions abounded here, though I could avail myself of
nothing but the fruit; for I had no knife or iron implement, either
to cut up a tortoise on turning it, or weapons wherewith to kill
animals; nor had I any means of making a fire to cook my capture, even
if I were successful.

“To this place then was I confined during nine months, without seeing
a human being. One day after another was lingered out, I know not how,
void of occupation or amusement, except collecting food, rambling from
hill to hill, and from island to island, and gazing on sky and water.
Although my mind was occupied by many regrets, I had the reflection
that I was lawfully employed when taken, so that I had no hand in
bringing misery on myself; I was also comforted to think that I had
the approbation and consent of my parents in going to sea, and trusted
that it would please God, in his own time and manner, to provide
for my return to my father’s house. Therefore, I resolved to submit
patiently to my misfortune.

“Sometime in November, 1723, I descried a small canoe approaching with
a single man; but the sight excited little emotion. I kept my seat
on the beach, thinking I could not expect a friend, and knowing that
I had no enemy to fear, nor was I capable of resisting one. As the
man approached, he betrayed many signs of surprise; he called me to
him, and I told him he might safely venture ashore, for I was alone,
and almost expiring. Coming close up, he knew not what to make of
me; my garb and countenance seemed so singular, that he looked wild
with astonishment. He started back a little, and surveyed me more
thoroughly; but, recovering himself again, came forward, and, taking
me by the hand, expressed his satisfaction at seeing me.

“This stranger proved to be a native of North Britain; he was well
advanced in years, of a grave and venerable aspect, and of a reserved
temper. His name I never knew, he did not disclose it, and I had not
inquired during the period of our acquaintance. But he informed me
he had lived twenty-two years with the Spaniards who now threatened
to burn him, though I know not for what crime; therefore he had fled
hither as a sanctuary, bringing his dog, gun, and ammunition, as also
a small quantity of pork, along with him. He designed spending the
remainder of his days on the island, where he could support himself by
hunting.

“I experienced much kindness from the stranger; he was always ready to
perform any civil offices, and assist me in whatever he could, though
he spoke little; and he gave me a share of his pork.

“On the third day after his arrival, he said he would make an
excursion in his canoe among the neighboring islands, for the purpose
of killing wild hogs and deer, and wished me to accompany him. Though
my spirits were somewhat recruited by his society, the benefit of the
fire, which I now enjoyed, and dressed provisions, my weakness and the
soreness of my feet, precluded me; therefore he set out alone, saying
he would return in a few hours. The sky was serene, and there was no
prospect of any danger during a short excursion, seeing he had come
nearly twelve leagues in safety in his canoe. But, when he had been
absent about an hour, a violent gust of wind and rain arose, in which
he probably perished, as I never heard of him more.

“Thus, after having the pleasure of a companion almost three days,
I was as unexpectedly reduced to my former lonely state, as I had
been relieved from it. Yet through the goodness of God, I was myself
preserved from having been unable to accompany him; and I was left
in better circumstances than those in which he had found me, for now
I had about five pounds of pork, a knife, a bottle of gunpowder,
tobacco, tongs and flint, by which means my life could be rendered
more comfortable. I was enabled to have fire, extremely requisite
at this time, being the rainy months of winter. I could cut up a
tortoise, and have a delicate broiled meal. Thus, by the help of the
fire, and dressed provisions, through the blessings of God, I began
to receive strength, though the soreness of my feet remained. But I
had, besides, the advantage of being able now and then to catch a dish
of cray fish, which, when roasted, proved good eating. To accomplish
this I made up a small bundle of old broken sticks, nearly resembling
pitch-pine, or candle-wood, and having lighted one end, waded with
it in my hand, up to the waist in water. The cray fish, attracted by
the light, would crawl to my feet and lie directly under it, when, by
means of a forked stick, I could toss them ashore.

“Between two and three months after the time of losing my companion,
I found a small canoe, while ranging along the shore. The sight of
it revived my regret for his loss, for I judged that it had been
his canoe; and, from being washed up here, a certain proof of his
having been lost in the tempest. But on examining it more closely, I
satisfied myself that it was one which I had never seen before....”

Three months after he lost his companion Philip Ashton found a
small canoe which had drifted on the island beach. In this fragile
craft he made his way to another island where he found a company of
buccaneers who chased him through the woods with a volley of musketry.
Re-embarking in his canoe he headed for the western end of this
island and later reached Roatan where he lived alone for seven months
longer. Here he was discovered and hospitably cared for by a number of
Englishmen who had fled from the Bay of Honduras in fear of an attack
by Spaniards. These refugees had planted crop and were living in what
seemed to Philip Ashton as rare comfort. “Yet after all,” he said of
them, “they were bad society, and as to their common conversation there
was but little difference between them and pirates.”

At length this colony of outlaws was attacked and disbanded by a ship’s
company of pirates headed by Spriggs who had thrown off his allegiance
to Low and set up in the business of piracy for himself with a ship of
twenty-four guns and a sloop of twelve.

Ashton evaded their clutches and with one Symonds, who had also fled
from the attack of Spriggs, made his way from one island to another
until he was fortunate enough to find a fleet of English merchant
vessels under convoy of the _Diamond_ man-of-war bound for Jamaica.
They touched at one of these islands near the Bay of Honduras to
fill their water casks and it was there that Ashton found the Salem
brigantine commanded by Captain Dove.

The journal says in conclusion: “Captain Dove not only treated me with
great civility and engaged to give me a passage home but took me into
pay, having lost a seaman whose place he wanted me to supply.

“We sailed along with the _Diamond_, which was bound for Jamaica, in
the latter end of March, 1725, and kept company until the first of
April. By the providence of Heaven we passed safely through the Gulf
of Florida, and reached Salem Harbor on the first of May, two years,
ten months and fifteen days after I was first taken by pirates; and
two years, and two months, after making my escape from them on Roatan
island. That same evening I went to my father’s house, where I was
received as one risen from the dead.”

CHAPTER IV

THE PRIVATEERSMEN OF ’76

Privateering has ceased to be a factor in civilized warfare. The swift
commerce destroyer as an arm of the naval service has taken the place
of the private armed ship which roamed the seas for its own profit
as well for its country’s cause. To-day the United States has a navy
prepared both to defend its own merchant vessels, what few there are,
and to menace the trade of a hostile nation on the high seas.

When the War of the Revolution began, however, Britannia ruled the
seas, and the naval force of the Colonies was pitifully feeble. In
1776 there were only thirty-one Continental cruisers of all classes in
commission and this list was steadily diminished by the ill-fortunes of
war until in 1782 only seven ships flew the American flag, which had
been all but swept from the ocean. During the war these ships captured
one hundred and ninety-six of the enemy’s craft.

On the other hand, there were already one hundred and thirty-six
privateers at sea by the end of the year 1776, and their number
increased until in 1781 there were four hundred and forty-nine of
these private commerce destroyers in commission. This force took no
fewer than eight hundred British vessels and made prisoners of twelve
thousand British seamen during the war. The privateersmen dealt
British maritime prestige the deadliest blow in history. It had been
an undreamt of danger that the American Colonies should humble that
flag which “had waved over every sea and triumphed over every rival,”
until even the English and Irish Channels were not safe for British
ships to traverse. The preface of the Sailor’s Vade-Mecum, edition of
1744, contained the following lofty doctrine which all good Englishmen
believed, and which was destined to be shattered by a contemptible
handful of seafaring rebels:

“That the Monarchs of GREAT BRITAIN have a peculiar and Sovereign
Authority upon the Ocean, is a Right so Ancient and Undeniable that it
never was publicly disputed, but by HUGO GROTIUS in his MARE LIBERUM,
published in the Year 1636, in Favour of the DUTCH Fishery upon our
Coasts; which Book was fully Controverted by Mr. Selden’s MARE CLAUSUM,
wherein he proves this Sovereignty from the Laws of God and of Nature,
besides an uninterrupted Fruition of it for so many Ages past as that
its Beginning cannot be traced out.”

When the War of 1812 was threatening, _The London Statesman_ paid this
unwilling tribute to the prowess of these Yankee privateersmen of the
Revolution:

“Every one must recollect what they did in the latter part of the
American War. The books at Lloyds will recount it, and the rate of
assurances at that time will clearly prove what their diminutive
strength was able to effect in the face of our navy, and that when
nearly one hundred pennants were flying on their coast. Were we able to
prevent their going in and out, or stop them from taking our trade and
our store-ships, even in size of our own garrisons? Besides, were they
not in the English and Irish Channels picking up our homeward bound
trade, sending their prizes into French and Spanish ports to the great
terror and annoyance of our merchants and shipowners?

“These are facts which can be traced to a period when America was in
her infancy, without ships, without money, and at a time when our navy
was not much less in strength than at present.”

At the beginning of the Revolution, Salem was sending its boys to fill
the forecastles of the vessels built in its own yards and commanded by
its own shipmasters. Hard by were the towns of Beverly and Marblehead
whose townsmen also won their hardy livelihood on the fishing banks
and along distant and perilous trading routes. When British squadrons
and cruisers began to drive them ashore to starve in idleness, these
splendid seamen turned their vessels into privateers and rushed them
to sea like flights of hawks. It was a matter of months only before
they had made a jest of the boastful lines which had long adorned the
columns of the Naval Chronicle of London:

“The sea and waves are Britain’s broad domain
And not a sail but by permission spreads.”

This race of seafarers had been drilled to handle cannon and muskets.
Every merchantman that sailed for Europe or the West Indies carried
her battery of six pounders, and hundreds of Salem men and boys could
tell you stories of running fights and escapes from French and Spanish
freebooters and swarming pirates. Commerce on the high seas was not a
peaceful pursuit. The merchantman was equipped to become a privateer
by shipping a few more guns and signing on a stronger company. The
conditions of the times which had made these seamen able to fight as
shrewdly as they traded may be perceived from the following extracts
from the “Seaman’s Vade-Mecum,” as they appear in the rare editions
published both in 1744 and 1780: “_Shewing how to prepare a Merchant
Ship for a close fight by disposing their Bulk-heads, Leaves, Coamings,
Look-holes_, etc.”

“If the Bulkhead of the Great Cabbin be well fortified it may be of
singular Use; for though the Enemy may force the Steerage, yet when
they unexpectedly meet with another Barricade and from thence a warm
Reception by the Small-Arms, they will be thrown into great Confusion,
and a Cannon ready loaded with Case-shot will do great Execution;
but if this should not altogether answer the Purpose, it will oblige
the Enemy to pay the dearer for their Conquest. For the Steerage may
hold out the longer, and the Men will be the bolder in defending it,
knowing that they have a place to retire into, and when there they may
Capitulate for Good Quarter at the last Extremity....”

“... It has been objected that Scuttles (especially that out of the
Forecastle) are Encouragements for Cowardice; that having no such
Convenience, the Men are more resolute, because they must fight, die
or be taken. Now if they must fight or die, it is highly unreasonable
and as cruel to have Men to be cut to Pieces when they are able to
defend their Posts no longer, and in this Case the Fate of the Hero
and the Coward is alike; and if it is to fight or be taken, the
Gallant will hold out to the last while the Coward (if the danger runs
high), surrenders as soon as Quarter is offered; and now if there be a
Scuttle, the Menace of the Enemy will make the less Impression on their
Minds, and they will stand out the longer, when they know they can
retire from the Fury of the Enemy in case they force their Quarters.
In short, it will be as great a blemish in the Commander’s Politics
to leave Cowards without a Scuttle as it will be Ingratitude to have
Gallant Men to be cut to Pieces.”

“_How to Make a Sally_

“Having (by a vigorous defence) repulsed the Enemy from your
Bulk-heads, and cutting up your Deck, it may be necessary to make a
SALLY to compleat your Victory; but by the Way, the young MASTER must
use great caution before he SALLY out, lest he be drawn into some
Strategem to his Ruin; therefore for a Ship of but few hands it is not
a Mark of Cowardice to keep the Close-Quarters so long as the Enemy
is on board; and if his Men retire out of your Ship, fire into him
through your Look-holes and Ports till he calls for QUARTER. And if
it should ever come to that, you must proceed Warily (unless you out
Number him in Men) and send but a few of your Hands into his Ship while
the others are ready with all their Small-arms and Cannon charged; and
if they submit patiently disarm and put them down below, where there
is no POWDER or WEAPONS; but plunder not, lest your men quarrel about
Trifles or be too intent in searching for Money, and thereby give the
Enemy an opportunity to destroy you; and if you take the Prize (when
you come into an harbor) let everything be equally shared among the
Men, the Master only reserving to himself the Affections of his Men by
his Generosity which with the Honour of the Victory to a brave Mind is
equivalent to all the rest....”

“It is presumed that the Sally will be most Advantageous if made out
of the Round-house, because having cleared the Poop, you will have no
Enemy at your back; wherefore let all but two or more, according to
your Number, step up into the Round-house, bringing with them all or
most of the Musquets and Pistols there, leaving only the Blunderbusses.
Let all the Small-Arms in the Quarters be charged, and the Cannon that
flank the Decks and out of the Bulk-heads, traversing those in the
Round-house, pointing towards the mizzenmast to gaul the Enemy in case
of a retreat. All things being thus prepared, let a Powder-chest be
sprung upon the Poop, and four Hand Granadoes tost out of the Ports,
filled with Flower and fuzees of a long duration, then let the Door be
opened, and in the Confusion make your Sally at once, half advancing
forward and the other facing about to clear the Poop; when this is
done, let them have an eye to the Chains. At the Round-house Door let
two men be left to stand by the Port-cullis, each having a brace of
Pistols to secure a Retreat; let then those in the Forecastle never
shoot right aft, after the Sally is made, unless parallel with the
Main Deck. The rest must be left to Judgment.”

Try to imagine, if you please, advice of such tenor as this compiled
for the use of the captains of the transatlantic liners or cargo
“tramps” of to-day, and you will be able to comprehend in some
slight measure how vast has been the change in the conditions of
the business of the sea, and what hazards our American forefathers
faced to win their bread on quarterdeck and in forecastle. Nor were
such desperate engagements as are outlined in this ancient “Seaman’s
Vade-Mecum” at all infrequent. “Round-houses” and “great cabbins” were
defended with “musquets,” “javalins,” “Half-pikes” and cutlasses, and
“hand-granadoes” in many a hand-to-hand conflict with sea raiders
before the crew of the bluff-blowed, high-popped Yankee West Indiaman
had to “beat off the boarders” or make a dashing “Sally” or “capitulate
for Good Quarter at the last Extremity.”

Of such, then, were the privateersmen who flocked down the wharves and
among the tavern “rendezvous” of Salem as soon as the owners of the
waiting vessels had obtained their commissions from the Continental
Congress, and issued the call for volunteers. Mingled with the hardy
seamen who had learned their trade in Salem vessels were the sons of
wealthy shipping merchants of the best blood of the town and county who
embarked as “gentlemen volunteers,” eager for glory and plunder, and a
chance to avenge the wrongs they and their kinfolk had suffered under
British trade laws and at the hands of British press gangs.

The foregoing extracts from the “Seaman’s Vade-Mecum” show how
singularly fixed the language of the sea has remained through the
greater part of two centuries. With a few slight differences, the terms
in use then are commonly employed to-day. It is therefore probable
that if you could have been on old Derby Wharf in the year of 1776,
the talk of the busy, sun-browned men and boys around you would have
sounded by no means archaic. The wharf still stretches a long arm
into the harbor and its tumbling warehouses, timbered with great hewn
beams, were standing during the Revolution. Then they were filled with
cannon, small arms, rigging and ships’ stores as fast as they could
be hauled hither. Fancy needs only to picture this landlocked harbor
alive with square-rigged vessels, tall sloops and topsail schooners,
their sides checkered with gun-ports, to bring to life the Salem of the
privateersman of one hundred and forty years ago.

Shipmasters had no sooner signaled their homecoming with deep freights
of logwood, molasses or sugar than they received orders to discharge
with all speed and clear their decks for mounting batteries and
slinging the hammocks of a hundred waiting privateersmen. The guns
and men once aboard, the crews were drilling night and day while they
waited the chance to slip to sea. Their armament included carronades,
“Long Toms” and “long six” or “long nine” pounders, sufficient muskets,
blunderbusses, pistols, cutlasses, tomahawks, boarding pikes, hand
grenades, round shot, grape, canister, and double-headed shot.

When larger vessels were not available tiny sloops with twenty or
thirty men and boys mounted one or two old guns and put to sea to
“capture a Britisher” and very likely be taken themselves by the first
English ship of war that sighted them. The prize money was counted
before it was caught, and seamen made a business of selling their
shares in advance, preferring the bird in the bush, as shown by the
following bill of sale:

“BEVERLY, ye 7th, 1776.

“Know all men by these presents, that I the subscriber, in
consideration of the sum of sixteen dollars to me in hand paid by
Mr. John Waters, in part for ½ share of all the Prizes that may be
taken during the cruize of the Privateer Sloop called the _Revenge_,
whereof Benjamin Dean is commissioned Commander, and for the further
consideration of twenty-four dollars more to be paid at the end of
the whole cruize of the said Sloop; and these certify that I the
subscriber have sold, bargained and conveyed unto the said John
Waters, or his order, the one half share of my whole share of all
the prizes that may be taken during the whole cruize of said Sloop.
Witness my hand,

“P. H. BROCKHORN.”

An endorsement on the back of the document records that Mr. Waters
received the sum of twenty pounds for “parte of the within agreement,”
which return reaped him a handsome profit on the speculation. Many
similar agreements are preserved to indicate that Salem merchants
plunged heavily on the risks of privateering by buying seamens’ shares
for cash. The articles of agreement under which these Salem privateers
of the Revolution made their warlike cruises belong with a vanished
age of sea life. These documents were, in the main, similar to the
following:

“_Articles of Agreement_

“Concluded at Salem this Seventh day of May, 1781, between the owners
of the Privateer Ship _Rover_, commanded by James Barr, now fixing
in this port for a cruise of four months against the Enemies of the
United States of America, on the first part and the officers and
seamen belonging to said Ship _Rover_ on the other part as follows,
_viz._:

“Article 1st. The owners agree to fix with all expedition said Ship
for sea, and cause her to be mounted with Twenty Guns, four Pounders,
with a sufficiency of ammunition of all kinds and good provisions for
one Hundred men for four months’ cruise, also to procure an apparatus
for amputating, and such a Box of medicine as shall be thought
necessary by the Surgeon.

“Article 2nd. The Officers and Seamen Shall be entitled to one half
of all the prizes captured by Said Ship after the cost of condemning,
etc., is deducted from the whole.

“Article 3rd. The Officers and Seamen agree that they will to the
utmost of their abilities discharge the duty of Officers and Seamen,
according to their respective Stations on board Said Ship, her boats
and Prizes, by her taken, and the Officers and Seamen further agree
that if any Officer or Private shall in time of any engagement with
any Vessell abandon his Post on board said Ship or any of her boats
or Prizes by her taken, or disobey the commands of the Captain or any
Superior Officer, that said Officer or Seaman, if adjudged guilty by
three Officers, the Captain being one, shall forfeit all right to any
Prize or Prizes by her taken.

“Article 4th. The Officers and Seamen further agree that if any
Officer shall in time of any engagement or at any other time behave
unworthy of the Station that he holds on board said Ship, it shall be
in the power of three officers, the captain being one, to displace
said Officer, and appoint any one they may see fit in his place. That
if any Officer belonging to said Ship shall behave in an unbecoming
character of an officer and gentleman, he shall be dismissed and
forfeit his share of the cruise.

“Article 5th. The owners, officers and Seamen agree that if any one
shall first discover a sail which shall prove to be a Prize, he shall
be entitled to Five hundred Dollars.

“Article 6th. Any one who shall first board any Vessell in time
of an engagement, which shall prove a Prize, Shall be entitled to
one thousand Dollars and the best firelock on board said Vessell,
officers’ prizes being excepted.

[Illustration: Agreement by which a Revolutionary privateer seaman
sold his share of the booty in advance of his cruise]

“Article 7th. If any officer or Seaman shall at the time of an
Engagement loose a leg or an arm he shall be entitled to Four Thousand
Dollars; if any officer or Seaman shall loose an Eye in time of an
Engagement, he shall receive the Sum of Two thousand Dollars; if any
officer shall loose a joint he shall be entitled to one thousand
Dollars, the same to be paid from the whole amount of prizes taken by
said Ship.

“Article 8th. That no Prize master or man, that shall be put on board
any Prize whatever and arrive at any port whatever, Shall be entitled
to his share or shares, except he remain to discharge the Prize, or he
or they are discharged by the agent of said Ship, except the Privateer
is arrived before the Prize.

“Article 9th. That for the Preservation of Good order on board said
Ship, no man to quit or go out of her, on board of any other Vessell
without having obtained leave from the commanding officer on board.

“Article 10th. That if any person Shall count to his own use any part
of the Prize or Prizes or be found pilfering any money or goods, and
be convicted thereof, he shall forfeit his Share of Prize money to the
Ship and Company.

“That if any person shall be found a Ringleader of a meeting or cause
any disturbance on board, refuse to obey the command of the Captain,
or any officer or behave with Cowardice, or get drunk in time of
action, he shall forfeit his or their Share of or Shares to the rest
of the Ship’s Company.”

So immensely popular was the privateering service among the men and
youth of Salem and nearby ports that the naval vessels of the regular
service were hard put to enlist their crews. When the fifes and drums
sounded through the narrow streets with a strapping privateersman in
the van as a recruiting officer, he had no trouble in collecting a
crowd ready to listen to his persuasive arguments whose burden was
prize money and glory. More than once a ship’s company a hundred
strong was enrolled and ready to go on board by sunset of the day the
call for volunteers was made. Trembling mothers and weeping wives could
not hold back these sailors of theirs, and as for the sweethearts they
could only sit at home and hope that Seth or Jack would come home a
hero with his pockets lined with gold instead of finding his fate in a
burial at sea, or behind the walls of a British prison.

It was customary for the owners of the privateer to pay the cost of the
“rendezvous,” which assembling of the ship’s company before sailing was
held in the “Blue Anchor,” or some other sailors’ tavern down by the
busy harbor. That the “rendezvous” was not a scene of sadness and that
the privateersmen were wont to put to sea with no dust in their throats
may be gathered from the following tavern bill of 1781:

DR.

Captain George Williams, Agent Privateer Brig _Sturdy Beggar_ to
Jonathan Archer, Jr.

To Rendezvous Bill as follows:

1781 Aug. 8-12 to 11 Bowls punch at 3-1 Bowl tod. at 1-3 1.14.3
14 to 8 bowls punch 1 bowl chery tod. at 1-9 1. 5.9
20 to 6 bowls punch 8 Bowls Chery tod. 2 Grog 1.14.6
22 to 7 bowls punch 7 bowls Chery tod. 1.13.3
30 to 14 Bowls punch 8 bowls Chery tod. and 2½
Grog 2.19.1

Sept. 4 to 7 Bowls punch 10 bowls chery 3 Grog 2.13.9
6 to 10 bowls punch 1 bowl chery tod. 2 grog 1.14.3
10 to 4½ bowls punch 1. 2.6

There were stout heads as well as stout hearts in New England during
those gallant days and it is safe to say that the crew of the _Sturdy
Beggar_ was little the worse for wear after the farewell rounds of
punch, grog and “chery tod.” at the rendezvous ruled by mine host,
Jonathan Archer. It was to be charged against privateering that it drew
away from the naval service the best class of recruits.

An eye witness, Ebenezer Fox of Roxbury, wrote this account of the
putting an armed State ship into commission in 1780:

“The coast was lined with British cruisers which had almost annihilated
our commerce. The State of Massachusetts judged it expedient to build a
gun vessel, rated as a twenty-gun ship, named _Protector_,[9] commanded
by Captain John Foster Williams, to be fitted as soon as possible and
sent to sea. A rendezvous was established for recruits at the head of
Hancock’s Wharf (Boston) where the National flag, then bearing thirteen
stars and stripes, was hoisted.

“All means were resorted to which ingenuity could devise to induce men
to enlist. A recruiting officer bearing a flag and attended by a band
of martial music paraded the streets, to excite a thirst for glory and
a spirit of military ambition. The recruiting officer possessed the
qualifications requisite to make the service alluring, especially to
the young. He was a jovial, good-natured fellow, of ready wit and much
broad humor. Crowds followed in his wake, and he occasionally stopped
at the corners to harangue the multitude in order to excite their
patriotism. When he espied any large boys among the idle crowd crowded
around him he would attract their attention by singing in a comical
manner:

“‘All you that have bad Masters,
And cannot get your due,
Come, come, my brave boys
And join our ship’s crew.’

“Shouting and huzzaing would follow and some join the ranks. My
excitable feelings were aroused. I repaired to the rendezvous, signed
the ship’s papers, mounted a cockade and was, in my own estimation,
already half a sailor.

“The recruiting business went on slowly, however; but at length upward
of 300 men were carried, dragged and driven on board; of all ages,
kinds and descriptions; in all the various stages of intoxication from
that of sober tipsiness to beastly drunkenness; with the uproar and
clamor that may be more easily imagined than described. Such a motley
group has never been seen since Falstaff’s ragged regiment paraded the
streets of Coventry.”

When Captain John Paul Jones, however, was fitting out the _Ranger_
in Portsmouth harbor in the spring of 1777, many a Salem lad forsook
privateering to follow the fortunes of this dashing commander in the
service of their country. On Salem tavern doors and in front of the
town hall was posted the following “broadside,” adorned with a wood
cut of a full-rigged fighting ship. It was a call that appealed to the
spirit of the place, and it echoes with thrilling effect, even as one
reads it a hundred and forty years after its proclamation:

“Great
Encouragement
For SEAMEN

“All GENTLEMEN SEAMEN and able-bodied LANDSMEN who have a Mind to
distinguish themselves in the GLORIOUS CAUSE of their COUNTRY and make
their Fortunes, an opportunity now offers on board the Ship RANGER of
Twenty Guns (for France) now laying in Portsmouth in the State of New
Hampshire, Commanded by JOHN PAUL JONES, Esq.: let them repair to the
Ship’s Rendezvous in PORTSMOUTH, or at the Sign of Commodore MANLEY in
SALEM, where they will be kindly entertained, and receive the greatest
Encouragement. The Ship RANGER in the Opinion of every Person who has
seen her is looked upon to be one of the best CRUIZERS in AMERICA. She
will be always able to fight her Guns under a most excellent Cover;
and no Vessel yet built was ever calculated for sailing faster.

[Illustration: Proclamation posted in Salem during the Revolution
calling for volunteers aboard Paul Jones’ _Ranger_]

“Any GENTLEMEN VOLUNTEERS who have a Mind to take an agreable Voyage
in this pleasant Season of the Year may, by entering on board the
above Ship RANGER meet with every Civility they can possibly expect,
and for a further Encouragement depend on the first Opportunity being
embraced to reward each one Agreable to his MERIT. All reasonable
Travelling Expences will be allowed, and the Advance Money be paid on
their Appearance on Board.

“In CONGRESS, March 29, 1777.

“Resolved,

“That the MARINE COMMITTEE be authorized to advance to every able
Seaman that enters into the CONTINENTAL SERVICE, any Sum not exceeding
FORTY DOLLARS, and to every ordinary Seaman or Landsman any Sum not
exceeding TWENTY DOLLARS, to be deducted from their future Prize Money.

“By Order of Congress,
“JOHN HANCOCK, President.”

It was of this cruise that Yankee seamen the world over were singing in
later years the song of “Paul Jones and the _Ranger_,” which describes
her escape from a British battleship and four consorts:

“’Tis of the gallant Yankee ship
That flew the Stripes and Stars,
And the whistling wind from the west nor’west
Blew through her pitch pine spars.
With her starboard tacks aboard, my boys.
She hung upon the gale,
On an autumn night we raised the light
On the old Head of Kinsale.

* * * * *

“Up spake our noble captain then,
As a shot ahead of us past;
‘Haul snug your flowing courses,
Lay your topsail to the mast.’

Those Englishmen gave three loud hurrahs
From the deck of their covered ark,
And we answered back by a solid broadside
From the decks of our patriot bark.

‘Out booms, out booms,’ our skipper cried,
‘Out booms and give her sheet,’
And the swiftest keel that ever was launched
Shot ahead of the British fleet.
And amidst a thundering shower of shot,
With stern sails hoisted away,
Down the North Channel Paul Jones did steer
Just at the break of day.”

The privateersmen were as ready to fight, if needs be, as were these
seamen that chose to sail with Paul Jones in the Continental service.
All British merchantmen carried guns and heavy crews to man them,
and while many of them thought it wisdom to strike their colors to
a heavily armed privateer without a show of resistance, the “packet
ships” and Indiamen were capable of desperate actions. The American
privateers ran the gauntlet also of the king’s ships which swarmed in
our waters, and they met and engaged both these and British privateers
as formidable as themselves. The notable sea fights of this kind are
sometimes best told in the words of the men who fought them. Captain
David Ropes, of an old Salem seafaring family, was killed in a
privateer action which was described in the following letter written
by his lieutenant, later Captain William Gray. Their vessel was the
private armed ship _Jack_ of Salem, carrying twelve guns and sixty men.

“SALEM, June 12, 1782.

“On the 28th of May, cruising near Halifax, saw a brig standing in for
the land; at 7 P. M. discovered her to have a copper bottom, sixteen
guns and full of men; at half-past nine o’clock she came alongside
when a close action commenced.

“It was our misfortune to have our worthy commander, Captain Ropes,
mortally wounded at the first broadside. I was slightly wounded at
the same time in my right hand and head, but not so as to disable me
from duty. The action was maintained on both sides close, severe, and
without intermission for upwards of two hours, in which time we had
seven killed, several wounded and several abandoned their quarters.
Our rigging was so destroyed that not having command of our yards,
the _Jack_ fell with her larboard bow foul of the brig’s starboard
quarter, when the enemy made an attempt to board us, but they were
repulsed by a very small number compared with them. We were engaged in
this position about a quarter of an hour, in which time I received a
wound by a bayonet fixed on a musket which was hove with such force,
as entering my thigh close to the bone, entered the carriage of a bow
gun where I was fastened, and it was out of my power to get clear
until assisted by one of the prize masters.

“We then fell round and came without broadsides to each other, when
we resumed the action with powder and balls; but our match rope,
excepting some which was unfit for use, being all expended, and being
to leeward, we bore away making a running fight. The brig being far
superior to us in number of men, was able to get soon repaired, and
completely ready to renew the action. She had constantly kept up a
chasing fire, for we had not been out of reach of her musketry. She
was close alongside of us again, with fifty picked men for boarding.

“I therefore called Mr. Glover and the rest together and found we had
but ten men on deck. I had been repeatedly desired to strike, but I
mentioned the suffering of the prison ship, and made use of every
other argument in my power for continuing the engagement. All the
foreigners, however, deserted their quarters at every opportunity. At
2 o’clock P. M. I had the inexpressible mortification to deliver up
the vessel.

“I was told, on enquiry, that we were taken by the _Observer_, a sloop
of war belonging to the navy, commanded by Captain Grymes. She was
formerly the _Amsterdam_, and owned in Boston; that she was calculated
for sixteen guns, but then had but twelve on board; that the _Blonde_
frigate, being cast away on Seal Island, the captain, officers, and
men had been taken off by Captain Adams, in a sloop belonging to
Salem, and Captain Stoddart in a schooner belonging to Boston, and by
them landed on the main. Most of the officers and men having reached
Halifax were by the Governor sent on board the brig in order to come
out and convoy in the captain of a frigate who was, with some of his
men, coming to Halifax in a shallop, and that the afternoon before
the action, he and some others were taken on board the brig, which
increased his number to one hundred and seventy-five men.

“Captain Ropes died at 4 o’clock P. M. on the day we were taken, after
making his will with the greatest calmness and composure.”

The Nova Scotia _Gazette_ of June 4, 1782, contained this letter as a
sequel of an incident mentioned by Lieutenant Gray in the foregoing
account of the action:

“To the Printer, Sir: In justice to humanity, I and all my officers
and Ship’s company of His Majesty’s late Ship _Blonde_ by the
commanders of the American Private Ships of War, the _Lively_ and the
_Scammel_ (Captains Adams and Stoddart), have the pleasure to inform
the Public that they not only readily received us on board their
Vessels and carried us to Cape Race, but cheerfully Supplied us with
Provisions till we landed at Yarmouth, when on my releasing all my
Prisoners, sixty-four in number, and giving them a Passport to secure
them from our Cruisers in Boston Bay, they generously gave me the
Same to prevent our being made Prisoners or plundered by any of their
Privateers we might chance to meet on our Passage to Halifax.

“For the relief and comfort they so kindly affoarded us in our common
Sufferings and Distress, we must arduantly hope that if any of their
Privateers should happen to fall into the hands of our Ships of War,
that they will treat them with the utmost lenity, and give them every
endulgance in their Power and not look upon them (Promiscuously) in
the Light of American Prisoners, Captain Adams especially, to whom I
am indebted more particularly obliged, as will be seen by his letters
herewith published. My warmest thanks are also due to Captain Tuck
of the _Blonde’s_ Prize Ship _Lion_ (Letter of Marque of Beverly)
and to all his officers and men for their generous and indefatigable
endeavors to keep the Ship from Sinking (night and day at the Pumps)
till all but one got off her and by the blessing of God saved our
Lives.

“You will please to publish this in your next Paper, ... which will
oblige your humble Servant,

“EDWARD THORNBROUGH,
“Commander of H. M. late Ship _Blonde_.”

A very human side of warfare is shown in this correspondence, coupled
with the brutal inconsistency of war, for after their rescue the
officers and men of the _Blonde_, who felt such sincere friendship and
gratitude toward the crews of two Yankee privateers, had helped to
spread death and destruction aboard the luckless _Jack_.

The log books of the Revolutionary privateersmen out of Salem are so
many fragments of history, as it was written day by day, and flavored
with the strong and vivid personalities of the men who sailed and
fought and sweated and swore without thought of romance in their
adventurous calling. There is the log of the privateer schooner
_Scorpion_, for example, during a cruise made in 1778. Her master has
so far sailed a bootless voyage when he penned this quaint entry:

“This Book was Maid in the Lattd. of 24:30 North and in the Longtd.
of 54:00 West at the Saim time having Contryary Winds for Several
Days which Makes me fret a’most Wicked. Daly I praye there Maye be
Change such as I Want. This Book I Maid to Keep the Accounts of my
Voyage but God Knoes beste When that Will be, for I am at this Time
very Empasente[10] but I hope there soon be a Change to Ease my
trobled Mind. Which is my Earneste Desire and of my people. ********
(illegible) is this day taken with the palsy, but I hope will soon gete
beter. On this Day I was Chaced by two Ships of War which I tuck to be
Enemies, but comeing in thick Weather I have Lost Site of them and so
conclude myself Escapt which is a small Good Fortune in the Midste of
my Discouragementes.”

A note of Homeric mirth echoes from the past of a hundred and forty
years ago in the “Journal of a Cruising Voyage in the Letter of Marque
Schooner _Success_, commanded by Captain Philip Thrash, Commencing 4th
Oct. 1778.” Captain Thrash, a lusty and formidable name by the way,
filled one page after another of his log with rather humdrum routine
entries; how he took in and made sail and gave chase and drilled his
crew at the guns, etc. At length the reader comes to the following
remarks. They stand without other comment or explanation, and leave one
with a desire to know more:

“At 1-2 past 8 discovered a Sail ahead, tacked ship. At 9 tacked ship
and past just to Leeward of the sail which appeared to be a damn’d
Comical Boat, by G—d.”

[Illustration: Schooner _Baltic_ (1765), type of the smaller vessels in
which the Revolutionary privateersmen put to sea. Paintings of American
ships as old as this are exceedingly rare]

What was it about this strange sail overhauled in midocean by
Captain Philip Thrash that should have so stirred his rude sense of
humor? Why did she strike him as so “damn’d Comical”? They met and went
their way and the “Comical” craft dropped hull down and vanished in a
waste of blue water and so passed forever from our ken. But I for one
would give much to know why she aroused a burst of gusty laughter along
the low rail of the letter-of-marque schooner _Success_.

FOOTNOTES:

[9] See Captain Luther Little’s story of the _Protector’s_ fight with
the _Admiral Duff_. Chapter VI, Page 109.

[10] (impatient)

CHAPTER V

JONATHAN HARADEN, PRIVATEERSMAN

(1776-1782)

The United States navy, with its wealth of splendid tradition, has few
more commanding figures than Captain Jonathan Haraden, the foremost
fighting privateersman of Salem during the Revolution, and one of the
ablest men that fought in that war, afloat or ashore. His deeds are
well-nigh forgotten by his countrymen, yet he captured one thousand
cannon in British ships and counted his prizes by the score.

Jonathan Haraden was born in Gloucester, but as a boy was employed
by George Cabot of Salem and made his home there for the remainder
of his life. He followed the sea from his early youth, and had risen
to a command in the merchant service when the Revolution began. The
Massachusetts Colony placed two small vessels in commission as State
vessels of war, and aboard one of these, the _Tyrannicide_, Jonathan
Haraden was appointed lieutenant. On her first cruise, very early in
the war, she fought a king’s cutter from Halifax for New York. The
British craft carried a much heavier crew than the _Tyrannicide_, but
the Yankee seamen took her after a brisk engagement in which their
gunnery was notably destructive.

Soon after this, Haraden was promoted to the command of this audacious
sloop of the formidable name, but he desired greater freedom of
action. A Salem merchant ship, the _General Pickering_, of 180 tons,
was fitting out as a letter of marque, and Haraden was offered the
command. With a cargo of sugar, fourteen six-pounders and forty-five
men and boys he sailed for Bilboa in the spring of 1780. This port of
Spain was a popular rendezvous for American privateers, where they were
close to the British trade routes. During the voyage across, before his
crew had been hammered into shape, Haraden was attacked by a British
cutter of twenty guns, but managed to beat her off and proceeded on his
way after a two hours’ running fight.

He was a man of superb coolness and audacity and he showed these
qualities to advantage while tacking into the Bay of Biscay. At
nightfall he sighted a British privateer, the _Golden Eagle_,
considerably larger than the _Pickering_, and carrying at least eight
more guns. Instead of crowding on sail and shifting his course to avoid
her, he set after her in the darkness and steered alongside. Before the
enemy could decide whether to fight or run away Haraden was roaring
through his speaking trumpet:

“What ship is this? An American frigate, Sir. Strike, or I’ll sink you
with a broadside.”

The British privateer skipper was bewildered by this startling summons
and surrendered without firing a shot. A prizemaster was put on board
and at daylight both vessels laid their course for Bilboa. As they
drew near the harbor, a sail was sighted making out from the land. All
strange sails were under suspicion in that era of sea life, and Captain
Haraden made ready to clear his ship for action even before the English
captain, taken out of the prize, cheerfully carried him word that he
knew the stranger to be the _Achilles_, a powerful and successful
privateer hailing from London, carrying more than forty guns and at
least a hundred and fifty men. The description might have been that
of a formidable sloop of war rather than a privateer, and the British
skipper was at no pains to hide his satisfaction at the plight of the
Yankee with her fourteen six-pounders and her handful of men.

At the sight of an enemy thrice his fighting strength, Captain Haraden
told the English captain:

“Be that as it may, and you seem sure of your information, I sha’n’t
run away from her.”

The wind so held that the _Achilles_ first bore down upon the prize
of the _Pickering_ and was able to recapture and put a prize crew
aboard before Captain Haraden could fetch with gunshot. With a British
lieutenant from the _Achilles_ in command, the prize was ordered to
follow her captor. It was evident to the waiting Americans aboard the
_Pickering_ that the _Achilles_ intended forcing an engagement, but
night was falling and the English privateer bore off as if purposing to
convoy her prize beyond harm’s way and postpone pursuit until morning.

The hostile ships had been sighted from Bilboa harbor where the
_Achilles_ was well known, and the word swiftly passed through the
city that the bold American was holding pluckily to her landfall as
if preparing for an attempt to recapture her prize. The wind had
died during the late afternoon and by sunset thousands of Spaniards
and seamen from the vessels in the harbor had swarmed to crowd the
headlands and the water’s edge where they could see the towering
_Achilles_ and her smaller foe “like ships upon a painted ocean.”
An eye witness, Robert Cowan, said that “the _General Pickering_ in
comparison to her antagonist looked like a long boat by the side of a
ship.”

Because of lack of wind and the maneuvers of the _Achilles_, Captain
Haraden thought there was no danger of an attack during the night, and
he turned in to sleep without more ado, after ordering the officer of
the watch to have him called if the _Achilles_ drew nearer. His serene
composure had its bracing effect upon the spirits of the men. At dawn
the captain was awakened from a sound slumber by the news that the
_Achilles_ was bearing down upon them with her crew at quarters. “He
calmly rose, went on deck as if it had been some ordinary occasion,”
and ordered his ship made ready for action.

We know that he was a man of commanding appearance and an unruffled
demeanor; the kind of fighting sailor who liked to have things done
handsomely and with due regard for the effect of such matters upon his
seamen.

Several of his crew had been transferred to the prize, and were now
prisoners to the _Achilles_. The forty-five defenders being reduced
to thirty-odd, Captain Haraden, in an eloquent and persuasive address
to the sixty prisoners he had captured in the _Golden Eagle_, offered
large rewards to volunteers who would enlist with the crew of the
_Pickering_. A boatswain and ten men, whose ties of loyalty to the
British flag must have been tenuous in the extreme, stepped forward
and were assigned to stations with the American crew. Her strength was
thus increased to forty-seven men and boys. The captain then made a
final tour of the decks, assuring his men that although the _Achilles_
appeared to be superior in force, “he had no doubt they would beat her
if they were firm and steady, and did not throw away their fire.” One
of his orders to the men with small arms was: “Take particular aim at
their white boot tops.”

The kind of sea fighting that won imperishable prestige for American
seamen belongs with a vanished era of history. As the gun crews of
the _General Pickering_ clustered behind their open ports, they saw
to it that water tubs were in place, matches lighted, the crowbars,
handspikes and “spung staves” and “rope spunges” placed in order by
the guns. Then as they made ready to deliver the first broadside, the
orders ran down the crowded low-beamed deck:

“Cast off the tackles and breechings.”

“Seize the breechings.”

“Unstop the touch-hole.”

“Ram home wad and cartridge.”

“Shot the gun-wad.”

“Run out the gun.”

“Lay down handspikes and crows.”

“Point your gun.”

“FIRE.”

The Yankee crew could hear the huzzas of the English gunners as the
_Achilles_ sought to gain the advantage of position. Captain Haraden
had so placed his ship between the land and a line of shoals, that
in closing with him the _Achilles_ must receive a raking broadside
fire. He knew that if it came to boarding, his little band must be
overwhelmed by weight of numbers and he showed superb seamanship in
choosing and maintaining a long range engagement.

The _Pickering_ was still deep laden with sugar, and this, together
with her small size, made her a difficult target to hull, while the
_Achilles_ towered above water like a small frigate. The Americans
fired low, while the English broadsides flew high across the decks
of the _Pickering_. This rain of fire killed the British volunteer
boatswain aboard the _Pickering_ and wounded eight of the crew early
in the fight. Captain Haraden was exposed to these showers of case and
round shot, but one of his crew reported that “all the time he was as
calm and steady as amid a shower of snowflakes.”

Meanwhile a multitude of spectators, estimated to number at least a
hundred thousand, had assembled on shore. The city of Bilboa had turned
out _en masse_ to enjoy the rare spectacle of a dashing sea duel fought
in the blue amphitheater of the harbor mouth. They crowded into fishing
boats, pinnaces, cutters and row boats until from within a short
distance of the smoke-shrouded _Pickering_ the gay flotilla stretched
to the shore so closely packed that an onlooker described it as a solid
bridge of boats, across which a man might have made his way by leaping
from one gunwale to another.

Captain Haraden was on the defensive. The stake for which he fought
was to gain entrance to the port of Bilboa with his cargo and retake
his prize, nor did he need to capture the _Achilles_ to win a most
signal victory. For two hours the two privateers were at it hammer and
tongs, the British ship unable to outmaneuver the Yankee and the latter
holding her vantage ground. At length the commander of the _Achilles_
was forced to decide that he must either run away or be sunk where he
was. He had been hulled through and through and his rigging was so cut
up that it was with steadily increasing difficulty that he was able
to avoid a raking from every broadside of his indomitable foe. It is
related that he decided to run immediately after a flight of crowbars,
with which the guns of the _Pickering_ had been crammed to the muzzles,
made hash of his decks and drove his gunners from their stations.

Captain Haraden made sail in chase. He offered his gunners a cash
reward if they should be able to carry away a spar and disable the
_Achilles_ so that he might draw up alongside the enemy and renew the
engagement. His fighting blood was at boiling heat and he no longer
thought of making for Bilboa and thanking his lucky stars that he had
gotten clear of so ugly a foe. But the _Achilles_ was light, while her
mainsail “was large as a ship of the line,” and after a chase of three
hours, the _General Pickering_ had been distanced. Captain Haraden
sorrowfully put about for Bilboa, and took some small satisfaction in
his disappointment by overhauling and retaking the _Golden Eagle_, the
prize which had been the original bone of contention.

The prize had been in sight of the action, during which the captured
American prizemaster, master John Carnes, enjoyed an interesting
conversation with the British prizemaster from the _Achilles_ who had
been placed in charge of the vessel.

Mr. Carnes informed his captor of the fighting strength of the
_General Pickering_. The British prizemaster rubbed his eyes when he
saw the little Yankee vessel engage the _Achilles_ and roundly swore
that Carnes had lied to him. The latter stuck to his guns, however, and
added by way of confirmation:

“If you knew Captain Jonathan Haraden as well as I do, you would not
be surprised at this. It is just what I expected, and I think it not
impossible, notwithstanding the disparity of force, that the _Achilles_
will at least be beaten off, and I shall have the command of this prize
again before night.”

The Spanish populace welcomed Captain Haraden ashore as if he had been
the hero of a bull fight. He was carried through the streets at the
head of a triumphant procession and later compelled to face veritable
broadsides of dinners and public receptions. His battle with the
_Achilles_ had been rarely spectacular and theatrical, and at sight
of one of his elaborately embroidered waistcoats to-day, displayed in
the Essex Institute, one fancies that he may have had the fondness for
doing fine things in a fine way which made Nelson pin his medals on his
coat before he went into action at Trafalgar.

In a narrative compiled from the stories of those who knew and
sailed with this fine figure of a privateersman we are told that “in
his person he was tall and comely; his countenance was placid, and
his manners and deportment mild. His discipline on board ship was
excellent, especially in time of action. Yet in the common concerns
of life he was easy almost to a fault. So great was the confidence he
inspired that if he but looked at a sail through his glass, and then
told the helmsman to steer for her, the observation went round, ‘If
she is an enemy, she is ours.’ His great characteristic was the most
consummate self-possession on all occasions and in midst of perils, in
which if any man equalled, none ever excelled him. His officers and
men insisted he was more calm and cool amid the din of battle than at
any other time; and the more deadly the strife, the more imminent the
peril, the more terrific the scene, the more perfect his self-command
and serene intrepidity. In a word he was a hero.”

Large and resonant words of tribute these, written in the long ago, and
yet they are no fulsome eulogy of Jonathan Haraden of Salem.

During another voyage from Salem to France as a letter of marque, the
_Pickering_ discovered, one morning at daylight, a great English ship
of the line looming within cannon shot. The enemy bore down in chase,
but did not open fire, expecting to capture the Yankee cockleshell
without having to injure her. He was fast overhauling the quarry, and
Captain Haraden manned his sweeps. The wind was light and although one
ball fired from a bowchaser sheared off three of his sweeps, or heavy
oars, he succeeded in rowing away from his pursuer and made his escape.
It was not a fight, but the incident goes to show how small by modern
standards was the ship in which Jonathan Haraden made his dauntless
way, when he could succeed in rowing her out of danger of certain
capture.

In his early voyages in the _Pickering_ she was commissioned as a
letter of marque, carrying cargoes across the Atlantic, and fetching
home provisions and munitions needed in the Colonies, but ready to
fight “at the drop of the hat.” She was later equipped with a slightly
heavier armament and commissioned as a full-fledged privateer. With his
sixteen guns Captain Haraden fought and took in one action no less than
three British ships carrying a total number of forty-two guns. He made
the briefest possible mention in his log of a victory which in its way
was as remarkable as the triumph of the _Constitution_ over the _Cyane_
and the _Levant_ in the second war with England.

It was while cruising as a privateer that the _Pickering_ came in
sight of three armed vessels sailing in company from Halifax to New
York. This little squadron comprised a brig of fourteen guns, a
ship of sixteen guns and a sloop of twelve guns. They presented a
formidable array of force, the ship alone appearing to be a match for
the _Pickering_ in guns and men as they exchanged signals with each
other, formed a line and made ready for action. “Great as was the
confidence of the officers and crew in the bravery and judgment of
Captain Haraden, they evinced, by their looks, that they thought on
this occasion he was going to hazard too much; upon which he told them
he had no doubt whatever that if they would do their duty, he would
quickly capture the three vessels, and this he did with great ease by
going alongside of each of them, one after another.”

This unique feat in the history of privateering actions was largely due
to Captain Haraden’s seamanship in that he was able so to handle the
_Pickering_ that he fought three successive single ship actions instead
of permitting the enemy to concentrate or combine their attack.

Somewhat similar to these tactics was the manner in which he took
two privateer sloops while he was cruising off Bermuda. They were
uncommonly fast and agile vessels and they annoyed the Yankee skipper
by retaking several of his prizes before he could send them free of
this molestation. The sloops had no mind to risk an action with Haraden
whose vessel they had recognized. So after nightfall he sent down his
fore topgallant yard and mast, otherwise disguised the _Pickering_,
and vanished from that part of the seas. A day later he put about and
jogged back after the two privateers, putting out drags astern to
check his speed. The _Pickering_ appeared to be a plodding merchantman
lumbering along a West India course.

[Illustration: Derby Wharf, Salem, Mass., as it appears to-day. Here
the East India ships once lay three deep, and these decaying warehouses
were filled with the riches of the most remote lands a century ago]

As soon as he was sighted by his pestiferous and deluded foes, they set
out in chase of him as easy booty. Letting the first sloop come within
easy range, Jonathan Haraden stripped the _Pickering_ of the painted
canvas screens that had covered her gun ports, let go a murderous
broadside and captured the sloop almost as soon as it takes to tell
it. Then showing English colors above the Stars and Stripes aboard the
_Pickering_, as if she had been captured, he went after the consort and
took her as neatly as he had gathered the other.

Captain Haraden knew how to play the gentleman in this bloody game of
war on the ocean. An attractive light is thrown upon his character by
an incident which happened during a cruise in the _Pickering_. He fell
in with a humble Yankee trading schooner which had been to the West
Indies with lumber and was jogging home with the beggarly proceeds of
the voyage. Her skipper signaled Captain Haraden, put out a boat and
went aboard the privateer to tell a tale of woe. A little while before
he had been overhauled by a British letter of marque schooner which had
robbed him of his quadrant, compass and provisions, stripped his craft
of much of her riggings, and with a curse and a kick from her captain,
left him to drift and starve.

Captain Haraden was very indignant at such wanton and impolite conduct
and at once sent his men aboard the schooner to re-rig her, provisioned
her cabin and forecastle, loaned the skipper instruments with which to
work his passage home and sent him on his way rejoicing. Then having
inquired the course of the plundering letter of marque when last seen,
he made sail to look for her. He was lucky enough to fall in and
capture the offender next day. Captain Haraden dressed himself in his
best and, to add dignity to the occasion, summoned the erring British
skipper to his cabin and there roundly rebuked and denounced him for
his piratical conduct toward a worthless little lumber schooner. He
gave his own crew permission to make reprisals, which probably means
that they helped themselves to whatever pleased their fancy and kicked
and cuffed the offending seamen the length of their deck. Captain
Haraden then allowed the letter of marque to resume her voyage. “He
would not, even under these circumstances, sink or destroy a ship
worthless as a prize and thus ruin a brother sailor.”

Off the Capes of the Delaware, Captain Haraden once captured an English
brig of war, although the odds were against him, by “the mere terror
of his name.” He afterward told friends ashore how this extraordinary
affair occurred. There was a boy on the _Pickering_, one of the
captain’s most ardent adorers, a young hero worshiper, who believed the
_Pickering_ capable of taking anything short of a line-of-battle ship.
He had been put aboard a prize off the Capes, which prize had been
captured, while making port, by the British brig-of-war. The lad was
transferred to the brig with his comrades of the prize crew, and was
delighted a little later to see the _Pickering_ standing toward them.
Being asked why he sang and danced with joy, the boy explained with the
most implicit assurance:

“That is my master in that ship, and I shall soon be with him.”

“Your master,” cried the British bos’n, “and who in the devil is he?”

“Why, Captain Haraden. You can’t tell me you never heard of him? He
takes everything he goes alongside of, and he will soon have you.”

This unseemly jubilation on an enemy’s deck was reported to the captain
of the brig. He summoned the boy aft, and was told the same story with
even more emphasis. Presently the _Pickering_ ran close down, and
approached the brig to leeward. There was a strong wind and the listed
deck of the brig lay exposed to the fire of the privateer. Captain
Haraden shouted through his trumpet:

“Haul down your colors, or I will fire into you.”

The captain of the brig-of-war had wasted precious moments, and his
vessel was so situated at that moment that her guns could not be
worked to leeward because of the seas that swept along her ports. After
a futile fire from deck swivels and small arms, she surrendered and
next day was anchored off Philadelphia.

One or two more stories and we must needs have done with the exploits
of Jonathan Haraden. One of them admirably illustrates the sublime
assurance of the man and in an extreme degree that dramatic quality
which adorned his deeds. During one of his last voyages in the
_Pickering_ he attacked a heavily armed “king’s mail packet,” bound to
England from the West Indies. These packets were of the largest type of
merchant vessels of that day, usually carrying from fifteen to twenty
guns, and complements of from sixty to eighty men. Such a ship was
expected to fight hard and was more than a match for most privateers.

The king’s packet was a foe to test Captain Haraden’s mettle and he
found her a tough antagonist. They fought four full hours, “or four
glasses,” as the log records it, after which Captain Haraden found that
he must haul out of the action and repair damages to rigging and hull.
He discovered also, that he had used all the powder on board except one
charge. It would have been a creditable conclusion of the matter if he
had called the action a drawn battle and gone on his way.

It was in his mind, however, to try an immensely audacious plan which
could succeed only by means of the most cold-blooded courage on his
part. Ramming home his last charge of powder and double shotting the
gun, he again ranged alongside his plucky enemy, who was terribly cut
up, but still unconquered, and hailed her:

“I will give you five minutes to haul down your colors. If they are not
down at the end of that time, I will fire into and sink you, so help me
God.”

It was a test of mind, not of armament. The British commander was a
brave man who had fought his ship like a hero. But the sight of this
infernally indomitable figure on the quarterdeck of the shot-rent
_Pickering_, the thought of being exposed to another broadside at
pistol range, the aspect of the blood-stained, half-naked privateersmen
grouped at their guns with matches lighted, was too much for him.
Captain Haraden stood, watch in hand, calling off the minutes so that
his voice could be heard aboard the packet:

“ONE—”

“TWO—”

“THREE.”

But he had not said “FOUR,” when the British colors fluttered down from
the yard and the packet ship was his.

When a boat from the _Pickering_ went alongside the prize, the crew
“found the blood running from her scuppers, while the deck appeared
more like the floor of a slaughter house than the deck of a ship. On
the quarterdeck, in an armchair, sat an old gentleman, the Governor of
the island from which the packet came. During the whole action he had
loaded and fired a heavy blunderbuss, and in the course of the battle
had received a ball in his cheek, which, in consequence of the loss of
teeth, had passed out through the other cheek without giving a mortal
wound.”

A truly splendid “old gentleman” and a hero of the first water!

In the latter part of the war Captain Haraden commanded the _Julius
Cæsar_, and a letter written by an American in Martinique in 1782 to a
friend in Salem is evidence that his activities had not diminished:

“Captain Jonathan Haraden, in the letter of marque ship, _Julius
Cæsar_, forty men and fourteen guns, off Bermuda, in sight of two
English brigs, one of twenty and the other of sixteen guns, took a
schooner which was a prize to one of them, but they both declined to
attack him. On the 5th ult., he fell in with two British vessels, being
a ship of eighteen guns and a brig of sixteen, both of which he fought
five hours and got clear of them. The enemy’s ship was much shattered
and so was the _Cæsar_, but the latter’s men were unharmed. Captain
Haraden was subsequently presented with a silver plate by the owners of
his ship, as commemorative of his bravery and skill. Before he reached
Martinico he had a severe battle with another English vessel which he
carried thither with him as a prize.”

Captain Haraden, the man who took a thousand cannon from the British
on the high seas, died in Salem in 1803 in his fifty-ninth year. His
descendants treasure the massive pieces of plate given him by the
owners of the _Pickering_ and the _Julius Cæsar_, as memorials of
one who achieved far more to win the independence of his nation than
many a landsman whose military records won him the recognition of his
government and a conspicuous place in history.

While the important ports of Boston, New York, and others to the
southward were blockaded by squadrons of British war vessels, the
Salem privateers managed to slip to sea and spread destruction. It
happened on a day of March, in 1781, that two bold English privateers
were cruising off Cape Cod, menacing the coastwise trading sloops and
schooners bound in and out of Salem and nearby ports. The news was
carried ashore by incoming vessels which had been compelled to run for
it, and through the streets and along the wharves of Salem went the
call for volunteers. The ships _Brutus_ and _Neptune_ were lying in the
stream and with astonishing expedition they were armed and made ready
for sea as privateers.

One of the enemy’s vessels was taken and brought into Salem only two
days after the alarm had been given. Tradition relates that while the
two Salem privateers were sailing home in company with their prize, the
_Brutus_ was hailed by an English sloop which had been loitering the
coast on mischief bent. The Yankee skippers seeking to get their prize
into port without risk of losing her in battle, had hoisted English
colors. Dusk had deepened into darkness when from the quarterdeck of
the British sloop sounded the husky challenge:

“Ship ahoy. What ship is that?”

“The English armed ship _Terror_,” answered the Salem captain.

“Where are you bound?”

“Just inside the Cape for safety.”

“Safety from what?” asked the guileless Englishman.

“A whole fleet of damned Yankee privateers.”

“Where are they?”

“They bear from the pitch of the Cape, about sou’east by East, four
leagues distant.”

“Aye, aye, we’ll look out for them and steer clear,” returned John
Bull, and thereupon with a free wind he stood out to sea leaving the
_Brutus_ to lay her course without more trouble.

Not all the Salem privateers were successful. In fairness to the foe it
should be recorded that one in three, or fifty-four in a total of one
hundred and fifty-eight privateers and letter of marque ships were lost
by capture during the war. Many of these, however, were scarcely more
than decked rowboats armed with one gun and a few muskets. But of the
four hundred and forty-five prizes taken by Salem ships, nine-tenths of
them reached American ports in safety.

There was a lad who had been captured in a Salem privateer, and forced
to enlist in the English navy. He was not of that heroic mold which
preferred death to surrender and the hardships of prison life appear to
have frightened him into changing his colors. He wrote home to Salem in
1781:

“HONOURED FATHER AND MOTHER:

“I send you these few lines to let you know that I am in good health
on board the _Hyeane_ Frigate which I was taken by and I hope I shall
be at home in a few months’ time. When I was taken by the _Hyeane_ I
was carried to England, where I left the ship and went on board a brig
going to New York. There I was prest out of her into the _Phœnix_,
forty-eight gun ship. I remained in her four months and was then taken
on board the _Hyeane_ again, where I am still kept. We are lying in
Carlisle Bay in Barbadoes. We are now going on an expedition, but will
soon be back again when the captain says he will let me come home.”

Alas, the boy who had weakened when it came to the test of his loyalty
was not so well pleased with his choice when peace came. In August,
1783, we find him writing to his mother:

“I cannot think of returning home till the people of New England are
more reconciled, for I hear they are so inveterate against all who have
ever been in the English navy that I can’t tell but their rage may
extend to hang me as they do others.”

Another letter of that time, while it does not deal wholly with
privateering, views the war from the interesting standpoint of a
Loyalist or Tory of Salem who was writing to friends of like sympathies
who had also taken refuge in England. It is to be inferred from his
somewhat caustic comments about certain _nouveaux riche_ families of
the town that the fortunes of privateering had suddenly prospered some,
while it had beggared the estate of others.

“BRISTOL, England, February 10, 1780.

“Perhaps it may amuse you to be made acquainted with a few particulars
of our own country and town, that may not have come to your
knowledge.... It is a melancholy truth that while some are wallowing
in undeserved wealth that plunder and Rapine has thrown into their
hands, the wisest and most peaceable, and most deserving, such as
you and I know, are now suffering for want, accompanied by many
indignities that a licencious and lawless people can pour forth upon
them. Those who a few years ago were the _meaner people_ are now by
a Strange Revolution become almost the only men in Power, riches and
influences; those who on the contrary were leaders in the highest line
of life are very glad at this time to be unknown and unnoticed, to
escape insult and plunder and the wretched condition of all who are
not Violent Adopters of Republican Principles. The Cabots of Beverly,
who you know had but five years ago a very moderate share of property
are now said to be by far the most wealthy in New England.... Nathan
Goodale by an agency concern in Privateers and buying up Shares,
counts almost as many pounds as most of his neighbors.”

What may be called the day’s work of the Revolutionary privateers
is compactly outlined in the following series of reports from Salem
annals. In an unfinished manuscript dealing with privateering the late
James Kimball of Salem made this note:

“June 26, 1857. This day saw John W. Osgood, son of John Osgood, who
stated that during the war of the Revolution his father was first
Lieutenant of the Brig _Fame_ commanded by Samuel Hobbs of Salem, from
whence they sailed. When three days out they fell in with a British
man-of-war which gave chase to the Privateer which outsailed the
man-of-war, who, finding that she was getting away from him, fired a
round shot which came on board and killed Captain Hobbs, which was the
only injury sustained during the chase.

“Upon the death of Captain Hobbs the crew mutinied, saying the captain
was dead, and the cruise was up, refused further duty and insisted
upon returning to Salem. Lieutenant Osgood now becoming the captain,
persisted in continuing the Cruise, yet with so small a number as
remained on his side, found great difficulty in working the Ship. The
mutineers stood in fear, but part of the officers stood by Captain
Osgood. No one feeling willing to appear at their head, they one day
Sent him a Round Robin requiring the return of the Privateer. Captain
Osgood still persisted in continuing the cruise.

“When an English Vessell hove in sight he told them that there was a
Prize, that they had only to take her and he would soon find others.
One of the Crew, to the leader to whom they all looked, replied that
he would return to his duty. All the rest followed him, sail was made
and they soon came up with the Prize. She proved to be a man-of-war in
disguise, with drags out. As soon as this was discovered the Privateer
attempted to escape, but she could not and was captured and carried to
Halifax.”

Selecting other typical incidents almost at random as they were
condensed in newspaper records, these seem to be worthy of notice:

“June 31, 1778. Much interest is made here for the release of Resolved
Smith from his captivity. On his way from the West Indies to North
Carolina he was taken, and confined on board the prison ship _Judith_
at New York. Describing his situation, he said that he and other
sufferers were shut in indiscriminately with the sick, dead and dying.
‘I am now closing the eyes of the last two out of five healthy men that
came about three weeks ago with me on board this ship.’”

“July, 1779. The Brig _Wild Cat_, Captain Daniel Ropes, seventy-five
men, fourteen guns, is reported as having taken a schooner belonging
to the British navy. The next day, however, he was captured by a
frigate and for his activity against the enemy was confined in irons at
Halifax. On hearing of his severe treatment, our General Court ordered
that an English officer of equal rank be put in close confinement until
Captain Ropes is liberated and exchanged.”

“Feb. 13, 1781. Ship _Pilgrim_, Captain Robinson, reported that on
Christmas Day he had a battle with a Spanish Frigate and forced her to
retire, and on January 5th engaged a privateer of thirty-three men,
twenty-two guns, for three hours and took her. He had nine men killed
and two wounded while his opponent had her captain and four more killed
and thirteen wounded.”

“March 13, 1781. It is reported that the Brig _Montgomery_, Captain
John Carnes, had engaged a large British cutter, lost his lieutenant
and had five wounded. From another account we learn that after a hard
fight he succeeded in beating his opponent off.”

“It is reported on the 19th of the same month that the ship _Franklin_,
Captain John Turner, had taken a ship after a fight of forty minutes,
having had one killed and one wounded. The prize had two killed and
eight wounded.”

“August 26, 1781. The ship _Marquis de Lafayette_, seventy-five men and
sixteen guns, reported as having attacked a brig of thirty-two guns,
upwards of two hours, but was obliged to draw off, much damaged, with
eight killed and fourteen wounded and leaving the enemy with seventeen
killed besides others wounded.”

Privateering was destined to have a powerful influence upon the
seafaring fortunes of Salem. Elias Hasket Derby, for example, the
first great American shipping merchant and the wealthiest man in the
Colonies, found his trading activities ruined by the Revolution.
He swung his masterly energy and large resources into equipping
privateers. It was his standing offer that after as many shares as
possible had been subscribed for in financing any Salem privateer, he
would take up the remainder, if more funds were needed. It is claimed
that Mr. Derby was interested in sending to sea more than one-half of
the one hundred and fifty-eight privateers which hailed from Salem
during the Revolution. After the first two years of war he discerned
the importance of speed, and that many of the small privateers of
his town had been lost or captured because they were unfit for their
business. He established his own shipyards, studied naval architecture,
and began to build a class of vessels vastly superior in size, model
and speed to any previously launched in the Colonies. They were
designed to be able to meet a British sloop of war on even terms.

These ships took a large number of prizes, but Elias Hasket Derby
gradually converted them from privateers to letters of marque, so that
they could carry cargoes to distant ports and at the same time defend
themselves against the largest class of British privateers. At the
beginning of the war he owned seven sloops and schooners. When peace
came he had four ships of from three hundred to three hundred and fifty
tons, which were very imposing merchant vessels for that time.

It was with these ships, created by the needs of war, that the commerce
of Salem began to reach out for ports on the other side of the world.
They were the vanguard of the great fleet which through the two
generations to follow were to carry the Stars and Stripes around the
Seven Seas. Ready to man them was the bold company of privateersmen,
schooled in a life of the most hazardous adventure, braced to face all
risks in the peaceful war for trade where none of their countrymen
had ever dared to seek trade before. While they had been dealing
shrewd blows for their country’s cause in war, they had been also in
preparation for the dawning age of Salem supremacy on the seas in the
rivalries of commerce, pioneers in a brilliant and romantic era which
was destined to win unique fame for their port.

CHAPTER VI

CAPTAIN LUTHER LITTLE’S OWN STORY

(1771-1799)

Captain Luther Little made no great figure in the history of his
times, but he left in his own words the story of his life at sea which
ancient manuscript contributes a full length portrait of the kind of
men who lived in the coastwise towns of New England in the eighteenth
century. He was not of Salem birth, but he commanded a letter of marque
ship out of Salem during the Revolution, which makes it fitting that
the manuscript of his narrative should have come into the hands of
his grandson, Philip Little, of Salem. This old time seaman’s memoir,
as he dictates it in his old age, reflects and makes alive again the
day’s work of many a stout-hearted ship’s company of forgotten American
heroes.

Born in Marshfield, Massachusetts, in 1756, Luther Little was a sturdy
man grown at the beginning of the Revolution and had already spent
five years at sea. At the age of fifteen he forsook his father’s farm
and shipped on board a coasting sloop plying between Maine and the
South Carolina ports. On one of these voyages he was taken ill with
a fever and was left ashore in a settlement on the Pimlico River,
North Carolina. The planter’s family who cared for the lad through his
long and helpless illness were big-hearted and cheery folk, and his
description of a “reaping bee,” as enjoyed a hundred and forty years
ago, is quaintly diverting.

“When the evening amusements began our host performed on the violin
and the young people commenced dancing. I was brought down stairs by
one of the daughters and placed on a chair in one corner of the room
to witness their sports. They got so merry in the dance that I was
unheeded, and they whirled so hard against me as to knock me from my
chair. One of the young women caught me in her arms, and carried me
to the chamber and laid me on the mat. They held their frolic until
midnight and eight or ten of the girls tarried till morning. My mat
lay in one corner of the garret, and they were to occupy another on
the opposite side. When they came upstairs they commenced performing a
jumping match after making preparations for the same by taking off some
of their clothes. They performed with much agility, when one of the
stranger girls observing me in one corner of the garret exclaimed with
much surprise: ‘Who is that?’ The answer was: ‘It’s only a young man
belonging to the North that is here sick, and won’t live three days.
Never mind him.’”

His sloop having returned, this sixteen-year-old sailor surprised his
kind host by gaining sufficient strength to go on board and soon after
set sail for Martinique in the West Indies. The Revolutionary Committee
of North Carolina had ordered the captain to fetch back a supply of
powder and shot. He took aboard this cargo after driving overboard and
threatening to blow out the brains of an English lieutenant who had it
in mind to make a prize of the sloop while she lay at Martinique.

It was out of the frying pan into the fire, for when the vessel reached
the Carolina coast, “the news of our unexpected arrival had been noised
abroad,” relates Luther Little, “and the King’s tender lay within a
few miles of the bar in wait for us. Twelve pilot boats from Ocrakoke
came off to us and informed us that the tender was coming out to take
us. We loaded the pilot boats with powder, and the balls, which were in
kegs, we hove overboard. By this time the tender made her appearance
and ordered us all on board, made a prize of the sloop and ordered her
for Norfolk where lay the English fleet. When our pilot and his crew
went to take their boat I mingled with them and walked quietly on board
without being observed, and set hard at rowing with one of the oars.
The captain and the rest of the crew were made prisoners.”

The pilot boat landed young Little at Ocrakoke, where he found that the
other pilots who had taken the powder ashore had stolen ten casks of
it, scurvy patriots that they were. So the stout-hearted lad of sixteen
borrowed an old musket and stood guard all night over the powder kegs.
“The next morning,” he tells us, “the pilots finding they could plunder
no more of the powder, agreed to carry it up the Pimlico River to the
several County Committees for whom it was destined.” Luther Little went
with them and saw to it that the powder reached its owners.

One Colonel Simpson offered him a small schooner laden with corn to be
delivered down the Pongo River. She had a crew of slaves which the boy
skipper loftily rejected and took his little schooner single-handed
downstream, making port after a two days’ voyage. While at anchor there
came a hurricane which had a most surprising effect on his fortunes.
“I shut myself down in the cabin,” said he, “and in the course of the
night found the vessel adrift. Not daring to go on deck I waited the
result and soon felt the vessel strike. After thumping a while she
keeled to one side and remained still. At daylight next morning I
ventured on deck and found myself safe on terra firma, in the woods,
one half mile from the water, the tide having left me safe among the
trees.”

Making his way on foot to the home of the consignee, he reported his
arrival, explained the situation and wrote his employer that he had
delivered his cargo safe, and that he would find his schooner half a
mile in the woods anchored safely among the trees.

The marooned seaman had not to wait long for another berth. On the same
day of his escape he saw a sloop beating out of the river and hailed
her skipper. A foremast hand was wanted and Little shipped aboard for
the West Indies. During the passage they were chased by an English
frigate, and ran in under the guns of the Dutch fort at St. Eustatia.
Cargo and vessel were sold, and Luther Little transferred himself to
another sloop bound for Rhode Island.

“Arriving safe after a passage of eleven days,” he writes, “I took
my pack and travelled to Little Compton where I had an uncle. Here I
stayed one week, and then marched home on foot, the distance of seventy
miles, without one cent in my pocket. I had been absent eleven months.”

A few months later Luther Little shipped on board a letter of marque
brig bound to Cadiz. Off Cape Finnesterre a storm piled the vessel on
the rocks where she went to pieces. Little was washed over the bows,
but caught a trailing rope and hauled himself aboard with a broken leg.
While he was in this plight the brig broke in two, and somehow, with
the help of his fellow seamen, he was conveyed ashore to a Spanish
coast fortification. Thence they were taken by boat to Bellisle. The
infant Uncle Sam was not wholly neglectful of his subjects, even though
he was in the death-grip of a Revolution, for to the inn at Bellisle
there came “a coach with four white horses and Mr. John Baptiste, an
officer in the employ of the United States government, to enquire if
there were any from off that wreck who needed assistance and wished to
go to the hospital.”

Luther Little lay in a hospital at Lisbon from autumn into spring
where, he relates: “I was treated with great kindness and attention and
although in my midnight dreams the spirits of a kind mother and beloved
sisters would often hover around my pillow, still on waking, the
thought that I had escaped an early death was ever present to the mind,
and I felt that although far from home and friends, I had every reason
to be thankful.”

The canny youngster had a shoe with a hollow heel, which hiding place
he had prepared before leaving home, and in which he had tucked eight
gold dollars with this sagacious reflection:

“Previous to this I had been left among strangers perfectly destitute
without money either to assist myself, or to remunerate them for
kindness received. I was now leaving home again, the future was covered
with a veil which a wise Providence had never permitted human knowledge
to rend. I knew not with what this voyage might be fraught—evil or
good. I therefore resolved if possible to have something laid up as the
old adage expresses, ‘for a wet day.’”

When Luther was discharged from the Spanish hospital eleven other
luckless American seamen who had been cast on their beam ends were
set adrift with him. The shoe with the hollow heel held the only cash
in the party who undertook an overland journey of three hundred miles
to the nearest seaport whence they might expect to find passage home.
While spending the night at a port called St. Ubes there came ashore
the captain and lieutenant of an English privateer. These were very
courteous foemen, for the captain told how he had been made prisoner
by a Yankee crew, carried into Salem, and treated so exceedingly well
that he was very grateful. Thereupon he ordered his lieutenant to go
off to the privateer and fetch a dozen of pickled neats’ tongues which
he gave the stranded pilgrims to put in their packs. He also turned
over to them a Portuguese pilot to escort them through the desolate and
hostile country in which their journey lay. With the Portuguese, the
neats’ tongues, and wine in leather bottles, paid for from the hollow
heel, the American tars trudged along, sleeping on the ground and in
shepherds’ sheds until they reached the boundary between Spain and
Portugal.

“The Spanish and English were at war,” relates Luther Little, “and
the stable in which we slept was surrounded by Spaniards who swore we
were English and they would take us prisoners. In vain the landlord of
the nearby tavern expostulated with them, saying we were Americans in
distress traveling to Faro. They still persisted in forcing the door.
The pilot told them that we were desperate men armed to the teeth and
at length they disappeared.”

They were among a set of accomplished thieves, for next day they bought
some mackerel and stowed it in their packs from which it was artfully
stolen by the very lad who had sold it to them. The pilot cheered them
with tales of highway robbery and murder as they fared on, indicating
with eloquent gestures sundry stones which marked the burial places
of slain travelers. They were once attacked by a gang of brigands who
stole their mule and slender store of baggage, but the seamen rallied
with such headlong energy that the robbers took to the bushes.

Reaching the port of Faro, they found a good-hearted mate of a
Portuguese brig who gave them a ham, four dozen biscuit and a part of
a cheese. The French Consul also befriended them, and supplied a boat
to take them to a port called Iammont. Although the ingenuous Luther
Little explains their next adventure as pacific, it is not unfair to
presume that his company committed a mild-mannered kind of piracy.
However, he tells the tale in this fashion:

“We reached the mouth of the Iammont River next morning. Here we met a
Spanish shallop coming out, bound to Cadiz, loaded with small fish and
manned with six men. The Captain was very old. We shifted on board this
shallop and sailed toward Cadiz with a fair wind. When night approached
the Spanish captain having no compass, steered by a star; at ten the
clouds came over and the stars were shut in, the wind blowing fresh.
The Spaniards fell on their knees, imploring the aid of their saints.
Directly the captain concluded to go on shore, and took his cask of
oil to break the surf, and bore away toward the shore. We being the
strongest party (eleven to six), hauled the shallop onto her course and
obliged the old Spaniard to take the helm, it still continuing very
thick. At one that morning we struck on the Porpoise Rocks at the mouth
of Cadiz Bay; we shipped two seas which filled the boat. With our hats
we bailed out water, fish and all, directly made Cadiz light, and ran
in near the wall of the city. The sentry from the wall told us to come
no nearer, whereupon the old captain hauled down sails and let go his
anchor. At daylight I paid one Spanish dollar apiece passage money and
we left the boat.

“We went to the gate of the city and sat down on some ship timber.
One of our men was then two days sick with a fever. When the gate was
opened we marched in, two of us carrying the sick man. A little way
inside we met a Spaniard who spoke English. He invited us to his house,
and gave us a breakfast of coffee and fish, and told us we were welcome
to remain there until we could find a passage home.”

Next day Luther Little as spokesman waited upon John Jay, United States
Minister to the Court of Madrid, who had come to Cadiz with his wife in
the _Confederacy_ frigate. Minister Jay put the sick man in a hospital
while the others sought chances to work their way home. They found in
the harbor an English brig which had captured an American ship and
was then in her turn retaken by the Yankee crew who had risen upon
the prize crew. According to Luther Little this Yankee mate, Morgan
by name, was a first-class fighting man, for he had sailed the brig
into Cadiz, flying the Stars and Stripes, with only a boy or two to
help him. She carried twelve guns and needed a heavy crew to risk the
passage home to Cape Ann.

Reinforced by the captain and crew of another American vessel which had
been taken by an English frigate, Luther Little’s party sought Minister
Jay and explained the situation. They could work their passage in the
brig, but they had no provisions. Would he help them? Mr. Jay made this
singular compact, that he would give them provisions if they would sign
a document promising to pay for the stores at the Navy Yard in Boston,
or to serve aboard a Continental ship until the debt was worked out.
All hands signed this paper by which they put themselves in pawn to
serve their country’s flag, and the brig sailed from Cadiz.

After thirty days they were on George’s Bank where they lay becalmed
while an English privateer swept down toward them with sweeps out. A
commander was chosen by vote, decks cleared for action, and two guns
shifted over to the side toward the privateer. “The captain ordered
his crew to quarters. When the privateer came up to us we gave her a
broadside; she fired upon us, then dropped astern and came up on the
larboard side,” so Little describes it. “As soon as the guns would bear
upon her we gave her another broadside. They returned the same. The
privateer schooner giving up the contest, dropped astern and made off,
we giving her three cheers.”

Without mishap the brig arrived off Cape Ann, and continued on to
Boston. There Luther Little obtained money from friends and paid off
his share of the debt to the Navy Board. He was the only one of the
eleven of his party who redeemed themselves, however, the others going
aboard Continental cruisers as stipulated by the shrewd Minister Jay
who, in this fashion, secured almost a dozen lusty seamen for the navy.

“Once more I reached home entirely destitute,” comments Luther Little,
who tarried on his father’s farm a few weeks, and then once more
“bade home and those dear to me, adieu.” This was in the year 1780.
He entered on board the United States ship _Protector_, of twenty-six
guns and 230 men, as midshipman and prizemaster. Her commander was John
Foster Williams, and her first lieutenant, George Little, was a brother
of our hero. Their names deserve remembrance, for the _Protector_
fought one of the most heroic and desperate engagements of the
Revolution of which Midshipman Little shall tell you in his own words:

“We lay off in Nantasket Roads making ready for a six months’ cruise,
and put to sea early in April of 1780. Our course was directed
eastward, keeping along the coast till we got off Mount Desert, most
of the time in a dense fog, without encountering friend or foe. On the
morning of June ninth, the fog began to clear away, and the man at the
masthead gave notice that he discovered a ship to the windward of us.
We perceived her to be a large ship under English colors, standing down
before the wind for us. We were on the leeward side.

“As she came down upon us she appeared to be as large as a
seventy-four. The captain and lieutenant were looking at her through
their glasses, and after consulting decided that she was not an English
frigate but a large king’s packet ship, and the sooner we got alongside
of her the better. The boatswain was ordered to pipe all hands to
quarters, and clear the ship for action. Hammocks were brought up and
stuffed into the nettings, decks wet and sanded, matches lighted and
burning, bulkheads hooked up.

“We were not deceived respecting her size. It afterwards proved she was
of eleven hundred tons burden, a Company ship which had cruised in the
West Indies for some time and then took a cargo of sugar and tobacco at
St. Kitts bound to London. She carried thirty-six twelve-pounders upon
the gun deck, and was furnished with two hundred and fifty men, and
was called the _Admiral Duff_, Richard Strange, master. We were to the
leeward of her and standing to the northward under cruising sail. She
came down near us, and aimed to pass us and go ahead. After passing by
to the leeward she hove to under fighting colors. We were all this time
under English colors and observed her preparing for action. Very soon I
heard the sailing master call for his trumpet:

“‘Let fall the foresail, sheet home the main topgallant sail.’

“We steered down across her stern, and hauled up under her lee quarter.
At the same time we were breeching our guns aft to bring her to bear.
Our first lieutenant possessed a very powerful voice; he hailed the
ship from the gang-board and enquired:

“‘What ship is that?’

“He was answered ‘The _Admiral Duff_.’

“‘Where are you from and where bound?’

“‘From a cruise bound to London,’ they answered, and then enquired:
‘What ship is that?’

“We gave no answer. The captain ordered a broadside given, and colors
changed at the first flash of a gun, and as the thirteen stripes took
the place of the English ensign they gave us three cheers and fired a
broadside. They partly shot over us, their ship being so much higher
than ours, cutting away some of our rigging. The action commenced
within pistol shot and now began a regular battle, broadside to
broadside.

“After we had engaged one half hour there came in a cannon ball through
the side and killed Mr. Scollay, one of our midshipmen. He commanded
the fourth twelve-pounder from the stern, I commanded the third.
The ball took him in the head. His brains flew upon my gun and into
my face. The man at my gun who rammed down the charge was a stout
Irishman. Immediately on the death of Mr. Scollay he stripped himself
of his shirt and exclaimed:

“‘An’ faith, if they kill me they shall tuck no rags into my insides.’

“The action continued about an hour when all the topmen on board
the enemy’s ship were killed by our marines, who were seventy in
number, all Americans. Our marines also killed the man at the wheel,
caused the ship to come down upon us, and her cat-head stove in our
quarter-gallery.

“We lashed their jib-boom to our main-shrouds, and our marines from the
quarterdeck firing into their port holes kept them from charging. We
were ordered from our quarters to board, but before we were able the
lashings broke. We were ordered back to quarters to charge our guns
when the other ship shooting alongside of us, the yards nearly locked.
We gave her a broadside which cut away her mizzen mast and made great
havoc among them. We perceived her sinking, at the same time saw that
her main topgallant sail was on fire, which ran down the rigging and
caught a hogshead of cartridges under the quarterdeck and blew it up.

“At this time from one of their forward guns there came into the port
where I commanded a charge of grape shot. With three of them I was
wounded, one between my neck bone and windpipe, one through my jaw
lodging in the roof of my mouth, and taking off a piece of my tongue,
the third through the upper lip, taking away part of the lip and all of
my upper teeth. I was immediately taken to the cockpit, to the surgeon.
My gun was fired only once afterward; I had fired nineteen times. I
lay unattended to, being considered mortally wounded and was past by
that the wounds of those more likely to live might be dressed. I was
perfectly sensible and heard the surgeon’s remark:

“‘Let Little lay. Attend to the others first. He will die.’

[Illustration: Captain Luther Little

(The scars and disfigurement left by wounds received in the action with
the _Admiral Duff_ have been faithfully reproduced by the painter)]

“Perceiving me motion to him he came to me and began to wash off
the blood, and dress my wound. After dressing the lip and jaw he
was turning from me. I put my hand to my neck, and he returned and
examined my neck, pronouncing it the deepest wound of the three. I bled
profusely, the surgeon said two gallons.

“By this time the enemy’s ship was sunk and nothing was to be seen of
her. She went down on fire with colours flying. Our boats were injured
by the shots and our carpenters were repairing them in order to pull
out and pick up the men of the English that were afloat. They succeeded
in getting fifty-five, one half wounded and scalded.

“The first lieutenant told me that such was their pride when on the
brink of a watery grave, that they fought like demons, preferring death
with the rest of their comrades rather than captivity, and that it was
with much difficulty that many of them were forced into the boats. Our
surgeon amputated limbs from five of the prisoners, and attended them
as if they had been of our own crew. One of the fifty-five was then
sick with the West Indies fever and had floated out of his hammock
between decks. The weather was excessively warm and in less than ten
days sixty of our men had taken the epidemic.

“The _Admiral Duff_ had two American captains, with their crews, on
board as prisoners. These (the captains) were among the fifty-five
saved by our boats. One of them told Captain Williams that he was with
Captain Strange when our vessel hove in sight, that he asked him what
he thought of her, and told him he thought her one of the Continental
frigates. Captain Strange thought not, but he wished she might be; at
any rate were she only a Salem privateer she would be a clever little
prize to take home with him. During the battle while Captain Williams
was walking the quarterdeck a shot from the enemy took his speaking
trumpet from his hand, but he picked it up and with great calmness
continued his orders.[11]

“We sailed for the coast of Nova Scotia near to Halifax. After cruising
there about a week we discovered a large ship steering for us, and
soon discovered her to be an English frigate. We hove about and ran
from her, our men being sick, we did not dare to engage her. This was
at four o’clock in the afternoon. The frigate gained on us fast. When
she came up near us we fired four stern chasers, and kept firing. When
she got near our stern she luffed and gave us a broadside which did no
other damage save lodging one shot in the mainmast and cutting away
some rigging. We made a running fight until dark, the enemy choosing
not to come alongside. In the evening she left us and hauled her wind
to the southward and we for the north.”

The captain of the _Protector_ needed wood and water and so set sail
for the Maine coast where he landed his invalids, converting a farmer’s
barn into a temporary hospital with the surgeon’s mate in charge.
While the cruiser lay in harbor Luther Little’s sense of humor would
not permit this incident to go unforgotten:

“Among our crew was a fellow half Indian and half negro who coveted
a fatted calf belonging to a farmer on the shore. His evil genius
persuaded him to pilfer the same, but he could find only one man
willing to assist him. Cramps, which was the negro’s name, took a boat
one evening and went on shore to commit the depredation. He secured the
victim and returned to the ship without discovery. He arrived under
the ship’s bows and called for his partner in crime to lower the rope
to hoist the booty on board, but his fellow conspirator had dodged
below and it so happened that the first lieutenant was on deck. Cramps,
thinking it was his co-worker in iniquity, hailed him in a low voice,
asking him to do as he had agreed and that damned quick.

“The lieutenant, thinking that something out of the way was going on,
obeyed the summons. Cramps fixed the noose around the calf’s neck, and
cried:

“‘Pull away, blast your eyes. My back is almost broke carrying the
crittur so far on the land. Give us your strength on the water.’

“The lieutenant obeyed, and Cramps, boosting in the rear, the victim
was soon brought on deck. Cramps jumped on board and found both himself
and the calf in possession of the lieutenant. Next morning the thief
was ordered to shoulder the calf and march to the farmer and ask
forgiveness, and take the reward of his sins which was fifty lashes.”

So seriously had Midshipman Little been raked with the three grape shot
that he was sent home to recover his strength, and he did not rejoin
the _Protector_ until her second cruise five months later. After taking
several prizes between the New England coast and the West Indies,
she sailed for Charleston. One afternoon a sail was sighted to the
leeward. “We wore around,” says the narrative, “and made sail in chase,
found we gained fast upon her and at sunset we could see her hull. When
night shut in we lost sight of her. There came over us a heavy cloud
with squalls of thunder and lightning and by the flashes we discovered
the ship which had altered her course. We hauled our wind in chase and
were soon alongside. The next flash of lightning convinced us she was
of English colours. We hailed her. She answered ‘from Charleston bound
to Jamaica,’ and inquired where we were from. The first lieutenant
shouted back:

“‘The _Alliance_, United States frigate.’

“Our men were all at quarters and lanterns burning at every port. Our
captain told him to haul down his colours, and heave to. There was no
answer. We fired three twelve pounders. He called out and said he had
struck. Captain Williams asked why he did not shorten sail and heave
to. He replied that his men had gone below and would not come up. Our
barge was lowered, a prize crew and master put on board and we took
possession of the ship. She proved to be of eight hundred tons burden,
with three decks fore and aft carrying twenty-four nine-pounders and
manned with eighty men. We ordered her for Boston where she arrived
safe.”

This handsome capture was achieved by an audacious “bluff,” but this
cruise of the _Protector_ was fated to have a less fortunate ending. A
few days later another prize was taken and, lucky for Luther Little,
he was put aboard as prizemaster. While he was waiting in company with
the _Protector_ for his orders to proceed, the cruiser sighted another
sail and made off in chase. Prizemaster Little tried to follow her
until night shut down, and then as she showed no lights he gave up the
pursuit and shaped his course for Nantucket. At daylight next morning,
the mate who was standing his watch on deck, went below to inform
Skipper Little that two large ships were to the leeward. The latter
climbed aloft with his glass and made them out to be British frigates
in chase of the _Protector_. They took no notice of the prize a mile
to windward of them but pelted hard after the Yankee war ship and when
last seen she was in the gravest danger of capture.

Luther Little cracked on sail for Boston with his prize and upon
arriving called upon Governor John Hancock and told him in what a
perilous situation he had left the _Protector_. Ten days later the news
came that the cruiser had been taken by the _Roebuck_ and _Mayday_
frigates and carried into New York.

Luther Little, having escaped with the skin of his teeth, forsook
the service of the United States and like many another stout seaman
decided to try his fortune privateering. Captain William Orme, a Salem
merchant, offered him the berth of lieutenant aboard the letter of
marque brig _Jupiter_. She was a formidable vessel, carrying twenty
guns and a hundred and fifty men. From Salem, that wasp’s nest of
Revolutionary privateersmen, the _Jupiter_ sailed for the West Indies.
Captain Orme went in his ship, but while he was a successful shipping
merchant, he was not quite a dashing enough comrade for so seasoned a
sea-dog as this young Luther Little. To the windward of Turk’s Island
they sighted a large schooner which showed no colors.

“Our boatswain and gunner had been prisoners a short time before in
Jamaica,” says Lieutenant Little, “and they told Captain Orme that she
was the _Lyon_ schooner, bearing eighteen guns. Our boatswain piped
all hands to quarters and we prepared for action. Captain Orme, not
being acquainted with a warlike ship, told me I must take the command,
advising me to run from her. I told him in thus doing we should surely
be taken. I ordered the men in the tops to take in the studding-sails.
We then ran down close to her, luffed, and gave her a broadside,
which shot away both of her topmasts. She then bore away and made sail
and ran from us, we in chase. We continued thus for three hours, then
came alongside. I hailed and told them to shorten sail or I’d sink
them on the spot. Our barge was lowered and I boarded her; all this
time she had no colours set. I hailed our ship and told Captain Orme I
thought her a clear prize, and bade the men prepare to board her. But
the captain hailed for the boat to return. I obeyed and told him she
had a good many men and several guns. The captain said he would have
nothing to do with her, as he feared they might rise upon us. Much to
my reluctance we left her.”

After having thirty men of the crew violently ill at one time in the
fever-stricken harbor of Port au Prince, the letter of marque _Jupiter_
was freighted with sugar and coffee and set out for Salem. Dodging two
English frigates cruising for prizes in the Crooked Island passage, she
passed a small island upon which some kind of signal appeared to be
hoisted.

“I was in my hammock quite unwell,” relates Lieutenant Little of the
_Jupiter_. “The captain sent for me on deck and asked me if I thought
a vessel had been cast away on the island. After spying attentively
with my glasses, I told him it was no doubt a wreck, and that I could
discover men on the island, that probably they were in distress. I
advised him to send a boat and take them off. He said the boat should
not go unless I went in her. I told him I was too sick, to send Mr.
Leach, our mate. He would not listen to me. I went. We landed at the
leeward of the island, and walked toward the wreck, when ten men came
towards us. They were the captain and crew of the unfortunate vessel.
They were much moved at seeing us, said they were driven ashore on
the island and had been there ten days without a drop of water. By
this time Captain Orme had hove a signal for our return, there being a
frigate in chase. Going to the ship the wrecked captain, who was an
old man named Peter Trott, asked me where our vessel was from. I told
him we were bound to Salem, and he was quite relieved, fearing we were
an English man-of-war. We came alongside and the boat was hoisted up
and every sail set, the frigate in chase. She gained upon us and at
dark was about a league astern. The clouds were thick and I told the
captain we were nearly in their power, our only chance being to square
away and run to the leeward across the Passage, it being so thick that
they could not discover us with their night glasses. We lay to until we
thought the frigate had passed, made sail toward morning, and fetched
through the Passage.”

After this voyage Luther Little became captain of a large brig which
had a roundhouse and was steered by a wheel which was uncommon for
merchantmen in those days. He had one terrific winter passage home from
the West Indies, fetched up off the Massachusetts coast with every man
of his crew but one helplessly frozen, and his vessel half full of
water. With his one lone seaman he was blown off to sea, and at length
ran his waterlogged craft ashore on the Maine coast. Nothing daunted,
he worked her down to Boston, after being frozen up and adrift in ice,
and sending ashore for men to help him pump out his hold.

“Here at this era of my life, the wheel of fortune turned,” he makes
comment. “The last seventeen years had been spent mostly on the wide
waters. I had passed through scenes at which the heart shrinks as
memory recalls them; but now the scene changed. Ill luck was ended.”

Thereafter Captain Luther Little continued in the West India trade
until he had made twenty-four successful voyages, “always bringing back
every man, even to cook and boy.” After this he shifted to the commerce
with Russia, making six yearly voyages to St. Petersburg at a time when
the American flag was almost unknown in that port.

“During one of these voyages,” he recounts, “when off Norway in a cold
snow storm lying to, a man on the main yard handling the mainsail
fell overboard, went under the vessel, and came up on the lee side. I
was then on the quarterdeck, caught a hen coop, and threw it into the
ocean. He succeeded in getting hold of it. I then ordered topsails hove
aback, and to cut away the lashings of the yawl. The man not being in
sight I ordered the boat to pull to windward. They succeeded in taking
him and brought him on board. He was alive though unable to speak
or stand. I had him taken into the cabin, and by rubbing and giving
him something hot, he was soon restored to duty. I asked him what he
thought his fate would be when overboard. He said that he tried the hen
coop lying to and found that would not answer. Then he thought he would
try it scudding, and ‘sir,’ he answered, ‘if you had not sent your boat
just as you did, I should have borne away for the coast of Norway.’”

When his sea life ended at the age of forty-one, Captain Luther Little
could say with a very worthy pride:

“In all my West India and Russian voyaging I never lost a man, never
carried away a spar, nor lost a boat or anchor.”

In 1799, before the opening of the nineteenth century, this sturdy
Yankee seaman, Luther Little, was ready to retire to his ancestral
farm in Marshfield where his great-grandfather had hewn a home in the
wilderness. In the prime of his vigor and capacity, having lived a
dozen lives afloat, he was content to spend forty-odd years more as a
New England farmer. And in his eighty-fifth year this old-fashioned
American sailor and patriot still sunny and resolute, was able to sit
down and describe the hazards through which he had passed just as they
are here told.

FOOTNOTES:

[11] In the log book of the _Protector_ Captain Williams described the
engagement as follows: “_June 9th, 1780._ At 7 A. M. saw a ship to the
Westward, we stood for her under English colours, the ship standing
athaught us, under English colours, appeared to be a large ship. At 11
came alongside of her, hailed her, she answered from Jamaica. I shifted
my colours and gave her a broadside; she soon returned us another.
The action was very heavy for near three Glasses, when she took fire
and blew up. Got out the Boats to save the men, took 55 of them, the
greatest part of them wounded with our shot and burnt when the ship
blew up. She was called the _Admiral Duff_ of 32 guns, Comman’d by
Richard Strang from St. Kitts and Eustatia, ladened with Sugar and
Tobacco, bound to London. We lost in the action one man, Mr. Benja.
Scollay and 5 wounded. Rec’d several shot in our Hull and several of
our shrouds and stays shot away.”

Ebenezer Fox who was a seaman aboard the _Protector_ related: “We
ascertained that the loss of the enemy was prodigious, compared with
ours. This disparity, however, will not appear so remarkable when it is
considered that, although their ship was larger than ours, it was not
so well supplied with men; having no marines to use the musket, they
fought with their guns alone, and as their ship lay much higher out
of the water than ours, the greater part of their shot went over us,
cutting our rigging and sails without injuring our men. We had about
seventy marines who did great execution with their muskets, picking off
the officers and men with a sure and deliberate aim.”

CHAPTER VII

THE JOURNAL OF WILLIAM RUSSELL

(1776-1783)

An attempt to portray the seafaring life of our forefathers would be
signally incomplete without some account of the misfortunes endured
when the American privateersman or man-of-war’s-man was the loser in an
encounter on blue water. During the Revolution, when privateers were
swarming from every port from Maine to the Carolinas, scores of them
were captured by superior force and their crews carried off to be laid
by the heels, often for two and three years, in British prisons of war.
Brilliant as was the record of the private armed ships of Salem, her
seamen, in large numbers, became acquainted with the grim walls of Old
Mill Prison at Plymouth and Forton Prison near Portsmouth.

They were given shorter rations than the French, Spanish and Dutch
prisoners of war with whom they were confined, and they were treated
as rebels and traitors and committed as such. Manuscript narratives
of their bitter experiences as preserved in Salem show that these
luckless seamen managed to maintain hope, courage and loyalty to a most
inspiring degree, although theirs was the hardest part to play that can
be imagined. Many of them shipped again in privateer or Continental
cruiser as soon as they were released and served their country until
the end of the war.

As recalling this prison life in a personal and intimate way, the
subjoined journal of William Russell is quoted at considerable length
although he was not a native of Salem. He sailed and was captured
in a ship commanded by Captain John Manley, of Marblehead; however,
he met many masters and seamen of Salem vessels during his years of
confinement in Old Mill Prison, and his journal came at length into
the hands of his grandson, James Kimball of Salem. What he suffered in
prison and how heartily he hated his captors and their nation can be
compactly concluded from these vitriolic verses of his:

_“Great Mars with me, come now and view, this more than Hellish crew!
Great Vulcan send your thunder forth, and all their fields bestrew!
Rain on their heads perpetual fire in one eternal flame:
Let black destruction be their doom, dishonor’d be their name:
Send mighty bolts to strike the traitors, North and Mansfield, dead:
And liquid fires to scald the crown from Royal George’s head:
Strike all their young posterity, with one eternal curse.
Nor pity them, no more than they, have ever pitied us!_

One hundred and thirty years ago William Russell was earning a humdrum
livelihood as an usher in a “public school” of Boston taught by one
Master Griffith. Whatever else he may have drilled into the laggard
minds of his scholars, it is certain that the young usher did not try,
by ferrule or precept, to inspire loyalty for their gracious sovereign,
King George and his flag. It is recorded that “he was of an ardent
temperament and entered with great zeal into the political movement
of the Colonies,” and was early enrolled among the “Sons of Liberty,”
which organization preached rebellion and resistance to England long
before the first clash of arms. At the age of twenty-three this
undignified school teacher was one of the band of lawless patriots who,
painted and garbed as red Indians, dumped a certain famous cargo of tea
into Boston Harbor.

When a British fleet and army took possession of seething Boston,
Master Griffith had to look for another usher, for William Russell had
“made himself obnoxious to the ‘authorities,’” and found it advisable
to betake himself with his family to places not so populous with red
coats.

His active service in the cause of the Revolution did not begin until
June of 1777, when the Massachusetts State’s Train of Artillery for
the defense of Boston was reorganized, and the first entry in the
regimental orderly book was in the handwriting of Sergeant Major
William Russell; a roll of the officers which included the name of
“Paul Revere, Lieutenant Colonel.”

Sergeant Major Russell was later appointed adjutant of this regiment
and served in the Rhode Island campaign until the end of the year 1778.
Thereafter that “ardent temperament” in his country’s cause led him to
seek the sea, and the artillery officer entered the naval service as a
captain’s clerk on board the Continental ship _Jason_ under the famous
Captain John Manley of Marblehead. They were sure of hard fighting who
sailed with John Manley. While in command of the frigate _Hancock_ he
had taken the British twenty-eight-gun frigate Fox after a severe and
bloody action. Later, in the privateer _Cumberland_, he had suffered
the misfortune of being carried into Barbados by the British frigate
_Pomona_, but breaking out of jail with his men at night he seized a
British government vessel, put her crew in irons, and sailed her to
the United States. Reaching Boston, Captain Manley was given the fine
Continental cruiser _Jason_, of twenty guns and a hundred and twenty
men.

It was this vessel and its dashing commander which lured young William
Russell from his military service. But the _Jason_ was captured during
Captain Manley’s first cruise in her by the swift British frigate
_Surprise_ after a hammer and tongs engagement in which the American
loss was thirty killed and wounded. Carried as prisoners to England,
the officers and some of the men of the _Jason_ were thrown into Old
Mill Prison at Plymouth where William Russell kept the journal which
is by far the most complete and entertaining account of the experience
of the Revolutionary privateersmen and naval seamen who suffered
capture that has been preserved.

After two and a half years’ confinement in a British prison, William
Russell, having left a wife and children at home, was exchanged and
sent to Boston in a cartel, or vessel under a flag of truce. He enjoyed
his homecoming no more than a few days when he re-entered the service
of his country as a privateersman and was again captured during his
first cruise, and sent to the notorious prison ship _Jersey_ in New
York harbor. He was not paroled until the spring of 1783, when with
health shattered by reason of his years of hardship as a prisoner
of war he returned to Cambridge and endeavored to resume his old
occupation of teaching. He mustered a few scholars at his home in the
“Light House Tavern,” but consumption had gripped him and he died in
the following year, on March 7, 1784, at the age of thirty-five. He had
given the best years of his life to his country and he died for its
cause with as much indomitable heroism and self-sacrificing devotion as
though musket ball or boarding pike had slain him.

The Journal of William Russell’s long captivity in Mill Prison begins
as follows:[12]

“Dec. 19, 1779. This morning the Boatswain told us to get ready to go
on shore to be examined. Went to the Fountain Inn Dock. Examined by two
Justices and committed to Mill Prison in Plymouth for Piracy, Treason
and Rebellion against His Majesty on the High Sea.[13] This evening
came to the Prison, finding 168 Americans among whom was Captain
Manley and some more of my acquaintances. Our diet is short, only ¾
pound of beef, 1 lb. of bread, 1 qt. of beer per day per man.”

[Illustration: The East India Marine Society’s hall, now the home of
the Peabody Museum]

[Illustration: Page from the records of the East India Marine Society,
written in 1799]

Much of this vivacious journal is occupied with the stories of
attempted escapes from the prison. The punishment was severe, but
nothing could daunt the high spirits of these Yankee seamen who were
continually burrowing through the walls, gnawing their way to liberty
like so many beavers, and now and then scoring a success. This appears
to have been their chief diversion, a warfare of wits waged against
their guards, with considerable good humor on both sides. Less than two
weeks after his commitment William Russell records, January 1, 1780:
“Made a breach in the wall of the Prison, with the design of escaping,
but it was discovered by the Sentinel on the other side. The masons
were sent to mend it but it being dinner time they left for dinner and
two Sentinels were placed to prevent our escape. Eight of our men put
on frocks and took mortar and daubed their clothing, going through the
hole as workmen. One of them came back into the yard undiscovered, but
the rest were taken or gave themselves up.

“Jan. 7th. Began another hole at the south end of the prison. The dirt
was put in our bread sacks which was the occasion of our being found
out. The masons were sent for and the hole stopped again. Richard Goss,
Jacob Vickary, Samuel Goss and John Stacey were put upon one half diet
and confined to the Black Hole for forty days.

“Jan. 28th. Began upon the same again and tho’ the two Sentinels were
kept with us all night, and two lamps burning, we went on with it with
great success. The weather being very rainy and frost in the ground
which thawed just as we were going through, the Sentinel marching on
his post broke into the hole that ran across the road. Immediately the
guard was alarmed and came into the prison, some with guns, some with
cutlasses. However we got to our hammocks and laughed at them. One
of the prisoners threw a bag of stones down stairs and liked to have
killed a drummer. The hole was mended next day and all hopes of our
escape is at an end. Very bad weather and very dark times.”

The attention of these energetic prisoners was diverted from more
attempts to break through the walls by the tidings of the arrival of
a cartel or vessel sent to take home exchanged Americans. The list of
“Pardons,” as the journal calls them, did not include Captain Manley
and the men of the _Jason_, and on March 5th it is related:

“One hundred embarked to-day in the cartel for France, we remained in
good spirits. I wrote a petition to the Honourable Commissioners for
taking care of Sick and Hurt Seamen at London, in Captain Manley’s
name, to obtain His Majesty’s pardon for nineteen Americans that came
after the 168 that were pardoned, that we might be ready to go in the
next draft. The cartel sailed and we are awaiting her return with great
expectation of being released from this disagreeable confinement.”

The story of their bitter disappointment is told in a letter written by
William Russell to his wife in Boston at this time. This true-hearted
patriot was much concerned about the fortunes of his fighting
countrymen, news of whom was filtering into Mill Prison in the form of
belated and distorted rumors. He wrote:

“MY DEAR:

“I transmit these few lines to you with my best love, hoping by the
blessing of God they will find you and my children, with our Mother,
Brother and Sisters, and all relations in as good state of health as
they leave me, but more composed in mind. I desire to bless Almighty
God for the measure of health I have enjoyed since this year came in,
as I have not had but one twenty-four hours’ illness, tho’ confined in
this disagreeable prison, forgotten as it seems by my Countrymen.

“My dear, in my last letter sent by Mr. Daniel Lane, I mentioned my
expectation of being at home this summer (but how soon are the hopes of
vain man disappointed), and indeed everything promised fair for it till
the return of the Cartel from France which was the 20th of last month.
We expected then to be exchanged, but to our sorrow found that she
brought no prisoners back. She lay some weeks in Stone Pool waiting for
orders, till at last orders came from the Board at London that she was
suspended until such time as they knew why the prisoners were not sent.
Then all hope of our being exchanged was and still is at an end, except
kind Providence interposes.

“It is very evident that the People here are in no wise blameable, for
they were ready and willing to exchange us, had there been anybody
sent from France. We have been informed by one of our friends that saw
a letter from Doctor Franklin which mentioned that the reason of our
not being exchanged was owing to the neglect of Monsieur Le Sardine,
Minister at France. If so I shall never love a Frenchman. However, God
only knows!

“I understand Mr. John Adams has superseded Doctor Franklin at France,
to whom I am going to write if he can’t get us exchanged this Fall. If
he don’t I think many in the yard will enter into the King’s service.
And I should myself, was it not that (by so doing) _I must sell my
Country, and that which is much more dearer to me, yourself and my
children_, but I rely wholly on God, knowing He will deliver me in His
own good time.

“I am extremely sorry to hear that Charleston is taken. Had our people
beat them there the War would have been over, for that was all their
dependence. They would have readily granted us our Independence for
they are sick of the War. It is not too late yet if the people in
America would turn out in good spirit, as they might soon drive them
off the Earth.”

The foregoing letter was written in April, 1780, and Charleston was
not captured by General Clinton’s army until May 12th. It was a false
report, therefore, which brought grief to the heart of William Russell
and his comrades, and must have been born of the fact that Clinton was
preparing to make an overland march against Charleston from his base at
Savannah. The history of two and a half years of the Revolution as it
was conveyed to the Americans in Mill Prison in piecemeal and hearsay
rumors was a singularly grotesque bundle of fiction and facts.

No sooner was the hope of exchange shattered than the industrious
Americans were again absorbed in the game of playing hide-and-seek with
the prison guard. On April 11th, William Russell goes on to say in his
matter-of-fact fashion:

“This evening Captain Manley and six others got over the sink dill
wall and went across the yard into the long prison sink and got over
the wall, except Mr. Patten who seeing somebody in the garden he was
to cross was afraid to go down the wall by the rope. He came back and
burst into the prison by the window, frightening the Sentinel who was
placed to prevent escapes. He in turn alarmed the guard, but by this
time the rest had got into Plymouth, and being late at night they took
shelter in Guildhall. The guard finding a rope over the wall knew that
somebody had made their escape. They surrounded Plymouth, made a
search and found Captain Manley, Mr. Drummond, Knight, Neagle and Pike,
and put them into the Black Hole that night.”

A more cheering item of news found its way into the journal under date
of June 27th:

“Somerset Militia mounted guard. Have just heard from a friend that
Captain Paul Jones had taken two Frigates, one Brig and a Cutter.”

There is something fine and inspiriting in the following paragraph
which speaks for itself:

“July 4, 1780. To-day being the Anniversary of American Independence,
the American prisoners wore the thirteen Stars and Stripes drawn on
pieces of paper on their hats with the motto, _Independence, Liberty
or Death_. Just before one o’clock we drew up in line in the yard and
gave Thirteen Cheers for the Thirteen United States of America and were
answered by the French prisoners. The whole was conducted in a decent
manner and the day spent in mirth.”

It is the more to be regretted that Mr. Patten and one John Adams
should have chosen this day to turn traitor and enlist on board the
British sixty-four gun ship _Dunkirk_ “after abusing Captain Manley
in a shameful manner.” To atone for their desertion of their flag,
however, there is the shining instance of one Pike as told on July 26th:

“When we were turning in at sunset some high words arose between the
soldiers and our people. An officer and two men came to the window and
asked if we were English, and began to use uncivil language. Upon which
Pike said he was an Englishman and was taken by the Americans in the
first of the war, and would fight for them as long as they had a vessel
afloat. They called him a rascal and threatened to put him in the Black
Hole. We laughed at them and told them there were more rascals outside
than in. They went out of the yard and soon returned with six or seven
more soldiers to put Pike into the Black Hole, but not knowing him they
seized on several and let them go. They searched the prison, and we
told them that if they confined one they should confine all. Whereupon
they went out again and we clapped our hands at them and gave them
three Cheers.”

Late in July the master, mate and crew of the American Letter of
Marque _Aurora_ were brought into the prison, increasing the number of
American prisoners to an even hundred. That England was fighting the
world at large during this period appears in the muster roll of Mill
Prison which included also 287 French and 400 Spanish seamen.

The capture of Henry Laurens, formerly President of the Congress of the
United States and recently appointed Minister to Holland, was a matter
of great interest to the Yankee seamen in Mill Prison, and the diarist
has this to say about it in his journal for September, 1780:

“10th. A frigate arrived last Friday at Dartmouth from New Foundland
and brought three Americans as prisoners. One was Henry Laurens, Esq.,
of South Carolina who was taken in a tobacco-laden vessel which sailed
with a fleet of twelve from Virginia.

“Mr. Laurens, Esq., late President of the Congress of the United States
but now Ambassador to Holland, and his clerk, were committed to the
Tower after a spirited speech.”

“Sept. 30, 1780. _To-day I am twelve Months a Prisoner and fourteen
Months since I left Home._”

Thus ends the chronicle of the first year of William Russell’s wearing
exile in Old Mill Prison, the story of a brave and patient man who
showed far more concern for the cause of his fellow patriots at home
than for his own hapless plight and separation from his loved ones.
Crew after crew of American privateering vessels had been brought into
the prison, and most of this unfortunate company seem to have been of
a dauntless and cheerful temper. They had tried one hazard of escape
after another, only to be flung into the “Black Hole” with the greatest
regularity. And whereas in other British jails and in their prison
ships there were scenes of barbarous oppression and suffering, these
sea-dogs behind the gray walls at Plymouth appear to have been on terms
of considerable friendliness with their guards, except for the frequent
and painful excursions to the “Black Hole.” The Americans, however,
took their punishment as a necessary evil following on the heels of
their audacious excursions over and through the prison walls.

Christmastide of 1780 brought a large addition to the prison company,
eighty-six Frenchmen from Quebec and nine Americans belonging to the
privateerships _Harlequin_ and _Jack_ of Salem and the _Terrible_ of
Marblehead. All hands found cause for rejoicing that war was declared
between Holland and England, and the journal makes mention on December
25th:

“To-day being Christmas and the happy news of the Dutch War, I drew
up the Americans in the yard at one o’clock to Huzza in the following
manner: Three times for France; three times for Spain; and seven times
for the seven states of Holland. The French in the other yard answered
us and the whole was performed in a decent manner.

“28th. Captain Samuel Gerrish made his escape over the wall into the
French prison. He remained in the French prison all night and went off
about eight o’clock this morning. We were informed that Captain Gerrish
got the French barber to dress his hair this morning in the prison. A
little while after, Mr. Cowdry with some French officers came into the
yard, and when they retired Captain Gerrish placed himself among them,
and went out bowing to the Agent who did not know him. He has not been
heard of since. The Agent ordered all the prisoners shut up at noon.
After dinner we were all called over, but no Captain Gerrish. The Agent
is pretty good-natured. Mr. Saurey brought us our money, and says he
has enough for us all winter.

“Dec. 31st. We have now 122 Dutch prisoners. The year closes at twelve
o’clock midnight; _and we still in prison_.

“1781. Jany. 1st. A Sentinel informed Captain Manley to-day that a
Minister in Cornwall had been in a trance and when he came out said
that England would be reduced and lose two Capital places or Cities,
and that in the run of a year there would be Peace.

“3d. To-day eighteen or twenty of the Americans innoculated themselves
for the Small Pox. Mr. Saurey came to-day and brought our money which
is augmented to a Shilling a week and to be continued during our
confinement. Such as are necessitated for clothes Captain Connyngham is
to make a list of and Mr. Saurey[14] will send it to Mr. Diggs[15] at
London in order to obtain them.

“Feb. 4th (Sunday). This morning Captain Manley communicated to me
that he had received a great deal of abuse from Captain Daniel Brown
and was determined to have satisfaction by giving him a challenge to
fight a duel with pistols, and desired me to load them. Accordingly
Captain Manley[16] went into the chamber and took his pistols with
ammunition and put them on the table and told Captain Brown that he had
been ill-treated and desired him to fight like a Gentleman or ask his
pardon. Brown said he would not ask his pardon and refused to accept
the challenge, upon which Captain Manley told him he was no Gentleman
but a great Coward, and bid him have a caution how he made use of his
name again.

“28th. Read the speech of Sir P. Clark in the House of Commons,
reported in the Sherbourne _Gazette_, who said that the American
refugees, _instead of a Prison ought to have a Halter_.

“An Agent from Congress with proposals is undoubtedly in London at
this time and it is whispered that his terms will be agreed to by the
English Cabinet.

“March 4th. Wrote a letter to my wife and mother.”

The letter referred to has been preserved and reads in part:

“MILL PRISON, MARCH 4, 1781.

“Notwithstanding my long confinement, I bless God that I have not
experienced the want of any of the necessaries of life in this prison,
for with my industry[17] and what I am allowed, I live comfortably for
a prisoner.

“The usage we receive, if I am any judge, is very good, for we are
allowed the liberty of the yard all day and an open market at the
gate to buy or sell, from nine o’clock in the morning to two in the
afternoon, besides we have comfortable lodgings. I have never been
in the Black Hole once, for I have made it my study to behave as a
prisoner ought and I am treated accordingly. Last year before this time
we had the pleasing prospect of an Exchange and one hundred went, but
to my inexpressible grief I see but little hope of being exchanged now
till the war is at an end. Where to lay the blame I’m at a loss, tho’
I think our People might do more than they do. However, I keep up good
spirits and still live in hopes as we are informed that something is
doing for us tho’ very slowly.”

In a letter written a week later and addressed also to his wife in
Boston, William Russell said:

“You can’t imagine the anxiety I have to hear from home, for my spirits
are depressed and I grow melancholy to think in what situation you
must be, with three young children to maintain. But I hope you will be
carried through all your trouble and remember that there is a God that
never suffers such as put their trust in Him to want.”

“May 4, 1781. Samuel Owens informed the Agent of the people’s
innoculating themselves for the Small Pox, upon which the Agent and
Doctor of the Royal Hospital came into the yard and searched the arms
of such as had been innoculated and took the names of the others to
report to the Board of Commissioners.

“May 5th. Samuel Owens, _Informer_, was cut down[18] last night upon
which he told the Agent that Mayo and Chase were the persons and that
they had threatened his life. The Agent threatened to put Mayo in
irons. However, upon Mayo’s shaking hands with Owens the matter was
settled.

“9th. An account from New York says that Connecticut and Massachusetts
are in the greatest disorder and almost starved, that their Treasuries
are exhausted and their Taxes so high that the People refuse to pay
them; that George Washington has advertised his Estate for Sale. _Thus
far for you, ye Lying Gazette!_

“Yesterday Captain Manley dressed himself with an intent to go _out_
at the Gate behind the Doctor. Just as he got past through the Gate,
the Turnkey looked him in the face, which prevented his escape. In the
afternoon Joseph Adams was dressed for the same purpose, which would
have been effected had not Captain Connyngham prevented. To-day a
lugger’s crew was brought to Prison, forty in number, mostly Americans.
Nothing more remarkable except the digging of a hole being discovered.

“May 18th. Lieutenant Joshua Barney made his escape over the gate at
noon, and has not been missed yet. Mr. James Adams got over the paling
into the little yard in order to escape but making too great a noise,
was discovered by the guard and was obliged to get back.

“19th. A tailor brought a suit of clothes to the prison for Lieutenant
Barney by which means his escape was discovered and we were mustered.
The Agent says he saw him at 12 o’clock this day, and has ordered us
to be locked in the yard all day, dinner time excepted. The way we
concealed his escape was when we were counted into the prison we put a
young boy out through the window and he was counted twice. So much for
one of our Mill Prison capers!”

This Lieutenant Joshua Barney, after whom one of the torpedo craft of
the modern American navy is named, made a brilliant sea record, both
as an officer of the naval service and as a fighting privateersman.
His escape from Mill Prison was perhaps the most picturesque incident
of his career. Although the story of his flight came back to William
Russell and his comrades only as a scanty report that he had made way
to sea, it is known from other sources that after leaving the prison
Lieutenant Barney found refuge in the home of a venerable clergyman
of Plymouth who sympathized with the American cause. There he was so
fortunate as to find two friends from New Jersey, Colonel William
Richardson, and Doctor Hindman, who had been captured as passengers in
a merchant vessel and were seeking an opportunity to return home. They
had bought a fishing smack in which they proposed sailing to France as
the first stage of their voyage.

Barney disguised himself as a fisherman and safely joined the smack
as pilot and seaman. They put to sea past the fleet of British
war vessels off Plymouth, and stood for the French coast. Alas, a
Guernsey privateer overhauled them in the Channel and insisted upon
searching the smack. Barney played a desperate game by throwing off his
fisherman’s great coat and revealing the uniform of a British officer.
He declared that he was bound for France on a secret and urgent
business of an official nature and demanded that he be suffered to
proceed on his course. The skipper of the privateer was suspicious and
stubborn, however, and the upshot of it was that the smack was ordered
back to Plymouth.

Making the best of the perilous situation, Barney insisted that he be
taken aboard the flagship of Admiral Digby, where “his captor would
find cause to repent of his rash enterprise.” Once in Plymouth harbor,
however, the American officer escaped to shore and after wandering far
and wide amid hairbreadth escapes from recapture found a haven in the
heavily wooded grounds of Lord Edgecomb’s estate. From this hiding
place he managed to return to the home of the clergyman whence he had
set out. Three days later, in another kind of disguise he took a post
chaise to Exeter, and from there fled by stage to Bristol, and so to
London, France and Holland.

In Holland Lieutenant Barney secured passage in the private armed
ship _South Carolina_, bound to Bilboa. In his diary, John Trumbull,
the famous American painter, pays a fine tribute to the seamanship of
Joshua Barney. The _South Carolina_ was caught in a terrific storm
which strewed the English Channel with shattered shipping. The vessel
was driving onto the coast of Heligoland, and almost helpless. “The
ship became unmanageable,” writes Trumbull, “the officers lost their
self-possession, and the crew all confidence in them, while for a few
moments all was confusion and dismay. Happily for us Commodore Barney
was among the passengers—he had just escaped from Mill Prison. Hearing
the increased tumult aloft, and feeling the ungoverned motion of the
ship, he flew upon deck, saw the danger, assumed command, the men
obeyed, and he soon had her again under control.”

Shortly after reaching America, Lieutenant Barney was offered
command of the _Hyder Ally_, a ship commissioned by the Pennsylvania
Legislature, mounting sixteen six-pounders and carrying one hundred and
twenty men. In this converted merchantman, hastily manned and equipped,
Barney won one of the most brilliant naval victories of the Revolution
against the _General Monk_ off the Capes of the Delaware.

FOOTNOTES:

[12] From manuscripts in the possession of the Essex Institute, Salem.

[13] The commitment proceedings in the case of William Russell were
conducted by two justices, and their findings read in part as follows:

“For as much as appears unto James Young and Ralph Mitchell, two of the
Justices of our Lord the King, assigned to keep the Peace within the
said county (of Devon) on the examination of William Russell, Mariner
late of the Colony of Massachusetts Bay in North America, a Prisoner
brought before us, charged with being found in Arms and Rebellion on
the High Seas on board the _Jason_ ship American Privateer, sailed out
of Boston in North America, and commissioned by the North American
Congress, which was taken by the _Surprise_, English Frigate;

“That the said William Russell was taken at Sea in the High Treason
Act committed on the High Seas, out of the Realm on the 29th day of
September last, being then and there found in Arms levying War, in
Rebellion and aiding the King’s Enemies, and was landed in Dartmouth in
the County of Devon, and the said William Russell now brought before
in the Parish of Stock Demereall aforesaid, charged with and to be
committed for the said offense to the Old Mill Prison in the Borough of
Plymouth.”

[14] In his “History of Prisons,” published in 1792, John Howard, the
philanthropist, mentions in an account of a visit to Forton Prison near
Portsmouth during the Revolution:

“The American prisoners there had an allowance from the States paid by
order of Dr. Franklin.”

The small payments of cash doled out to the American seamen in Mill
Prison were entrusted to this Miles Saurey, of London, by Benjamin
Franklin, at that time in France as Minister.

[15] Under date of “Passy, 25 June, 1782,” Franklin wrote his friend
Robert R. Livingston:

“I have long suffered with these poor brave men who with so much public
virtue have endured four or five years’ hard imprisonment rather than
serve against their country. I have done all I could toward making
their situation more comfortable but their numbers were so great that I
could do little for each, and that very great villain, Diggs, defrauded
them of between three and four hundred pounds, which he drew from me on
their account.”

[16] The diarist, oddly enough, fails to explain how Captain Manley
secured “his pistols with ammunition” while in prison.

[17] William Russell had organized a school among the prisoners soon
after his arrival at Plymouth. This school he taught during the two
years of his captivity and the small store of pence received as
“tuition fees” enabled him to buy many extras in the way of food and
clothing. There were many youngsters in the prison who had been taken
out of privateers as cabin-boys, powder-boys, etc., and lads of twelve
and thirteen were then shipping as full-fledged seamen to “fight the
British.” The prison schoolmaster helped keep these small firebrands
out of mischief.

[18] Meaning that the lashings of his hammock were cut.

CHAPTER VIII

THE JOURNAL OF WILLIAM RUSSELL (_concluded_)

(1779-1783)

June 5, 1782. Yesterday was ‘George the Foolish’s’ Birthday. The
Shipping and Forts fired Salutes at noon; Cowdry hoisted an English
Jack, and a _French_ one under it, and fired his Battery. In the
afternoon the Officers of the Guard took some of their men, and fired
the Cannon a number of times. In loading a piece, they did not stop the
vent, and fire took the cartridge before the rammer was out, and killed
one and wounded three of their men. A very melancholy circumstance has
happened, two to three hundred of us taken ill with a violent cold,
myself included. I still remain unwell, but something better; the men
in general are improving. I was taken with a violent pain in my head,
back, stomach and legs with a dry cough, but knowing the Doctor would
give me but one sort of medicine, let the ail be what it may, I thought
to use none of his drugs, but to trust the _Physician of Physicians_,
and use such means as I might think proper.

“One of our Men said to the Doctor,

“‘Doctor, I’ve a violent pain in my Head.’

“Reply: ‘Take some Mixture.’

“‘Doctor, I’ve a sour Stomach.’

“Reply: ‘Take some Mixture.’

“Doctor, ‘I’ve a violent Fever on me every Night.’

“Reply: ‘Take some Mixture.’

“In short let the disease be what it will, you must take his Mixture,
or Electuary. N. B.,—This Medicine is Salts and Jalap; his Electuary,
Conserve of Roses and Balsam. However, we have styled it Doctor Ball’s
Infallable Cure for all Manner of Diseases.

“6th. This morning the Doctor came and bled one of our men, and went
out without doing up his arm, or even saying what quantity of blood
should come from him. This is the second man he has stuck his lance in,
and left bleeding. I remain very ill, and the whole Prison is put on
Hospital diet, which is: 1 lb. of white bread, ½ pint of milk, ½ lb. of
mutton, ½ lb. of cabbage, and 1 quart of beer. By not hearing anything
of the Transports and with the violent pain in my head, I am almost
beside myself.”

Under date of Dec. 22, 1781, William Russell had set down in his
journal: “Mr. _Burke_ in the House of Commons, speaking of Hon. Mr.
Lauren’s ill treatment in the Tower, was told by Lord Newhaven, that if
he (Newhaven) had said as much, he should have expected to be put in
Mr. Lauren’s place. To whom Mr. Burke replied that he did not aspire
to such places, being a poor man he could not afford it; as for his
Lordship, he being a man of Fortune, such places would suit him best,
but a meaner prison would do for him, and he should think himself very
happy in any place, _if he had such agreeable Companions with him as
Mr. Laurens and Doctor Franklin_.

“General Burgoyne being asked in the House of Commons concerning his
not being Exchanged for Mr. Laurens said he would sooner return to
America, and spend his days in a Dungeon there than ask a favor of the
Ministry.”

After his surrender at Saratoga Major General Burgoyne was permitted
to return to England as a prisoner of war on parole. When the British
Government refused to release Henry Laurens from his imprisonment in
the Tower of London, the Congress of the United States demanded that
General Burgoyne be summoned to return to America to save his parole.
This retaliatory measure and the unusual circumstances of Mr. Lauren’s
confinement were discussed in Parliament in the debate referred to in
the foregoing entry of the journal.

“8th. This morning we had a quarrel with the old Guard. The Sergeant
was very insolent and went out and brought in a number of the Guard,
primed and loaded, but we did not value them, but took our own time in
turning out, after which we stoned and hooted them out of the Yard.
They presented twice but the Officer would not let them fire. We had
a sermon preached to us from the 22d Chap. 21st verse of Job, by My
Lady Huntingdon’s Chaplain, who came down from London on purpose
to preach our farewell sermon. Mr. Miles Saurey came with him, and
brought letters from Mr. Laurens to Captain Greene, informing him that
Lord Shelborn says we are to be sent away as soon as possible to our
respective States, and that such as have property in France are to be
paroled to leave for France.

“Mr. Laurens is to be Exchanged for Lord Cornwallis,[19] and will
leave the Kingdom in a few days. Mr. Laurens writes that we are to be
provided with necessaries for our voyage, and wishes us a good passage,
and safe return to our Native Land.

“14th. Mr. Saurey brought a letter from the Rev. Mr. Wren of
Portsmouth; the purport of which is that a Ship is Victualed and at
Portsmouth to carry the Americans belonging to the North to Boston, and
the men belonging to the Southward are to come around to Plymouth and
join the men in our Prison. They are expected to embarque in a week or
ten days.

“Mr. Pollard received a letter from Mr. John Joy formerly of Boston,
informing him that the Cartels were fitting out and were to sail the
next day, wind permitting. We are in high spirits, and hope soon to be
delivered from this Castle of Despair. I’m afraid we shall be detained
by contrary winds, for the wind keeps to the Westward and blows fresh,
which is against the vessels coming from the Downs.

“15th. We are informed by a letter from Mr. Joy to Jacob Homer, that
His Majesty has been pleased to pardon us, in order for our Exchange,
and that we are to be immediately delivered from this Awful place of
Confinement.

“We had an excellent sermon, by the Rev. Mr. Sampson, a Dissenter,
belonging in Cornwall, from 61 Chap. of Isaiah, 1st and 2d verses.
In reading the last Hymn, when he came to the word _Rebel_, he made
a stop, and compar’d the Rebel to the Prodigal spoken of in the New
Testament, and lest we should be offended at using the Word, altered
it to _Children_ and _Stubborn_. His discourse was very suitable to
our circumstances. The manner in which he delivered himself drew the
greatest attention. When he spoke of our Parents, Wives and Children
and the tears they had shed for us whilst in this deplorable place,
and when I come to reflect on the precarious situation we were in some
months gone, in a strange land, not knowing what might happen, and then
to comprehend the reality of the Transporting News, of being released
from this dismal place of exile and suffering, _I am compelled to cry
out, O God, in the midst of Thy Judgments, Thou has remembered Mercy_!

“9th. Capt. Malcolm came to see us, and informed us that the air
is infected with this Disorder that is among us. Some persons have
experimented by flying a kite in the air with a piece of beef to the
tail. When it came down the beef was tainted. I desire to thank God
that the pain in my head is somewhat abated, and the people in general
are getting better.

“No news from any Quarter. Dark times, low in Spirits and low in purse.

“17th. Fair, a grand wind E. by N. for our Transports to come from
Torbay. This morning Thomas Adams of Old York died in the Hospital.
I have greatly recovered from my sickness, and find myself able to
embarque, was the vessel ready to receive me.

“19th. Only one Cartel has arrived, and she is for the Southward, her
Captain named Maxwell, who informed me that the Cartel for the North
(the _Lady’s Adventure_) could not get out of Torbay last Monday. We
are in daily expectation of seeing them as a signal is now hoisted for
a Fleet from the East.

“_This day I am thirty months a Prisoner in this disagreeable place._

“We have had the happiness of receiving the joyful news of the arrival
of the Northern Cartel. The men for the Southward embarque on Saturday,
and the men for the North on Monday or Tuesday next. The long-looked
for day is come at last for us to leave these Gloomy Walls, where
nothing but Horror and Despair reigns. This afternoon we were Honor’d
with a visit from the Duke of Richmond, and a number of generals and
other Officers.

“His Grace asked if we had any complaints against Mr. Cowdry. Capt.
Greene reply’d to the Duke ‘that Cowdry was a dirty fellow.’ The Duke
reply’d: ‘Government keeps dirty fellows, to do their dirty Work.’

“His Grace said to us, that we had gained what we had been fighting
for, and we should find it so when we arrived in America.

“21st. This morning Mr. Cowdry ordered the Men bound South to get
ready to embarque to-morrow at 10 o’clock. Slops are to be served this
afternoon, and the Prisoners to be examined at 6 o’clock in the morning.

“_I desire to bless God that I once more have my health_, but I am
in a Miserable condition for want of cash, and what I am to do for
Sea-stores I am at a loss.

“22d. Yesterday the Cloathing was served out to the South’ard Men, and
instead of 20 shillings they drew only 16/3. One O’Hara and John Cooper
abused the Agent and broke his Windows for which they were put in the
Black Hole. Mr. Cowdry embarqued 215 men on board the Cartel for the
South’ard.

“23d. We are to hold ourselves in readiness to embarque to-morrow at 2
o’clock. Cowdry sent a Paper into the Prison for our People to sign,
that he had used us with marks of kindness, &c. It was immediately torn
up.

“June 24th. The Escort came and the Agent opened the _Gate of the
Castle of Despair_, and 400 Americans marched out to the Water side,
where we found four Launches, and a Cutter waiting to receive us,
I went on board the Cutter, and in a short time was on board the
Good Ship _Lady’s Adventure_, a Cartel bound to Boston. We had our
complement on board by 6 o’clock. The Agent came off and received a
Receipt for 400 Men and wished us a good Voyage.

“We immediately hove up anchors, and at 8 o’clock made sail. I was
transported with Joy at my deliverance from a loathsome Prison, where
I’ve been confined thirty Months and five days, almost despairing of
ever seeing my Native Country, my Loving Wife and Dear Children and
my relatives and friends who are so dear to me; but ‘Glory to God in
the Highest’ for His goodness unto us. I thank God I’ve a prospect
now before me of seeing _America_, that _Land of Liberty_, and on my
arrival of finding all connected with me in health and happiness.

“The Rev. Robert Heath and Mr. Saurey took their leave of us. The Ship
is 700 Ton with accommodations, and well found, the Captain and crew
are very civil, and _now I’ve taken my departure from Old Mill Prison,
and hope never to see it again_.

“We have fine Wind, and May God grant us a quick passage, and guide the
Ship to her desired Port.”

Thus ends the Journal written in Mill Prison. During the voyage to
the United States, William Russell kept a detailed diary, or log, of
the working of the _Lady’s Adventure_, which makes dry reading for
landlubbers. Here and there, however, he jotted down a paragraph having
to do with the company on board the Cartel, after the manner of the
following extracts:

“Thursday, July 4, 1782. Our People requested the Owner to let
them have an allowance of Brandy, it being the Anniversary of our
Independence. Accordingly it was granted, and he gave two quarts to
a man to a Mess. I was desired to acquaint the Captain that we meant
to give thirteen cheers for the thirteen United States of America, if
agreeable to him. He was agreed and accordingly the men came on deck,
and manned the Yards and Tops, and gave thirteen Cheers, and then three
cheers for the Captain. He was very polite and sent for me down to the
Cabin, where I was kindly entertained. The People behaved very well,
and very few drunk: _Myself Merry_. I desired one Lieutenant Weeks
and Captain Henfield to take the command, but they refused and I was
obliged to officiate myself. Whether Lieutenant Weeks thought himself
too good or not, I can’t say, but Captain Henfield was _very excusable_.

[Illustration: The Salem Custom House, built in 1818]

“July 9th. Hoisted out the boat to catch turtle. Captains Henfield and
Hamilton very angry because we kept the ship on her course and did
not heave to. Captain Hamilton said he was a lousy rascal that kept
her away. Mr. John Washburn replied: ‘I was at the wheel and am no
more lousy than your Honour.’ Upon that Captain Hamilton struck Mr.
Washburn, and Mr. Brewer resented it and made a strike at Hamilton.

“August 7th. Discovered land under our leebow, and made it to be Cape
Sable. A man at the Mast Head discovered a Light House off Cape Sambro
bearing East by South, and a number of Islands around us, from the
weather bow to the lee quarter. Set jib, foretopmast staysail and
spritsail topsail. Captain Trask (one of our Company) took charge of
the ship as Pilot, filled the topsails and bore down for the northern
part of the Rock bound Island. Saw a small vessel under the lee of the
Island (a privateer) which immediately made sail and ran out. Later saw
a boat (Shallop) with three men which made a Signal of Distress. They
came alongside but their Skipper was very much afraid, and wouldn’t
believe we were a Cartel until he was taken into the cabin. The Captain
had some discourse with him by which we were informed that the American
War is not over, that five American Privateers from Salem lately
demolished the Forts at Chester[20] and Malagash,[20] and plundered the
town, but used the prisoners with humanity. Came to anchor in seven
fathoms. The American Sod appears very comforting to a person whose
anxious desires for three years past have been to see the land where
Freedom reigns.

“Dined on Halibut, went on shore and picked and ate Gooseberries.
Washed and Loused myself, and made great fires in the woods. The boats
were employed in bringing the People on board.”

The party spent several days ashore, catching and cleaning fish,
cutting spars, gathering firewood and enjoying their freedom after the
long and trying voyage. At length the foretopsail was cast loose as a
signal for sailing, the ensign hoisted with a wisp to recall the boats
and the _Lady’s Adventure_ got under way for the southward. William
Russell’s journal relates under date of August 12th:

“Spoke a fishing schooner three days out from Plymouth which enquired
for John Washburn. We told the captain he was on board whereupon the
old man gave three cheers with his Cap and then threw it overboard. No
tongue can express the Heart-feeling Satisfaction it is unto us to have
the happiness of a few moments’ conversation with an American so short
from Home. Cheer up, my Heart, and don’t despair for thy Deliverance
draweth near.

“August 13th. At one half past six o’clock discovered land, Cape Cod
over our lee quarter. Stood in for Boston Light House Island. The men
are very uneasy, and clamour, some for Marblehead, some for Boston,
and can’t agree. Captain Humble is very willing the ship should go to
Boston this evening, if any man will take charge of her. None will
venture, so Captain Humble ordered the Ship to stretch off and on till
morning.”

Thus ends the sea journal of William Russell, but the Salem _Gazette_
of August 15, 1782, contains the following item under the head of
Shipping Intelligence:

“By an arrival of two Cartel Ships at Marblehead from England, 583 of
our Countrymen have been restored to their Families and Friends. One
of the Ships which arrived on Sunday last had an eight weeks’ passage
from Portsmouth and brought in 183 prisoners. The other which arrived
in fifty-two days from Plymouth sailed with 400 and one died on the
passage.”

It makes the story of this humble sailor of the Revolution much
more worth while to know that after three years of the most irksome
captivity, he was no sooner at home with his “dear wife and family”
than he was eager and ready to ship again under the Stars and Stripes.
Ill-fated as was his superb devotion to his Country, he had suffered
his misfortunes in Old Mill Prison with a steadfast courage. It was
so ordered, however, that he should be free no more than thirty days
after his glad homecoming in the _Lady’s Adventure_. He must have
re-entered the American naval service a few days after reaching Boston,
for we know that he was captured in a privateer on September 16th,
by a British Man of War and taken into Halifax. On November 28th he
was committed to the _Jersey_ Prison ship in New York harbor. Here he
found himself in a far worse plight than in Mill Prison with its genial
routine of escape and its friendly relations with the Agent, the Guard,
and the French and Spanish prisoners. All that is known of this final
chapter in the case of William Russell, patriot, must be gleaned from a
few letters to his wife and friends. The first of these is addressed to
“Mrs. Mary Russell, at Cambridge,” and says in part:

“On Board the _Jersey_ Prison ship, New York, November 21st, 1782.

“I write with an aching heart to inform you of my miserable condition.
I’m now in the worst of places and must suffer if confined here during
the Winter, for I am short of cloathing and the provisions is so scant
that it is not enough to keep body and soul together. I was two months
on board the Man of War and have been almost to Quebec. This is the
awfullest place I ever saw, and I hope God will deliver me from it
soon. I conclude, praying for your support in my absence, and the
prosperity of an Honoured Mother and family.”

To his mother, “Mistress Mary Richardson, Light House Tavern,
Cambridge,” he wrote on November 25th:

“HONOURED MAMA:

“I present these Lines with my Duty to you hoping they’l find you
with the family and all connected in perfect health. I was taken on
the 16th Sept. and brought to New York, the 13th inst., and put out
on board this ship the 18th. Indeed it is one of the worst places in
the World, and the Prisoners are suffering; Sickly and dying daily,
not having the common necessaries of life. I have seen Mr. Welsh who
promised to assist me but have heard no more from him since the 18th
inst. Mr. Chadwell has tried to get me exchanged but has not made out.
He talks of taking Mr. Stone and me ashore and will assist us whilst
confined. You will give my kind love to my Wife and family, likewise
to my Brothers and Sisters, and desire Moses to write to me, and try
to get me exchanged. My love to all relations and friends.

“May God preserve you in health and all with whom we are connected, is
the earnest prayer

“of your Dutiful Son
“WM. RUSSELL.”

Two weeks later the Captain addressed to his friends, “Messrs. Edes
and Sons, Printers, Boston,” a moving appeal for help in the following
words:

“JERSEY PRISON SHIP, New York Harbor,
“Dec. 7th, 1782.

“Mr. EDES,
“Dear Friend:

“I write you a few lines to inform you of my miserable situation, and
at the same time to beg your assistance. I am again by the fortune
of War thrown into the Enemies’ hands, where our scanty allowance is
not sufficient to support nature, and part of that we are cheated out
of. I had the promise of a Gentleman’s friendship at York, to get me
Paroled or Exchanged but find that Admiral Digby is so inveterate
against Privateersmen that he’ll not allow any Paroles. Therefore,
Sir, I most earnestly intreat of you to use your influence with Maj.
Hopkins to send to Mr. Sproat Commissioner of Prisoners at New York,
for Mr. John Stone and me, which he may do very easily, and pray send
in the _first Flag some British Prisoner to release me. I suppose my
Brother has arrived and brought some in._”

Some happy shift of fortune seems to have bettered the situation of
the prisoner in January of 1783, for he wrote to his wife in a wholly
different strain to inform her of his deliverance from “that horrid
pit” below the decks of the prison ship. Although still confined aboard
the _Jersey_, he was able to say:

“My Dear, my situation is greatly altered. I am aft with a gentleman
where I want for nothing, but live on the best, with good Tea night
and morning and fresh meat every day. In short I am used like a
gentleman in every respect both by Mr. Emery and his wife. Indeed, my
Dear, I am happy in getting from between decks, out of that horrid pit
where nothing but Horror is to be seen. My duty to my Mother, love to
my Brothers and Sisters, and hope ere long to enjoy your agreeable
company.

Your affectionate husband,
“WM. RUSSELL.”

On March 21, 1783, after more than six months of this second term of
imprisonment, the influence and persistency of his friends in Boston
obtained for him a three months’ parole.[21] Without going home
William Russell at once endeavored to repair his shattered fortunes
by embarking in a “venture” aboard a merchant vessel in order that he
might return to Boston with money for the support of his family. The
following letters to his wife explain his plans and purposes. He had
obtained passage from New York to New Haven in the _Lady’s Adventure_,
the same merchant vessel which had fetched him from Plymouth six months
before. Her Master, Captain Humble, proved himself a staunch friend of
our most unfortunate but undaunted seafarer. Writing from New Haven on
March 23, 1783, William Russell told his wife:

“NEW HAVEN, Connecticut, 23d March, 1783.

“MRS. RUSSELL:

“By the assistance of good friends I am once more in the land of
_Freedom and Independence_, for which I’ve fought, Bled and Suffered
as much as any without exception on the Continent, but the greatest of
my concern has (as ever) been for you and our little ones.

“On the 20th inst. Capt. D. Adams came on board the _Lady’s
Adventurer_ (Capt. Humble) with an order from the Admiral for me. You
can’t think the joy I must feel (without you had been in my place) on
seeing my townsman, my Captain and Friend. True friendship is never
known till we are in adversity, and then experience the assistance of
the Advocate, who steps forward to our defence. Capt. Adams has been
at great cost in getting me from New York, and I have no way to make
satisfaction without my remaining on Board his vessel will effect it.
Our circumstances are such that for me to come home with my fingers in
my mouth would be of little consolation to those who have been without
my help for almost four years. Therefore I think it my duty to try
what I can do, and hope by the assistance of Capt. Adams to obtain a
small Adventure and try my luck at a Merchant Voyage, and if Fortune
smiles, expect to see you in a short time.

“I recover my health slowly, and hope that Salt water will do what the
Physician could not effect.

“I am grieved at not hearing from you. Though out of sight, and the
enjoyment of liberty might make you forgetful, I’m not so.”

(To Mrs. Mary Russell, Cambridge.)

“HALIFAX, Nova Scotia, May 16, 1783.

“I doubt not you thought it strange I did not come home when _Paroled_
from New York, but the fever left me so low I could not stand the
fatigues of so long a journey, and at the same time was destitute of
money to support me on the road.

“Capt. Daniel Adams gave me a kind offer to go with him and laid me in
a Venture which don’t at present seem to succeed so well as I would
wish. However, I shall bring you home something for yourself and hope
to see you soon. I desire if any person should make any inquiry where
we are, you would answer at the Eastwd. for I don’t know whether the
trade is opened among you or not. However, we are not the only vessel
that’s here from the _Thirteen States_.

“We are treated very politely by his Excellency, and the Inhabitants,
and I’ve a number of old friends here, and shall give you an acct. of
them on my return.”

During the summer of 1783, William Russell returned to Cambridge,
broken in health, with a scanty reward from his trading venture. He
tried to gather together enough pupils to form a small school in his
living quarters at the “Light House Tavern,” Cambridge. This endeavor
was short-lived, for he was fast wasting with consumption. He died in
the spring following his return from the sea whereon he had suffered
greatly for his Country. He was no more than thirty-five years old
when his untimely end came, but his life was exceedingly worth while
even though it was his lot rather to endure than to achieve. Nor
could he have desired any more worthy obituary, nor wished to preach
a more inspiring doctrine to later generations of free-born Americans
than was voiced in these words sent to his wife from Old Mill Prison,
England, one hundred and twenty-six years ago:

“I think many in the Yard will enter into the King’s service. And I
should myself, was it not that (by so doing) _I must sell my Country,
and that which is much more dearer to me, yourself and my children_,
but I rely wholly on God, knowing He will deliver me in His own good
time.”

FOOTNOTES:

[19] “Mr. Laurens having been constituted one of the five Commissioners
to negotiate a Peace, the New Administration consulted with Mr.
Laurens, and after the first conference he was released from his
Parole, as well as his securities. Earl Cornwallis was released from
his parole in consideration of the favors granted Mr. Laurens.” (From a
London Newspaper of May 8th, 1782.)

In a letter from Sir Guy Carelton and Admiral Digby to General
Washington, dated at New York August 2, 1782, they stated:

“With respect to Mr. Laurens we are to acquaint you that he has been
discharged from all engagements without any conditions whatever; after
which he declared of his own accord, that he considered Lord Cornwallis
as free from his Parole.”

[20] “In the month of July, 1782, four privateers, two of them, the
_Hero_ and the _Hope_ of Salem, attacked Lunenburg in Nova Scotia. They
landed ninety men who marched to the town against a heavy discharge
of musketry, burnt the commander’s dwelling and a blockhouse. Their
opponents retreated to another blockhouse upon which one of the
privateers brought her guns to bear and forced them to surrender. The
captors carried a considerable quantity of merchandise to their vessel
and ransomed the town for one thousand pounds sterling. The Americans
had three wounded.” (From Felt’s “Annals of Salem.”)

[21] The following is the text of the parole issued, granted to William
Russell:

“We the Subscribers, having been captured in American Vessels and
brought into this Port, hereby acknowledge ourselves Prisoners of
War to the King of Great Britain; and having permission from His
Excellency, Rear Admiral Digby, Commander in Chief, etc., etc., etc.,
to go to Rhode Island, Do Pledge our Faith and most Sacredly promise
upon our Parole of Honour that we will not do, say, or write, or cause
to be done, said, or written, directly or indirectly, in any Respect
whatever, anything to the Prejudice of His Majesty’s Service; and that
we will return to this Place unless Exchanged in three Months from the
date hereof, and deliver up again to the Commissary General for Naval
Prisoners, or to the Person acting for or under him; And do further
promise upon our Honour that we will not in future enter on Board, or
otherwise be concerned in an American Privateer.

“In Testimony whereof we have hereunto set our hands and Seals, at New
York, this 21st day of March, 1783.

“Present

WM. RUSSELL (seal)
SAMUEL THOMPSON (seal)
“WM. WEIR

“Bachus, a Negro Boy, their Servant, is also to go with them.

“These are to certify that the above is a true Copy of the Original
Parole, signed by the Persons above named and filed in this Office; and
that they have leave to pass by the way of Long Island to Connecticut.

“Commisary’s Office for Naval Prisoners at New York.

“March 21, 1783.

“To Whom it may Concern. THOS. D. HEWLINGS,
“D. C. M. P.

CHAPTER IX

RICHARD DERBY AND HIS SON JOHN

(1774-1792)

The first armed resistance to British troops in the American colonies
was made at Salem and led by Captain Richard Derby of the third
generation of the most notable seafaring family in this country’s
annals. Born in 1712, he lived through the Revolution, and his career
as a shipmaster, merchant and patriot covered the greater part of
the American maritime history of the eighteenth century. Until 1757,
when he retired from active service on the sea, his small vessels
of from fifty to one hundred tons burden were carrying fish, lumber
and provisions to the West Indies and fetching home sugar, molasses,
cotton, rum and claret, or bringing rice and naval stores from
Carolina. With the returns from these voyages, assorted cargoes were
laden for voyages to Spain and Madeira and the proceeds remitted in
bills on London, or in wine, salt, fruit, oil, lead and handkerchiefs
to America.

Captain Richard Derby’s vessels ran the gauntlet of the privateers
during the French War from 1756 to 1763, and their owner’s letters
to his London agents describe them as mounting from eight to twelve
cannon, mostly six-pounders, “with four cannon below decks for
close quarters.” Accustomed to fighting his way where he could not
go peaceably, Richard Derby and the men of his stamp whose lives
and fortunes were staked on the high seas, felt the fires of their
resentment against England wax hotter and hotter as her shipping laws
smote their interests with increasing oppression.

In fact, the spirit of independence and protest against interference
by the mother country had begun to stir in the seaport towns a full
century before the outbreak of armed revolution. It is recorded in
Salem annals that “when it was reported to the Lords of Plantations
that the Salem and Boston merchants’ vessels arrived daily from Spain,
France, Holland, and the Canaries (in 1763) which brought wines,
linens, silks and fruits, and these were exchanged with the other
colonies for produce which was carried to the aforesaid kingdoms
without coming to England, complaint was made to the Magistrates that
these were singular proceedings. Their reply was ‘that they were His
Majesty’s Vice-Admirals in those seas and _they would do that which
seemed good to them_.’”

The spirit of those “Vice Admirals” who proposed to do what seemed good
to them continued to flourish and grow bolder in its defiance of unjust
laws, and the port of Salem was primed and ready for open rebellion
long before that fateful April day at Lexington and Concord. In 1771,
four years before the beginning of the Revolution, the Salem _Gazette_
published on the first anniversary of the “Boston Massacre,” the
following terrific proclamation framed in a border of black in token of
mourning:

“As a Solemn and Perpetual Memorial:

“Of the Tyranny of the British Administration of Government in the
years 1768, 1769, and 1770;

“Of the fatal and destructive Consequences of Quartering Armies, in
Time of Peace, in populous cities;

“Of the ridiculous Policy and infamous Absurdity of supporting _Civil
Government by a Military Force_.

“Of the Great Duty and Necessity of firmly opposing Despotism at its
first Approaches;

“Of the detestable Principles and arbitrary Conduct of those
_Ministers_ in Britain who advised, and of their _Tools_ in America
who desired the Introduction of a Standing Army in this Province in
the year 1768;

“Of the irrefragible Proof which those ministers themselves thereby
produced, that the Civil Government, as by them Administered, was
weak, wicked, and tyrannical;

“Of the vile Ingratitude and abominable Wickedness of every American
who abetted and encouraged, either in Thought, Word or Deed, the
establishment of a Standing Army among his Countrymen;

“Of the unaccountable Conduct of those _Civil Governors_, the
immediate Representatives of His Majesty, who, while the _Military_
was triumphantly insulting the whole LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE
STATE, and while the blood of the Massacred Inhabitants was flowing
in the Streets, persisted in repeatedly disclaiming all authority of
relieving the People, by any the least removal of the Troops:

“And of the Savage cruelty of the IMMEDIATE PERPETRATORS:

“_Be it forever Remembered_

“That this day, THE FIFTH OF MARCH, is the Anniversary of
BOSTON MASSACRE IN KING ST. BOSTON,
NEW ENGLAND, 1770.

“In which Five of his Majesty’s Subjects were slain and six wounded,
By the Discharge of a number of Muskets from a Part of Soldiers under
the Command of Capt. Thomas Preston,

“GOD Save the People!

“Salem, March 5, 1771.”

The fuse was laid to the powder by the arrival of Lieutenant General
Thomas Gage as the first military governor of Massachusetts in May,
1774. He at once moved the seat of government from Boston to Salem
which was the second town in importance of the colony, and Salem
began to exhibit symptoms of active hostility. Gage’s change of
administrative headquarters was accompanied by two companies of the
Sixty-fourth Regiment of the line, Colonel Alexander Leslie, which were
encamped beyond the outskirts of the town. The presence of these troops
was a red rag to the people of Salem, and furthermore, Gage outraged
public opinion by proposing to choose his own councillors, which
appointments had been previously conceded to the Provincial Assembly.
A new Act of Parliament, devised to suit the occasion, eliminated the
councillors who had been named by the Assembly or General Court, and
Gage adjourned this body, then in session in Boston, and ordered it to
reconvene in Salem on June 7th.

When the Assembly met in Salem it passed a resolution protesting
against its removal from Boston, and acted upon no other political
measures for ten days when the House adopted a resolution appointing
as delegates to the Congress at Philadelphia, James Bowdoin, Thomas
Cushing, Samuel Adams, John Adams, and Robert Treat Paine “to consult
upon measures for the restoration of harmony between Great Britain
and the Colonies.” This action angered General Gage, and he at once
prepared a proclamation dissolving the General Court. His secretary
posted off to the Salem “town house” to deliver said proclamation,
but he was refused admittance, word being brought out to him that the
“orders were to keep the door fast.” Therefore the defeated secretary
read the document to the curious crowd outside and afterwards in
the empty council chamber. So ended the last Provincial Assembly of
Massachusetts under a British Governor.

[Illustration: Richard Derby]

Having moved his headquarters to Salem, General Gage let it be known
that he regarded the odious Boston Port Bill as a measure which
must be maintained by military law and an army of twenty thousand
men if needs be. He also suppressed the town meetings, appointed new
councillors, and heaped up other grievances with such wholesale energy
that Salem flew up in arms and defied him. A town meeting had been
called for August 24th to choose delegates to a county convention, and
the people of the town refused to harken unto the order prohibiting
their most jealously guarded institution of local government, the town
meeting. Gage hurried back from Boston, took command of his troops,
and ordered the Fifty-ninth Regiment of foot to make ready for active
service. It is recorded that he showed “Indecent passion, denounced
the meeting as treasonable and spoke with much vehemence of voice and
gesture, threatened the committee of the town whom he met at the house
of Colonel Brown, and ordered up his troops.”

The citizens thereupon held a meeting in the open air, chose their
delegates to the county convention, and dispersed. Timothy Pickering,
afterwards Washington’s Secretary of War, and other members of the
Committee were placed under arrest for their part in this town meeting.
Before nightfall of the same day three thousand men of Salem and nearby
towns had armed themselves with muskets and were ready to march to the
rescue if their town meeting should be further molested, or British
troops employed to enforce any further punishments.

General Gage had declared with an oath that he would transport every
man of the Committee, and the “embattled farmers” and sailors feared
lest these fellow townsmen of theirs might be carried on board the
frigate _Scarboro_ which was making ready to sail for England. An
express rider was sent out from Boston at midnight to carry the warning
of the proposed sailing of this man-of-war, and with the threat of
transportation bracing their resolution, the men of Salem replied that
“they were ready to receive any attacks they might be exposed to for
acting in pursuance to the laws and interests of their country, as
becomes men and Christians.”

The issue was not forced by General Gage and having made a failure of
the campaign and a blunder of the transfer of the seat of government
he returned to Boston with his troops in September. In February of the
following year, 1775, he was informed that the Provincial Congress had
stored a large amount of munitions and a number of cannon in Salem, and
he ordered Colonel Leslie to embark in a transport with a battalion
of infantry, disembark at Marblehead, march across to Salem and seize
this material of war. These troops, two hundred and fifty strong,
sailed from Boston at night and landed on the Marblehead beach Sunday
afternoon. Major Pedrick, a patriot of the town, at once mounted a
horse and galloped to Salem, two miles away, to carry warning of this
invasion. The British infantry marched along the turnpike until they
came to the North River, a small, navigable stream making up from Salem
Harbor. This was spanned by a drawbridge, and Colonel Leslie was much
disturbed to find the drawbridge raised and a formidable assemblage of
Salem citizens buzzing angrily at the farther side of the stream. The
British officer had no orders to force the passage, and the situation
was both delicate and awkward in the extreme. Timothy Pickering had
been chosen colonel of the First Regiment of militia and forty of his
armed men were mustered, drawn up ready to fire at the order. Colonel
Leslie threatened to let loose a volley of musketry to clear the road,
and was told by Captain John Felt of Salem:

“You had better not fire, for there is a multitude, every man of whom
is ready to die in this strife.”

Some of the more adventurous patriots climbed to the top of the raised
drawbridge and hurled insulting taunts at the British infantry, yelling
“Fire and be damned to you.” Rev. Thomas Barnard of the North Church
tried to make peace and addressed Colonel Leslie: “You cannot commit
this violation against innocent people, here on this holy day, without
sinning against God and humanity. Let me entreat you to return.”

At the head of the crowd of armed men of Salem stood Captain Richard
Derby. He owned eight of the nineteen cannon which had been collected
for the use of the Provincial Congress and he had not the slightest
notion of surrendering them. There was a parley while Colonel Leslie
argued that he was in lawful use of the King’s highway. The Salem
rejoinder was to the effect that the road and the bridge were private
property to be taken from them only by force and under martial law. At
this juncture, when bloody collision seemed imminent, Captain Richard
Derby took command of the situation, and roared across the stream, as
if he were on his own quarterdeck:

“Find the cannon if you can. Take them if you can. They will never be
surrendered.”

A fine portrait of this admirable old gentleman has been preserved,
and in a well-powdered wig, with a spyglass in his hand, he looks
every inch the man who hurled this defiance at Great Britain and dared
a battalion of His Majesty’s foot to knock the chip off his stalwart
shoulder. Colonel Leslie made a half-hearted attempt to set his men
across the river in boats, and it was at this time that the only
casualty occurred, a Salem man, Joseph Whicher, receiving a bayonet
thrust. Meanwhile the Marblehead regiment of patriot militia had been
mustered under arms, and the Minute Men of Danvers were actually on the
march toward the North River bridge. Perceiving that to force a passage
meant to set the whole colony in a blaze, and unwilling to shoulder
so tremendous a responsibility without orders from General Gage, the
British colonel delayed for further discussion. At length Captain Derby
and his friends proposed that in order to satisfy Colonel Leslie’s
ideas of duty and honor, he should be permitted to cross the bridge
and immediately thereafter return whence he came. This odd compromise
was accepted, and after marching to the farther side of the river the
troops faced about and footed back to their transport at Marblehead,
without finding the cannon they had come out to take. It was a victory
for Captain Richard Derby and his townsmen and well worth a conspicuous
place in the history of the beginnings of the American Revolution.

Another prominent figure in this tremendously dramatic situation was
Colonel David Mason, a veteran soldier who had commanded a battery in
the French War in 1756-7, and a scientist of considerable distinction
who had made discoveries in electricity of such importance that
he was requested to journey to Philadelphia to discuss them with
Doctor Franklin. Colonel Mason was a man of great public spirit and
patriotism, and in November, 1774, he had received an appointment as
Engineer from the “Massachusetts Committee of Safety,” which was the
first military appointment of the Revolutionary War. He was from this
time actively engaged in collecting military stores for the use of his
country and making secret preparation for the approaching contest with
England. He had obtained from Captain Derby the cannon which Colonel
Leslie wished to confiscate and had given them to a Salem blacksmith to
have the iron work for the carriages made and fitted.

Colonel Mason resided near the North Bridge and Doctor Barnard’s
church. When he heard the British troops were drawing near he ran into
the North Church and disrupted the afternoon service by shouting at the
top of his voice: “The regulars are coming and are now near Malloon’s
Mills.” He and others in authority among their fellow-townsmen tried
to control the hotheads and avert hostilities. But the task was made
difficult by defiant patriots who bellowed across the drawbridge:

“Soldiers, red jackets, lobster coats, cowards, damn your government.”

A high-spirited dame, Sarah Tarrant by name, poked her head out of a
window of her cottage overlooking the scene and shrilly addressed the
British colonel:

“Go home and tell your master he has sent you on a fool’s errand, and
broken the peace of our Sabbath. What? Do you think we were born in the
woods to be frightened by owls? Fire at me if you have the courage, but
I doubt it.”

John Howard of Marblehead, who was one of the militia men under
arms, stated in his recollections of the affair at the North Bridge
that there were eight military companies in Marblehead at that time,
comprising nearly the whole male population between sixteen and sixty
years of age. They were all promptly assembled under Colonel Orne, to
the number of a thousand men. Their orders were “to station themselves
behind the houses and fences along the road prepared to fall upon
the British on their return from Salem, if it should be found that
hostile measures had been used by them; but if it should appear that no
concerted act of violence upon the persons or property of the people
had been committed, they were charged not to show themselves, but to
allow the British detachment to return unmolested to their transport.”

The episode was taken seriously in England as shown by an item in the
_Gentleman’s Magazine_ of London of April 17, 1775, which reported: “By
a ship just arrived at Bristol from America, it is reported that the
Americans have hoisted the standard of liberty at Salem.”

William Gavett of Salem wrote an account of the affair of which he was
an eye-witness and described certain lively incidents as follows:

“One David Boyce, a Quaker, had gone out with his team to assist in
carrying the guns out of reach of the troops, and they were conveyed
to the neighborhood of what was then called Buffum’s hill, to the
northwest of the road leading to Danvers and near the present estate
of Gen. Devereux. My father looked in between the platoons, as I heard
him tell my mother, to see if he could recognize any of the soldiers
who had been stationed at Fort William on the Neck, many of whom
were known to him, but he could discover no familiar faces and was
blackguarded by the soldiers for his inquisitiveness, who asked him,
with oaths, what he was looking after. The northern leaf of the draw
was hoisted when the troops approached the bridge, which prevented them
from going any further. Their commander (Col. Leslie) then went upon
West’s, now Brown’s, wharf, and Capt. John Felt followed him. He then
remarked to Capt. Felt, or in his hearing, that he should be obliged to
fire upon the people on the northern side of the bridge if they did not
lower the leaf. Capt. Felt told him if the troops did fire they would
be all dead men, or words to that effect. It was understood afterwards
that if the troops fired upon the people, Capt. Felt intended to
grapple with Col. Leslie and jump into the river, for said he, ‘I would
willingly be drowned myself to be the death of one Englishman.’ Mr. Wm.
Northey, observing the menacing attitude assumed by Capt. Felt, now
remarked to him, ‘don’t you know the danger you are in opposing armed
troops, and an officer with a drawn sword in his hand?’ The people
soon commenced scuttling two gondolas which lay on the western side
of the bridge and the troops also got into them to prevent it. One
Joseph Whicher, the foreman in Col. Sprague’s distillery, was at work
scuttling the Colonel’s gondola, and the soldiers ordered him to desist
and threatened to stab him with their bayonets if he did not—whereupon
he opened his breast and dared them to strike. They pricked his breast
so as to draw blood. He was very proud of this wound in after life and
was fond of exhibiting it.”

[Illustration:

From a painting by Lewis J. Bridgman

“Leslie’s Retreat,” North Bridge, Salem, Mass., February 26, 1775]

It was a son of this Captain Richard Derby who carried to England the
first news of the Battle of Lexington in the swift schooner _Quero_,
as the agent of the Provincial Congress. No American’s arrival in
London ever produced so great a sensation as did that of this Salem
sailor, Captain John Derby, in May, 1775. He reached England in advance
of the king’s messenger dispatched by General Gage, and startled the
British nation with the tidings of the clash of arms which meant the
loss of an American empire.

Three days after the fight at Lexington, the Provincial Congress met at
Concord, and appointed a committee “to take depositions _in perpetuam_,
from which a full account of the transactions of the troops under
General Gage in the route to and from Concord on Wednesday last may be
collected to be sent to England by the first ship from Salem.”

Captain Richard Derby was a member of this Congress, and he offered
his fast schooner _Quero_ of sixty-two tons for this purpose, his son
Richard, Jr., to fit her out, and his son John to command her for this
dramatic voyage. Old Captain Richard, hero of the North River bridge
affair, was a sturdy patriot and a smart seaman. He knew his schooner
and he knew his son John, and the news would get to England as fast as
sail could speed it.

General Gage had sent his official messages containing the news of the
Lexington fight by the “Royal Express-packet” _Sukey_, which sailed on
April 24th. Captain John Derby in the _Quero_ did not get his sailing
orders from the Provincial Congress until three days later, on April
27th. These orders read as follows:

“_Resolved_: that Captain Derby be directed and he hereby is directed
to make for Dublin, or any other good port in Ireland, and from thence
to cross to Scotland or England, and hasten to London. This direction
is given so that he may escape all enemies that may be in the chops of
the Channel to stop the communication of the Provincial Intelligence
to the agent. He will forthwith deliver his papers to the agent on
reaching London.

“J. WARREN, Chairman.

“P. S.—You are to keep this order a profound secret from every person
on earth.”

The letter which Captain John Derby carried with his dispatches read as
follows:

“IN PROVINCIAL CONGRESS, WATERTOWN,

“APRIL 26, 1775.

“TO THE HON. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQ., LONDON:

“SIR: From the entire confidence we repose in your faithfulness and
abilities, we consider it for the happiness of this Colony that the
important trust of agency for it, on this day of unequalled distress,
is devolved on your hands; and we doubt not your attachment to the
cause of the liberties of mankind will make every possible exertion in
our behalf a pleasure to you, although our circumstances will compel
us often to interrupt your repose by matters that will surely give
you pain. A single instance hereof is the occasion of the present
letter; the contents of this packet will be our apology for troubling
you with it. From these you will see how and by whom we are at last
plunged into the horrours of a most unnatural war. Our enemies, we
are told, have despatched to Great Britain a fallacious account of
the tragedy they have begun; to prevent the operation of which to
the publick injury, we have engaged the vessel that conveys this to
you as a packet in the service of this Colony, and we request your
assistance in supplying Captain Derby, who commands her, with such
necessaries as he shall want, on the credit of your constituents in
Massachusetts Bay. But we most ardently wish that the several papers
herewith enclosed may be immediately printed and dispersed through
every Town in England, and especially communicated to the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, that they may take
such order thereon as they may think proper, and we are confident
your fidelity will make such improvement of them as shall convince
all who are not determined to be in everlasting blindness, that it
is the united efforts of both Englands that must save either. But
whatever price our brethren in one may be pleased to put on their
constitutional liberties, we are authorized to assure you that the
inhabitants of the other, with the greatest unanimity, are inflexibly
resolved to sell theirs only at the price of their lives.

“Signed by order of the Provincial Congress,

“JOS. WARREN, President _pro tem_.”

John Derby cracked on sail like a true son of his father, and made a
passage across the Atlantic of twenty-nine days, handsomely beating
the lubberly “Royal-Express packet” _Sukey_, which had sailed from
Boston four days ahead of him. It is supposed that he made a landing
at the Isle of Wight, went ashore alone, and hurried to London as fast
as he could. The tidings he bore were too alarming and incredible to
be accepted by the statesmen and people of Great Britain. Nothing had
been heard from General Gage and here was an audacious Yankee skipper,
dropped in from Heaven knew where, spreading it broadcast that the
American colonists were in full revolt after driving a force of British
regulars in disastrous rout. From the office of the Secretary of State,
Lord Dartmouth issued this skeptical statement, May 30th:

“A report having been spread and an account having been printed and
published, of a skirmish between some people of the Province of
Massachusetts Bay, and a detachment of His Majesty’s troops, it is
proper to inform the publick that no advices have as yet been received
in the American Department of any such event. There are reasons to
believe that there are dispatches from General Gage on Board the
_Sukey_, Captain Brown, which though she sailed four days before the
vessel that brought the printed accounts, is not arrived.”

On the following day, Hutchinson, who had preceded Gage as Governor of
Massachusetts, wrote from London to his son in Boston:

“Captain Darby, in ballast arrived at Southampton from Marblehead the
27, and came to London the next evening. I am greatly distressed for
you. Darby’s own accounts confirm many parts of the narrative from the
Congress, and they that know him say he deserves credit and that he has
a good character; but I think those people would not have been at the
expense of a vessel from Marblehead or Salem to England for the sake of
telling the truth.”

On June 1st, Lord Dartmouth wrote General Gage as follows:

“WHITEHALL, 1st June, 1775.

“SIR: Since my letter to you of 27th ult. an account has been printed
here, accompanied with depositions to verify it, of skirmishes between
a detachment of the troops under your command and different bodies of
the Provincial Militia.

“It appears upon the fullest inquiry that this account, which is
chiefly taken from a Salem newspaper, has been published by a Capt.
Darby, who arrived on Friday or Saturday at Southampton in a small
vessel in ballast, directly from Salem, and from every circumstance,
relating to this person and the vessel, it is evident he was employed
by the Provincial Congress to bring this account, which is plainly
made up for the purpose of conveying every possible prejudice and
misrepresentation of the truth.

“From the answers he has given to such questions as has been asked,
there is the greatest probability that the whole amounts to no more
than that a Detachment, sent by you to destroy Cannon and Stores
collected at Concord for the purpose of aiding Rebellion, were fired
upon, at different times, by people of the Country in small bodies
from behind trees and houses, but that the party effected the service
they went upon, and returned to Boston, and I have the satisfaction
to tell you that, the affair being considered in that light by all
discerning men, it has had no other effect here than to raise that
just indignation which every honest man must feel at the rebellious
conduct of the New England Colonies. At the same time it is very
much to be lamented that we have not some account from you of the
transaction, which I do not mention from any supposition that you did
not send the earliest intelligence of it, for we know from Darby that
a vessel with dispatches sailed four days before him. We expect the
arrival of that vessel with great impatience, but ’till she arrives I
can form no decisive judgment of what has happened, and therefore can
have nothing more to add but that I am, &c., DARTMOUTH.”

Alas for British hopes and fears, the eagerly awaited arrival of the
_Sukey_ confirmed the disastrous news revealed by Captain John Derby,
as may be learned from the following article in _The London Press_:

“TO THE PUBLICK.

“LONDON, June 12, 1775.

“When the news of a massacre first arrived, the pensioned writer
of the _Gazette_ entreated the publick ‘to suspend their judgment,
as Government had received no tidings of the matter.’ It was added
that there was every reason to expect the despatches from General
Gage, by a vessel called the _Sukey_. The publick have suspended
their judgment; they have waited the arrival of the _Sukey_; and the
humane part of mankind have wished that the fatal tale related by
Captain Derby might prove altogether fictitious. To the great grief of
every thinking man, this is not the case. We are now in possession
of both the accounts. The Americans have given their narrative of
the massacre; the favorite servants have given a Scotch account of
the skirmish. In what one material fact do the two relations, when
contrasted with each other, disagree? The Americans said ‘that a
detachment of the King’s Troops advanced toward Concord; that they
attempted to secure two bridges on different roads beyond Concord;
that when they reached Lexington they found a body of Provincials
exercising on a green; that on discovering the Provincial militia
thus employed, the King’s Troops called out to them to disperse,
damned them for a parcel of rebels, and killed one or two, as the most
effectual method intimidating the rest.’ This the writer of the Scotch
account in the _Gazette_ styles, ‘marching up to the rebels to inquire
the reason of being so assembled.’ Both relations, however, agree in
this, that a question was asked; the pensioned varnisher only saying
that it was asked in a civil way, attended with the loss of blood.

“Thus far, then, the facts, in every material circumstance, precisely
agree; and as yet, we have every reason to believe that the _Salem
Gazette_ is to the full as authentick as our Government paper, which,
as a literary composition, is a disgrace to the Kingdom.

“The _Salem Gazette_ assured us that the King’s Troops were compelled
to return from Concord; that a handful of militia put them to rout,
and killed and wounded several as they fled. Is this contradicted
in the _English Gazette_? Quite the contrary; it is confirmed. The
Scotch account of the skirmish acknowledges that ‘on the hasty
return of the troops from Concord, they were very much annoyed, and
several of them were killed and wounded.’ The Scotch account also
adds ‘that the Provincials kept up a scattering fire during the whole
of the march of the King’s Troops of fifteen miles, by which means
several of them were killed and wounded.’ If the American Militia
‘kept up a scattering fire on the King’s Troops, of fifteen miles,’
the Provincials must have pursued, and the regulars must have fled,
which confirms the account given in the _Salem Gazette_, wherein
it is asserted that the Regulars ‘were forced to retreat.’ Whether
they marched like mutes at a funeral, or whether they fled like
the relations and friends of the present ministry who were amongst
the rebel army at the battle of Cullodon, is left entirely to the
conjecture of the reader; though it should seem that a scattering
fire, poured in upon a retreating enemy for fifteen miles together,
would naturally, like goads applied to the sides of oxen, make them
march off as fast as they could.”

The newspaper account which Captain Derby carried to London was printed
in _The Essex Gazette_ of the issue of “from Tuesday, April 18, to
Tuesday, April 25.” _The Salem Gazette_ had suspended publication the
day before the great events of Concord and Lexington, and therefore
it was _The Essex Gazette_ of Salem which was taken to England, the
slight error in the name of the journal being immaterial. This edition
of the little four-paged weekly newspaper which shook the British
Empire to its foundations, was not made up after the pattern of modern
“scarehead” journals. The story of Concord and Lexington was tucked
away on an inside page with no headline, title or caption whatever, and
was no more than a column long. It may be called the first American war
correspondence and no “dispatches from the front” in all history have
equaled this article in _The Essex Gazette_ as a stupendous “beat” or
“scoop,” measured by the news it bore and the events it foreshadowed.
The _Gazette_ carried on its title page the legends, “Containing the
freshest advices, both foreign and domestic”; “Printed by Samuel and
Ebenezer Hall at their Printing-Office near the Town House.”

The article in question read, for the most part, as follows:

“SALEM, April 25.

“Last Wednesday, the 19th of April, the troops of his _Britannick_
Majesty Commenced Hostilities upon the People of this Province,
attended with circumstances of cruelty not less brutal than what
our venerable Ancestors received from the vilest savages of the
Wilderness. The Particulars relative to this interesting Event, by
which we are involved in all the Horrors of a Civil War, we have
endeavoured to collect as well as the present confused state of
affairs will admit.

“On Tuesday Evening a Detachment from the Army, consisting, it is
said, of 8 or 900 men, commanded by Lieut. Col. Smith, embarked at
the Bottom of the Common in Boston, on board a Number of Boats, and
landed at Phip’s farm, a little way up Charles River, from whence
they proceeded with Silence and Expedition, on their way to Concord,
about 18 miles from Boston. The People were soon alarmed, and began
to assemble, in several towns, before Daylight, in order to watch the
Motion of the Troops. At Lexington, 6 miles below Concord, a Company
of Militia, of about 100 Men, mustered near the Meeting House; the
Troops came in Sight of them just before Sun-rise, and running within
a few rods of them, the Commanding Officer accosted the Militia in
words to this Effect:

“‘_Disperse, you Rebels—Damn you, throw down your Arms and disperse._’

“Upon which the Troops huzza’d, and immediately one or two Officers
discharged their Pistols, which were instantaneously followed by
the Firing of 4 or 5 of the Soldiers, and then there seemed to be a
general discharge from the whole Body; Eight of our Men were killed,
and nine wounded. In a few minutes after this action the Enemy renewed
their March for Concord; at which Place they destroyed several
Carriages, Carriage Wheels, and about 20 barrels of Flour; all
belonging to the Province. Here about 150 Men going toward a Bridge,
of which the Enemy were in Possession, the latter fired and killed
2 of our Men, who then returned the Fire, and obliged the Enemy to
retreat back to Lexington, where they met Lord Percy, with a large
Reinforcement, with two Pieces of Cannon. The Enemy now having a Body
of about 1800 Men, made a Halt, picked up many of their Dead, and took
care of their Wounded. At Menotomy, a few of our Men attacked a Party
of twelve of the Enemy (carrying stores and Provisions to the Troops),
killed one of them, wounded several, made the Rest Prisoners, and
took Possession of all their arms, Stores, Provisions, &c., without
any loss on our side. The Enemy having halted one or two Hours at
Lexington found it necessary to make a second Retreat, carrying with
them many of their Dead and Wounded, who they put into Chaises and
on Horses that they found standing in the Road. They continued their
Retreat from Lexington to Charlestown with great Precipitation; and
notwithstanding their Field Pieces, our People continued the Pursuit,
firing at them till they got to Charlestown Neck (which they reached a
little after Sunset), over which the Enemy passed, proceeded up Bunker
Hill, and soon afterward went into the Town, under the protection of
the _Somerset_ Man of War of 64 guns.”

There follows a list of the names of the Provincial Casualities,
numbering 38 killed and 19 wounded, with accusations of savage and
barbarous behavior on the part of the British troops. The writer then
goes on to say:

“I have seen an account of the Loss of the Enemy, said to have come
from an officer of one of the Men of War; by which it appears that 63
of the Regulars, and 49 Marines were killed, and 103 of both wounded;
in all 215. Lieut. Gould of the 4th Regiment, who is wounded,
and Lieut. Potter of the Marines, and about twelve soldiers, are
Prisoners....

“The Public most sincerely sympathize with the Friends and Relations
of our deceased Brethren, who gloriously sacrificed their Lives in
fighting for the Liberties of their Country. By their noble, intrepid
Conduct, in helping to defeat the Forces of an ungrateful Tyrant,
they have endeared their Memories to the present generation who will
Transmit their Names to Posterity with the highest Honour.”

The opposite page of _The Gazette_ contained an editorial, or
communication, signed “Johannes in Ermo,” which Captain John Derby
must have enjoyed spreading broadcast in London. It was a battle-hymn
in prose, the voice of a free people in arms, indomitable defiance at
white-heat. This was the message it flung to the mother country over
seas:

“Great Britain, adieu! no longer shall we honour you as our mother;
you are become cruel; you have not so much bowels as the sea monsters
toward their young ones; we have cried to you for justice, but behold
violence and bloodshed! your sword is drawn _offensively_, and the
sword of New England _defensively_; by this stroke you have broken us
off from you, and effectually alienated us from you. O, Britain, see
you to your own house!

“King George the third, adieu! no more shall we cry to you for
protection, no more shall we bleed in defense of your person. Your
breach of covenant; your violation of faith; your turning a deaf ear to
our cries for justice, for covenanted protection and salvation from the
oppressive, tyrannical, and bloody measures of the British Parliament,
and putting a sanction upon all their measures to enslave and butcher
us, have _Dissolved our Allegiance_ to your Crown and Government! your
sword that ought in _justice to protect_ us, is now drawn _with a
witness_ to destroy us! Oh, George, see thou to thine house!

“General Gage, pluck up stakes and be gone; you have drawn the sword,
you have slain in cool blood a number of _innocent_ New England men—you
have made the assault—and be it known to you, the _defensive sword_
of New England is now drawn, it now studies just revenge; and it will
not be satisfied until your blood is shed—and the blood of every son
of violence under your command—and the blood of every traitorous
_Tory_ under your protection; therefore, depart with all your master’s
forces—depart from our territories, return to your master soon, or
destruction will come upon you; every moment you tarry in New England,
in the character of your Master’s General, you are viewed as an
_Intruder_, and must expect to be treated by us as our inveterate enemy.

“O, my dear New England, hear thou the alarm of war! the call of Heaven
is to arms! to arms! The sword of Great Britain is drawn against us!
without provocation how many of our sons have been fired upon and slain
in cool blood, in the cool of the day....

“I beseech you, for God’s sake, and for your own sake, watch
against every vice, every provocation of God Almighty against us;
against intemperance in drinking—against profane language and all
debauchery!—and let us all rely on the army of the Most High....”

* * * * *

That after a safe homeward voyage Captain Derby reported to General
Washington in person[22] on the 18th of July, appears from the _Essex
Gazette_ for that month as follows:

“CAMBRIDGE, July 21.

“Capt. John Derby, who sailed from Salem for London a few Days after
the Battle of Lexington, returned last Tuesday, and the same Day
came to Head-Quarters in this Place. Very little Intelligence has yet
transpired—we only learn, that the News of the Commencement of the
American War through the People in England, especially the City of
London, into great Consternation, and occasioned a considerable Fall of
the Stocks. That the Ministry (knowing nothing of the Battle till they
saw it published in the London papers) advertised, in the _Gazette_,
that they had received no Account of any Action, and pretended to
believe that there had been none. That the Parliament was prorogued two
Days before Capt. Derby arrived, but it was said would be immediately
called together again. That, when he left London, which was about
the 1st of June, no Account of Hostilities had been received by the
Ministry from General Gage, notwithstanding the Vessel he dispatched
sailed four Days before Capt. Derby. That our friends increased in
Number; and that many who had remained neuter in the dispute, began
to express themselves warmly in our Favor: That we, however, have no
Reason to expect any Mercy from the Ministry, who seem determined to
pursue their Measures (long since concerted) for ruining the British
Empire.

“Capt. Derby brought a few London Papers, some as late as the 1st of
June, but we have not been able to obtain a Sight of them. We are
informed they contain very little News, and scarce any Remarks on
American Affairs.”

It was singularly appropriate that this same Captain John Derby who
carried the news to England of the beginning of the American Revolution
should have been the shipmaster to carry home to the United States the
first tidings of peace in 1783, when he arrived from France in the ship
_Astrea_ with the message that a treaty had been signed.

This Captain John Derby won a claim to further notice in the history
of his times as one of the owners of the ship _Columbia_ which sailed
from Boston in 1787, circumnavigated the globe, and on a second voyage
discovered and named the mighty Columbia River on the northwest coast
of America. The vast territory which includes the states of Oregon,
Washington and Idaho was then an unknown and unexplored land, claimed
by Spain because her navigators discovered it, by Great Britain because
Francis Drake had sailed along the coast in 1759, by Russia because
Bering had mapped the North Pacific and prepared for the opening
in 1771 of the fur trade from Oregon to China. But no nation had
established a foothold in this territory and its extent and natural
features were wrapped in mystery.

In 1783, a young American seaman who had sailed with Captain Cook on
an exploring voyage of the North Pacific, published a chart and a
journal of the voyage, and first brought to the attention of American
shipowners the importance of the Northwest fur trade. Ledyard was
called an enthusiast, a visionary, until his story attracted the
serious consideration of the leading shipping merchants of Boston and
Salem. John Derby joined three men of Boston in the venture and the
quartette of partners subscribed what was then a huge capital of fifty
thousand dollars to equip and despatch a ship to the northwest coast
and open an American trade in furs with the Indians.

The _Columbia_ was chosen, a ship of two hundred and thirteen tons,
small even for that period, mounting ten cannon. Captain John Kendrick
was given the command. As consort and tender for coastwise navigation
and trade a sloop of ninety tons, the _Lady Washington_, Captain Robert
Gray, was fitted out.

Besides the ship’s stores, the two vessels carried a cargo of hardware,
tools, utensils, buttons, toys, beads, etc., to be bartered with the
Indians. The State and Federal Governments granted special letters
to the captains, and “hundreds of medals signalizing the enterprise
were put aboard for distribution wherever the vessel touched. Years
afterward some of these medals and cents and half-cents of the State of
Massachusetts were to be found in the wake of the _Columbia_ among the
Spaniards of South America, the Kanakas of Hawaii and the Indians of
Oregon.”[23]

The two little vessels fared bravely around Cape Horn, and steered
north until they reached the fur wilderness country of the great
Northwest. After many hardships and thrilling adventures the _Columbia_
returned to Boston with a cargo of tea from China. It was a famous
voyage in the history of American commercial enterprise, but it brought
so little profit to the owners that Captain John Derby and one other
partner sold out their shares in the _Columbia_. She was refitted,
however, and again sent to the Northwest in 1790 in command of Captain
Gray. On this voyage Captain Gray discovered the Columbia River shortly
after he had met at sea the English navigator, Vancouver, who reported
passing the mouth of a small stream “not worthy his attention.” By
so close a margin did Vancouver miss the long-sought great river of
Oregon, and the chance to claim the Northwestern America for the
British flag by right of discovery.

On May 19, 1792, Captain Gray landed with his seamen, after sailing
twenty-five miles up the river and formally named it the Columbia. “It
has been claimed for many men before and since Marcus Whitman that
they saved Oregon to the United States. But surely the earliest and
most compelling title to this distinction is that Captain Robert Gray
of Boston, and the good ship _Columbia_. They gave us the great river
by the powerful right of discovery, and the great river dominated
the region through which it ran.... The voyage of the _Columbia_ was
plainly and undeniably the first step which won for the United States
a grip on the Oregon territory that no diplomatic casuistry and no
arrogant bluster could shake.[23]

FOOTNOTES:

[22] (July 18, 1774.) “Captain John Derby who carried to England the
tidings of Lexington battle, appears at headquarters in Cambridge and
relates that the news of the commencement of the American war threw the
people, especially in London, into great consternation, and occasioned
a considerable fall of stocks; that many there sympathized with the
Colonies.” (Felt’s Annals of Salem.)

[23] “The American Merchant Marine,” by Winthrop L. Martin.

CHAPTER X

ELIAS HASKET DERBY AND HIS TIMES

(1770-1800)

Elias Hasket Derby, the son of Captain Richard Derby, and a brother
of Captain John Derby, was the most conspicuous member of this great
seafaring family, by reason of his million-dollar fortune, his
far-seeing enterprise and his fleet of ships which traded with China,
India, Mauritius, Madeira, Siam, Arabia and Europe. He was the first
American to challenge the jealous supremacy of the East India, the
Holland, the French and the Swedish chartered companies in the Orient.
He made of commerce an amazingly bold and picturesque romance at a time
when this infant republic was still gasping from the effects of the
death grapple of the Revolution. He was born in 1739, went to sea as
had his father and his grandfather before him, and like them rose to
the command and ownership of vessels while still in his youth. As told
in a previous chapter, he was the foremost owner of Salem privateers
during the Revolution, and finding the large, swift and heavily manned
ship created by the needs of war unfitted for coastwise and West India
trade, he resolved to send them in search of new markets on the other
side of the globe.

No sooner was peace declared than he was making ready his great ship,
the _Grand Turk_, for the first American voyage to the Cape of Good
Hope. The _Grand Turk_ had been built in 1781 for privateering and as
a letter of marque. She was of three hundred tons burden, the largest
vessel built in a Salem shipyard until after the Revolution, and Elias
Hasket Derby was proud of her speed, her beauty and her record. During
the Revolution she mounted twenty-two guns and fought them handily. On
her second cruise as a privateer she captured two rich prizes, took
them into Bilboa, and more than paid for herself. Later the _Grand
Turk_ made several cruises in West India waters and, among other
successes, captured a twenty-gun ship, the _Pompey_, from London.

This was the ship with which Elias Hasket Derby blazed a trail
toward the Orient, the forerunner of his pioneering ventures to the
East Indies. Of the methods and enterprise of Elias Hasket Derby,
as typified in such voyages as this of the _Grand Turk_, one of his
captains, Richard Cleveland, wrote in his recollections of the methods
and enterprise of this typical merchant of his time:

“In the ordinary course of commercial education, in New England, boys
are transferred from school to the merchant’s desk at the age of
fourteen or fifteen. When I had reached my fourteenth year it was my
good fortune to be received in the counting house of Elias Hasket Derby
of Salem, a merchant who may justly be termed the father of American
commerce to India, one whose enterprise and commercial sagacity were
unequalled in his day. To him our country is indebted for opening
the valuable trade to Calcutta, before whose fortress his was to be
the first vessel to display the American flag; and following up the
business, he had reaped golden harvests before other merchants came
in for a share of them. The first American ships seen at the Cape of
Good Hope and the Isle of France belonged to him. His were the first
American ships which carried cargoes of cotton from Bombay to China,
and among the first ships which made a direct voyage to China and
back was one owned by him. Without possessing a scientific knowledge
of the construction and sparring of ships, Mr. Derby seemed to have
an intuitive faculty in judging of models and proportions, and his
experiments in several instances for the attainment of swiftness in
sailing were crowned with success unsurpassed in this or any other
country.

“He built several ships for the India trade immediately in the vicinity
of the counting house, which afforded me an opportunity of becoming
acquainted with the building, sparring and rigging of ships. The
conversations to which I listened relating to the countries then newly
visited by Americans, the excitement on the return of an adventure from
them and the great profits which were made, always manifest from my own
little adventures, tended to stimulate the desire in me of visiting
those countries, and of sharing more largely in the advantages they
presented.”

The _Grand Turk_, “the great ship,” as she was called in Salem, was
less than one hundred feet long, yet she was the first of that noble
fleet which inspired a Salem historian, Rev. George Bachelor, to write
in an admirable tribute to the town in which his life was passed:

“After a century of comparative quiet, the citizens of this little town
were suddenly dispersed to every part of the Oriental world and to
every nook of barbarism which had a market and a shore.... The reward
of enterprise might be the discovery of an island in which wild pepper
enough to load a ship might be had almost for the asking, or of forests
where precious gums had no commercial value, or spice islands unvexed
and unvisited by civilization. Every shipmaster and every mariner
returning on a richly loaded ship was the owner of valuable knowledge.

“Rival merchants sometimes drove the work of preparation night and
day when virgin markets had favors to be won, and ships which set out
for unknown ports were watched when they slipped their cables and
sailed away by night, and dogged for months on the high seas in the
hope of discovering the secret well kept by owner and crew. Every man
on board was allowed a certain space for a little venture. People in
other pursuits, not excepting the merchant’s minister, intrusted their
savings to the supercargo, and watched eagerly the results of their
ventures. This great mental activity, and profuse stores of knowledge
brought by every ship’s crew, and distributed, together with India
shawls, blue china, and unheard of curiosities from every savage shore,
gave the community a rare alertness of intellect.”

It was the spirit as is herein indicated that achieved its finest
flower in such merchants as Elias Hasket Derby. When his ships took
their departure from the Massachusetts coast they vanished beyond his
ken for one or two years. His captains were intrusted with the disposal
of the cargo to the best advantage. There was no sending orders by mail
or cable. It was this continual sense of facing unknown hazards, of
gambling with the sea and hostile, undiscovered shores that prompted
those old shipmasters to inscribe on the title pages of their log books:

“A Journal of an Intended Voyage by God’s Assistance ... Cape Ann bore
W.N.W. from whence I take my departure. So God send the good ship to
her Desired Port in Safety. Amen.”

[Illustration:

From a painting made by a Chinese artist at Canton, 1786

The _Grand Turk_, first American ship to touch at the Cape of Good Hope]

When the _Grand Turk_ made her first voyage to the Cape of Good Hope in
1784, commanded by Captain Jonathan Ingersoll, the scanty navigating
equipment of his time is said to have consisted of “a few erroneous
maps and charts, a sextant and a Guthrie’s Grammar.”[24] The _Grand
Turk_ made her passage in safety and while she lay in Table Bay,
Major Samuel Shaw, an American returning from Canton, sent a boat
aboard for Captain Ingersoll and later wrote of this Salem venture:

“The object was to sell, rum, cheese, salt, provisions and chocolate,
loaf sugar, butter, etc., the proceeds of which in money with a
quantity of ginseng, and some cash brought with him, Captain Ingersoll
intended to invest in Bohea tea; but as the ships bound to Europe
are not allowed to break bulk on the way, he was disappointed in
his expectations of procuring that article and sold his ginseng for
two-thirds of a Spanish dollar a pound, which is twenty per cent.
better than the silver money of the Cape. He intended remaining a short
time to purchase fine teas in the private trade allowed the officers
on board India ships, and then to sail to the coast of Guinea, to
dispose of his rum, etc., for ivory and gold dust; thence without
taking a single slave to proceed to the West Indies and purchase sugar
and cotton, with which he would return to Salem. Notwithstanding the
disappointment in the principal object of the voyage and the consequent
determination to go to the coast of Guinea, his resolution not to
endeavor to retrieve it by purchasing slaves did the captain great
honor, and reflected equal credit upon his employers, who, he assured
me, would rather sink the whole capital employed than directly or
indirectly be concerned in so infamous a trade.”

The _Grand Turk_ returned by way of the West Indies where the sales of
his cargo enabled her captain to load two ships for Salem. He sent the
_Grand Turk_ home in charge of the mate and returned in the _Atlantic_.
During the voyage Captain Ingersoll rescued the master and mate of
an English schooner, the _Amity_, whose crew had mutinied while off
the Spanish Main. The two officers had been cast adrift in a small
boat to perish. This was the first act in a unique drama of maritime
coincidence.

After the castaways had reached Salem, Captain Duncanson, the English
master of the _Amity_, was the guest of Mr. Elias Hasket Derby while
he waited for word from his owners and an opportunity to return to his
home across the Atlantic. He spent much of his time on the water front
as a matter of course, and used to stand at a window of Mr. Derby’s
counting house idly staring at the harbor.

One day while sweeping the seaward horizon with the office spyglass,
the forlorn British skipper let fly an oath of the most profound
amazement. He dropped the glass, rubbed his eyes, chewed his beard and
stared again. A schooner was making across the bar, and presently she
stood clear of the islands at the harbor mouth and slipped toward an
anchorage well inside.

There was no mistaking her at this range. It was the _Amity_, his own
schooner which had been taken from him in the West Indies, from which
he and his mate had been cast adrift by the piratical seamen. Captain
Duncanson hurried into Mr. Derby’s private office as fast as his legs
could carry him. By some incredible twist of fate the captors of the
_Amity_ had sailed her straight to her captain.

Mr. Derby was a man of the greatest promptitude and one of his anchored
brigs was instantly manned with a heavy crew, two deck guns slung
aboard, and with Captain Duncanson striding the quarterdeck, the brig
stood down to take the _Amity_. It was Captain Duncanson who led the
boarders, and the mutineers were soon overpowered and fetched back to
Salem jail in irons. The grateful skipper and his mate signed a crew in
Salem, and took the _Amity_ to sea, a vessel restored to her own by so
marvelous an event that it would be laughed out of court as material
for fiction.

In November, 1785, the _Grand Turk_ was cleared, in command of Captain
Ebenezer West for the Isle of France, but her owner had it in his mind,
and so instructed his captain, to continue the voyage to Batavia and
China. In June of 1787, she returned to Salem with a cargo of teas,
silks, and nankeens; a notable voyage in seas when the American flag
was almost unknown. Her successful commerce with Canton lent a slightly
humorous flavor to the comment of the _Independent Chronicle_ of
London, dated July 29, 1785:

“The Americans have given up all thought of a China trade which can
never be carried on to advantage without some settlement in the East
Indies.”

Captain Ebenezer West who took the _Grand Turk_ to the Orient on this
voyage was a member of so admirable a family of American seamen and
shipmasters that the records of the three brothers as written down in
the official records of the Salem Marine Society deserves a place in
this chapter.

“Captain Nathaniel West was born in Salem, Jan. 31, 1756, and died
here December 19, 1851. His elder brother, Ebenezer, and his younger,
Edward, as well as himself, were possessed of great energy and
enterprise, and all three early selected the ocean for their field of
action. Ebenezer was for nearly four years during the Revolution a
prisoner of war, and was exchanged shortly before peace was proclaimed.
He subsequently had command of E. H. Derby’s famous ship, the _Grand
Turk_, and in her completed the second voyage by an American vessel to
Canton, returning to Salem in 1786.

“Capt. Edward West, the youngest, was in command of his brother
Nathaniel’s ship, _Hercules_, seized in Naples in 1809, and had the
good fortune to obtain her release in order to transport Lucien
Bonaparte and family to Malta, thus saving his ship from confiscation.
He died at Andover, June 22, 1851, six months before his brother
Nathaniel, at the age of ninety-one.

“In 1775, Nathaniel, at the age of nineteen, being in command of a
merchant vessel in the West India trade, was captured by a British
frigate, and was soon recognized by Capt. Gayton, her commander, as
the son of an old friend, and was compelled to serve as midshipman on
board a British seventy-four, under the command of Capt. Edwards. Of
their personal kindness he often spoke in after life. Being on shore
as officer of a press gang, he effected his escape in London, and made
his way to Lisbon, where he embarked on board the _Oliver Cromwell_,
a Salem privateer of sixteen guns, and returned to this port. On the
passage, having been closely pursued for three days, he narrowly
escaped being captured by a British frigate. Aware of his impending
fate, if taken, he encouraged and stimulated the crew to the use of the
sweeps, himself tugging at the oar, and by his energy and incessant
diligence was mainly instrumental in saving the ship.

He made several cruises in the _Oliver Cromwell_ and other armed
vessels, and took many prizes. He participated with the famous Captain
of the privateer _Black Prince_, carrying eighteen guns and one hundred
and fifty men. On one occasion, with Capt. Nathaniel Silsbee as his
Lieutenant, he put into Cork on a dark night and cut out and took away
a valuable prize.

Capt. West subsequently embarked in commerce and pursued it with
continued success until he had amassed a large fortune. He was among
the pioneers in various branches of trade, the Northwest, China,
East India, etc.—and knew their origin and progress through their
various stages. In 1792, he built and despatched the schooner _Patty_,
commanded by his brother, Capt. Edward West, and she was the first
American vessel to visit Batavia. His ship _Prudent_ (in 1805) was
among the first of the very few American vessels that visited the Dutch
Spice Islands, Amboyna, etc. His ship _Minerva_ was the first Salem
vessel to circumnavigate the globe, having sailed from here in 1800
for the N. W. coast and China. His ship _Hercules_, under his brother
Edward’s command, on the conclusion of the war with Great Britain in
1815, was the first vessel to sail from the United States for the
East Indies, under the terms of the treaty. The _Hercules_, built for
Capt. West in 1805, was a few years since doing good service as a
whaler out of New Bedford, and is, we believe, still in existence.

[Illustration: Nathaniel West]

“His age so nearly approximated an hundred years that we may say he
flourished during four generations of his race, in the most active
and enterprising walks of life. In person, Capt. West was of fine
figure, and of a majestic mien and gait. He never forgot the dignity
which belonged to his years and station. He was a gentleman of the
old school in manners and dress, and adhered with scrupulous tenacity
to the costume of his early years. His physical powers were so little
impaired, even in his extreme old age, that he was frequently seen
driving along in his gig, or walking with vigorous and elastic step,
until a very short time before his death; and many of our readers can
recall his commanding and dignified appearance in our streets. He
united in himself personal frugality, economy, and untiring industry;
and his favorite maxim was, ‘without these none can be rich, and with
these few would be poor.’”

When Mr. Derby decided to push out for a share of the East India
commerce he sent his eldest son, Elias Hasket, Jr., to England and
the Continent as soon as he was graduated from Harvard College. There
the young man remained until he had become a linguist and had made a
thorough study of the English and French methods of trade with the Far
East. Having laid this thorough foundation for his bold venture, Elias
Hasket, Jr., was now sent to India where he lived three years in the
interests of his house, and firmly established an immensely profitable
trade which for half a century was to make the name of Salem far more
widely known in Bombay and Canton than that of New York or Boston. A
little later the Derby ship _Astrea_ was showing the American flag to
the natives of Siam.

How fortunes were won in those brave days may be learned from the
record of young Derby’s activities while in the Far East. In 1788 the
proceeds of one cargo enabled him to buy a ship and a brigantine in the
Isle of France (Mauritius) in the Indian Ocean. These two vessels he
sent to Bombay to load with cotton. Two other ships of his house, the
_Astrea_ and the _Light Horse_ he filled with cargoes at Calcutta and
Rangoon, and sent them home to Salem. Then he returned in still another
ship, the brig _Henry_.

When the profit of these several transactions were reckoned it was
found that more than $100,000 had been earned by this little fleet
above all outlay. Soon after his return young Derby sailed for Mocha,
an Arabian port in the Red Sea, to pick up a cargo of coffee. The
natives had never heard of America, and the strange vessel was a nine
days’ wonder.

In 1788 Mr. Derby decided to send a ship for a direct voyage to
Batavia, another novel commercial undertaking. While the purely
business side of these enterprises is not thrilling, it holds a certain
interest as showing the responsibilities of the shipmasters upon whose
judgment depended the results of the voyage. For this first American
voyage to Batavia, the instructions of the captain and supercargo from
the owner, Mr. Derby, read as follows:

“SALEM, February, 1789.

“CAPTAIN JAMES MAGEE, Jr.,

“MR. THOMAS PERKINS (supercargo)

“Gents: The ship _Astrea_ of which James Magee is master and Mr.
Thomas Perkins is supercargo, being ready for sea, I do advise and
order you to come to sail, and make the best of your way for Batavia,
and on your arrival there you will dispose of such part of your cargo
as you think may be the most for my interest.

“I think you had best sell a few casks of the most ordinary ginseng,
if you can get one dollar a pound for it. If the price of sugar be
low, you will then take into the ship as much of the best white kind
as will floor her, and fifty thousand weight of coffee, if it is as
low as we have heard—part of which you will be able to stow between
the beams and the quintlings, and fifteen thousand of saltpeter, if
very low; some nutmegs, and fifty thousand weight of pepper. This you
will stow in the fore peak, for fear of its injuring the teas. The
sugar will save the expense of any stone ballast and it will make a
floor for the teas, etc., at Canton.

“At Batavia you must if possible, get as much freight for Canton as
will pay half or more of your charges; that is, if it will not detain
you too long, as by this addition of freight it will exceedingly help
the voyage. You must endeavor to be the first ship with ginseng, for
be assured you will do better alone than you will if there are three
or four ships at Canton at the same time with you....

“Captain Magee and Mr. Perkins are to have five per cent. commission
for the sales of the present cargo and two and one-half per cent. on
the cargo home, and also five per cent. on the profit made on goods
that may be purchased at Batavia and sold at Canton, or in any other
similar case that may arise on the voyage. They are to have one-half
the passage money—the other half belongs to the ship. The privileges
of Captain Magee is five per cent. of what the ship carries on cargo,
exclusive of adventures. It is ordered that the ship’s books shall be
open to the inspection of the mates and doctor of the ship, so that
they may know the whole business, as in case of death or sickness it
may be of good service in the voyage. The Philadelphia beer is put up
so strong that it will not be approved of until it is made weaker; you
had best try some of it first.

“You will be careful not to break any acts of trade while you are
out on the voyage, to lay the ship and cargo liable to seizure, for
my insurance will not make it good. Be very careful of the expense
attending the voyage, and remember that a one dollar laid out while
absent is two dollars out of the voyage. Pay particular attention to
the quality of your goods, as your voyage very much depends on your
attention to this. You are not to pay any moneys to the crew while
absent from home unless in a case of real necessity, and then they
must allow an advance for the money. Annexed to these orders you have
a list of such a cargo for my own account as I at present think may do
best for me, but you will add or diminish any article as the price may
be.

“... Captain Magee and Mr. Perkins—Although I have been a little
particular in these orders, I do not mean them as positive; and you
have leave to break them in any part where you by calculation think
it for my interest, excepting your breaking Acts of Trade which I
absolutely forbid. Not having to add anything, I commit you to the
Almighty’s protection, and remain your friend and employer,

“ELIAS HASKET DERBY.”

The captain was expected to “break his orders in any part,” if he could
drive a better bargain than his employer had been able to foresee
at a distance of ten thousand miles from the market. Merchants as
well as navigators, the old-time shipmaster found compensation for
these arduous responsibilities in the “privileges” which allowed him
a liberal amount of cargo space on their own account, as well as a
commission on the sales of the freight out and back. His own share of
the profits of two or three voyages to the Far East might enable him
to buy and ship and freight a vessel for himself. Thereafter, if he
were shrewd and venturesome enough, he rose rapidly to independence and
after a dozen years of the quarterdeck was ready to step ashore as a
merchant with his own counting house and his fleet of stout ships.

In 1793, Captain Jonathan Carnes of Salem was looking for trade along
the Sumatra coast. Touching at the port of Bencoolen, he happened to
learn that wild pepper might be found along the northwest coast of
Sumatra. The Dutch East India Company was not as alert as this solitary
Yankee shipmaster, roaming along strange and hostile shores.

Captain Carnes kept his knowledge to himself, completed his voyage to
Salem, and there whispered to a merchant, Jonathan Peele, that as soon
as possible a secret pepper expedition should be fitted out. Mr. Peele
ordered a fast schooner built. She was called the _Rajah_, and carried
four guns and ten men. There was much gossiping speculation about her
destination, but Captain Carnes had nothing at all to say. In November,
1795, he cleared for Sumatra and not a soul in Salem except his owner
and himself knew whither he was bound. The cargo consisted of brandy,
gin, iron, tobacco and dried fish to be bartered for wild pepper.

For eighteen months no word returned from the _Rajah_, and her
mysterious quest. Captain Carnes might have been wrecked on coasts
whereof he had no charts, or he might have been slain by hostile
natives. But Jonathan Peele, having risked his stake, as Salem
merchants were wont to do, busied himself with other affairs and pinned
his faith to the proven sagacity and pluck of Jonathan Carnes. At last,
a string of signal flags fluttered from the harbor mouth. Jonathan
Peele reached for his spyglass, and saw a schooner’s topsails lifting
from seaward. The _Rajah_ had come home, and when she let go her anchor
in Salem harbor, Captain Jonathan Carnes brought word ashore that he
had secured a cargo of wild pepper in bulk which would return a profit
of at least seven hundred per cent. of the total cost of vessel and
voyage. In other words, this one “adventure” of the _Rajah_ realized
what amounted to a comfortable fortune in that generation.

There was great excitement among the other Salem merchants. They
forsook their desks to discuss this pepper bonanza, but Captain
Jonathan Carnes had nothing to say and Mr. Jonathan Peele was as dumb
as a Salem harbor clam. The _Rajah_ was at once refitted for a second
Sumatra voyage, and in their eagerness to fathom her dazzling secret,
several rival merchants hastily made vessels ready for sea with orders
to go to that coast as fast as canvas could carry them and endeavor to
find out where Captain Carnes found his wild pepper. They hurried to
Bencoolen, but were unsuccessful and had to proceed to India to fill
their holds with whatever cargoes came to hand. Meanwhile the _Rajah_
slipped away for a second pepper voyage, and returned with a hundred
and fifty thousand pounds of the precious condiment.

There was no hiding this mystery from Salem merchants for long,
however, and by the time the _Rajah_ had made three pepper voyages, the
rivals were at her heels, bartering with native chieftains and stowing
their holds with the wild pepper which long continued to be one of the
most profitable articles of the Salem commerce with the Orient. It was
a fine romance of trade, this story of Captain Carnes and the _Rajah_,
and characteristic of the men and methods of the time. For half a
century a large part of the pepper used in all countries was reshipped
from the port of Salem, a trade which flourished until 1850. During the
period between the first voyage of Captain Carnes and 1845, the Salem
custom house records bore the entries of almost two hundred vessels
from the port of Sumatra.

While Sumatra and China and India were being sought by Salem ships,
Elias Hasket Derby in 1796 sent his good ship _Astrea_ on a pioneer
voyage to Manila. She was the first American vessel to find that port,
and was loaded with a rich cargo of sugar, pepper and indigo, on which
twenty-four thousand dollars in duties were paid at the Salem Custom
House.

To carry on such a business as that controlled by Elias Hasket Derby,
enlisted the activities of many men and industries. While his larger
ships were making their distant voyages, his brigs and schooners were
gathering the future cargoes for the Orient; voyaging to Gothenburg
and St. Petersburg for iron, duck and hemp; to France, Spain and
Madeira for wine and lead; to the West Indies for rum, and to New York,
Philadelphia and Richmond for flour, provisions, iron, and tobacco.
These shipments were assembled in the warehouses of Derby wharf, and
paid for in the teas, coffee, pepper, muslin, silks and ivory which
the ships from the far East were bringing home. In fourteen years Mr.
Derby’s ships to the far Eastern ports and Europe made one hundred and
twenty-five voyages, and of the thirty-five vessels engaged in this
traffic only one was lost at sea.

In one of the most entertaining and instructive chapters of “Walden,”
Thoreau takes the trouble to explain the business of a successful
shipping merchant of Salem. The description of his activities may be
fairly applied to Elias Hasket Derby and his times.

“To oversee all the details yourself in person; to be at once pilot
and captain, and owner and underwriter; to buy and sell and keep the
accounts; to read every letter received, and write or read every
letter sent; to superintend the discharge of imports night and day;
to be upon many ports of the coast almost at the same time—often the
richest freights will be discharged upon a Jersey shore; to be your own
telegraph, unweariedly sweeping the horizon, speaking all vessels bound
coastwise; to keep up a steady dispatch of commodities for the supply
of such a distant and exorbitant market; to keep yourself informed of
the state of the markets, prospects of war and peace everywhere, and
anticipate the tendencies of trade and civilization. Taking advantage
of the results of all exploring expeditions using new passages and all
improvements in navigation; charts to be studied, the position of reefs
and new lights and buoys to be corrected, for by the error of some
calculator the vessel often splits upon a rock that should have reached
a friendly pier; universal science to be kept pace with, studying the
lives of all great discoverers and navigators, great adventurers and
merchants, from Hanno and the Phœnicians down to our day; in fine,
account of stock must be taken from time to time, to know how you
stand. It is such a labor to task the faculties of a man—such problems
of profit and loss, of interest, of tare and tret, and gauging of all
kinds in it, as demand a universal knowledge.”

There is to-day nothing at all comparable with the community of
interests which bound all Salem in a kinship with the sea and its
affairs. Every ship for China or India carried a list of “adventures,”
small speculations entrusted to the captain or supercargo, contributed
by boys and girls, sweethearts, brothers, mothers and wives. In the log
of Mr. Derby’s ship, the _Astrea_, for a voyage to Batavia and Canton
are the following “memoranda” of “adventures,” which were to be sold by
the captain and the profits brought home to the investors:

“Captain Nathaniel West. 15 boxes spermacetti candles. 1 pipe
Teneriffe wine.”

“James Jeffry. 1 cask ginseng.”

“George Dodge. 10 Dollars. 1 pipe Madeira wine.”

In searching among the old logs for these “adventures,” the author
found “on board Ship _Messenger_ of Salem, 1816”:

“Memorandum of Miss Harriet Elkin’s Adventure.

“Please to purchase if at Calcutta two net bead with draperies; if at
Batavia or any spice market, nutmegs, and mace, or if at Canton,
Two Canton Crape shawls of the enclosed colors at $5 per shawl.
Enclosed is $10. Signed.

“HENRIETTA ELKINS.”

[Illustration: William Gray]

[Illustration: Elias Hasket Derby]

“Memorandum of Mr. John R. Tucker’s Adventure.

“Mr. C. STANLEY, Sir:

“I hand you a bag containing 100 Spanish dollars for my adventure on
board the ship _Messenger_ which please invest in coffee and sugar, if
you have room after the cargo is on board. If not, invest the amount
in nutmegs, or spice as you think best. Please do for me as you do for
your own, and oblige your obt.

“JOHN R. TUCKER.

“To EDWARD STANLEY, master.”

Captain Stanley kept an itemized record of his transactions with Mr. J.
Tucker’s one hundred Spanish dollars, and it may be interesting to note
how such an “adventure” was handled to reap profits for the waiting
speculator in faraway Salem. The captain first bought in Batavia ten
bags of coffee for $83.30, which with boat hire, duty and sacking made
the total outlay $90.19. This coffee he sold in Antwerp on his way
home for $183.75. Arriving at Salem he paid over to Mr. Tucker the sum
of $193.57, or almost one hundred per cent. profit on the amount of
the “adventure.” This is enough to show why this kind of speculative
investment was so popular in the Salem of a century ago.

The same ship carried also “Mrs. Mary Townsend’s adventure,” to wit:

“Please to purchase lay out five dollars which I send by you, Vizt:

“One Tureen 14 by 10 Inches, China. One Nett bead and you will oblige.”

Almost every household of Salem had its own menfolk or near kinfolk on
the sea, not in the offshore fisheries, nor in the coastwise trade
where the perils of their calling might be somewhat atoned for by the
frequent visits of these loved ones. The best and bravest men of Salem
were in the deep-water, square-rigged vessels which vanished toward
the Orient and to the South Seas to be gone, not months but years on a
voyage.

After open hostilities had fairly begun between France and the United
States, in 1798, our ports began to send out privateersmen and the
merchants’ fleets sought refuge. Elias Hasket Derby, with a revival
of his bold Revolutionary spirit, decided to risk a cargo of sugar
and coffee to meet the urgent demands of the Mediterranean ports. For
this particular mission he built the ship _Mount Vernon_, a notable
combination of commercial and naval fitness. She was the last venture
of this great merchant, and with characteristic enterprise he took the
chances of evading the French and the Algerine pirates with a cargo
whose profits would be enormous if the _Mount Vernon_ could make the
passage in safety. This fine ship was only one hundred feet long, but
she carried fifty men and twenty guns. She was built for speed as
well as fighting ability, and she made Cape Vincent on her outward
passage in sixteen days from Salem. Her voyage was a brilliant success,
although her owner died before she came home. The _Mount Vernon_ on
this one voyage paid to the Derby estate a profit of one hundred
thousand dollars on a total investment for ship and cargoes of $43,000.
The letter book of the _Mount Vernon_ for this notable voyage in the
history of the American merchant marine tells how she fought her way
across the Atlantic. Captain Elias Hasket Derby, junior, was in charge
of the vessel, and he wrote his father as follows:

“GIBRALTER, 1st, August, 1799.

“E. H. DERBY, Esq., Salem:

“Honored Sir: I think you must be surprised to find me here so early.
I arrived at this port in seventeen and one-half days from the time
my brother left the ship (off Salem). In eight days and seven hours
were up with Carvo, and made Cape St. Vincent in sixteen days. The
first of our passage was quite agreeable; the latter light winds,
calm, and Frenchmen constantly in sight for the last four days. The
first Frenchman we saw was off Tercira, a lugger to the southward.
Being uncertain of his force, we stood by him to leeward on our course
and soon left him.

“July 28th in the afternoon we found ourselves approaching a fleet of
upwards of fifty sail, steering nearly N. E. We run directly for their
centre; at 4 o’clock found ourselves in their half-moon; concluding
it impossible that it could be any other than the English fleet,
continued our course for their centre, to avoid any apprehension of a
want of confidence in them. They soon dispatched an 18-gun ship from
their centre, and two frigates, one from their van and another from
the rear to beat towards us, being to windward.

“On approaching the centre ship under easy sail, I fortunately
bethought myself that it would be but common prudence to steer so far
to windward of him as to be a gunshot’s distance from him; to observe
his force, and manoevering. When we were abreast of him he fired a gun
to leeward and hoisted English colors. We immediately bore away and
meant to pass under his quarter, between him and the fleet, showing
our American colors. This movement disconcerted him and it appeared to
me he conceived we were either an American sloop of war or an English
one in distress, attempting to cut him off from the fleet. While we
were in the act of wearing on his beam, he hoisted _French_ colors and
gave us his broadside.

“We immediately brought our ship to the wind and stood on about a
mile, wore towards the centre of the fleet, hove about and crossed
on him on the other tack about half grape shot distance and received
his broadside. Several of his shot fell on board of us, and cut our
sails—two round shot striking us, without much damage. All hands were
active in clearing ship for action, for our surprise had been complete.

“In about ten minutes we commenced firing our stern chasers and
in a quarter of an hour gave him our broadside in such a style as
apparently sickened him, for he immediately luffed in the wind,
gave us his broadside, went in stays in great confusion, wore ship
afterwards in a large circle, and renewed the chase at a mile and a
half distance—a manoever calculated to keep up appearances with the
fleet and to escape our shot. We received seven or eight broadsides
from him, and I was mortified at not having it in my power to return
him an equal number without exposing myself to the rest of the fleet,
for I am persuaded I should have had the pleasure of sending him home
had he been separate from them.

“At midnight we had distanced them, the chasing rocket signals being
almost out of sight, and soon left them. We then kept ourselves in
constant preparation till my arrival here; and indeed it had been
very requisite, for we have been in constant brushes ever since. The
day after we left the (French) fleet we were chased till night by two
frigates whom we lost sight of when it was dark. The next morning off
Cape St. Vincent in the latitude of Cadiz, were chased by a French
lateen-rigged vessel apparently of 10 or 12 guns, one of them an
18-pounder. We brought to, for his metal was too heavy for ours, and
his position was to windward, where he lay just in a situation to cast
his shot over us, and it was not in my power to put him off. We of
course bore away, and saluted him with our long nines. He continued in
chase till dark and when we were nearly by Cadiz, at sunset, he made
a signal to his consort, a large lugger whom we had just discovered
ahead. Having a strong breeze I was determined to pass my stern over
him if he did not make way for me. He thought prudent so to do.

[Illustration: The ship _Mount Vernon_, owned by Elias Hasket Derby,
in her fight with a French fleet]

“At midnight we made the lights in Cadiz city but found no English
fleet. After laying to till daybreak, concluded that the French must
have gained the ascendency in Cadiz and thought prudent to proceed to
this place where we arrived at 12 o’clock, _popping at Frenchmen all
the forenoon_. At 10 A. M. off Algeciras Point were seriously attacked
by a large latineer who had on board more than 100 men. He came so
near our broadside as to allow our six-pound grape to do execution
handsomely. We then bore away and gave him our stern guns in a cool
and deliberate manner, doing apparently great execution. Our bars
having cut his sails considerably he was thrown into confusion, struck
both his ensign and his pennant. I was then puzzled to know what to
do with so many men; our ship was running large with all her steering
sails out, so that we could not immediately bring her to the wind and
we were directly off Algeciras Point from whence I had reason to fear
she might receive assistance, and my port (Gibralter) in full view.

“These were circumstances that induced me to give up the gratification
of bringing him in. It was, however, a satisfaction to flog the rascal
in full view of the English fleet who were to leeward. The risk of
sending here is great, indeed, for any ship short of our force in men
and guns—but particularly heavy guns.

“It is absolutely necessary that two Government ships should
occasionally range the straits and latitude of Cadiz, from the
longitude of Cape St. Vincent. I have, now while writing to you, two
of our countrymen in full view who are prizes to these villains.
Lord St. Vincent, in a 50-gun ship bound for England, is just at
this moment in the act of retaking one of them. The other goes into
Algeciras without molestation.

“You need have but little apprehension for my safety, as my crew are
remarkably well trained and are perfectly well disposed to defend
themselves; and I think after having cleared ourselves from the
French in such a handsome manner, you may well conclude that we can
effect almost anything. If I should go to Constantinople, it will be
with a passport from Admiral Nelson for whom I may carry a letter to
Naples.

“Your affectionate son,

“ELIAS HASKET DERBY.”

That the experience of Captain Elias Hasket Derby, Jr., in the _Mount
Vernon_ was not an unusual one is indicated by the following letter
written by Captain Richard Wheatland and published in a Salem newspaper
of 1799 under these stirring headlines:

“_A sea Fight gallantly and vigorously maintained by the Ship
Perseverance, Captain Richard Wheatland of this port against one of
the vessels of the Terrible Republic. The French Rascals, contrary
to the Laws of War and Honor, fought under false colours, whilst the
Eagle, true to his charge, spreads his wings on the American flag._”

“SHIP PERSEVERANCE,

“Old Straits of Bahama, Jan. 1, 1799.

“Dec. 31st. Key Romain in sight, bearing south, distance four or five
leagues. A schooner has been in chase of us since eight o’clock,
and has every appearance of being a privateer. At one o’clock P. M.
finding the schooner come up with us very fast, took in steering
sails, fore and aft and royals; at half-past one about ship and stood
for her; she immediately tacked and made sail from us. We fired a
gun to leeward and hoisted the American ensign to our mizzen peak;
she hoisted a Spanish jack at main-top masthead and continued to run
from us. Finding she outsailed us greatly, and wishing to get through
the Narrows in the Old Straits, at two o’clock P. M. we again about
ship and kept on our course. The schooner immediately wore, fired a
gun to leeward, and kept after us under a great press of sail.
At half-past two she again fired a gun to leeward, but perceiving
ourselves in the Narrows above mentioned, we kept on to get through
them if possible before she came up with us, which we effected.

[Illustration: Elias Hasket Derby mansion (1799-1816)]

[Illustration: Prince House. Home of Richard Derby. Built about 1750]

“At three o’clock finding ourselves fairly clear of Sugar Key and Key
Laboas, we took in steering sails, wore ship, hauled up our courses,
piped all hands to quarters and prepared for action. The schooner
immediately took in sail, hoisted an English Union flag, and passed
under our lee at a considerable distance. We wore ship, she did the
same and we passed each other within half a musket. A fellow hailed us
in broken English and ordered the boat hoisted out and the captain to
come on board with his papers, which he refused. He again ordered our
boat out and enforced his orders with a menace that in case of refusal
he would sink us, using at the same time the vilest and most infamous
language it is possible to conceive of.

“By this time he had fallen considerably astern of us; he wore and
came up on our starboard quarter, giving us a broadside as he passed
our stern, but fired so excessively wild that he did us very little
injury, while our stern-chasers gave him a noble dose of round shot
and lagrange. We hauled the ship to wind and as he passed poured a
whole broadside into him with great success. Sailing faster than we
he ranged considerably ahead, tacked and again passed, giving us a
broadside and a furious discharge of musketry which they kept up
incessantly until the latter part of the engagement.

“His musket balls reached us in every direction, but his large shot
either fell short or went considerably over us while our guns loaded
with round shot and square bars of iron, six inches long, were plied
so briskly and directed with such good judgment that before he got
out of range we had cut his mainsail and foretopsail all to rags and
cleared his decks so effectively that when he bore away from us there
were scarcely ten men to be seen. He then struck his English flag and
hoisted the flag of the Terrible Republic and made off with all the
sail he could carry, much disappointed, no doubt, at not being able to
give us a fraternal embrace.

“The wind being light and knowing he would outsail us, added to a
solicitude to complete our voyage, prevented our pursuing him; indeed
we had sufficient to gratify our revenge for his temerity, for there
was scarcely a single fire from our guns but what spread entirely
over his hull. The action which lasted an hour and twenty minutes,
we conceive ended well, for exclusive of preserving the property
entrusted to our care, we feel confidence that we have rid the world
of some infamous pests of society. We were within musket shot the
whole time of the engagement, and were so fortunate as to receive
but very trifling injury. Not a person on board met the slightest
harm. Our sails were a little torn and one of the quarterdeck guns
dismounted.

“The privateer was a schooner of 80 or 90 tons, copper bottom, and
fought five or six guns on a side. We are now within forty-eight hours
sail of Havana, where we expect to arrive in safety; indeed we have
no fear of any privateer’s preventing us unless greatly superior in
force. The four quarterdeck guns will require new carriages, and one
of them was entirely dismounted.

“We remain with esteem,

“Gentlemen,

“Your Humble Servant,

“RICHARD WHEATLAND.”

FOOTNOTES:

[24] The edition of 1800 of this popular compendium of knowledge bore
on the title page: “A New Geographical, Historical and Commercial
Grammar and Present State of the Several Kingdoms of the World.
Illustrated with a Correct Set of Maps, Engraved from the Most Recent
Observations and Draughts of Geographical Travellers. The Eighteenth
Edition Corrected and Considerably enlarged. London. 1800.”

The work contained “Longitude, Latitude, Bearings and Distances of
Principal Places from London” as one of its qualifications for use
among mariners.

CHAPTER XI

PIONEERS IN DISTANT SEAS

(1775-1817)

The name of Joseph Peabody takes rank with that of Elias Hasket
Derby as an American who did much to upbuild the commerce, wealth
and prestige of his nation in its younger days. It may sound like an
old-fashioned doctrine in this present age of concentration of wealth
at the expense of a sturdy and independent citizenship, to assert
that such men as Joseph Peabody deserve much more honor for the kind
of manhood they helped to foster than for the riches they amassed for
themselves. They did not seek to crush competition, to drive out of
business the men around them who were ambitious to win a competence
on their own merits and to call themselves free citizens of a free
country. Those were the days of equal opportunities, which shining
fact finds illustration in the career of Joseph Peabody, for example,
who, during his career as a ship owner, advanced to the rank of master
thirty-five of his fellow townsmen who had entered his employ as cabin
boys or seamen. Every one of these shipmasters, “if he had the stuff
in him,” became an owner of shipping, a merchant with his own business
on shore, an employer who was eager, in his turn, to advance his own
masters and mates to positions of independence in which they might work
out their own careers.

During the early years of the nineteenth century, Joseph Peabody built
and owned eighty-three ships which he freighted on his own account and
sent to every corner of the world. The stout square-riggers which flew
the Peabody house flag made thirty-eight voyages to Calcutta, seventeen
to Canton, thirty-two to Sumatra, forty-seven to St. Petersburg, and
thirty to other ports of Europe. To man this noble fleet no fewer than
seven thousand seamen signed shipping articles in the counting room of
Joseph Peabody. The extent of his commerce is indicated by the amount
of duties paid by some of these ships. In 1825 and 1826, the _Leander_,
a small brig of two hundred and twenty-three tons, made two voyages to
Canton which paid into the Salem Custom House duties of $86,847, and
$92,392 respectively. In 1829, 1830, and 1831, the _Sumatra_, a ship
of less than three hundred tons, came home from China with cargoes,
the duties on which amounted to $128,363; $138,480, and $140,761. The
five voyages named, and all of them were made in ships no larger than a
small two-masted coasting schooner of to-day, paid in duties a total of
almost six hundred thousand dollars.

Typical of the ships which won wealth and prestige for Joseph Peabody,
was the redoubtable _George_ which was the most successful vessel of
her period. For twenty-two years she was in the East India trade,
making twenty-one round voyages with such astonishing regularity as
to challenge comparison with the schedules of the cargo tramps of
to-day. She was only one hundred and ten feet in length, with a beam
of twenty-seven feet, but during her staunch career the _George_ paid
into the United States Treasury as duties on her imports more than six
hundred thousand dollars.

She was built in 1814 by a number of Salem ship carpenters who had been
deprived of work by the stagnation of the War of 1812. They intended
to launch her as a co-operative privateer, to earn her way by force
of arms when peaceable merchantmen were driven from the high seas.
But the war ended too soon to permit these enterprising shipwrights
to seek British plunder and they sold the _George_ to Joseph Peabody.
She sailed for India in 1815, with hardly a man in her company, from
quarterdeck to forecastle, more than twenty-one years of age. Every man
aboard of her could read and write, and most of the seamen had studied
navigation.

Not always did these enterprising and adventurous Salem lads return
to their waiting mothers. In the log of the _George_ for a voyage to
Calcutta in 1824, the mate has drawn with pencil a tombstone and a
weeping willow as a tribute to one Greenleaf Perley, a young seaman who
died in that far-off port. The mate was a poet of sorts and beneath the
headstone he wrote these lines:

“The youth ambitious sought a sickly clime,
His hopes of profit banished all his fears;
His was the generous wish of love divine,
To sooth a mother’s cares and dry her tears.”

Joseph Peabody began his sea life when a lad in his teens in the hardy
school of the Revolutionary privateersmen. He made his first cruise
in Elias Hasket Derby’s privateer, _Bunker Hill_, and his second in
the _Pilgrim_ owned by the Cabots of Beverly. A little later he became
second officer of a letter of marque ship, the _Ranger_, owned by
Boston and Salem shipping merchants. It was while aboard the _Ranger_
that young Peabody won his title as a fighting seaman. Leaving Salem
in the winter of 1781-82, the _Ranger_ carried salt to Richmond, and
loaded with flour at Alexandria for Havana. Part of this cargo of flour
was from the plantation of George Washington, and the immortal story of
the hatchet and the cherry tree must have been known in Cuba even then,
for the Spanish merchants expressed a preference for this brand of
flour and showed their confidence by receiving it at the marked weight
without putting it on the scales.

The _Ranger_ returned to Alexandria for another cargo of flour, and
on July 5th, 1782, dropped down the Potomac, ready for sea. Head
winds compelled her to anchor near the mouth of the river. At three
o’clock of the following night, the seaman on watch ran aft, caught
up a speaking trumpet, and shouted down to the sleeping officers in
the cabin that two boats were making for the ship. Captain Simmons and
Lieutenant Peabody rushed up the companionway, and as they reached the
deck, received a volley of musketry from the darkness. Captain Simmons
fell, badly wounded, and Peabody ran forward in his night clothes,
calling to the crew to get their boarding pikes. He caught up a pike
and with a brave and ready seaman named Kent, sprang to the bows and
engaged in a hand to hand fight with the boarding party which was
already pouring over the rail from the boat alongside.

The _Ranger’s_ crew rallied and held the deck against this invasion
until a second boat made fast in another quarter and swept the deck
with musket fire. The first officer was in the magazine below, breaking
out ammunition, the captain was wounded, and the command of this
awkward situation fell upon Lieutenant, or Second Officer Peabody, who
was a conspicuous mark in his white nightshirt. He ordered cold shot
heaved into the boats to sink them if possible, and one of them was
smashed and sunk in short order.

Peabody then mustered his crew against the boarding party from the
other boat, and drove them overboard. After the _Ranger’s_ decks had
been cleared in fierce and bloody fashion and the fight was won, it was
found that one of her crew was dead, three wounded, the captain badly
hurt, and although Peabody had not known it in the heat of action, he
had stopped two musket balls and bore the marks of a third. One of
the very able seamen of the _Ranger_ had seen a boarder about to fire
point-blank at Peabody and with a sweep of his cutlass he cut off
the hand that held the pistol. For this service Peabody made the seaman
a life-long pensioner, showing that his heart was in the right place in
more ways than one.

[Illustration: Joseph Peabody]

The _Ranger_ carried twenty men and seven guns at this time, and the
enemy attempted to carry the ship with sixty men in two barges, their
loss being more than forty in killed and wounded. They were later
ascertained to be a band of Tories who had infested the bay of the
mouth of the Potomac for some time, and had captured a brig of ten
guns and thirty men a few days before this. The _Ranger_ sailed up to
Alexandria to refit and land her wounded, and the merchants of the town
presented the ship with a silver mounted boarding-pike in token of
their admiring gratitude for her stout defense. This trophy became the
property of Joseph Peabody and was highly prized as an adornment of his
Salem mansion in later years.

When the _Ranger_ went to sea again, Thomas Perkins of Salem, her first
officer, was given the command and Peabody sailed with him as chief
mate. Thus began a friendship which later became a business partnership
in which Perkins amassed a large fortune of his own. Peabody sailed as
a shipmaster for a Salem firm for several years after peace came, and
at length bought a schooner, the _Three Friends_, in which he traded to
the West Indies and Europe. The story of his career thereafter was one
of successful speculation in ships and cargoes and of a growing fleet
of deep-water vessels until his death in 1844, a venerable man of large
public spirit, and shining integrity, a pillar of his state and town,
whose fortune had been won in the golden age of American enterprise in
remote seas.

William Gray completed the triumvirate of Salem ship owners of
surpassing sagacity and success, his name being rightfully linked
with those of Elias Hasket Derby and Joseph Peabody. He served his
apprenticeship in the counting room of Richard Derby and was one of the
earliest American shipping merchants to seek the trade of Canton and
the ports of the East Indies. In 1807 he owned fifteen ships, seven
barks, thirteen brigs, and one schooner, or one-fourth of the tonnage
of the port. He became the lieutenant governor of the Commonwealth and
left a princely fortune as the product of his farsighted industry.

For the information of those unfamiliar with the records of that epoch
on the seas, the rapidity with which these lords of maritime trade
acquired their fleets and the capital needed to freight and man them,
it may be worth while to give a concrete example of the profits to
be won in those ventures of large risks and larger stakes. A letter
written from the great shipping house of the Messrs. Perkins in Boston
to their agents in Canton in 1814, goes to show that the operations
of the captains of industry of the days of Derby and Gray and Peabody
would have been respected by the capitalists of this twentieth century.
Here is the kind of Arabian Night’s Entertainment in the way of
dazzling rewards which these old-time merchants planned to reap:

“To MESSERS. PERKINS AND CO.
CANTON, Jan. 1, 1814.

“You say a cargo laid at Canton would bring three for one in South
America, and your copper would give two prices back. Thus, $30,000
laid out in China would give you $90,000 in South America, one half of
which laid out in copper would give one hundred per cent, or $90,000,
making $135,000 for $30,000.

“60,000 pounds of indigo even at 80 cents, $48,000; 120 tons of sugar
at $60, or $7,200, and cotton or some other light freight, say skin
tea, $20,000, in all $75,000, would be worth $400,000 here, and not
employ the profits of the voyage to South America. Manila sugar is
worth $400 or $500 per ton here, clear of duty. The ship should be
flying light, her bottom in good order, the greatest vigilance used on
the voyage and make any port north of New York.

“(signed) THOMAS H. PERKINS and JAMES PERKINS.”

It was the heyday of opportunity for youth. Robert Bennet Forbes,
by way of example, was the nephew of this Thomas Perkins of Boston,
and likewise became a wealthy merchant and ship owner. Young Forbes
went to sea before the mast as a boy of thirteen. He has told how his
mother equipped him with a supply of thread, needles, buttons, etc.,
in his ditty-bag, also some well-darned socks, a Testament, a bottle
of lavender water, one of essence of peppermint, a small box of broken
sugar and a barrel of apples. “She wanted to give me a pillow and some
sheets and pillow cases,” he writes, “but I scorned the idea, having
been told that sailors never used them, but usually slept with a stick
of wood with the bark on for a pillow. My good mother who had been at
sea herself and fully realized the dangers and temptations to which I
should be exposed, felt that there could be but one more severe trial
for her, and that was to put me in my grave. My uncle contributed a
letter full of excellent advice, recommending me to fit myself to be a
good captain and promising to keep me in mind. William Sturgiss, who
had much experience of the sea, took an interest in me and gave me this
advice:

“‘Always go straight forward, and if you meet the Devil cut him in
two and go between the pieces; if any one imposes on you, tell him to
whistle against a northwester and to bottle up moonshine.’”

Forbes was 15 years old when Mr. Cushing, of the firm’s shipping house
in Canton, wrote to Thomas H. Perkins in Boston:

“I have omitted in my letters per _Nautilus_, mentioning our young
friend Bennet Forbes, recommending his being promoted to be an officer
on the return of the Canton packet. He is without exception the finest
lad I have ever known, and has already the stability of a man of
thirty. During the stay of the ship I have had him in the office and
have found him as useful as if he had been regularly brought up in the
business; he has profited so much by the little intercourse he has had
with the Chinese that he is now more competent to transact business
than one half of the supercargoes sent out.”

The Crowninshield family of Salem earned very unusual distinction on
salt water and a national fame as men of affairs and statecraft. There
were six brothers of them, born of a seafaring father and grandfather,
and this stalwart half dozen Crowninshields one and all, went to sea
as boys. One died of fever at Guadaloupe at the age of fourteen while
captain’s clerk of a Salem ship. The five surviving brothers commanded
ships before they were old enough to vote, and at one time the five
were absent from Salem, each in his own vessel, and three of them in
the East India trade.

“When little boys they were all sent to a common school and about their
eleventh year began their first particular study which should develop
them as sailors and ship captains. These boys studied their navigation
as little chaps of twelve years old and were required to thoroughly
master the subject before being sent to sea. It was common in those
days to pursue their studies by much writing out of problems, and boys
kept their books until full. Several such are among our family records
and are interesting in the extreme, beautifully written, without blots
or dog’s ears, and all the problems of navigation as practised then,
are drawn out in a neat and in many cases a remarkably handsome manner.
The designing of vessels was also studied and the general principles of
construction mastered.

“As soon as the theory of navigation was mastered, the youngsters
were sent to sea, sometimes as common sailors, but commonly as ship’s
clerks, in which position they were enabled to learn everything about
the management of a ship without actually being a common sailor.”[25]

[Illustration: Hon. Jacob Crowninshield]

This method of nautical education was of course open only to those of
considerable influence who wished to fit their sons to become merchants
as well as shipmasters. It seems to have been remarkably efficient in
training the five Crowninshields. One of these shipmasters, Benjamin
W., became Secretary of the Navy under Jefferson, and United States
Congressman, while another brother, Jacob, was a Congressman from 1803
to 1805 and had the honor of declining a seat in Jefferson’s Cabinet.
Jacob Crowninshield, however, earned a more popular kind of fame by
bringing home from India in 1796, the first live elephant ever seen
in America. It is probable that words would be wholly inadequate to
describe the sensation created by this distinguished animal when led
through the streets of Salem, with a thousand children clamoring their
awe and jubilation.[26] It is recorded that this unique and historical
elephant was sold for ten thousand dollars.

The eldest of these brothers, Captain George Crowninshield, who served
his years at sea, from forecastle to cabin, and then retired ashore
to become a shipping merchant, was the patriotic son of Salem who
chartered the brig _Henry_, manned her with a crew of shipmasters and
sailed to Halifax to bring home the bodies of Lawrence and Ludlow
after the defeat of the _Chesapeake_ by the _Shannon_. Those who knew
him have handed down a vivid description of his unusual personality.
He was robust and daring beyond the ordinary, and a great dandy in
his small clothes and Hessian boots with gold tassels. “His coat was
wonderful in cloth, pattern, trimmings and buttons, and his waistcoat
was a work of art. He wore a pigtail and on top of all a bell-crowned
beaver hat, not what is called a beaver to-day, but made of beaver
skin, shaggy like a terrier dog.”

Captain George has the distinction of being the first American yacht
owner. As early as 1801 he had built in Salem a sloop called the
_Jefferson_ in which he cruised for several years. She was turned into
a privateer in the War of 1812. While the _Jefferson_ was beyond doubt
the first vessel built for pleasure in this country, and the first
yacht that ever flew the Stars and Stripes, her fame is overshadowed
by that of the renowned _Cleopatra’s Barge_, the second yacht owned by
Captain Crowninshield, and the first of her nation to cruise in foreign
waters. The _Cleopatra’s Barge_ was a nine-days’ wonder from Salem to
the Mediterranean, and was in many ways one of the most remarkable
vessels ever launched.

Her owner found himself at forty-nine years in the prime of his
adventurous energy with his occupation gone. The shipping firm founded
by his father had been dissolved, and this member of the house fell
heir to much wealth and leisure. Passionately fond of the sea and
sailors he determined to build the finest vessel ever dreamed of by
a sober-minded American, and to cruise and live aboard her for the
remainder of his days. There were no other yachts to pattern after,
wherefore the _Cleopatra’s Barge_ was modeled and rigged after the
fashion of a smart privateer, or sloop-of-war.

When she was launched in Salem harbor in 1817, at least a thousand
curious people visited her every day she lay in port. Her fittings
were gorgeous for her time, what with Oriental draperies, plate glass
mirrors, sideboards, and plate. She was eighty-seven feet long, and in
dimensions almost the counterpart of the famous sloop _Mayflower_ of
modern times. When she was ready for sea, this yacht had cost her owner
fifty thousand dollars. She was rigged as a brigantine, and carried
a mighty press of sail, studding-sails on the fore-yards, sky-sail,
“ring-tail,” “water-sail,” and other handkerchiefs now unknown.

With that bold individuality of taste responsible for the yellow
curricle in which Captain George was wont to dazzle Salem, when he
drove through the streets, he painted his yacht in different colors
and patterns along her two sides. To starboard she showed a hull of
horizontal stripes laid on in most of the colors of the rainbow. To
port she was a curious “herring-bone” pattern of brilliant hues. Her
stern was wide and pierced with little cabin windows.

With his cousin Benjamin as skipper, and a friend, Samuel Curwen
Ward, the owner sailed for the Mediterranean on what was destined to
be a triumphant voyage. He had prepared himself with no fewer than
three hundred letters of introduction to eminent civil, military and
naval persons of Italy, Spain and other countries. The cook of the
_Cleopatra’s Barge_ was a master of his craft, the stock of wine was
choice and abundant, and if ever an open-handed yachtsman sailed the
deep it was this Salem pioneer of them all.

The vessel was the sensation of the hour in every port. Her journal
recorded that an average of more than three thousand visitors came
aboard on every pleasant day while she was in foreign ports, and that
in Barcelona eight thousand people came off to inspect her in one day.
Wherever possible the owner chartered a band of music or devised other
entertainment for his guests. His yacht was more than a pleasure barge,
for he had the pleasure of beating the crack frigate _United States_
in a run from Carthagena to Port Mahone, and on the way to Genoa she
logged thirteen knots for twelve hours on end.

It was at Genoa that an Italian astronomer of considerable distinction,
Baron von Zack, paid a visit on board and several years later recorded
his impressions of the _Cleopatra’s Barge_ in a volume, written in
French, and published in Genoa in 1820.

“How does it happen that the Commanders of French vessels, with
thirty-four schools of Hydrography established in the Kingdom, either
know not, or do not wish to know, how to calculate the longitude of
their vessels by Lunar distances, while even the cooks and negroes of
American vessels understand it?

“I will now relate what I once witnessed on board an American vessel,
the _Cleopatra’s Barge_, which arrived in the month of July, 1817, at
the port of Genoa from Salem, one of the handsomest Towns in the State
of Massachusetts, U. S. A., Lat. 42° 35′ 20″ N., Long. 73° 9′ 30″ W.
All the city crowded to see this magnificent palace of Neptune; more
than 20,000 persons had visited this superb floating palace, and were
astonished at its beauty, luxury and magnificence. I went among others.
The owner was on board; he was a gentleman of fortune of Salem, who had
amassed great riches during the late war with Great Britain. He was
brother to the Secretary of the Navy of the United States.

“This elegant vessel was built for his own amusement, after his own
ideas, upon a plan and model new in very many respects, and was
considered the swiftest sailer in America. He had traveled or sailed
for his pleasure in this costly jewel (_bijou_) that appeared more
the model of a cabinet of curiosities than a real vessel. He had left
America in this charming shell (_coquille_) for the purpose of visiting
Europe and making the tour of the Mediterranean _&_ had already touched
at the ports of Spain, France, Italy, the Archipelago, Dardanelles,
coasts of Asia, Africa, etc. We have since heard of the death of this
gentleman, a short time after his return to Salem. His name was George
Crowninshield—he was of German origin—his ancestor was a Saxon
officer who, having the misfortune to kill his adversary in a duel,
sought refuge in America. The captain of this beautiful vessel was a
lively old gentleman, a cousin to Mr. Crowninshield—his son, a young
man, was also on board. I shall not here enter into detail concerning
the remarkable construction of this vessel, still less her splendor—the
public journals have already noticed them.

[Illustration: Benjamin Crowninshield]

“In making some enquiries respecting my friends and correspondents in
Philadelphia and Boston, among others I mentioned Dr. Bowditch. ‘He is
the friend of our family, and our neighbor in Salem,’ replied the old
Captain. ‘My son, whom you see there, was his pupil; it is properly he,
and not myself, that navigates this vessel; question him and see if he
has profited by his instructions.’

“I observed to this young man, ‘you have had so excellent a teacher
in Hydrography that you cannot fail of being well acquainted with the
science. In making Gibralter what was the error in your longitude?’
The young man replied, ‘Six miles.’ ‘Your calculations were then very
correct; how did you keep your ship’s accounts?’ ‘By chronometers and
by Lunar observations.’ ‘You then can ascertain your Longitude by Lunar
distances?’

“Here my young captain appearing to be offended with my question,
replied with some warmth, ‘What! I know how to calculate Lunar
distances! Our cook can do that!’ ‘Your cook!’ Here Mr. Crowninshield
and the old Captain assured me, that the cook on board could calculate
Longitude quite well; that his taste for it frequently led him to do
it. ‘That is he,’ said the young man, pointing to a Negro in the after
part of the vessel, with a white apron about his waist, a fowl in one
hand, and a carving knife in the other.

‘Come here, John,’ said the old Captain to him, ‘this gentleman
is surprised that you understand Lunar observations. Answer his
questions.’ I asked, ‘By what method do you calculate Lunar distances?’
The cook answered, ‘It is immaterial—I use some time the method of
Maskelyne, Lyons, or Bowditch, but I prefer that of Dunthorne, as I am
more accustomed to it.’ I could hardly express my surprise at hearing
that black-face answer in such a manner, with a bloody fowl and carving
knife in his hands.

“‘Go,’ said Mr. Crowninshield, ‘lay aside your fowl and bring your
books and journal and show your calculations to the gentleman.’ The
cook returned with his books under his arms, consisting of Bowditch’s
Practical Navigator, Maskelyne’s Requisite Tables, Hutton’s Logarithms
and the Nautical Almanack, abridged from the Greenwich Edition. I saw
all the calculations this Negro had made on his passage, of Latitude,
Longitude, Apparent Time, etc. He replied to all my questions with
admirable precision, not merely in the phrases of a cook, but in
correct nautical language.

“This cook had sailed as cabin-boy with Captain Cook in his last voyage
round the world and was acquainted with several facts relative to
the assassination of the celebrated navigator at Owhyhee, February,
1779. ‘The greatest part of the seamen on board the Barge,’ said Mr.
Crowninshield, ‘can use the sextant and make nautical calculations.’

“Indeed Mr. Crowninshield had with him many instructors. At Genoa
he had taken one acquainted with Italian—he had also on board an
instructor in the French language, a young man who had lost his
fingers in the Russian campaign. What instruction! what order! what
correctness! what magnificence was to be observed in this Barge; I
could relate many more interesting particulars concerning this true
Barque of _Cleopatra_.”

The editor of the _Diario di Roma_ newspaper of Rome considered the
_Cleopatra’s Barge_ worthy of a eulogistic notice, a translation of
which was printed in the _Essex Register_ of October 11, 1817:

“Soon after the visit of the fleet, there anchored in our port a
schooner from America, of a most beautiful construction, elegantly
found, very light, and formed for fast sailing, and armed like our
light armed vessels. It was named the _Cleopatra_, belonging to a
very rich traveller, George Crowninshield, of Salem, who constructed
her for his own use, and for the voyages he had undertaken in company
with Captain Benjamin Crowninshield, his cousin. Besides the extreme
neatness of everything about the vessel to fit her for sea, her
accommodations were surprising and wonderful. Below was a hall of
uncommon extent, in which the luxury of taste, the riches and elegance
of the furniture, the harmony of the drapery, and of all the ornaments,
inspired pleasure and gallantry. The apartment of the stern was equally
rich and interesting. Five convenient bed chambers displayed with that
same elegance, were at the service of the Captain, with an apartment
for the plate of every kind, with which it was filled. Near was another
apartment which admitted all the offices of a kitchen, and in it was a
pump with three tubes which passed through the vessel, to supply water
from the sea, or discharge what they pleased, with the greatest ease.

“The rich and distinguished owner had with him beside his family
servants, several linguists, persons of high talent in music, and
an excellent painter. Everything to amuse makes a part of the daily
entertainment. The owner and Captain were affable, pleasing and civil,
and gave full evidence of the talents, the industry and the good taste
of their nation, which yields to none in good sense and true civility.
The above travellers having complied with the usual rules of the city,
upon receiving a particular invitation, he visited the _Cleopatra_ in
company with many persons of distinction, and partook of an elegant
collation.”

The _Salem Gazette_ of Sept. 26, 1817, contained the following “extract
of a letter from a gentleman on board the _Cleopatra’s Barge_”:

“BARCELONA, June 8.

“You have undoubtedly heard of our movements in the Mediterranean;
indeed you must have heard of us, from every place at which we have
touched—for the _Cleopatra’s Barge_ is more celebrated abroad than
at home. Even the Moors of Tangier visited us tho’ they abhor the
Christians. At Gibralter the Englishmen were astonished. In Malaga,
Carthagena and this place the Spaniards have been thunderstruck. For
these four days past the whole of this great city has been in an
uproar. They begin to crowd on board at daylight, and continue to
press upon us till night. This morning the Mole was so crowded with
people waiting to come on board, that we have been obliged to get
under weigh, and stand out of the Mole, yet the boats, with men, women
and children, are rowing after us. Thus it has been in every place we
have visited. In Port Mahon we were visited by all the officers of our
squadron.”

Further tidings were conveyed to the admiring townspeople of Salem by
means of an article in the _Essex Register_ under date of Oct. 25th:

“Having noticed the attention paid to the American barge _Cleopatra_,
at Rome, we could not refuse the pleasure of assuring our friends
that Capt. G. Crowninshield had been equally successful in arresting
attention in France. The following is an extract from a Letter dated
at Marseilles, 14th July, 1817, from a person long residing in
France: ‘Capt. G. Crowninshield left this port in the beginning of
this month, for Toulon and Italy. During his stay here, thousands of
both sexes were on board of his beautiful Vessel. Every day it was
like a continual procession. It gave me the utmost pleasure, as the
universal opinion was that no vessel could compare with this Vessel.
I felt proud that such a splendid specimen of what could be done in
the United States was thus exhibited in Europe. We consider it as an
act of patriotism. The Vessel was admired. The exquisite taste in her
apartments greatly astonished the French for their _amour propre_
had inclined them to believe that only in France the true _gout_ was
known.’”

[Illustration:

Ship _Ulysses_—This painting shows a jury rudder about to be put in
place at sea, in 1806. So ingenious was the display of seamanship in
the rigging of this emergency rudder that her commander, Capt. Wm.
Mugford was awarded a medal by the American Philosophical Society
]

[Illustration: Yacht _Cleopatra’s Barge_, 191 tons, built in Salem,
1816, shows the “herring-bone” design painted in bright colors on side
of the yacht]

The _Cleopatra’s Barge_ returned to Salem in triumph, but Captain
George Crowninshield died on board while making ready for a second
voyage abroad. She was sold and converted into a merchantman, made a
voyage to Rio, then rounded the Horn, and at the Sandwich Islands was
sold to King Kamehameha to be used as a royal yacht. Only a year later
her native crew put her on a reef and the career of the _Cleopatra’s
Barge_ was ended in this picturesque but inglorious fashion.

In reading the old-time stories of the sea, one is apt to forget that
wives and sweethearts were left at home to wait and yearn for their
loved ones, for these logs and journals deal with the day’s work of
strong men as they fought and sailed and traded in many seas. Few
letters which they sent home have been preserved. It is therefore the
more appealing and even touching to find in a fragment of the log of
the ship _Rubicon_, the expression of such sentiment as most of these
seamen must have felt during the lonely watches in midocean. It is a
curious document, this log, written by a shipmaster whose name cannot
be found in the bundle of tattered sheets rescued from the rubbish of
an old Salem garret.

On the fly leaf is scrawled:

“Boston, May the 11th, 1816. Took a pilot on board the Ship _Rubicon_
and sailed from Charlestown. 12th of May at 3 P. M. came to an anchor
above the Castle, the wind S.E.”

The ship was bound from Boston to St. Petersburg, and after he had
been a week at sea, her master began to write at the bottom of the
pages of his log certain intimately personal sentiments which he sought
to conceal in a crude cipher of his own devising. The first of these
entries reads as follows as the captain set it down, letter by letter:

“L nb wvzi druv what hszoo R dirgv go uroo gsrh hsvvg R droo gvoo blf
gszg R ollp blfi ovgvih levi zmw levi zmw drhs nv rm blf zinh yfg R
dzng rm kzgrvmxv gsrmprmt lm Z szkb nvvgrmt——R zn dvoo.”

It is not easy to fathom why the captain of the good ship _Rubicon_
should have chosen to make such entries as this in the log. This much
is clear, however, that he longed to say what was in his heart and he
wished to keep it safe from prying eyes. He left no key to his cipher,
but his code was almost childish in its simplicity, and was promptly
unraveled by the finder of the manuscript, David Mason Little of Salem.
The old shipmaster reversed the alphabet, setting down “Z” for “A,” “Y”
for “B,” and so on, or for convenience in working it out, the letters
may be placed as follows:

A—Z
B—Y
C—X
D—W
E—V
F—U
G—T
H—S
I—R
J—Q
K—P
L—O
M—N
N—M
O—L
P—K
Q—J
R—I
S—H
T—G
U—F
V—E
W—D
X—C
Y—B
Z—A

Reading from the top of the column, the letters of the reversed
alphabet are to be substituted for the letters standing opposite
them in their normal order. The passage already quoted therefore
translates itself as follows:

“O, Dear Wife, what shall I write to fill this sheet. I will tell you
that I look your letters over and over and wish me in your arms, but I
wait in patience, thinking on a happy meeting. I am well.”

[Illustration: Log of the good ship _Rubicon_, showing the captain’s
cipher at the bottom of the page]

Other messages which this sailor wrote from his heart and confided to
his cipher in the log of the _Rubicon_ read in this wise:

“My Heart within me (is) ashes. I want to see my loving Wife and press
her to my bosom. But, O, my days are gone and past no more to return
forever.”

* * * * *

“True, undivided and sincere love united with its own object is one of
the most happy Passions that possesses the human heart.”

* * * * *

“Joanna, this day brings to my mind grateful reflections.

“This is the day that numbers thirty years of my Dear’s life. O, that
I could lay in her arms to-night and recount the days that have passed
away in youthful love and pleasure.”

* * * * *

“The seed is sown, it springs up and grows to maturity, then drops its
seed and dies away, while the young shoot comes up and takes its place.
And so it is with Man that is born to die.”

Now and then a sea tragedy is so related in these old log books that
the heart is touched with a genuine sympathy for the victim, as if he
were more than a name, as if he were a friend or a neighbor. It is
almost certain that no one alive to-day has ever heard of Aaron Lufkin,
able seaman, who sailed from Calcutta for the Cape of Good Hope in
the year 1799. The ship’s clerk, William Cleveland of Salem, who kept
a journal of the voyage, wrote of this sailor in such a way that you
will be able to see him for what he was, and will perhaps wish no
better epitaph for yourself:

“Aaron Lufkin, one of the most active of our seamen held out till he
was scarcely able to walk, but as this appeared to be fatigue, his
case was not particularly observed by the Captain nor officers. When
he first complained he said he had been unwell for some days but that
there were so few on duty he would stand it out. Unfortunately his zeal
for his duty cost him his life, for on the 17th of April he died after
lingering in torment for several days. He was often out of his head and
continually on the fly when no person was attending him, and constantly
talking of his father, mother and sisters, which shewed how fond he was
of them. Indeed his little purchases in Calcutta for his sisters were a
sufficient proof. He was the only son of a respectable tradesman in the
town of Freeport (Maine) and the brother of eight or nine sisters, all
of which were younger than himself, though he was but twenty years old.”

The death of an able seaman, under such peaceful circumstances as
these, was a matter of no importance except to his kindred and his
shipmates. It is significant of the spirit and singularly dramatic
activity of those times that the loss of a whole ship’s company might
be given not so much space in the chronicles of the town as the
foregoing tribute to poor Aaron Lufkin. Indeed “Felt’s Annals of Salem”
is fairly crowded with appalling tragedies, told in a few bald lines,
of which the following are quoted as examples of condensed narration:

“News is received here that Captain Joseph Orne in the ship _Essex_ had
arrived at Mocha, with $60,000 to purchase coffee, and that Mahomet
Ikle, commander of an armed ship, persuaded him to trade at Hadidido,
and to take on board 30 of his Arabs to help navigate her thither while
his vessel kept her company; that on the approach of night, and at a
concerted signal, the Arabs attacked the crew of the _Essex_, and
Ikle laid his ship alongside, and that the result was the slaughter of
Captain Orne, and all his men, except a Dutch boy named John Hermann
Poll. The _Essex_ was plundered and burnt. The headless corpse of Capt.
Orne and the mutilated remains of a merchant floated on shore and were
decently buried. It was soon after ascertained that the faithless
Mahomet was a notorious pirate of that country. He kept the lad whose
life he had spared, as a slave until 1812, when Death kindly freed him
from his cruel bondage.”

On the 13th of November, 1807, “the ship _Marquis de Somereulas_[27]
arrives hither from Cronstadt and Elsinore. She brings in eleven men,
a woman called Joanna Evans, and her child, which were picked up Oct.
28th in a long-boat. The rest being eight in number, were rescued at
the same time on board a ship from Philadelphia. They had been in the
boat six days, during which seven of their company died of starvation.
The living, in order to sustain themselves, fed upon the dead. They
were the remains of one hundred and ten souls on board an English
transport which was waterlogged and then blew up and foundered. The
captain and some of his men, being in a small boat, by some means or
other separated from those in the long boat and were never afterwards
heard of. After the sad story of these shipwrecked sufferers was
generally known among our citizens, they experienced from them the most
kindly sympathy and substantial aid to the amount of between two and
three hundred dollars.”

A more cheerful story, and one which may be called an old-fashioned
sea yarn, was told with much detail by a writer in the Salem _Evening
Journal_ in 1855, who had received it at first hand from a shipmate
of the hero. In 1808, when England was nominally at peace with the
United States, but molesting her commerce and impressing her seamen
with the most pernicious energy, the bark _Active_, of Salem, arrived
at Martha’s Vineyard and Captain Richardson reported that “while on his
course for Europe he was captured by an English letter-of-marque, whose
commander put seven men on board with Captain Richardson and three of
his crew, the rest of his men being taken from him and the bark ordered
to Nevis. When near that port the Americans seized upon the arms of the
English, confined them in irons, and put away for home where Captain
Richardson afterwards arrived in safety.”

“A few years ago,” narrates the loquacious contributor to the Salem
_Evening Journal_ of 1855, “the writer heard from one who was on board
the barque _Active_ on the above mentioned voyage a somewhat amusing
account of one of the crew, who came down from New Hampshire, when
she was about ready to sail, and not being able to find any work on
shore, shipped with Capt. Richardson and went to sea. As a matter of
course, our country friend, as far as regarded nautical phrases and
the ‘ropes’ generally, was extremely verdant. To use his own words, he
‘didn’t really know t’other from which.’” Capt. Richardson knew all
this beforehand, but he also knew that our Yankee friend was a tall,
stout, and very smart young man and so he did not hesitate at all about
taking him on board his vessel. The chief mate, however, not being so
well aware of Peleg’s verdancy as the Captain, and observing that he
stood with his hands in his pockets gazing curiously around the ship,
whilst the rest of the crew were engaged in getting the anchor secured,
addressed him thus:

“‘Who are you?’

“‘Peleg Sampson, from away up in Moultonboro, State of New Hampshire. I
say, it’s a dernation mighty curious place this, ain’t it?’

“Rather surprised at the familiar manner of our Yankee friend, the mate
replied:

“‘I guess you’ll find it curious enough before the voyage is up. Lay
forward there and help cat that anchor.’

“Whilst the mate stepped on the forecastle for the purpose of
superintending this necessary operation, Peleg began to search all
around the deck with a minuteness that would have done honor to an
experienced gold-hunter. After he had been for a few minutes thus
engaged, he followed the mate to the forecastle deck and said:

“‘I say, mister, I cack’late there ain’t any of them critters here.’

“‘What critters? You d—n land-lubber,’ said the mate.

“‘Cats,’ returned Peleg, with an innocent gravity of tone and manner,
which made the sailors turn from their work and gaze, open-mouthed,
upon their verdant shipmate.

“‘Who the —— said anything about cats?’ asked the mate.

“‘Why you, you tarnal goslin,’ returned Peleg somewhat tartly. ‘Didn’t
you tell me to help cat the anchor, and before I could do that ere,
hadn’t I got to find the animal to do it with, hey, what?’

“On hearing this reply to the mate’s question, the old salts burst out
in a loud, uproarious guffaw, in which the chief officer most heartily
joined, as he had by this time become most fully aware that Peleg was
nothing more nor less than a ‘green hand.’

“About a week afterwards, when the _Active_ had got well out to sea,
and Peleg had recovered from a severe fit of seasickness so as to be
able to be about the decks, the mate, being in want of an article from
aloft, said to Peleg:

“‘Go up in the main-top there, and bring down a slush bucket that’s
made fast to the topmast rigging.’

“‘What, up these rope-ladders do you want me to go?’ asked Peleg, with
a scared look at the main-rigging.

“‘Yes,’ returned the mate, ‘and be spry about it, too.’

“‘Can’t do any such business,’ returned Peleg, in a very decided tone
of voice. ‘Why don’t you tell me to run overboard. I should jest as
soon think on’t, really. Now I’m ready to pull and haul, or wrestle,
back to back, Indian hug, or any way you like, fight the darnation
Englishers till I’m knocked down, or do anything I _kin_ do, but as to
going up them darnation littleish rope-ladders, I can’t think of it
no_how_.’

“Thinking it would be as well not to urge the matter farther at that
time, the mate sent another hand for the slush bucket, and thus
the affair ended. Afterwards, however, as we learned from the same
authority, Peleg became one of the smartest sailors on board the
vessel, and in the affair of retaking the ship from English, did most
excellent and efficient service.”

In Felt’s Annals of Salem, it is related under date of February 21,
1802, “the ships _Ulysses_, Captain James Cook; _Brutus_, Captain
William Brown, owned by the Messrs. Crowninshield; and the _Valusia_,
Captain Samuel Cook, belonging to Israel Williams and others sailed
for Europe (on the same day). Though when they departed the weather
was remarkably pleasant for the season, in a few hours a snowstorm
commenced. After using every exertion to clear Cape Cod the tempest
forced them the next day upon its perilous shore. The most sad of all
in this threefold catastrophe was the loss of life in the _Brutus_. One
hand was killed by the fore-yard prior to the ship striking; another
was drowned while attempting to reach the shore, and the commander with
six men perished with the cold after they had landed, while anxiously
seeking some shelter for their wet, chilled, and exhausted bodies.”

“(1819) July 16. A few days since one of our sailors was exceedingly
frightened by meeting in the street what he really believed to be the
ghost of a shipmate. This person was Peter Jackson, whose worth as a
cook was no less because he had a black skin. He had belonged to the
brig _Ceres_. As she was coming down the river from Calcutta, she was
thrown on her beam ends and Peter fell overboard. Among the things
thrown to him was a sail-boom on which he was carried away from the
vessel by the rapid current. Of course all on board concluded that he
was drowned or eaten by crocodiles, and so they reported when reaching
home. Administration had been taken on his goods and chattels and he
was dead in the eye of the law. But after floating twelve hours he was
cast ashore and as soon as possible hastened homeward. Notwithstanding
he had hard work to do away with the impression of his being dead, he
succeeded and was allowed the rights and privileges of the living.”

While Newport and Bristol, of all the New England ports, did the most
roaring trade in slaves and rum with the west coast of Africa, Salem
appears to have had comparatively few dealings with this kind of
commerce. Slavers were fitted out and owned in Salem, but they were
an inconsiderable part of the shipping activity, and almost the only
records left to portray this darker side of seafaring America in the
olden times are fragmentary references such as those already quoted
and these which follow. There has been preserved a singularly pitiful
letter from a Salem boy to his mother at home. It reads:

“CAYENNE, April 23, 1789.

“HONOUR’D PARENT:

“I take this Opportunity to write Unto you to let you know of a very
bad accident that Happen’d on our late passage from Cape Mount, on the
Coast of Africa, bound to Cayenne. We sailed from Cape Mount the 13th
of March with 36 Slaves on bord. The 26th day of March the Slaves Rised
upon us. At half-past seven, my Sire and Hands being foreward Except
the Man at the helm, and myself, three of the Slaves took Possession
of the Caben, and two upon the Quarter Deck. Them in the Caben took
Possession of the fier Arms, and them on the quarter Deck with the Ax
and Cutlash and Other Weapons. Them in the Caben handed up Pistels to
them on the quarter Deck.

“One of them fired and killed my Honoured Sire, and still we strove for
to subdue them, and then we got on the Quarter Deck and killed two of
them. One that was in the Caben was Comeing out at the Caben Windows in
order to get on Deck, and we discovered him and Knock’d him overbord.
Two being in the Caben we confined the Caben Doors so that they should
not kill us.

“Then three men went foreward and got the three that was down their
and brought them aft. And their being a Doctor on board, a Passenger
that could Speak the Tongue, he sent one of the boys down and Brought
up some of the fier Arms and Powder. And then we cal’d them up and one
came up, and he Cal’d the other and he Came up. We put them In Irons
and Chained them and then the Doctor Dres’d the People’s Wounds, they
being Slightly Wounded. Then it was one o’clock.

“They buried my Honoured Parent, he was buried as decent as he could
be at Sea, the 16th of this Month. I scalt myself with hot Chocolate
but now I am abel to walk about again. So I remain in good Health and
hope to find you the Same and all my Sisters and Brothers and all that
Inquires after Me. We have sold part of the Slaves and I hope to be
home soon. So I Remain your Most Dutiful Son,

“WM. FAIRFIELD.
“Addressed to Mrs. Rebecca Fairfield,
Salem, New England.”

Under date of May 29, 1789, Doctor Bentley wrote in his diary:

“On Wednesday went to Boston and returned on Friday. News of the death
of Captain William Fairfield who commanded the Schooner which sailed in
Captain Joseph White’s employ in the African Slave Trade. He was killed
by the Negroes on board.”

This following letter of instructions to one of the few Salem captains
in the slave trade was written in 1785, under date of November 12th:

“Our brig of which you have the command, being cleared at the office,
and being in every other respect complete for sea, our orders are that
you embrace the first fair wind and make the best of your way to the
Coast of Africa and there invest your cargo in slaves. As slaves, like
other articles when brought to market, generally appear to the best
advantage, therefore too critical an inspection cannot be paid to them
before purchase; to see that no dangerous distemper is lurking about
them, to attend particularly to their age, to their countenance, to
the strength of their limbs, and as far as possible to the goodness or
badness of their constitutions, etc., will be very considerable objects.

“Male or female slaves, whether full grown, or not, we cannot
particularly instruct you about, and on this head shall only observe
that prime male slaves generally sell best in any market. No people
require more kind and tender treatment to exhilarate their spirits than
the Africans, and while on the one hand you are attentive to this,
remember that, on the other hand, too much circumspection cannot be
observed by yourself and people to prevent their taking advantage of
such treatment by insurrection and so forth. When you consider that on
the health of your slaves almost your whole voyage depends, you will
particularly attend to smoking your vessel, washing her with vinegar,
to the clarifying your water with lime or brimstone, and to cleanliness
among your own people as well as among the slaves.”

These singularly humane instructions are more or less typical of the
conduct of the slave trade from New England during the eighteenth
century when pious owners expressed the hope that “under the blessing
of God” they might obtain full cargoes of negroes. The ships were
roomy, comparatively comfortable quarters were provided, and every
effort made to prevent losses by disease and shortage of water and
provisions. It was not until the nations combined to drive the traffic
from the high seas that slavers were built for speed, crammed to the
hatches with tortured negroes and hard-driven for the West Indies and
Liverpool and Charleston through the unspeakable horrors of the Middle
Passage.

Salem records are not proud of even the small share of the town in this
kind of commerce, and most of the family papers which dealt with slave
trading have been purposely destroyed. It is true also that public
sentiment opposed the traffic at an earlier date than in such other
New England ports as Bristol and Newport. Slaves captured in British
privateers during the Revolution were not permitted to be sold as
property, but were treated as prisoners of war. The refusal of Elias
Hasket Derby to let his ship _Grand Turk_ take slaves aboard on her
first voyage to the Gold Coast was an unusual proceeding for a shipping
merchant of that time. Nor according to Doctor Bentley was the slave
trade in the best repute among the people of the place.

While Salem commerce was rising in a flood tide of enterprising
achievement in the conquest of remote and mysterious markets on the
other side of the globe, and the wounds left by the Revolution were
scarcely healed, her ships began to bring home new tales of outrage at
the hands of British, French and Spanish privateers and men-of-war.
There was peace only in name. In 1790, or only seven years after the
end of the Revolution, seamen were bitterly complaining of seizures and
impressments by English ships, and the war with France was clouding
the American horizon. The Algerine pirates also had renewed their
informal activities against American shipping, and the shipmasters of
Salem found themselves between several kinds of devils and the deep sea
wherever they laid their courses.

The history of the sea holds few more extraordinary stories than that
related of a Salem sailor and cherished in the maritime chronicles of
the town.

“On the 14th of August, 1785, a French vessel from Martinique, bound
to Bordeaux came up with the body of a man floating at some fifty rods
distance. The captain ordered four men into the boat to pick it up.
When brought on board, to the great surprise of the crew, the supposed
dead body breathed. Half an hour afterwards the man opened his eyes and
exclaimed: ‘O God, where am I?’ On taking off his clothes to put him
to bed it was discovered that he had on a cork jacket and trousers.
It was afterwards ascertained that he had sailed from Salem in a brig
bound to Madrid. The brig was attacked by Sallee pirates and captured.
This sailor, pretending to be lame, was neglected by the Moors who
had captured him. About 11 o’clock at night, having put on his cork
apparatus, he let himself down from the forechains into the water
unperceived. He swam about two days when he being quite exhausted, his
senses left him, in which state he was discovered by the men from the
Frigate. On his arrival at Bordeaux he was presented by the Chamber of
Commerce with a purse of 300 crowns.”

On February 10th, 1795, the following appeal was posted in the streets
of Salem:

“For the purpose of taking into consideration the _unhappy situation_
of the _unfortunate prisoners_ at Algiers, and to devise some Method
for carrying into effect a General Collection for their Relief on
Thursday, the 19th day of the present Month!

“The Meeting is called by the desire of the Reverend Clergy and other
Respectable Citizens of this Town who wish to have some System formed
that will meet the Acceptance of the Inhabitants previous to the Day of
Contribution.

“The _truly deplorable fate of these miserable captives_ loudly calls
for your Commiseration, and the Fervent Prayers they have addressed
to you from their Gloomy Prisons ought to soften the most Adamantine
Heart. They intreat you in the most Impassioned Language not to leave
them to dispair, but as _Prisoners of Hope_, let those of them who
still survive the Plague, Pestilence, and Famine, anticipate the day
that shall relieve them from the Cruel scourge of an Infidel, and
restore them to the Arms of their long-bereaved Friends and Country.

“It is hoped that the Humane and Benevolent will attend that Charity
may not be defeated of her intended Sacrifice in the auspicious
Festival, when the New World shall all be assembled, and the United
States shall offer her tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving at the Altars
of God.”[28]

An item of the date of February 16th, 1794, records that “information
is received that Edward Harwood, mate, James Peas and Samuel Henry
of Salem, lately returned from Algerine captivity were apportioned
shares of a benefit previously taken for such sufferers at the Boston
Theatre.”

FOOTNOTES:

[25] From “An Account of the Yacht _Cleopatra’s Barge_.” by Benjamin
W. Crowninshield, Historical Collections of the Essex Institute, from
which much of the information in this chapter is derived.

[26] (1797) “Aug. 30.—Went to the Market House to see the Elephant.
The crowd of spectators forbade me any but a general and superficial
view of him. He was six feet four inches high. Of large Volume, his
skin black as tho’ lately oiled. A short hair was on every part but
not sufficient for a covering. His tail hung one third of his height,
but without any long hair at the end of it. His legs were still at
command at the Joints but he could not be persuaded to lie down. The
Keeper repeatedly mounted him but he persisted in shaking him off.
Bread and Hay were given him and he took bread out of the pockets of
the spectators. He also drank porter and drew the cork, conveying the
liquor from his trunk into his throat. His Tusks were just to be seen
beyond the flesh and it was said had been broken. We say _his_ because
this is the common language. It is a female, and teats appeared just
behind the fore legs.” (From the Diary of Dr. William Bentley.)

[27] “A narrative dated Sept. 18, 1806, is published. It relates that
the ship _Marquis de Somereulas_, Captain William Story, on the coast
of Sumatra, had a narrow escape from being surprised by some of the
natives. Two proas came alongside with fourteen men who were allowed
to come on board. Only five of the ship’s company were left on deck.
The mate and rest of the hands were stowing the cargo. The captain,
being in the cabin, heard Mr. Bromfield, the clerk who was above,
exclaim that he was cresed. The sailmaker ran to his rescue, but was
dangerously wounded and jumped down the hatchway. All the hands below
were ordered to gain the deck, though they had scarcely any arms. The
captain, while endeavoring to ascend the companionway, was attacked
with boarding pikes. His men attempted to get up but were repulsed
with several of them wounded. They were rallied and another effort
was about to be made. The injunction was given that if they did not
succeed, and the Malays took possession of the ship, a match should be
applied to the magazine to blow her up. In the meanwhile the natives
had retreated, which was immediately discovered by the crew who got on
deck with the expectation of a deadly contest. Mr. Bromfield was found
dead. The carpenter and cook were missing, but these two had escaped in
a boat and soon returned to unite with their comrades.” (Felt’s “Annals
of Salem.”)

[28] The 19th of February, 1795, was a day of National Thanksgiving
ordered by proclamation of President Washington.

CHAPTER XII

THE BUILDING OF THE ESSEX

(1799)

Twentieth century battleships are built at a cost of six or seven
millions of dollars with the likelihood of becoming obsolete before
they fire a gun in action. It is a task of years to construct one of
these mighty fabrics, short-lived as they are in service, and crammed
with intricate machinery whose efficiency under stress of war is
largely experimental.

One hundred and ten years ago there was launched from a Salem shipyard
a wooden sailing frigate called the _Essex_. She was the fastest and
handsomest vessel of the United States navy and a dozen years after
she first flew the flag of her country she won immortal renown under
Captain David Porter. There is hardly a full-rigged sailing ship afloat
to-day as small as the _Essex_, and in tonnage many modern three-masted
coasting schooners can equal or surpass her. Yet her name is one of the
most illustrious in the list of a navy which bears also those of the
_Constitution_, the _Hartford_, the _Kearsarge_ and the _Olympia_.

It was the maritime war with France at the end of the eighteenth
century which caused the building of the _Essex_. When American
commerce was being harried unto death by the frigates and privateersmen
of “the Terrible Republic” as our sailors called France, our shadow
of a navy was wholly helpless to resist, or to protect its nation’s
shipping. At length, in 1797, Congress authorized the construction
of the three famous frigates, _Constitution_, _Constellation_ and
_United States_, to fight for American seamen’s rights. The temper
and conditions of that time were reflected in an address to Congress
delivered by President John Adams on November 23, 1797, in which he
said:

“The commerce of the United States is essential, if not to their
existence, at least to their comfort, growth and prosperity. The
genius, character and habits of our people are highly commercial. Their
cities have been formed and exist upon commerce; our agriculture,
fisheries, arts and manufactures are connected with and dependent
upon it. In short, commerce has made this country what it is, and
it cannot be destroyed or neglected without involving the people in
poverty or distress. Great numbers are directly and solely supported
by navigation. The faith of society is pledged for the preservation of
the rights of commercial and seafaring, no less than other citizens.
Under this view of our affairs I should hold myself guilty of neglect
of duty if I forebore to recommend that we should make every exertion
to protect our commerce and to place our country in a suitable posture
of defence as the only sure means of preserving both.”

The material progress of this country has veered so far from seafaring
activities that such doctrine as this sounds as archaic as a Puritan
edict for bearing arms to church as a protection against hostile
savages. One great German or English liner entering the port of New
York registers a tonnage equaling that of the whole fleet of ships in
the foreign trade of Salem in her golden age of adventurous discovery.
Yet the liner has not an American among her crew of five hundred men,
and not one dollar of American money is invested in her huge hull. She
is a matter of the most complete indifference to the American people,
who have ceased to care under what flags their commerce is borne over
seas.

On the other hand, the shipping of Salem and other ports was a factor
vital to national welfare a century ago. But when John Adams preached
the necessity of resorting to arms to protect it, the country was too
poor to create a navy adequate for defense. Forthwith the merchants
whose ships were being destroyed in squadrons by French piracy offered
to contribute their private funds to build a fleet of frigates that
should reinforce the few naval vessels in commission or authorized.

It was a rally for the common good, a patriotic movement in which the
spirit of ’76 flamed anew. The principles that moved the American
people were voiced by James McHenry, Secretary of War in 1789, in a
letter to the Chairman of the Committee of the House of Representatives
for the Protection of Commerce:

“France derives several important advantages from the system she is
pursuing toward the United States. Besides the sweets of plunder
obtained by her privateers she keeps in them a nursery of seamen to be
drawn upon in conjunctures by the navy. She unfits by the same means
the United States for energetic measures and thereby prepares us for
the last degree of humiliation and subjection.

“To forbear under such circumstances from taking naval and military
measures to secure our trade, defend our territories in case of
invasion, and to prevent or suppress domestic insurrection, would be to
offer up the United States a certain prey to France ... and exhibit to
the world a sad spectacle of national degradation and imbecility.”

[Illustration: The frigate _Essex_, from the only painting made during
her career at sea]

In June of the following year, Congress passed an act “to accept not
exceeding twelve vessels on the credit of the United States, and to
cause evidences of debt to be given therefor, allowing an interest
thereon not exceeding six per cent.” It was in accordance with this
measure, which confessed that the United States was too poor to build
a million dollars’ worth of wooden ships of war from its treasury,
that subscription lists were opened at Newbury, Salem, Boston,
New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore and Norfolk, the citizens of each
of these seaports making ready to contribute a frigate as a loan to
the government. Even the infant city of Cincinnati subscribed toward
equipping a galley for the defense of the Mississippi against the
French.

At Salem, Elias Hasket Derby and William Gray, the two foremost
shipping merchants of the town, led the subscription list with the
sum of ten thousand dollars each, and in a few weeks $74,700 had been
raised in contributions as small as fifty dollars.

_The Salem Gazette_ of October 26, 1798, contained this item: “At
a meeting in the Courthouse in this town Tuesday evening last, of
those gentlemen who have subscribed to build a ship for the service
of the United States, it was voted unanimously to build a Frigate of
thirty-two guns and to loan the same to the Government; and William
Gray, jr., John Norris and Jacob Ashton, Esqr., Captain Benjamin Hodges
and Captain Ichabod Nichols were chosen a committee to carry the same
into immediate effect.” Captain Joseph Waters was appointed General
Agent, and Enos Briggs, a shipbuilder of Salem, was selected as master
builder.

The Master Builder inserted this advertisement in the Essex _Gazette_:

“THE SALEM FRIGATE

“TAKE NOTICE.

“To Sons of Freedom! All true lovers of Liberty of your Country. Step
forth and give your assistance in building the frigate to oppose
French insolence and piracy. Let every man in possession of a white
oak tree be ambitious to be foremost in hurrying down the timber to
Salem where the noble structure is to be fabricated to maintain your
rights upon the seas and make the name of America respected among the
nations of the world. Your largest and longest trees are wanted, and
the arms of them for knees and rising timber. Four trees are wanted
for the keel, which altogether will measure 146 feet in length, and
hew 16 inches square. Please to call on the subscriber who wants to
make contracts for large or small quantities as may suit best and will
pay the ready cash.

“ENOS BRIGGS.

“Salem, November 23, 1798.”

So enthusiastic was the response to the call for material that Master
Builder Enos Briggs was obliged to have this advertisement printed:

“THE SALEM FRIGATE

“Through the medium of the _Gazette_ the subscriber pays his
acknowledgements to the good people of the county of Essex for their
spirited exertions in bringing down the trees of the forest for
building the Frigate. In the short space of four weeks the complement
of timber has been furnished. Those who have contributed to their
country’s defence are invited to come forward and receive the reward
of their patriotism. They are informed that with permission of a kind
Providence, who hath hitherto favored the undertaking,

Next September is the time
When we’ll launch her from the strand
And our cannon load and prime
With tribute due to Talleyrand.

“ENOS BRIGGS.

“Salem, Jan. 1, 1799.”

The great timbers for the ship’s hull were cut in the “wood lots” of
Danvers, Peabody, Beverly and other nearby towns of Essex county and
hauled through the snowy streets of Salem on sleds drawn by slow-moving
oxen, while the people cheered them as they passed. The keel of the
frigate was laid on the 13th of April, 1799, and she was launched five
months and seventeen days later, on the 30th of September, Master
Builder Briggs saving his reputation as a prophet by the narrowest
possible margin.

The _Essex_ was a Salem ship from keel to truck. Her cordage was made
in three rope walks. Captain Jonathan Haraden, the most famous Salem
privateersman of the Revolution, made the rigging for the mainmast at
his factory in Brown Street. Joseph Vincent fitted out the foremast
and Thomas Briggs the mizzenmast in their rigging lofts at the foot of
the Common. When the huge hemp cables were ready to be carried to the
frigate, the workmen who had made them conveyed them to the shipyard
on their shoulders, the procession led by a fife and drum. Her sails
were cut from duck woven for the purpose at Daniel Rust’s factory in
Broad Street, and her iron work was forged by the Salem shipsmiths.
Six months before she slid into the harbor her white oak timbers were
standing in the woodlands of Massachusetts.

The glorious event of her launching inspired the editor of the Salem
_Gazette_ to this flight of eulogy:

“And Adams said: ‘Let there be a navy and there was a navy.’ To build a
navy was the advice of our venerable sage. How far it had been adhered
to is demonstrated by almost every town in the United States that is
capable of floating a galley or a gunboat.

“Salem has not been backward in this laudable design. Impressed with a
sense of the importance of a navy, the patriotic citizens of this town
put out a subscription and thereby obtained an equivalent for building
a vessel of force. Among the foremost in this good work were Messrs.
Derby and Gray, who set the example by subscribing ten thousand dollars
each. But alas, the former is no more—we trust his good deeds follow
him.

“Such was the patriotic zeal with which our citizens were inspired,
that in the short space of six months they contracted for the materials
and equipment of a frigate of thirty-two guns, and had her complete for
launching. The chief part of her timber was standing but six months
ago, and in a moment as it were, ‘every grove descended’ and put in
force the patriotic intentions of those at whose expense she was built.

“Yesterday the Stars and Stripes were unfurled on board the frigate
_Essex_ and at 12 o’clock she made a majestic movement into her
destined element, there to join her sister craft in repelling foreign
aggressions and maintaining the rights and liberties of a ‘Great, Free,
Powerful and Independent Nation.’

“The concourse of spectators was immense. The heart-felt satisfaction
of the beholders of this magnificent spectacle was evinced by the
concording shouts and huzzas of thousands which reiterated from every
quarter.

“The unremitting zeal of Mr. Briggs, the architect of this beautiful
ship, cannot be too highly applauded. His assiduity in bringing her
into a state of such perfection in so short a time entitles him to the
grateful thanks of his Country and we fondly hope his labors have not
been spent in vain, for we may truly say that he has not ‘given rest
to the sole of his foot’ since her keel was first laid. At least he
will have the consolation of reflecting on the important service he has
rendered his country in this notable undertaking.”

The guns of the frigate had been planted on a nearby hill, and as she
took the water they thundered a salute which was echoed by the cannon
of armed merchant vessels in the harbor. This famous frigate, literally
built by the American people, their prayers and hopes wrought into
every timber of her with the labor of their own hands, cost a trifle
less than $75,000 when turned over to the Government. The _Essex_ was
a large vessel for her time, measuring 850 tons. She was 146 feet in
length “over all,” while her keel was 118 feet long. Her beam was 37
feet and her depth of hold 12 feet 3 inches. The height between her gun
deck and lower deck was only 5 feet 9 inches. Her mainmast was 85 feet
long with a head of 12 feet. Above this was a topmast 55 feet long with
a head of 7½ feet, and towering skyward from the topmast her topgallant
mast of 40 feet with a head of 15 feet. Her mainyard was 80 feet long.

Rigged as a three-masted ship, with an unusual spread of canvas, the
_Essex_ must have been a rarely beautiful marine picture when under
way. The handling of such a majestic fabric as one of these old-time
men-of-war is mirrored in the song of “The Fancy Frigate” which
describes how such a ship as this noble _Essex_ was manned by the
hundreds of tars who swarmed among her widespread yards:

“Now my brave boys comes the best of the fun,
All hands to make sail, going large is the song.
From under two reefs in our topsails we lie,
Like a cloud in the air, in an instant must fly.
There’s topsails, topgallant sails, and staysails too,
There is stu’nsails and skysails, star gazers so high,
By the sound of one pipe everything it must fly.
Now, my brave boys, comes the best of the fun,
About ship and reef topsails in one.
All hands up aloft when the helm goes down,
Lower way topsails when the mainyard goes round.
Chase up and lie out and take two reefs in one,
In a moment of time all this work must be done.
Man your head braces, your haulyards and all,
And hoist away topsails when it’s ‘let go and haul,’
As for the use of tobacco all thoughts leave behind,
If you spit on the deck then your death warrant sign.
If you spit overboard either gangway or starn
You are sure of six dozen by way of no harm.”

But before this “fancy frigate” of the American navy could get to sea,
there was much to be done. Captain Richard Derby of Salem had been
selected to command her, but he was abroad in one of his own ships and
could not return home in time to equip the frigate for active service.
Therefore, Captain Edward Preble of the navy was offered the command,
which he accepted and hastened to Salem to put his battery and stores
aboard and recruit a crew. It is related that when Captain Preble saw
the armament that had been prepared for his ship he found the gun
carriages not at all to his liking.

“Who built those gun carriages,” he angrily demanded of Master Builder
Briggs.

“Deacon Gould,” was the answer.

“Send for Deacon Gould to meet me at the Sun tavern this evening,”
ordered Captain Preble.

Deacon Gould made his appearance and found Captain Preble waiting with
somewhat of irritation in his demeanor. The deacon was a man of the
most dignified port and he asked:

“What may be your will, Captain Preble?”

“You do not know how to make gun carriages, sir,” exclaimed the
fighting sailor.

“What’s that you say, Captain Preble. What’s that you say?” thundered
Deacon Gould. “I knew how to make gun carriages before you were born,
and if you say that word again I will take you across my knee and play
Master Hacker[29] with you, sir.”

Both men were of a hair-trigger temper and a clash was prevented by
friends who happened to be in the tavern. Captain Preble proceeded to
have the gun carriages cut down to suit him, however, as may be learned
from the following entry in his sea journal kept on board the _Essex_:

“26 12-pound cannon were taken on board for the main battery; mounted
them and found the carriages all too high; dismounted the cannon and
sent the carriages ashore to be altered.”

The battery of the _Essex_ consisted of 26 12-pounders on the gun
decks; 6 6-pounders on the quarter deck; 32 guns in all. During his
first cruise at sea Captain Preble recommended to the Secretary of the
Navy that 9-pounders replace the 6-pound guns on the quarterdeck which
he thought strong enough to bear them, a tribute to honest construction
by Master Builder Enos Briggs.

The official receipt of the acceptance of the _Essex_ in behalf of the
Government of the United States which Captain Preble gave the Salem
committee reads as follows:

“The Committee for building a frigate in Salem for the United States
having delivered to my charge the said frigate called the _Essex_,
with her hull, masts, spars and rigging complete, and furnished her
with one complete suit of sails, two bower cables and anchors, one
stream cable and anchor, one hawser, and kedge anchor, one tow line,
four boats and a full set of spare masts and spars except the lower
masts and bowsprit, I have in behalf of the United States received the
said frigate _Essex_ and signed duplicate receipts for the same.

“EDWARD PREBLE, Captain, U. S. N.

“Salem, Dec. 17, 1799.”

This receipt was not given until Captain Preble had taken time to make
a thorough examination of the vessel, for his first letter to the
Secretary of the Navy concerning the _Essex_ was written on November
17th, more than a month earlier than the foregoing document. He
reported on this previous date:

“Sir. I have the honor to inform you that I arrived here last evening
and have taken charge of the _Essex_. She is now completely rigged,
has all her ballast on board, and her stock of water will be nearly
complete by to-morrow night.... I am much in want of officers to
attend the ship, and the recruiting service. I shall be obliged to
open a rendezvous to-morrow to recruit men sufficient to make the ship
safe at her anchors in case of a storm. I presume the _Essex_ can be
got ready for sea in thirty days if my recruiting instructions arrive
soon. The agent, Mr. Waters, and the Committee are disposed to render
me every assistance in their power.

“Very respectfully,

“Your obedient servant,

“EDWARD PREBLE, Capt.

“To the Hon. Secretary of the Navy, etc., etc.”

In another letter with the foregoing address Captain Preble wrote:

“I beg leave to recommend Mr. Rufus Low of Cape Ann for Sailing Master
of the _Essex_. He has served as captain of a merchant ship for several
years and has made several voyages to India and sustains a good
reputation. His principal inducement for soliciting this appointment is
the injuries he has sustained by the French.”

The crew of the _Essex_, officers and men, numbered two hundred and
fifty when she went to sea. It was a ship’s company of Americans of
the English strain who had become native to the soil and cherished as
hearty a hatred for the mother country as they did the most patriotic
ardor for their new republic. There were only two “Macs” and one “O’”
on the ship’s muster rolls, and men and boys were almost without
exception of seafaring New England stock. In a letter of instructions
to Captain Preble, the Secretary of the Navy, Benjamin Stoddard, wrote
of the proposed complement of the _Essex_:

“Sixty able bodied seamen, seventy-three ordinary seamen, thirty boys,
fifty marines including officers. Able seamen $17 per month, ordinary
seamen and boys $5 to $17.”

Captain Preble was greatly pleased with the behavior of the frigate in
her first “trying out” run from Salem to Newport. He wrote from sea to
Joseph Waters:

“The _Essex_ is a good sea boat and sails remarkably fast. She went
eleven miles per hour with topgallant sails set and within six points
of the wind.”

He also wrote the Secretary of the Navy after leaving Newport:

“I have the honor to acquaint you that the _Essex_ in coming out of
the harbor sailed much faster than the _Congress_, and is, I think, in
every respect a fine frigate.”

Nor was this admiration limited to her own officers, for from the Cape
of Good Hope, on her first deep-water cruise, Captain Preble wrote home:

“The _Essex_ is much admired for the beauty of her construction by the
officers of the British Navy.”

In company with the frigate _Congress_ the _Essex_ sailed in January,
1800, for Batavia to convoy home a fleet of American merchantmen. Six
days out the _Congress_ was dismasted in a storm which the _Essex_
weathered without damage and proceeded alone as the first American war
vessel to double the Cape of Good Hope. Ten months later she reached
the United States with her merchantmen. The _Essex_ had not the good
fortune to engage the enemy, for a treaty of peace with France was
signed in February, 1801.

Captain Preble left the ship because of ill health, and in command
of Captain Wm. Bainbridge, she joined the Mediterranean squadron of
Commodore Richard Dale. She made two cruises in this service until
1805, and played a peaceful part on the naval list until the coming
of the War of 1812. At that time the eighteen-gun ship _Wasp_ was
the only American war vessel on a foreign station. A small squadron
was assembled at New York under Commodore Rodgers, comprising the
_President_, _Hornet_ and _Essex_. Captain David Porter had been
given command of the _Essex_ and he sailed with this squadron which
was later reinforced by the ships assembled with the pennant of
Commodore Decatur. The _Essex_ took several prizes, and fought a fierce
single-ship action with H. B. M. ship _Alert_ of twenty guns and 100
men, which he captured.

The immortal cruise of the _Essex_ under David Porter began when he was
ordered to meet Bainbridge’s ships, the _Constellation_ and _Hornet_ in
South American waters. Failing to find the squadron at the rendezvous
in the South Atlantic, in April David Porter headed for Cape Horn and
the Pacific in search of British commerce. Early in 1813 he was able to
report:

“I have completely broke up the British navigation in the Pacific;
the vessels which had not been captured by me were laid up and dared
not venture out. I have afforded the most ample protection to our own
vessels which were on my arrival very numerous and unprotected. The
valuable whale fishery there is entirely destroyed and the actual
injury we have done them may be estimated at two and a half million
dollars, independent of the vessels in search of me.

“They have furnished me amply with sails, cordage, cables, anchors,
provisions, medicines, and stores of every description; and the slops
on board have furnished clothing for my seamen. I have in fact lived on
the enemy since I have been in that sea, every prize having proved a
well-found store ship for me.”

In letters from Valparaiso Captain Porter was informed that a British
squadron commanded by Commodore James Hillyar was seeking him. This
force comprised the frigate _Phoebe_ of thirty-six guns, the _Raccoon_
and _Cherub_, sloops of war, and a store ship of twenty guns. “My ship,
as it may be supposed after being near a year at sea,” wrote Captain
Porter, “required some repairs to put her in a state to meet them;
which I determined to do and to bring them to action if I could meet
them on nearly equal terms.”

With this purpose in mind Captain Porter went in search of the British
squadron. In his words: “I had done all the injury that could be done
the British commerce in the Pacific, and still hoped to signalize my
cruise by something more splendid before leaving that sea.”

“Agreeably to his expectation,” as Captain Porter phrased it, the
_Phoebe_ appeared at Valparaiso shortly after the arrival of the
_Essex_ in that port. But instead of offering a duel on even terms
between the two frigates, the British Commodore brought with him the
_Cherub_ sloop of war. These two British vessels had a combined force
of eighty-one guns and 500 men, as compared with the thirty-six guns
and fewer than 300 men of the _Essex_. “Both ships had picked crews,”
said Captain Porter, “and were sent into the Pacific in company with
the _Raccoon_ of 32 guns and a store ship of 20 guns for the express
purpose of seeking the _Essex_, and were prepared with flags bearing
the motto, ‘God and Country; British Sailors Best Rights; Traitors
Offend Both.’ This was intended as reply to my motto, ‘Free Trade and
Sailors’ Rights,’ under the erroneous impression that my crew were
chiefly Englishmen, or to counteract its effect on their own crew....
In reply to their motto, I wrote at my mizzen: ‘God and Our Country;
Tyrants Offend Them.’”

Alongside the _Essex_ lay the _Essex, Junior_, an armed prize which
carried twenty guns and sixty men. For six weeks the two American
vessels lay in harbor while the British squadron cruised off shore
to blockade them, “during which time, I endeavored to provoke a
challenge,” explained Captain Porter, “and frequently but ineffectually
to bring the _Phoebe_ alone to action, first with both my ships, and
afterwards with my single ship with both crews on board. I was several
times under way and ascertained that I had greatly the advantage in
point of sailing, and once succeeded in closing within gun shot of
the _Phoebe_, and commenced a fire on her, when she ran down for the
_Cherub_ which was two miles and a half to leeward. This excited some
surprise and expressions of indignation, as previous to my getting
under way she hove to off the port, hoisted her motto flag and fired a
gun to windward. Com. Hillyar seemed determined to avoid a contest with
me on nearly equal terms and from his extreme prudence in keeping both
his ships ever after constantly within hail of each other, there were
no hopes of any advantages to my country from a long stay in port. I
therefore determined to put to sea the first opportunity which should
offer.”

On the 28th of March, 1813, the day after this determination was
formed, the wind blew so hard from the southward that the _Essex_
parted her port cable, and dragged her starboard anchor out to sea. Not
a moment was to be lost in getting sail on the ship to save her from
stranding. Captain Porter saw a chance of crowding out to windward of
the _Phoebe_ and _Cherub_, but his main-topmast was carried away by
a heavy squall, and in his disabled condition he tried to regain the
port. Letting go his anchor in a small bay, within pistol shot of a
neutral shore, he made haste to repair damages.

The _Phoebe_ and _Cherub_ bore down on the _Essex_, which was anchored
in neutral water, their “motto flags,” and union jacks flying from
every masthead. The crippled _Essex_ was made ready for action, and
was attacked by both British ships at three o’clock in the afternoon.
Describing the early part of the engagement Captain Porter reported to
the Navy Department:

“My ship had received many injuries, and several had been killed and
wounded; but my brave officers and men, notwithstanding the unfavorable
circumstances under which we were brought to action and the powerful
force opposed to us, were in no way discouraged; and all appeared
determined to defend their ship to the last extremity, and to die
in preference to a shameful surrender. Our gaff with the ensign and
the motto flag at the mizzen had been shot away, but ‘Free Trade and
Sailors’ Rights’ continued to fly at the fore. Our ensign was replaced
by another and to guard against a similar event an ensign was made fast
in the mizzen rigging, and several jacks were hoisted in different
parts of the ship.”

After hauling off to repair damages both the _Phoebe_ and the _Cherub_
stationed themselves on the starboard quarter of the _Essex_ where her
short carronades could not reach them and where her stern guns could
not be brought to bear, for she was still at her forced anchorage.
All the halyards of the _Essex_ had been shot away, except those of
the flying jib and with this sail hoisted the cable was cut and the
stricken Yankee frigate staggered seaward with the intention of laying
the _Phoebe_ on board and fighting at close quarters.

For only a short time was Porter able to use his guns to advantage,
however, for the _Cherub_ was able to haul off at a distance and pound
the _Essex_ while the _Phoebe_ picked her own range and shot the
helpless frigate to pieces with her long eighteen-pounders. In the
words of David Porter which seem worthy of quotation at some length:

“Many of my guns had been rendered useless by the enemy’s shot, and
many of them had their whole crews destroyed. We manned them again from
those which were disabled and one gun in particular was three times
manned—fifteen men were slain in the course of the action. Finding that
the enemy had it in his power to choose his distance, I now gave up
all hope of closing with him and as the wind for the moment seemed to
favour the design, I determined to run her on shore, land my men, and
destroy her.”

But the wind shifted from landward and carried the _Essex_ toward
the _Phoebe_, “when we were again exposed to a dreadful raking fire.
My ship was now totally unmanageable; yet as her head was toward the
enemy and he to leeward of me, I still hoped to be able to board him.”
This attempt failed, and a little later, the ship having caught fire in
several places, “the crew who had by this time become so weakened that
they all declared to me the impossibility of making further resistance,
and entreated me to surrender my ship to save the wounded, as all
further attempt at opposition must prove ineffectual, almost every gun
being disabled by the destruction of their crew.

“I now sent for the officers of division to consult them and what was
my surprise to find only acting Lieutenant Stephen Decatur M’Knight
remaining ... I was informed that the cockpit, the steerage, the
wardroom and the berth deck could contain no more wounded, that the
wounded were killed while the surgeons were dressing them, and that
if something was not speedily done to prevent it, the ship would soon
sink from the number of shot holes in her bottom. On sending for
the carpenter he informed me that all his crew had been killed or
wounded....

“The enemy from the smoothness of the water and the impossibility of
reaching him with our carronades and the little apprehension that was
excited by our fire, which had now become much slackened, was enabled
to take aim at us as at a target; his shot never missed our hull and my
ship was cut up in a manner which was perhaps never before witnessed;
in fine, I saw no hopes of saving her, and at 20 minutes after 6 P.
M. I gave the painful order to strike the colours. Seventy-five men,
including officers, were all that remained of my whole crew after the
action capable of doing duty and many of them severely wounded, some
of them whom have since died. The enemy still continued his fire, and
my brave, though unfortunate companions were still falling about me.
I directed an opposite gun to be fired to show them we intended no
farther resistance, but they did not desist; four men were killed at
my side, and others at different parts of the ship. I now believed he
intended to show us no quarter, that it would be as well to die with my
flag flying as struck, and was on the point of again hoisting it when
about 10 minutes after hauling down the colours he ceased firing.”

Of a crew of 255 men who went into action, the _Essex_ lost in killed,
wounded, and missing no fewer than 153 officers, seamen and marines,
including among the list of “slightly wounded” no less a name than
that of “David G. Farragut, midshipman,” who was destined to serve his
country a full half century longer on the sea before his great chance
should come to him on the quarterdeck of the _Hartford_ in the Civil
War.

Captain David Porter had been overmatched, fighting his crippled ship
against hopeless odds until his decks were such an appalling scene of
slaughter as has been recorded of few naval actions in history. But the
Salem-built frigate _Essex_ had fulfilled her destiny in a manner to
make her nation proud unto this day of the men who sailed and fought
her in the harbor of Valparaiso, many thousand miles from the New
England shipyard where a patriotic town of seafarers had united with
one common purpose to serve their country as best they could.

There was grief and indignation beyond words when the tidings reached
Salem that the _Essex_ had been taken, and bitter wrath against
England was kindled by the conviction, right or wrong, that Commodore
Hillyar had not played the part of an honorable foe in pitting both
his fighting ships against the Yankee frigate. This impression was
confirmed by that part of Captain Porter’s official report which read:

“We have been unfortunate but not disgraced—the defence of the _Essex_
had not been less honourable to her officers and crew than the capture
of an equal force; and I now consider my situation less unpleasant than
that of Com. Hillyar, who in violation of every principle of honour
and generosity, and regardless of the rights of nations, attacked the
_Essex_ in her crippled state within pistol shot of a neutral shore,
when for six weeks I had daily offered him fair and honourable combat
on terms greatly to his advantage. The blood of the slain must rest on
his head; and he has yet to reconcile his conduct to heaven, to his
conscience, and to the world.”

In a later letter to the Secretary of the Navy Captain Porter added
these charges:

“Sir: There are some facts relating to our enemy and although not
connected with the action, serve to shew his perfidy and should be
known.

“On Com. Hillyar’s arrival at Valparaiso he ran the _Phoebe_ close
alongside the _Essex_, and inquired politely after my health, observing
that his ship was cleared for action and his men prepared for boarding.
I observed: ‘Sir, if you by any accident get on board of me, I assure
you that great confusion will take place; I am prepared to receive
you and shall act only on the defensive.’ He observed coolly and
indifferently. ‘Oh, sir, I have no such intention’; at this instant
his ship took aback of my starboard bow, her yards nearly locking with
those of the _Essex_, and in an instant my crew was ready to spring on
her decks.

“Com. Hillyar exclaimed in great agitation: ‘I had no intention of
coming so near you; I am sorry I came so near you.’ His ship fell off
with her jib-boom over my stern; her bows exposed to my broadside,
her stern to the stern fire of the _Essex, Junior_, her crew in the
greatest confusion, and in fifteen minutes I could have taken or
destroyed her. After he had brought his ship to anchor, Com. Hillyar
and Capt. Tucker of the _Cherub_ visited me on shore; when I asked him
if he intended to respect the neutrality of the port: ‘Sir,’ said he,
‘you have paid such respect to the neutrality of this port that I feel
myself bound in honour, to do the same.’”

The behavior of Commander Hillyar after the action was most humane
and courteous, and the lapse of time has sufficed to dispel somewhat
of the bitterness of the American view-point toward him. If he was
not as chivalrous as his Yankee foeman believed to be demanded of the
circumstances, he did his stern duty in destroying the _Essex_ with
as great advantage to himself as possible. Captain Porter had shown
no mercy toward English shipping, and he was a menace to the British
commerce, which must be put out of the way. The inflamed spirit of
the American people at that time, however, was illustrated in a
“broadside,” or printed ballad displayed on the streets of Salem. This
fiery document was entitled:

“CAPTURE OF THE ESSEX

“Free Trade and Sailors’ Rights.

“Or, the In-glorious victory of the British with the _Phoebe_,
Frigate, of 36 guns and 320 men and the _Cherub_, sloop of war, with
28 guns, and 180 men over the unfortunate _Essex_, Frigate of 32 guns
and 255 men. Commanded by Captain _David Porter_. An action fought two
hours and 57 minutes against a double complement of Men and force, by
an enterprising and veteran Crew of Yankees.”

The closing verses of this superheated ballad were:

“The ESSEX sorely rak’d and gall’d;
While able to defend her
The _Essex Crew_ are not appall’d
They DIE but _don’t_ SURRENDER!
They fearless FIGHT, and FEARLESS DIE!
And now the scene is over;
For _Britain_, Nought but _Powers_ on high
Their DAMNING SINS can Cover.
They MURDER and refuse to _save_!
With Malice Most infernal!!
Rest, _England’s Glory_ in the Grave,
’Tis INFAMY—ETERNAL!!!
Brave HULL and LAWRENCE fought your Tars
With honorable dealings;
For great as JOVE and brave as MARS
Are hearts of _Humane Feelings_
Our tears are render’d to the brave,
Our hearts’ applause is given;
Their Names in Mem’ry we engrave,
Their spirits rest in Heaven;
Paroled see PORTER and his crew
In the ESSEX JUNIOR coasting;
They home return—hearts brave and true,
And scorn the _Britons_ boasting—
Arrived—by all around belov’d,
With welcome shouts and chanting,
Brave Tars—all valiant and approv’d,
Be such Tars never Wanting.
Should Britain’s _Sacrilegious_ band
Yet tell her in her native land
Her _Deeds_ are like her _Daring_,
That should she _not_ with WISDOM haste
Her _miscreant_ CRIMES undoing,
Her _Crown_, _Wealth_, _Empire_, _all_ must waste
And sink in common RUIN.”

One of the seamen of the _Essex_ returned to his home at the end of
the cruise and told these incidents of his shipmates as they have been
preserved in the traditions of the town:

“John Ripley after losing his leg said: ‘Farewell, boys, I can be of no
use to you,’ and flung himself overboard out of the bow port.

“John Alvinson received an eighteen-pound ball through the body; in the
agony of death he exclaimed: ‘Never mind, shipmates. I die in defence
of ‘Free Trade and Sailors’ Rights’ and expired with the word ‘Rights’
quivering on his lips.

[Illustration: Broadside ballad published in Salem after the news was
received of the loss of the _Essex_]

“James Anderson had his left leg shot off and died encouraging his
comrades to fight bravely in defence of liberty. After the engagement
Benjamin Hazen, having dressed himself in a clean shirt and jerkin,
told what messmates of his that were left that he could never submit to
be taken as a prisoner by the English and leaped into the sea where he
was drowned.”

FOOTNOTES:

[29] Master Hacker was a Salem schoolmaster of that time.

CHAPTER XIII

THE FIRST AMERICAN VOYAGERS TO JAPAN

(1799-1801)

It is commonly assumed that until the memorable visit of Commodore
Perry’s squadron in 1853 shattered the ancient isolation of Japan, no
American ship had ever been permitted to trade or tarry in a port of
that nation. More than half a century, however, before the tenacious
diplomacy of Matthew C. Perry had wrested a treaty “of friendship and
commerce,” at least three Yankee vessels had carried cargoes to and
from Nagasaki.

It was in 1799 that the ship _Franklin_, owned in Boston and commanded
by Captain James Devereux of Salem, won the historical distinction of
being the first American vessel to find a friendly greeting in a harbor
of Japan. In 1800, the Boston ship _Massachusetts_ sailed to Nagasaki
on a like errand, and her captain’s clerk, William Cleveland of
Salem, kept a detailed journal of this unusual voyage, which records,
to a considerable extent, duplicate the following very interesting
narratives of the adventures of the _Franklin_, and of the Salem ship
_Margaret_ which went from Batavia to Nagasaki in 1801. Aboard the
_Margaret_, Captain S. G. Derby, was a crew of Salem men, among them
George Cleveland, captain’s clerk, brother of William Cleveland, who
filled a similar berth in the _Massachusetts_ and also kept a journal.

In the logs and journals of these three voyages, as written by three
seafarers of Salem more than a century ago, has been preserved a wealth
of adventure, incident and description which to-day sound as archaic
as a chapter of the history of the Middle Ages in Europe. Excepting a
handful of Dutch traders, these three ships visited a land as strange
and unknown to the outside world as was the heart of Thibet a dozen
years ago. They sailed to the Orient as pioneers of American commerce,
and while at Batavia seeking cargo were chartered by the Dutch East
India Company for the annual voyage to Japan.

When the ship _Franklin_ set sail from Batavia for Nagasaki, in 1799,
only the Dutch were permitted to hold foreign intercourse with the land
of the Shoguns and the Samurai. They had maintained their singular
commercial monopoly for two centuries at a price which was measured
in the deepest degradation of national and individual dignity and
self-respect. The few Dutch merchants suffered to reside in Japan were
little better off than prisoners, restricted to a small island in
Nagasaki harbor, leaving it only once in four years when the Resident,
or chief agent, journeyed to Yeddo to offer gifts and obeisance to the
Shogun. At this audience, which took place in the “Hall of a Hundred
Mats,” the Dutch Resident “crept forward on his hands and feet, and
falling on his knees bowed his head to the ground and retired again
in absolute silence, crawling exactly like a crab.” To add insult to
injury, the Shogun usually sat hidden behind a curtain.

After this exhibition the envoys were led further into the palace and
ordered to amuse the Court. “Now we had to rise and walk to and fro,
now to exchange compliments with each other,” wrote one of them, “then
to dance, jump, represent a drunken man, speak broken Japanese, paint,
read Dutch, German, sing, put on our cloaks and throw them off again,
etc., I, for my part, singing a German love ditty.”

Of their life on the islet of Dezima, where the little colony of Dutch
traders was guarded and confined, this same chronicler, Kaempfer,
remarks:

“In this service we have to put up with many insulting regulations at
the hands of these proud heathens. We may not keep Sundays or fast
days, or allow our spiritual hymns or prayers to be heard; never
mention the name of Christ, nor carry with us any representation of
the Cross or any external sign of Christianity. Besides these things
we have to submit to many other insulting imputations which are always
painful to a noble heart. The reason which impels the Dutch to bear all
these sufferings so patiently is simply the love of gain.”

In return for these humiliations the Dutch East India Company was
permitted to send one or two ships a year from Batavia to Japan and to
export a cargo of copper, silk, gold, camphor, porcelain and bronze
which returned immense profits.

This curious system of commerce was in operation when the ship
_Franklin_ cleared from Boston for Batavia in 1798. His owner’s letter
of instructions ordered Captain Devereux to load Java coffee in bulk
and to return with all possible expedition. As was customary, the
ship’s company was given a share in the profits of the voyage, as
defined in a letter to the captain:

“We allow your first and second officers two and one-half tons
privilege, and one ton to your third mate, your sailors will be allowed
to bring their adventures in their chests and not otherwise. Your own
privilege will be five per cent. of the whole amount which the ship may
bring and ’tis our orders that she be completely filled.”

When Captain Devereux arrived at Batavia in April, 1799, he learned
that the Dutch East India Company was in need of a ship to make one of
the annual voyages to Japan. The Salem shipmaster and his supercargo
perceived that a large extra profit could be gleaned in such a venture
as this, after which the ship might return for her cargo of coffee and
go home to Boston as planned.

[Illustration: Page from the log of the _Margaret_, describing her
arrival at Nagasaki and the prodigious amount of saluting required]

[Illustration: The good ship _Franklin_]

This Batavia charter was an attractive adventure which promised to
fatten both the owner’s returns and the “privileges” of the ship’s
company, and after considerable preliminary skirmishing between the
hard-headed Dutchmen and the keen-witted Yankee seafarers, an agreement
was reached which has been preserved in the log of the _Franklin_.
It is a valuable fragment of history in itself, for it recites the
elaborate formalities and restrictions imposed upon foreign visitors by
the Japanese of a century and more ago. The document is entitled:

“The Ship _Franklin’s_ Charter Party for a Voyage from Batavia to
Japan, June the 16th, 1799.”

It begins as follows:

“We, the undersigned, Johannes Siberg, Commissary General, etc., etc.,
on the one part, and Walter Burling, supercargo of the American ship
_Franklin_ at present at anchor in this Road, of the burthen of 200
tons, commanded by James Devereux, on the other part, do Declare and
Certify to have agreed with respect to the Charter of said ship as
follows.”

It is then stipulated in the articles that the _Franklin_ shall carry
to Japan a cargo of cloves in sacks, cotton yarns, pieces of chintz,
sugar, tin, black pepper, sapan-wood, elephants’ teeth, and mummie,
and supplies for the Company’s agents in Nagasaki. The vessel is to
bring back to Batavia a cargo of copper, camphor, boxes and boards.
Her charter price or freight is to be paid Captain Devereux in coffee,
sugar, black pepper, cloves, indigo, tin, cinnamon and nutmegs.

After no fewer than ten numbered articles of instruction it is provided
that “the Capt., James Devereux, as soon as the cargo shall be on board
and his ship’s company in a proper situation, shall proceed with his
said ship to the port of her destination and there being discharged and
reloaded shall continue his voyage with the utmost diligence toward
this metropolis, and that he shall not under any pretext whatever,
approach or enter into any other port, either on his passage to Japan
or on his return, unless he is forced by urgent necessity which he must
justify on his return in a satisfactory manner.”

It would seem that not even the Dutch were always certain of a
hospitable reception at the hands of the haughty Japanese, for in
“article 13th” it is stated that “if by any unforeseen circumstances
the ship should not be allowed to enter the port of Japan, and by that
reason the Captain should be obliged to return with the cargo he took
from here, then after his arrival here, and having discharged the cargo
he took away, the freighter shall pay the freight agreed upon, of
thirty thousand piasters in produce as mentioned in article 4th.”

The thrifty Dutch inserted an article to read:

“If any of the ship’s company should be sick at Japan they may be
received in the Hospital on condition that they shall be taken on board
the ship at the time of her departure, and the expense incurred will be
for account of the letter (the ship).”

Having endeavored to protect themselves against every chance of
loss or delay in a document well nigh as long as the Declaration of
Independence, the officials in Batavia drew up the following letter:

“Instructions from the Dutch East India Company for Captain James
Devereux on his arrival at Japan:

“When you get to the latitude of 26 or 27, it will be necessary to
have everything in readiness to comply with the ceremonies which the
Japanese are accustomed to see performed by the ships of the Company.

“1st. You will have all your colors in order to dress the ship on her
entrance into port.

“2nd. There must be a table prepared on the quarterdeck which must be
covered with a piece of cloth and two cushions for the officers to sit
upon when they come on board.

“3rd. It is indispensably necessary to have a list of all the people on
board, passengers and officers, their stations and age.

“4th. All the books of the people and officers, particularly religious
books must be put into a cask and headed up; the officers from the
shore will put their seals upon the cask and take it on shore, and on
the departure of the ship will bring it on board without having opened
it.

“5th. Before your arrival at Japan you must make the people deliver you
their money and keep it until your departure; this will not be attended
with inconvenience as at Japan nothing is bought for cash, but they may
change their specie for cambang money, and then make their trade, but
this must be done by the Captain.

“6th. When you are in sight of Japan, you must hoist a Dutch pendant
and ensign in their proper places as if you were a Dutch ship.

“7th. When the Cavalles are on your starboard hand and the Island of
Japan on your larboard you must salute the guard on the Cavalles with
nine guns.

“8th. After that you pass on the larboard side of Papenburg and salute
with nine guns.

“9th. You then pass the guards of the Emperor on the starboard and
larboard nearly at the same time, and salute them with 7 or 9 guns, the
first all starboard guns, the second all larboard.

“10th. You then advance into the Road of Nangazacky (Nagasaki), and
after anchoring salute with 13 guns.

“11th. When you enter the Cavalles, the Commissaries of the Chief will
come on board and you must salute them with 9 guns; at the same time,
if it is practicable, hoist some colors to the yards as a compliment
to them; it is immaterial what colors you dress your ship with except
Spanish or Portuguese—it is, however, necessary to recollect that the
Dutch colors must be always in their proper place as if the ship was of
that nation.

“12th. When the Commissaries return on shore, you must salute them with
nine guns.

“13th. You must be very particular in letting the boats which are
around the ship know when you are going to fire as if you were to hurt
any of them the consequences would be very important.

“14th. After you have anchored and saluted the harbor, the officers
examine the list of your people and compare them with the number on
board. After having received them those who wish it can go on shore,
but before the Japanese land, all the arms and ammunition must be
sent on shore, and it will be proper that everything of the kind
should be landed, as they search the ship after she is unloaded. On
your departure they will return it all on board. If there should by
any mistake be any powder or firearms left on board, you must be very
careful that not so much as a pistol be fired until the return of the
ammunition which was landed.

“The agents of the Company will instruct you respecting the other
ceremonies to be observed.”

Captain Devereux’s log records that he burned the prodigious amount of
powder required and successfully steered a course through the other
complex ceremonies, nautical and commercial, without ruffling Japanese
dignity in any way. The _Franklin_ lay in Nagasaki harbor for almost
four months after which she returned to Batavia, to the satisfaction
of the East India Company. Thence she sailed for Boston with so large
a cargo of coffee, sugar and spices that it overflowed the hold and
filled the after cabin. The captain and officers berthed in a makeshift
“coach-house” knocked together on deck, but made no complaint as their
several “adventures” had been richly increased by the voyage and
trading with the Japanese.

In more than one stout old Salem mansion are treasured souvenirs of
the voyage of the _Franklin_. According to a memorandum of “a sale
of sundries received by ship _Franklin_ from Japan,” Captain Devereux
brought home as part of his adventure, “cabinets, tea trays, boxes
of birds, waiters, boxes of fans, nests of pans, camphor wood, mats,
kuspidors, together with inlaid tables and carved screens.”

In 1801, or two years later, the _Margaret_ of Salem lay in Nagasaki
as a chartered trader. George Cleveland, of a famous family of Salem
mariners, who sailed as the captain’s clerk, kept the log and journal
of this voyage, and his narrative contains much of interest concerning
the early relations between the Japanese and the people of other
countries.

“In the autumn of 1800,” he wrote soon after his return, “the ship
_Margaret_, built by Mr. Becket of this town, and owned by the late
Col. Benj. Pickman, John Derby, Esq., and Captain Samuel Derby who was
to command her, was launched. On the 25th November we left Salem harbor
bound for the East Indies, and probably a finer, a better-fitted or
better-manned ship never left this port before. We carried 6 guns and
20 men; most of the crew were fine young men in the bloom of youth. I
will enumerate those who lived many years after, namely: S. G. Derby,
captain; Thomas West, second mate; L. Stetson, carpenter; Samuel Ray,
Joseph Preston, Israel Phippen, Anthony D. Caulfield and P. Dwyer,
Thatcher and myself.

“We soon found on leaving port what a fast sailing ship the _Margaret_
was. When we were out eleven days we fell in with the barque _Two
Brothers_, Captain John Holman, who had left Salem some days before
us, bound for Leghorn. We made him ahead in the afternoon steering the
same course we were, and before night we were up alongside and spoke
him. The next day we fell in with a fleet of merchantmen, convoyed by
a frigate which was under very short sail, and kept all snug until she
had got into our wake, when she set sail in chase, but we distanced
her so much that in a very short time she gave it up and took in her
sails and rejoined the fleet.

“On the 4th of February, 1801, we anchored in Table Bay, Cape of Good
Hope. We saluted the Admiral’s flag, which civility was returned. On
the 10th February we left, bound to Sumatra, and found it difficult
to get to the westward as winds and currents were against us. After a
tedious passage we anchored in Bencoolen Roads, 136 days from Salem,
including our stoppage at the Cape. As nothing could be done to
advantage here we proceeded to Batavia and arrived there on the 25th of
April.

“Captain Derby soon made a bargain with the agents of the East India
Company to take the annual freights to and from Japan, and as it was
the custom from time immemorial that the Japan ship should sail on a
certain day, and as that day was some time ahead, it was necessary to
find some employment for the vessel previously, as it was dangerous to
the health of crews to be lying any time in Batavia Roads. The Company
offered Captain Derby a freight of coffee from a port a short distance
to the eastward, which he readily accepted. This wore away twelve or
fourteen days of the time, and added to the profits of the voyage.

“The cargo for Japan consisted of a great variety of articles, such as
the Dutch had been in the habit of shipping for nearly two centuries.
It was composed of sugar, spices, sapan wood, sandal wood, rattans,
glassware, cloths, medicines, and various other articles, and as
everything was to be done according to a prescribed rule, and as we
were not to sail until a certain day in June, we had time enough to do
all things right as regards receiving and stowing the cargo.

“We weighed anchor at 8 A. M., on the 20th June, 1801. We had
as passenger a young Dutchman who was going out as clerk to the
establishment in Japan. On the morning of July 16th, we made the
islands of Casique and St. Clara which are near the harbor of
Nangasacca (Nagasaki), our destined port. On the 18th two fishing boats
came alongside and supplied us with fish. On Sunday, 19th, we were
so near that we hoisted twenty different colors and in the afternoon
entered the harbour of Nangasacca. We had much ceremony to go through
in entering this port, which is considered indispensable, among other
things to fire several salutes.

“The day after our arrival I landed on the Island of Decima,[30] a
little island connected with the city of Nangasacca by a bridge. It is
walled all round and here the Dutch residents are obliged to pass their
lives. Provisions are very dear and everything had to be passed through
the hands of a compradore and he, no doubt, put upon them a large
profit. We had excellent sweet potatoes and mackerel, and sometimes
pork and fowls, and the bread was as good as any country could produce.

“Captain Derby, Mr. West and myself carried several articles of
merchandise on our own account. This has always been allowed to the
Dutch captains, but then the sale of these articles must be made by
the Japanese government. All these articles were landed on the island,
opened and displayed in a warehouse and on certain days the (Japanese)
merchants were allowed to go on the Island to examine them. Nothing
could exceed the minuteness with which they examined everything. Among
other articles we had a quantity of tumblers and wine glasses; these
they measured with the greatest care, running their fingers over every
part to determine what irregularities there were on the surface, and
then holding each piece up to the light to see the colour. They also
made drawings of the different description of pieces.

“After this investigation they marked on their memorandums the number
of the lot and the results of their investigations. Everything we had
to sell went through a similar ordeal so that to us, who were lookers
on and owners of the property, nothing could be more tedious. After
the goods had been sufficiently examined, a day was appointed for a
sale, in the city of Nangasacca, and was conducted with the greatest
fairness. Captain Derby and myself went into the city attended by the
requisite number of officers, and proceeded to what the Dutch call
the Geltchamber where we found one or more of the upper Banyoses[31]
seated in their usual state, and a general attendance of merchants.
We were placed where we could see all that was going on and received
such explanations as were requisite to an understanding of the whole
business. The goods being all disposed of, we were escorted back to the
Island with much formality, not however, until a day had been appointed
by the great men for the delivery of the goods.

“Delivering these adventures was a great affair, and it was a number of
days before the whole was taken away. No person in this country (who
has not traded with people who have so little intercourse with the
world) can have an idea of the trouble we had in delivering this little
invoice which would not have been an hour’s work in Salem. We finally,
after a great trial of our patience, finished delivering goods, and
articles that did not come up to the pattern were taken at diminished
prices.

“On the 20th September, 1801, we went into the city of Nangasacca. The
first place we went to was Facquia’s, an eminent stuff merchant. Here
we were received with great politeness and entertained in such a manner
as we little expected. We had set before us for a repast, pork, fowls,
eggs, boiled fish, sweetmeats, cakes, various kinds of fruit, sakey and
tea. The lady of the house was introduced, who drank tea with each of
us as is the custom of Japan. She appeared to be a modest woman.

[Illustration: View of Nagasaki before Japan was opened to commerce,
showing the island of Deshima and the Dutch trading post]

“The place we next visited was a temple to which we ascended by at
least two hundred stone steps. We saw nothing very remarkable in
this building excepting its size, which was very large, though in
fact we were only admitted to an outer apartment as there appeared
to be religious ceremonies going on within. Adjoining this was the
burying-ground. In this ground was the tomb of one of their Governors,
which was made of stone and very beautifully wrought. We next visited
another temple also on the side of a hill and built of stone. The
inside presented a great degree of neatness. It consisted of a great
many apartments, in some of which were images; in one, a kind of altar,
was a lamp which was continually burning. In another were several long
pieces of boards, painted black with an inscription to the memory of
some deceased Emperor or Governor. Before each of these was a cup of
tea which they informed us was renewed every day. There were other
apartments which the priests probably occupied, as there were many of
them passing in and out. They are dressed like the other Japanese,
excepting that their outside garments were all black and their heads
shaved all over.

“From this we went to the glass house which was on a small scale,
thence to a lacquer merchants where we were entertained with great
hospitality. Thence we went to a tea-house or hotel where we dined.
After dinner we were entertained with various feats of dancing and
tumbling. Toward dark we returned to the Island and so much was the
crowd in the streets to see us pass that it was with difficulty that we
could get along. The number of children we saw was truly astonishing.
The streets of the city are narrow and inconvenient to walk in as they
are covered with loose stones as large as paving stones. At short
distances you have to go up or down flights of stone steps. At the end
of every street is a gate which is locked at night. They have no kinds
of carriages, for it would be impossible to use them in such streets.

“The houses are one or two stories, built of wood; the exterior
appearance is mean, but within they are very clean and neat. The floors
are covered with mats, and it is considered a piece of ill manners to
tread on them without first taking off the shoes. The Japanese dress
much alike. That of the man consists first of a loose gown which comes
down as low as the ankles; over this is worn a kind of petticoat which
comes as low as the other; these are made of silk or cotton. The
petticoat does not go higher than the hips. Over the shoulders they
wear a shawl, generally of black crape, and around the waist a band
of silk or cotton. Through this band the officers of the government
put their swords, and they are the only persons allowed to carry these
instruments.

“The middle part of the head is all shaved, the remaining hair which
is left on each side and behind, is then combed together and made very
stiff with gum mixed with oil, and then turned up on top of the head in
a little club almost as large as a man’s thumb. This is the universal
fashion with rich and poor, excepting the priests.

“The poorer classes do not wear the silk petticoat and the coolies and
other laborers at the time we were there, threw all their clothing off
excepting a cloth around their middle when at work. The dress of the
woman is the long gown with large sleeves, and is very like that of the
men. They suffer the hair to grow long, which is made stiff with gum
and oil and then is turned up on top of the head where it is secured
with various turtle-shell ornaments.

“The Japanese observed one fast when we were there. It was in
remembrance of the dead. The ceremonies were principally in the night.
The first of which was devoted to feasting, at which they fancy their
departed friends to be present; the second and third nights the graves
which are lighted with paper lamps and situated on the side of a hill
make a brilliant appearance. On the fourth night at 3 o’clock the lamps
are all brought down to the water and put into small straw barques with
paper sails, made for the occasion, and after putting in rice, fruit,
etc., they are set afloat. This exhibition is very fine. On the death
of their parents they abstain from flesh and fish forty-nine days and
on the anniversary they keep the same fast, but do not do it for any
other relations.

“As the time was approaching for our departure we began to receive our
returns from the interior brought many hundred miles. These consisted
of the most beautiful lacquered ware, such as waiters, writing desks,
tea-caddies, knife boxes, tables, etc. These were packed in boxes so
neat that in any other country they would be considered cabinet work.
We also received a great variety of porcelain, and house brooms of
superior quality. The East India Company’s cargo had been loading some
time previous.

“The Company’s ships have been obliged to take their departure from the
anchorage opposite Nangasacca on a certain day to the lower roads, no
matter whether it blew high or low, fair or foul, even if a gale, and
a thousand boats should be required to tow them down. We of course had
to do as our predecessors had done. Early in November we went to this
anchorage and remained a few days when we sailed for Batavia where we
arrived safely after a passage of one month.”

Thus did one of the first Americans that ever invaded Japan with a
note-book record his random impressions. He and his shipmates saw the
old Japan of a feudal age, generations before the jinrickshaw and the
Cook’s tourist swarmed in the streets of Nagasaki. Japanese customs
have been overturned since then. The men no longer wear their hair
“turned up on top of the head in a little club,” but have succumbed
to the scissors and the cropped thatch of the European. In the modern
Japan, however, which builds her own battleships and railroads,
there still survives the imaginative sentiment that sets afloat the
“little straw barques with paper sails,” illumined with “paper lamps”
freighting offerings to the memories and spirits of the dead. The
twentieth century tourist on the deck of a Pacific liner in the Inland
Sea may sight these fragile argosies drifting like butterflies to
unknown ports, just as young George Cleveland watched them in Nagasaki
harbor.

The Yankee seamen were more cordially received than other and later
visitors. Six years after the voyage of the _Margaret_ the English
sloop-of-war _Phaeton_ appeared off the coast of Nagasaki. It happened
that the inhabitants of that city had been expecting the arrival of
one of the Dutch vessels from Batavia, and were delighted when a ship
was signaled from the harbor entrance. When the mistake was discovered
the city and surrounding country were thrown into great excitement.
Troops were called out to repel the enemy, who disappeared after taking
fresh water aboard. As a tragic result of the incident the Governor of
Nagasaki and five military commanders who had quite upset the province
during this false alarm, committed suicide in the most dignified manner
as the only way of recovering their self-respect.

Again in 1811, the Russian sloop-of-war _Diana_ lay off the Bay of
Kunashiri to fill her water casks. Cannon shot from a neighboring fort
and the hasty arrival of troops were followed by a series of protracted
explanations between ship and shore, after which the commander and five
of his crew were invited to a conference. First they were entertained
with tea and saki and later made prisoners and led in chains to
Hakodate. After some delay they were released and put on board the
_Diana_ to continue the cruise without apology of any kind from the
Japanese.

The Salem shipmasters, under the Dutch flag, were fortunate enough
to be welcomed when the French, Russian and English were driven from
the coasts of Japan as foemen and barbarians. They were the first and
last Americans to trade with the Japanese nation until after Perry had
emphasized his friendly messages with the silent yet eloquent guns of
the _Susquehanna_, _Mississippi_, _Saratoga_ and _Plymouth_.

The _Margaret_, “than which a finer, better fitted or better manned
ship never left the port of Salem,” deserved to win from the seas whose
distant reaches she furrowed, a kindlier fate than that which overtook
her only eight years after her famous voyage to Japan. Her end was so
rarely tragic that it looms large, even now, in the moving annals of
notable shipwrecks. There exists a rare pamphlet, the title page of
which, framed in a heavy border of black, reads as follows:

“Some Particulars of the Melancholy Shipwreck of the
_Margaret_, William Fairfield, Master, on her
Passage from Naples to Salem.
Having on board Forty-six Souls.
To which is Added a Short Occasional Sermon
and a Hymn
Printed for the Author 1810.”

The little pamphlet, frayed and yellow, makes no pretence of literary
treatment. It relates events with the bald brevity of a ship’s log, as
if the writer had perceived the futility of trying to picture scenes
that were wholly beyond the power of words. The _Margaret_ left Naples
on the 10th of April, 1810, with a crew of fifteen, and thirty-one
passengers. These latter were the captains, mates or seamen of American
vessels which had been confiscated by Napoleon’s orders in the harbors
of the Mediterranean.

Aboard the _Margaret_ were masters and men from Salem and Beverly,
Boston and Baltimore, all of them prime American sailors of the old
breed, shorn of all they possessed except their lives, which most of
them were doomed to lose while homeward bound as passengers. “They
passed the Gut of Gibraltar the 22nd of April,” says the pamphleteer,
“—nothing of importance occurred until Sunday the 20th of May, when
about meridian, in distress of weather, the ship was hove on her beam
ends and totally disabled. Every person on board being on deck reached
either the bottom or side of the ship and held on, the sea making a
continual breach over her. During this time their boats were suffering
much damage, being amongst the wreck of spars; they were with great
difficulty enabled to obtain the long-boat, which by driving too the
butts, and filling the largest holes with canvas, rendered it possible
for them to keep her above water by continual bailing, still keeping
her under the lee of the ship. It was now about 7 o’clock in the
evening, the boat being hauled near the ship for the purpose of getting
canvass, oakum, etc., to stop the leak, as many men as could reach the
long boat jumped into her, and when finding the boat would again be
sunk if they remained near the ship they were obliged to veer her to
the leeward of the ship about 15 or 20 fathoms. They had not lain there
long before one man from the ship jumped into the sea and swam for the
boat, which he reached and was taken in. But finding at the same time
that all were determined to pursue the same course they were obliged to
veer the boat still further from the ship.

“They remained in this situation all night. The morning following was
moderate and the sea tolerable smooth, at which time the people on the
wreck were about half of them on the taff rail and the remainder on the
bowsprit and windlass, every other part being under water. And they
kept continually entreating to be let come into the boat. At this time
casks of brandy and other articles of the cargo were drifting among
the spars, etc., from amongst which they picked up a mizzen top gallant
sail, 2 spars, 5 oars, 1 cask of Oil, 1 (drowned) pig, 1 goat, 1 bag of
bread, and they hove from the wreck a gallon keg of brandy. They then
fixed a sail for the boat from the mizzen top gallant sail.

“It was now about eleven o’clock when the people on the wreck had
secured 2 quadrants, 2 compasses, 1 hhd. of water, bread, flour and
plenty of provisions, as they frequently informed those in the boat,
but would not spare any to them unless they consented to come alongside
the ship, which they refused to do fearing their anxiety for life would
induce them to crowd in and again sink the boat. One of them jumped
into the sea and made for the small boat which he reached, but finding
they would not take him in, he returned to the wreck.

“At about meridian, finding they were determined to come from the wreck
to the long boat, they cut the rope which held them to the wreck. The
wind being to the southward and westward and moderate, they made their
course as near as possible for the islands of Corvo or Flores, having
two men continually employed in bailing the boat. In this situation
they proceeded by the best of their judgment (having neither compass
nor quadrant) for five days until they fell in with the brig _Poacher_
of Boston, Captain Dunn from Alicante, who took them on board, treated
them with every attention, and landed them in their native land on the
19th of June.

“When the long boat left the wreck there remained on board 31 souls.
They immediately made preparations for their remaining days by securing
on a stage they had erected for that purpose, all the necessaries of
life they could obtain from the wreck. For the first week, they had a
plenty of salt meat, pork, hams, flour, water, etc. They also caught
a turtle and having found a tinder box in a chest they kindled a fire
in the ship’s bell and cooked it, making a soup which afforded them a
warm dinner, and the only one they were able to cook.

“They remained under the direction of Captain Larcom, whom they had
appointed to act as their head, until Sunday, the 27th of May (seven
days), when the upper deck came off by the violence of the sea. At
this time they lost both the provisions and the water they had secured
on the stage. In this distressing situation, Captain Larcom and four
others took the yawl, shattered as she was. The other twenty-six went
forward on the bowsprit with two gallons of wine and a little salt
meat, where another stage was erected on the bows. At this time the
water being only knee-deep on the lower deck they were enabled to
obtain hams, etc., from below but which for want of water were of
little service. And the wine before mentioned was their only drink for
seven days.

“They procured a cask of brandy from the lower hold, of which they
drank so freely (being parched with thirst) that fourteen of them died
the succeeding night. They made one attempt to intercept a sail (four
having passed) from which the boat returned unsuccessful. Captain
Larcom with four others took the boat, there being only three others
in a situation to leave the wreck, and the others preferring to remain
on it rather than venture in the boat. They (Captain L. and 4 others)
left the wreck, by observation 39°, 12′, and steering N. W. when after
twenty-three days had elapsed, and two of them having died, the boat
was picked up by Captain S. L. Davis from Lisbon for Gloucester, where
they arrived on the 18th of July.”

In this abrupt manner the story ends, and perhaps it is just as well.
Those left alive and clinging to the submerged wreck numbered ten,
and there they perished without voice or sign to tell how long they
struggled and hoped against the inevitable end. The three survivors
who escaped in the yawl lived for twenty-three days almost without
food or water. When they landed they told how “previous to their
departure from the _Margaret_ they went under the bowsprit and joined
in prayer for deliverance with Captain Janvin of Newburyport. This
gentleman who remained behind had conducted a similar service daily for
his companions since their shipwreck, and many of them united in his
petitions quite seriously. Then the five men in the yawl took a solemn
leave of the ten survivors, of whom no farther tidings has ever reached
us. With two and a half gallons of brandy and a little port, the
adventurers in so small a boat for sixteen days pursued their anxious
and afflictive course. Then they caught rain in their handkershifs and
by wringing them out succeeded in partially allaying their thirst.
Later they caught some rudder fish and eat them.”

There are old men living in Salem who can recall John Very, second mate
of the brig _Romp_, who was one of the three that lived to be picked
up in the yawl. When the boys used to ask him to spin the yarn of the
wreck of the _Margaret_ he would shake his head and become morose and
sad. These were memories that he wished to forget, and it is pleasanter
even to a later generation to recall the _Margaret_, the fine ship
newly launched, with her crew of stalwart young men “in the bloom of
youth,” bravely setting sail on her maiden voyage to find the way to
mysterious Japan in the faraway year of Eighteen Hundred and One.

FOOTNOTES:

[30] The name of this island is spelled Decima, Disma, Deshima, by the
sailor diarists. In the official records of Commodore Perry’s voyage it
is spelled Dezima.

[31] Magistrates or police officers.

CHAPTER XIV

THE FIRST YANKEE SHIP AT GUAM

(1801)

That minute dot on the map of the Pacific known as Guam has appealed to
the American people with a certain serio-comic interest as a colonial
possession accidentally acquired and ruled by one exiled naval officer
after another in the rôle of a benevolent despot and monarch of all
he surveys. This most fertile and populous of the Ladrone Islands,
which are spattered over a waste of blue water for four hundred miles
and more, was casually picked up as the spoils of war, it will be
remembered, by the cruiser _Charleston_ soon after hostilities with
Spain had been declared in 1898. The Spanish Governor of Guam was
rudely awakened from his siesta by the boom of guns seaward and, with
the politeness of his race, hastened to send out word to the commander
of the American cruiser that he was unable to return the salute for
lack of powder. Thereupon he was informed that he was not being saluted
but captured, and the Stars and Stripes were run above the ancient
fort and its moldering cannon which had barked salvos of welcome to
the stately galleons of Spain bound from South America to Manila two
centuries before.

The sovereignty of Castile being eliminated in this hilarious and
harmless fashion, the hard headed legatees who wore the blue of the
American navy sought to reform what had been a tropical paradise, where
no man worked unless he wanted to, where simple, brown-skinned folk
dwelt in drowsy contentment without thought of the morrow. The gospel
taught by the late Captain Richard Leary as naval governor of Guam
aimed to make these happy islanders more industrious and more moral
according to the code of the United States. His successors have labored
along similar lines and Captain Dorn, governor of Guam in the year of
1908, proclaimed such commendable but rigorous doctrine as this:

“Every resident of the island having no apparent means of subsistence
who has the physical ability to apply himself or herself to some lawful
calling; every person found loitering about saloons, dram shops or
gambling houses, or tramping or straying through the country without
visible means of support; every person known to be a pickpocket, thief
or burglar, when found loitering about any gambling house, cockpit or
any outlying barrio, and every idle or dissolute person of either sex
caught occupying premises without the consent of the owner thereof,
shall on conviction be punished by a fine of $250, or imprisonment for
one year or both.”

A brighter picture of the life of these islanders was painted several
years ago by W. E. Safford, who wrote of them in a paper contributed to
the _American Anthropologist_:

“Everybody seemed contented and had a pleasant greeting for the
stranger. It seemed to me that I had discovered Arcadia, and when I
thought of a letter I had received from a friend asking whether I
believed it would be possible to civilize the natives, I felt like
exclaiming: ‘God forbid.’”

The same visitor relates of these people and their ways:

“There are few masters and few servants in Guam. As a rule, the farm
is not too extensive to be cultivated by the family, all of whom, even
to the little children, lend a hand. Often the owners of neighboring
farms work together in communal fashion, one day on A’s corn, the next
on B’s, and so on, laughing, skylarking, and singing at their work and
stopping whenever they feel like it to take a drink of tuba from a
neighboring cocoanut tree. Each does his share without constraint, nor
will one indulge so fully in tuba as to incapacitate himself for work,
for experience has taught the necessity of temperance, and every one
must do his share of the reciprocal services. By the time the young men
have finished their round the weeds are quite high enough once more in
A’s corn to require attention. In the evening they separate, each going
to his own ranch to feed his bullock, pigs and chickens; and after a
good supper they lie down on a Pandanus mat spread over the elastic
platform of split bamboo.”

A pleasant picture, this, of toil lightened by common interest; an
idyllic glimpse of what work ought to be, perhaps worthy the attention
of socialists, labor unions, and those that scorn the heathen in his
blindness.

Almost a hundred years before Guam became a United States possession,
the island was visited by a Salem bark, the _Lydia_, the first vessel
that ever flew the American flag in the harbor of this island. There
has been preserved in manuscript an illustrated journal of the first
mate of the _Lydia_, William Haswell, in which he wrote at considerable
length the story of this historical pioneering voyage, and his
impressions of the island and its people under Spanish rule in the
faraway year of 1801. As the earliest description of a visit to Guam
by an American sailor or traveler, the manuscript has gained a timely
interest by the transfer of the island from under the Spanish flag.

However arduous may be the restrictions imposed by the conscientious
naval governors of to-day, the journal of First Mate Haswell of the
_Lydia_ shows that the islanders were released from a condition of
slavery and merciless exploitation by the memorable arrival of the
cruiser _Charleston_ and the subsequent departure from the stone palace
of the last of the Dons of Spain.

The very earliest experience of these islanders with Christian
civilization must have inspired unhappy tradition to make them far from
fond of their rulers. The Marianne or Ladrone Islands were discovered
by Magellan on March 6, 1521, after a passage of three months and
twenty days from the strait which bears his name. Among the accounts
written of this voyage is that of Antonio Pigafetta, of Vicenza, which
relates the terrible sufferings endured across an unexplored ocean.
After there was no more food the crews were forced to eat rats, which
brought a price of half a crown each, “and enough of them could not be
got.” The seamen then ate sawdust, and the ox hide used as chafing gear
on the rigging of the mainyards. The water was yellow and stinking.
Scurvy devastated the expedition, and nineteen men died of it, while
twenty-five or thirty more fell ill “of divers sicknesses, both in the
arms and legs and other places in such manner that very few remained
healthy.”

In this desperate plight, Magellan sighted two islands on which there
were no natives nor any food, and passed by them to find an anchorage
off what was later called Guam. The natives came out to welcome the
ship, skimming over the water in wonderful canoes or proas, and brought
gifts of fruit. The ships’ sails were furled and preparations made to
land when a skiff which had ridden astern of the flagship was missed.
It may have broken adrift, but the natives were suspected of stealing
it, and Captain-General Magellan at once led forty armed men ashore,
burned forty or fifty houses and many boats, and slaughtered seven or
eight native men and women.

“Before we went ashore,” writes Pigafetta, “some of our people who
were sick said to us that if we should kill any of them whether man or
woman, that we should bring on board their entrails, being persuaded
that with the latter they could be cured. When we wounded some of
those islanders with arrows which entered their bodies, they tried to
draw forth the arrow, now in one way, now in another, in the meantime
regarding it with great astonishment, and they died of it, which did
not fail to cause us compassion. Seeing us taking our departure, then,
they followed us with more than a hundred boats for more than a league.
They approached our ships, showing us fish and pretending to wish to
give them to us; but when they were near they cast stones at us and
fled. We passed under full sail among their boats, which, with great
dexterity, escaped us. We saw among them some women who were weeping
and tearing their hair, surely for their husbands killed by us.”

After this bloodthirsty and wicked visitation no attempt was made to
colonize these islands until a Jesuit priest, Padre Diege Luis de
Suavitores, landed at Guam in 1668, when a mission was established. The
Spanish Jesuits held full sway until they were expelled in 1769 and
their place taken by the Friars.

When the Salem bark, _Lydia_, visited Guam, therefore, in 1801, the
Spanish administration was in its heyday and had been long enough
established to offer a fair survey of what this particular kind of
civilization had done for the natives. The _Lydia_ was in Manila on
a trading voyage when she was chartered by the Spanish Government to
carry to Guam the new governor of the islands, his family, his suite
and his luggage. The bark sailed from Manila for Guam on October 20,
1801, and two days later, while among the Philippine Islands, the first
mate wrote in his journal:

“Now having to pass through dangerous straits, we went to work to make
boarding nettings, and to get our arms in the best order, but had
we been attacked, we should have been taken with ease. The pirates
are numerous in their prows[32] and we have but eleven in number
exclusive of our passengers, _viz._, the captain, two officers, cook,
steward, and six men before the mast. The passengers are the Governor
of the Marianna Islands, his Lady, three children and two servant
girls, and twelve men servants, a Friar and his servant, a Judge and
two servants, total passengers twenty-four and we expected but eight.
Too many idlers to drink water, and to my certain knowledge they would
not have fought had we been attacked. However, we passed in safety.

[Illustration:

From a photograph by E. G. Merrill

Salem Harbor as it is to-day]

“These passengers caused a great deal of trouble when their baggage
came on board. It could not be told from the cargo and, of course,
we stowed it all away together below, so that every day there was a
search for something or other which caused the ship to be forever in
confusion.”

There was more excitement while passing between the islands of Panay
and Negros, where the bark was becalmed close to land, “and all our
passengers were in the greatest confusion for fear of being taken and
put to death in the dark and not have time to say their prayers.” Next
day the _Lydia_ anchored at the island of Sambongue and the “Governor,
his Lady and children” went on shore to visit the officers of the
Spanish settlement. Captain Barnard of the bark did not like the
appearance of this port, and “put the ship into the highest state of
defence possible, got all the boarding nettings up, and the arms loaded
and kept a sea watch. This night a Spanish launch, as it proved to be
afterwards, attempted to come on board, but we fired at it and ordered
it to keep off.”

Cordial relations were soon established between ship and shore,
however, and the Spanish Governor of Sambongue and his sons went on
board to make a friendly call. “We had made every preparation in our
power to receive them with the greatest respect,” says the journal.
“His sons were as bad as Indians. They wanted everything they saw.
Captain Barnard presented them with a day and night glass. They in
turn sent a boatload of cocoanuts, upwards of a thousand, and some
plantain stalks for the live stock, some small hogs, two sheep, a
small ox and goat, but the live stock was for the passengers. The same
evening the Governor’s sons returned on board and brought with them
six girls and their music to entertain us, but the ship was so full of
lumber that they had no place to show their dancing. However, we made
shift to amuse ourselves till three in the morning. The current then
turning and a light breeze from the northward springing up, we sent
them all on shore, they singing and playing their music on the way.”

The following day, November 7th, saw the _Lydia_ under way and William
Haswell, with cheerful recollections of this island, found time to
write:

“The town of Sambongue is a pleasant place and protected by fifty
pieces of cannon, the greatest part of them so concealed by the trees
that they cannot be seen by shipping. This proved fatal to two English
frigates that attempted to take it. They landed their men before the
Spaniards fired. The Spaniards destroyed two boats and killed, by their
account, forty men, one of them a Captain of Marines. The English
made the best of their way back to the ships. One of them got aground
abreast of the Fort and received great injury. This is their story,
but we must make allowance. One thing is certain, the British left the
greater part of their arms behind them. The English account is, the
_Fox_, four killed and twelve wounded, the _Sybille_, two killed and
six wounded.

“The English have so much of the Malay trade that but little comes to
the share of the Spaniards, and in the words of the Governor’s wife
there is plenty of cocoanuts, water and girls at Sambongue, but nothing
else. I was well pleased with the inhabitants, as they did everything
in their power to serve us.

“November 8th. We had fine weather, light winds and those easterly,
so that it rendered our passage long and tedious. Our passengers were
very anxious to arrive at the island where they were to be the head
commanders, a station they had never before enjoyed. The Friar was
praying day and night but it would not bring a fair wind.

“... Jan. 4th. 4 P. M. we set all steering sails and stood to the
westward and got sight of the Islands of Guam and Rota. Next day we
had light winds and calms. We steered for the north end of the island
and at five P. M. found it was too late to get in that night. Reeft
the topsails and stood off and on all night. At 4 P. M. set all sail
to get round to the S. W. side. At 10 A. M. saw the town of Aguana[33]
and at one we entered the harbour at Caldera. A gun was fired from the
Island Fort, at which we came to and handed sails, the ship rolling
very heavy. A small boat came on board to enquire who we were. As soon
as they were informed that the new Governor was on board, they set off
in the greatest hurry to carry the information to Don Manuel Mooro, the
old Governor.

“The breeze continuing, we got under weigh and beat up the harbour.
They placed canoes on the dangerous places and by 6 P. M. the ship was
up and anchored in sixteen fathoms of water, sails handed, boats and
decks cleaned. At midnight the Adjutant came on board with a letter
from Don Manuel wishing our passenger, Don Vincentz Blanco, joy on his
safe arrival and informing him that the boats would attend him in the
morning.

“Jan. 7th. Accordingly at 6 A. M. three boats came on board, one of
them a handsome barge, the crew in uniform, a large launch for baggage,
and a small boat for the Judge and his two servants. At ten the
Governor, his Lady, and suite left the Ship. We saluted with nine guns
and three cheers. We then went to work to clear ship.”

At this place in his narrative the first mate of the _Lydia_ turns
aside from the pomp and fine feathers of the new Governor’s reception
to tell of the hard fate of another vessel.

“We saw a ship heaving in sight and not able to find the passage
over the Reef. I took a small boat and went out and found her to be
an English ship in distress. I piloted them in and brought them to
anchorage near the Hill Forts in thirty fathoms of water. Their story
is as follows, that the ship was taken from the Spaniards on the coast
of Peru and carried to Port Jackson, New Holland, and condemned. The
present owners bought her there and went with her to New Zealand to cut
spars which they were intending to carry to the Cape of Good Hope. But
the ship going on shore and bilging herself, delayed them some time
which occasioned a greater expenditure of provisions than what they
expected.

“They at length got the ship repaired and loaded and went to the
Friendly Islands to get provisions, but they were disappointed as the
natives were at war with one another and nothing to be got but yams of
which they got a slender stock. They set off again, but the ship got
aground on some rocks which made her leaky. They got her off and stopt
the leak on the inside with clay as well as they could. Their men then
mutinied and insisted on carrying the ship to Macao, but not being able
to reach that place, they put in here for provisions, thinking the
Spaniards would let them go out again. But their ship was so bad that
she never left this place. They could not get at the leak any other way
than by heaving the keel out and that was a work of time. I sent them
some salt beef and pork on board and took an officer and fifty Indians
and a bower anchor and cable with me to get her up the harbour which we
were some time about, but plenty of men made light work, and I warped
her up abreast of the _Lydia_, and there moored her.

“Next day eight of the English ship’s men took a boat and went to town
to the Governor to enquire how much he would give them to carry the
ship to Manila, but he ordered them to be put in irons for mutiny.”

Meanwhile the _Lydia_ was discharging cargo and filling her water
casks. When the wind blew too hard for the boats to make a landing at
Agana, Mate Haswell writes: “I used to take my gun and two or three
Indians with me and wander into the woods, but in all my stay on the
Island I shot only one small deer and some hogs and a few birds amongst
which was a large Bat near three feet from tip of wing to wing. The
woods are so full of underbrush that it is hard labour to one that is
not used to it to get forward, but the Indians travel as fast as I can
on clear ground. I frequently went into inland Indian villages and
always found them hard at work with the tobacco which all belongs to
the King. As soon as dried it must be carried to the Governor and he
sells it all at an enormous price. Everything else they have, even the
cattle, belongs to the King.

“The houses are small, but very cleanly, and are built of a kind of
basket work, with cocoanut leaves and are about twelve feet from the
ground. Their furniture consists of two or three hammocks of net work,
and the same number of mats, a chest, one frying pan, a large copper
pan, and a few earthen jars. Near their houses is a large row of wicker
baskets in piles six feet high for their fowls to lay their eggs and
set in, the breed of which they are very careful to preserve. The fire
place is under a small shed near the house to shelter it from the rain.
Their food is chiefly shell fish and plantains, cocoanuts and a kind
of small potatoes which they dry and make flour of, and it makes good
bread when new.

“But to return to the _Lydia_. She was bountifully supplied with fresh
provisions, beef, pork, fowls, all at the King’s expense and in the
greatest plenty so that we gave three-quarters of it away to the
English ship, who had nothing allowed them but jerked beef and rice. As
our crew was small we had a great deal of duty a-going on, I often got
assistance from the English ship and with this supply of men the work
was light. I kept the long boat constantly employed bringing on board
wood and water. Four men were on shore cutting wood, and some hands
repairing the rigging, painting ship, etc., and getting ready for sea
as soon as possible.

“About this time Captain Barnard came on board and went, accompanied
by himself and the second officer, to make a survey of the hull of the
English ship, her hull, rigging, sails, etc., and found her not fit to
perform a passage without some new sails, a new cable and a great deal
of new rigging and a new boat, as hers were lost. The leak we thought
could be reduced on the inside, but all the seams were very open and
required caulking. A report of our opinions being drawn out, I was sent
to town with it.

“The Governor hinted it was impossible to get what was required, but
yet wished to send the ship to Manila. The poor owners hung their heads
in expectancy of the condemnation of the ship.”

After the _Lydia_ had been made ready for her return voyage to Manila,
Mr. Haswell relates that he went to town, Agana, for a few days, and
passed “the time in a very pleasant manner. I found them preparing our
sea stock, which was to be in the greatest abundance. It consisted of
eight oxen, fifty hogs, large and small, but in general about thirty
pounds each, twenty-four dozen of fowl, five dozen of pigeons, two live
deer and a boat load of yams, potatoes, watermelons, oranges, limes,
cocoanuts, etc. The way we came to be so well provided for was that
both the Governors and the Lieutenant Governor insisted on supplying
us with stock, but that was not all, for the Friars and the Captains
of the Villages near the seaside all sent presents on board, some one
thing, some another.

“Thus the ship’s decks were as full as they could be with live stock,
hen coops from one end of the quarterdeck to the other, the long boat
and main deck full of hogs, and the forecastle of oxen. This great
stock of provisions was more than half wasted, for the heat of the
weather was such that more than half of it was spoiled. It would not
keep more than twenty-four hours without being cooked and then not more
than two days, so that if we killed an ox of five hundred pounds, four
hundred of it was hove overboard, which was a pity, but we had no salt.

“All of the English gentlemen and some of the Spanish officers came
down to the waterside to see us embark. I then went in company with
Captain Barnard and bid the kind Governor farewell and found scarcely
a dry eye in the house. The Governor’s Lady would not make her
appearance, but she waved a handkerchief from the balcony of the Palace
as we embarked in the boats.

“Captain Barnard was disappointed as he expected to have carried the
old Governor back to Manila with us, and only required half the sum we
had for going out, which was 8,000 dollars, but the old man thought
4,000 dollars was too much and offered 2,000 which was refused, the
Captain thinking that he would give it at last. Don Manuel had the
precaution to embark all the old Governor’s goods and the remains of
his wife on board the _Lydia_ by which Captain Barnard thought he would
come up to his price, and so took them on board for the small sum of
two hundred dollars. Nothing was left behind but the old Governor and
servants. He expected to the last moment that we would stop for him,
but as soon as he saw us under weigh, he wanted to stop us, but it was
too late as we were gone before his messenger reached the fort.

“We left the Harbour de Calderon with a fine breeze N. E. and as
soon as we were at sea a man belonging to the English ship that had
secreted himself on board, came on deck and shewed himself. We had also
an Otaheita Indian that was under the care of Captain Barnard as his
servant. We had but one passenger, a Friar, and he was a good man, his
behaviour was very different from the one we carried out with us. He
was so bad that we were forced to send him to Coventry, or in other
words, no one would speak with him.”

Having finished this running chronicle of the voyage to Guam, the
first mate of the _Lydia_ made a separate compilation of such general
information as he had been able to pick up. His account of the
treatment of the natives by their Spanish overlords is in part as
follows:

“They are under the Spanish martial law. All (native) officers are
tried by the Governor and the King’s officers of the army. They have
the power to inflict any punishment they think proper. When a man is
found worthy of death he must be sent to Manila to be condemned and
then brought back again to be executed. There was only one lying in
irons for murder, but Captain Barnard would not take him with us. The
whole island belongs to the King of Spain whom the Governor personates,
and the inhabitants must pay a yearly rent for their houses and lands
and all the cattle are the property of the Crown and can be taken from
them at the pleasure of the King’s officers, nor dare they kill their
cattle but with the permission of the Governor or the Friars, and then
never kill a cow till she is very old. The only things they have are
the milk and butter and the labour of the beast, and a small piece when
it is killed.

“They are called free-men, but I think contrary. If the Governor wants
a road cut he calls on all the men and sets them about it and only
finds them rice till it is done. The old Governor carried too far and
was called a great Tyrant. He made them build two forts and a bridge
and cut a road through a high rock, build a school house and some other
things and never allowed them to be idle, but for want of a supply of
food from Manila the poor men were near starving as he did not give
them time to cultivate the land.

“The Church also has its modes of trial. They have a kind of
Inquisition or trial by Torture established but I never heard of their
punishing any person. The poor Indians respect the Friars highly,
but the Governor will not let the Friars meddle with the affairs of
Government, as they often want to do. They were at variance about a man
that had committed murder and fled to the Church for protection. One of
the Officers took him from under the altar. The priests resented this
but were forced to hold their tongues. They sat on trials before, but
now they are excluded and the Governor takes care of things temporal.
But we carried out a Judge with us to examine into the Governor’s
behaviour and to hear the complaints of the poor to see them redressed.

“On the arrival of the new Governor the ship that brings him salutes
him when he leaves the ship and on his landing all the forts fire
except the Citadel which fires on his entering the church. The road was
lined with the militia without arms and he was received at the landing
place by the Lieutenant Governor and Adjutant and the Guards under
arms. There was a handsome carriage and four horses for the children
and two chair palanquins for him and his Lady, but he mounted the
Adjutant’s horse, and rode under triumphal arches of flowers and leaves
of trees to the church which he entered with all his family. The forts
then fired and the Guards received him on his leaving the church and
conducted him to the Palace where the old Governor received him and the
Guards fired three volleys.

“A grand entertainment was provided of which all the officers partook
and in which the old Governor shewed his taste. His table was covered
with the best of provisions, consisting of beef, venison, fowls, fish,
turtle, etc. All was in the greatest style, and the old man still had
good wines and chocolate though he had been five years without supplies
from Manila. The feast he gave was grand and by far surpassing what was
to be expected on a barren island. The next day all the officers waited
on the Governor’s Lady to pay their respects. All of them brought
presents, _viz._, butter, eggs, fowls, fruit, but the Adjutant’s wife
gave her a pair of ear-rings of pearls, the largest that I ever saw.
They were entertained with music and dancing and had beverages served
round to them, but some of the head ones had chocolate, wine, cakes,
etc.

“In their dances the natives imitate the Spaniards as near as possible.
Their voices are soft and harmonious, their songs are short and
agreeable, their language borders on the Malay but not so that they can
understand one another. These people are very hospitable and on your
entering their huts they offer you young cocoanuts and will get any
kind of fruit they have in a few moments. They are in general healthy
and strong but a certain malady introduced among them by the Spaniards
has made sad ravages and they had no medicines in the Island at the
time of our arrival, and they have no person that is acquainted with
medicines or with disorders of any kind. It is a great pity that the
Spanish Government does not send a man sufficiently qualified to put a
stop to that dreadful disorder.

“The Roman Catholic religion is universally established in all its
Terrors. I could not find out whether the Indians had any of their
own, but they pay great respect to some large flat stones of an oval
shape that are often found near their villages and are engraved with
characters like Malay, but there was no person on the Island that could
decipher them, as all kinds of learning have been long lost by the poor
Indians. The Spaniards have established a school to teach them to
read and write, but there are few of them who learn more than to read
the Prayers which are given them by the Friars.

[Illustration: The old-time sailors used to have their vessels painted
on pitchers and punch bowls. (The legend beneath this gallant brig is
“Success to the Peggy”)]

[Illustration: Title page from the journal of the _Lydia_, bound to
Guam in 1801]

“In the inland places the men and women go naked, but they have clothes
and on the appearance of a European they run and put them on and are
proud of being dressed, but they cannot buy clothes to wear in common
because they are so dear, for the Governor gains eight hundred per
cent. on all he sells them. And no other person is allowed to trade.
They are very obedient to government and it is seldom that there is any
disturbance.

“Of the troops one company is of colored men formerly brought from
Manila but now more than half Indians. They are well clothed and make a
good appearance with bright arms and a good band of music. Of militia
there is one regiment of one thousand men. Their arms are in bad order,
so rusty that when the Militia paraded to receive the new Governor
they were not armed but sat about cleaning them. The payment of this
militia is the only cash in circulation on the Island. Every man has
ten dollars a year to keep himself in readiness. When pay day comes
it causes a kind of market. The Governor’s secretary pays them and
they carry the money to the dry goods store and lay it out in Bengal
goods, cottons, and in Chinese pans, pots, knives, and hoes, which soon
takes all their pay away so that the cash never leaves the Governor’s
hands. It is left here by the galleons in passing and when the Governor
is relieved he carries it with him to Manila, often to the amount of
eighty or ninety thousand dollars.

“The population is estimated at 11,000 inhabitants[34] of which twelve
only are white and about fifty or sixty mixed. The Governor and four
Friars are the only Spaniards from old Spain, the others are from Peru,
Manila, etc. The city or capital of the Island is on the north side in
a large bay, but there is no anchorage for shipping. It is a pleasant
town and contains five hundred houses of all sorts and one thousand
inhabitants of all descriptions. It is on a small plain under a hill
which protects it from the heavy gales that sometimes blow from the
eastward. The town consists of six streets, one of them three-quarters
of a mile long. The buildings of the Governor and Chief Officers are of
stone and are good houses. The Palace is two-story and situated in a
very pleasant part of the town with a large plantation of bread-fruit
trees before it, and a road from it to the landing place. It is in
the old Spanish style. The audience chamber is near a hundred feet
long, forty broad and twenty high and well ornamented with lamps and
paintings. At each end of it are private apartments. In the front is
a large balcony which reaches from one end of the house to the other.
Behind the palace are all the outhouses which are very numerous. Close
to the Palace are the barracks and guard-room. It is a large building
and is capable of containing five hundred men with ease. To the
northward stands the church, built like one of our barns at home. It
has a low steeple for the bells. On the inside it is well adorned with
pictures, images, etc. On the south east and near the church is the
free school which has a spire. Here the alarm bell is hung, also the
school bell. The scholars never leave the house but to go to church.”

In this rambling fashion does Mr. William Haswell, mate of the Salem
bark _Lydia_, discourse of Guam as he saw it in the year of Our Lord,
1801. He dwells at some length also on the remarkable abundance of
fish, shells and _beche de mer_, the animals wild and tame, “the finest
watermelons I ever saw,” and the proas or “Prows” which he has seen
“sail twelve knots with ease.” Of one of these craft he tells this tale:

“There is a Prow that was drove on shore in a southerly gale from the
Caroline Islands with only one man alive. She had been at sea fourteen
days, and ten of them without provisions. There were three dead in the
boat and the one that was alive could not get out of the boat without
assistance. She had but one out-rigger which they shifted from side
to side. In other ways she was like the Guam Prows. The man that came
in her was well used and has no desire to go back. He looks a little
like a Malay, but there was no person in the Island that understood his
language.”

Mate William Haswell has left unfinished certain incidents of his
voyage to the bewitching island of Guam. Why was the Friar of the
outward voyage sent to Coventry? Did the thrifty “old Governor” finally
overtake the remains of his wife which sailed away to Manila without
him? One might also wish to know more of the brilliantly successful
methods of the Governor as a captain of industry. The system by which
he kept all the cash in the island in his own pockets, paying his
militia in order that they might immediately buy goods of him at a
profit of eight hundred per cent., seems flawless. It has not been
surpassed by any twentieth century apostle of “high finance.”

Whatever sins of omission may be charged against the literary account
of First Mate William Haswell, it is greatly to his credit that
he should have taken pains to write this journal of the _Lydia_,
a memorial of the earliest voyage under the American flag to that
happy-go-lucky colony of Uncle Sam which in more recent years has added
something to the gaiety of nations.

FOOTNOTES:

[32] Proas.

[33] The name of the capital or chief town of Guam is spelled “Agana”
to-day.

[34] The first American census of Guam reported a native population of
between 9,000 and 10,000.

CHAPTER XV

NATHANIEL BOWDITCH AND HIS “PRACTICAL NAVIGATOR”

(1802)

“Hail to thee, poor little ship, _Mayflower_, of Delft Haven,”
wrote Thomas Carlyle, “poor common looking ship, hired by common
charter-party for coined dollars—caulked with mere oakum and
tar—provisioned with vulgarest biscuit and bacon—yet what ship Argo or
miraculous epic ship, built by the sea gods, was other than a foolish
bumbarge in comparison!”

This fine rhapsody is of a piece with many another tribute to the
memory of the Pilgrim Fathers and their immortal ship, and yet it would
seem that some measure of praise were due that sturdy English seaman,
Thomas Jones, the master of the _Mayflower_, who dared to make his
blundering way across the Atlantic three centuries ago. Nor can one go
wrong in admiring the courage and resourcefulness of any of these bold
seamen who crossed oceans, made their landfalls and destined ports in
safety and rolled home again with the crudest knowledge of navigation
and almost no instruments for accurately charting their courses. Even a
century ago shipmasters voyaged to faraway havens without chronometers,
trusting to the log-line and compass to find their longitude by dead
reckoning, and keeping track of their latitude with the quadrant and a
“Navigator” or “Seaman’s Friend.” Nathaniel Silsbee of Salem records
that as late as 1827 he made a passage in a brig to Rotterdam when
they had no chronometer, and knew nothing of lunar observations, but
navigated by dead reckoning, or the estimated speed of the ship. On his
first voyage of eighteen months beyond the Cape of Good Hope, “the only
spare canvass for the repair of a sail on board the vessel was what was
on the cover of the log-book.”[35]

Before informing the landsman who Nathaniel Bowditch was, and what this
self-taught astronomer and mathematician of Salem did to aid the great
multitudes of those that go down to the sea in ships, it may be worth
while to tell something of how our forefathers found their way from
shore to shore. The real beginnings of the science of navigation as it
is known to-day, are to be sought no further away than the seventeenth
century which first saw in use the telescope, the pendulum, logarithms,
the principles of the law of gravitation and instruments for measuring
minute angles of the heavens. The master of the _Mayflower_ in 1620 was
hardly better equipped for ocean pathfinding than Columbus had been
two centuries before him. Columbus in his turn had made his voyages
possible by employing the knowledge gained by the earlier Portuguese
exploring expeditions of the fifteenth century.

In fact, up to the time of the voyages undertaken under the patronage
of Prince Henry of Portugal which led to the discovery of the Cape
Verde Islands in 1447, and of Sierra Leone in 1460, thousands of years
had passed without the slightest improvement in aids to navigation
except the introduction of the mariners’ compass or magnetic needle
among European nations at the beginning of the fourteenth century.
The civilization which bordered the Mediterranean had known only
coastwise traffic, and the vast ocean beyond the Pillars of Hercules
was mysterious and unfurrowed by the keels of trading galleys. Ancient
discoveries in astronomy had taught that the altitudes of the sun and
stars varied with respect to the location of the observer according to
fixed laws, but the sailor had not dreamed of making use of these laws
to find his latitude or longitude, except for the tradition that the
adventurous Phoenician traders guided their vessels by means of the
known position of the constellation of Ursa Minor, or of the Pole star.

Prince Henry of Portugal resolved to collect and systematize all the
knowledge of nautical affairs obtainable in the early part of the
fifteenth century, preparatory to sending forth his intrepid seamen as
explorers of the Atlantic, and established an observatory near Cape
St. Vincent in order to obtain more accurate tables of the declination
of the sun, by which the mariner obtained his latitude in clumsy and
unreliable fashion. The sun’s “declination” is its angular distance
from the celestial equator, or the angle that a line drawn to the sun
from any point at sea or on the earth’s surface makes with the plane
of the celestial equator. In other words, the most important early
discovery in navigation, next to the use of the magnetic needle, was
the use of an instrument by which these angles could be determined and
then utilized by means of astronomical tables to find a ship’s distance
north or south of the earth’s equator, in degrees and fractions
thereof.

John II of Portugal, grand-nephew of this enlightened and ambitious
Prince Henry, endeavored to make further advancement in the same field
and employed a “Committee on Navigation” to collect new data and make
more calculations to lessen the errors in the tables of the sun’s
declination. They turned their attention also to the instrument then in
use for taking observations at sea, the cross-staff, and recommended
that the astrolabe should be employed instead. The shipmaster of
Columbus’ time went to sea with a cross-staff or astrolabe, a compass,
a table of the sun’s declination, a table for connecting the altitude
of the pole star and occasionally a very incorrect chart. The first sea
chart ever seen in England was carried there in 1489 by Bartholomew
Columbus. The log-line had not been invented and it was not until 1607
that any means was known of measuring a ship’s course through the water.

The cross-staff, as used by Columbus and Vasco da Gamma, consisted of
two light battens or strips of wood, joined in the shape of a cross,
the observer taking his sights from the ends of the “cross” and the
“staff,” on which the angles were marked in degrees. As a device
for measuring altitudes, the cross-staff had been known to ancient
astronomers, although unknown to their seamen. The astrolabe was a
copper disk, suspended from above with a plumb line beneath, and was
found to be more convenient for taking altitudes than the cross-staff,
and gradually superseded it.

The problem of finding longitudes at sea was far more baffling than
that of latitude. It was early discovered that the only accurate and
satisfactory method must be by ascertaining the difference in time
at two meridians at the same instant, but until the invention of the
chronometer this could be done only by finding, at two different
places, the apparent time of the same celestial phenomena. The most
obvious phenomena occurring to the early navigators were the motions
of the moon among the fixed stars, which was first suggested in 1514.
Better instruments and a sounder theory of the moon’s course were
needed before its motions could be predicted with accuracy and recorded
beforehand in an almanac in order to give the mariner a basis of
comparison with his own observations, and the very principal of such a
theory was, of course, unknown until Newton’s great discoveries, after
which the problem of lunar observations began to have a chief place in
the history of navigation.

The cross-staff and astrolabe gave place in time to the quadrant, which
was a much more accurate instrument for observation and was used by
the mariners of the eighteenth century. It, in its turn, was discarded
for the sextant during the nineteenth century, which instrument, as
improved and perfected, is in universal use at sea to-day for helping
to find a ship’s position by means of the measurement of angles with
respect to the sun and stars.

The chronometer, for finding longitudes, has taken the place of lunar
observations, and the story of the struggle to invent a time-keeping
mechanism of requisite accuracy for use at sea is one of the romances
of science. Watches were unknown until 1530, but before the end of
that century efforts had been made to ascertain the difference in
time between two places by means of two of these crude timepieces
which, however, were too unreliable to be of any practical service to
navigation. The study of the problem was stimulated by the offer of a
reward of a thousand crowns by Philip III of Spain, in 1598, to him who
should discover a safer and more accurate method of finding longitude
at sea than those in use. The States-General of Holland followed this
with the offer of ten thousand florins, and in 1674 England became
actively interested in the problem and Greenwich Observatory was
established for the benefit of navigation and especially to calculate
the moon’s exact position with respect to the fixed stars a year in
advance and so make the “lunar observation” method of determining
longitude a safer guide for the seamen than was the case with the
tables then existing.

The pressing need of such investigation was brought home to England by
a series of great disasters to her naval force because of blundering
navigation. Several men-of-war were wrecked off Plymouth in 1691
through a mistake in their landfall and Sir Cloudesley Shovel, one of
Great Britain’s immortal admirals, was lost with his fleet of ships off
the Scilly Islands in 1707 because of a mistake in reckoning position.
The government became convinced that the whole theory and practice
of navigation needed a radical overhauling, and in 1714 a “royal
commission for the discovery of longitude at sea” was appointed and at
the same time a series of splendid prizes was offered for the invention
of an accurate chronometer; five thousand pounds for a chronometer
that would enable a ship six months from home to find her longitude
within sixty miles; seven thousand five hundred pounds if the limit of
error were within forty miles; ten thousand pounds if the position were
correct within thirty miles. Another clause of this bill as enacted
by Parliament offered a “premium” of twenty thousand pounds for the
invention of any method whatever by means of which longitude at sea
could be determined within thirty miles. Two years later the Regent
of France offered a hundred thousand francs for the same purpose with
similar stipulations.

There lived in Yorkshire a young watchmaker, John Harrison, who learned
to make better watches than anybody else in England, and he had
followed with keen interest the experiments which attempted to find
longitude by means of watches set to keep Greenwich Observatory time
as nearly as possible. He determined to attack the problem in his way
and to compete for these royal prizes if it meant the devotion of a
lifetime to the art of making chronometers. He spent years in making
one instrument after another until in 1736 he carried to Greenwich a
“gridiron pendulum clock” which was placed on board a ship bound for
Lisbon. It proved to be accurate enough to correct the ship’s reckoning
of observations by several miles, and was a notable improvement on any
other timepiece of the day.

The Royal Commission urged Harrison to drop all other work and make a
business of competing for the prizes, and offered to supply him with
funds. For twenty-four years John Harrison strove to make a chronometer
that should win the twenty thousand pounds. He was sixty-eight years
old when, in 1761, he wrote the Commission that he had a chronometer
which he was willing to send on a trial voyage, and asked that his
son William be allowed to go with it to take care of the precious
instrument.

The Commission sent the chronometer out in a ship bound to Jamaica in
order that its mechanism might be tested by extremes of climate and
temperature. On arriving at Jamaica the chronometer had varied but
four seconds from Greenwich time. When the ship returned to England
after an absence of 147 days, the total variation was found to be
less than two minutes, or eighteen miles of longitude. The Commission
demanded that the chronometer be given another trial, and it was sent
to Barbados on a voyage five months long, at the end of which it showed
a variation of only sixteen seconds from Greenwich time, which meant
that John Harrison’s chronometer had lost or gained an average of about
two-thirds of a second a week.

The Yorkshire watchmaker, after a lifetime of service, had won a
momentous victory, but more exacting tests were demanded of his
masterpiece and he was threatened with death from old age before he was
finally given the twenty thousand pounds. Thenceforth the chronometer
slowly made its way among ship owners as a necessary article of the
captain’s equipment and the most important contribution to navigation
since the magnetic compass.

[Illustration: Nathaniel Bowditch, author of “The Practical Navigator”]

Old-fashioned mariners with an eye to expense continued to find their
longitude by means of lunar observations for half a century and more
after the chronometer had been perfected, and in American merchant
vessels the chronometer may be said to belong to the nineteenth century
era of navigation. “Dead reckoning” and lunar observations were the
main-stays of the Salem sea captains in the days of their greatest
activity over distant seas, and their fellow-townsman, Nathaniel
Bowditch, author of “The Practical Navigator,” was a far greater man,
and more useful to them, than John Harrison of Yorkshire.

The log-line and sandglass have been discarded on steamers of to-day
in favor of the patent log with its automatic registering mechanism,
but the old-fashioned method of measuring the ship’s course is used
on sailing vessels the world over. It gave to the language of the sea
the word “knot” for a nautical mile, and the passenger on board the
thirty-thousand-ton express liner of the Atlantic “steamer lanes” talks
of her six hundred and odd knots per day without knowing how the word
came into use, or that at the taffrail of the white-winged bark or ship
passed in midocean the log-line and glass are being used to reckon the
miles in genuine old-fashioned “knots,” just as they were employed a
century ago.

The “log” is a conical-shaped canvas bag, or a triangular billet of
wood so attached to the “log-line” that it will drag with as much
resistance as possible. The line is wound round a reel, and is divided
at regular intervals into spaces called “knots.” These are marked
on the line by bits of rag or leather; at the first knot is a plain
piece of leather, at the second a piece of leather with two tails;
at the third a knot is tied in the line, and so on according to a
simple system which enables the observer to identify the sequence
and number of the “knots.” The glass is like an hourglass, but
the sand is carefully measured to run through in exactly fourteen
or twenty-eight seconds. The log-line and its knots are carefully
measured to correspond with the glass. That is, if the sand runs out in
twenty-eight seconds, the distance between two knots of the line bears
the same ratio to the length of a real “knot,” or nautical mile as the
twenty-eight seconds for which the sandglass is set bears to an hour
of time. Therefore the number of “knots” of the line unreeled out over
the stern of the ship while the sand is running in the glass gives the
number of miles which she is traveling per hour.

When the speed is to be read, one man throws overboard the “log” and
line, while another stands ready with the glass. The first twenty
or thirty fathoms of line are allowed to pay out before the knots
are counted. When the drag has settled quietly in the sea astern and
anchored itself, a white rag tied to the line marks the instant for
turning the glass. As the bit of white rag flashes over the rail the
man with the reel begins to count the knots that slip past, the glass
is set running, and when the last trickle of sand has sifted through,
the man holding it shouts “stop her.” The other man with the log reel
notes the number of knots paid out, and down on the ship’s log-book go
the figures as the number of miles per hour the ship is making through
the water.

The log and sandglass, along with the sounding lead, are survivals of a
vanished age of sea life, perhaps the only necessary aids to navigation
which are used to-day precisely as our forefathers used them. For this
reason, and also because the log and glass played so vital a part in
the day’s work of the navigators of such ports as Salem, they have been
discussed at some length in this introduction to a sketch of the life
of Nathaniel Bowditch, for his place among the truly great men of his
time, great in benefactions to humanity, cannot be perceived by the
landsman without some slight knowledge of the conditions which then
existed in the vastly important science of deep-water navigation.

The nineteenth century had to thank this seafaring astronomer of Salem
for its most valuable working treatise on navigation which illustrates
with singular aptness the fact, often overlooked, that the ship captain
is a practical astronomer and this his calling has been more and more
safeguarded by methods of applied science. Or as Professor Simon
Newcomb has expressed it:

“The usefulness of practical astronomy and the perfection it has
attained may be judged from this consideration: take an astronomer
blindfolded to any part of the globe, give him the instruments we have
mentioned, a chronometer regulated to Greenwich or Washington time, and
the necessary tables, and if the weather be clear so that he can see
the stars, he can, in the course of twenty-four hours tell where he is
in latitude and longitude within a hundred yards.”

For more than a century the name of Nathaniel Bowditch has been known
in the forecastle and cabin of every American and English ship, and a
volume of “The Practical Navigator” is to be found in the sea kit of
many a youngster who aspires to an officer’s berth. The book is still
one of the foremost authorities in its field, a new edition being
published by the United States Hydrographic Office every three or four
years. A multitude of landlubbers who have no knowledge of seafaring
as a calling have heard of “Bowditch” as a name intimately linked with
the day’s work on blue water. At his death in 1838, his fellow mariners
of the East India Marine Society, of which he had been president,
spread upon their records a resolution which voiced the sentiment of
shipmasters in every port and sea:

“Resolved, That in the death of Nathaniel Bowditch a public, a
national, a humane benefactor has departed; that not this community,
nor one nation only, but the whole world has reason to do honor to his
memory; that when the voice of eulogy shall be still, when the tear of
sorrow shall cease to flow, no monument will be needed to keep alive
his memory among men, but as long as ships shall sail, the needle point
to the north, and the stars go through their appointed course in the
Heavens, the name of Dr. Bowditch will be revered as one who helped
his fellowmen in time of need, who was and is to them a guide over the
pathless ocean, and of one who forwarded the great interest of mankind.”

This ocean pathfinder of Salem, Nathaniel Bowditch, made no important
discoveries in the science of navigation, but with the intellect
and industry of a true mathematical genius, he both eliminated the
costly errors in the methods of navigation used in 1800, and devised
much more certain and practicable ways of finding a ship’s position
on the trackless sea. So important were the benefits he wrought to
increase the safety of shipping that when the news of his death was
carried abroad, the American, English and Russian vessels in the port
of Cronstadt half-masted their flags, while at home the cadets of the
United States Naval School wore an official badge of mourning, and
the ships at anchor in the harbors of Boston, New York and Baltimore
displayed their colors at half-mast. The London _Atheneum_ said of “The
Practical Navigator,” in the days when no love was lost between British
and American seamen:

“It goes, both in American and British ships, over every sea of the
globe, and is probably the best work of the sort ever published.”

What Nathaniel Bowditch did was to undertake the revision of a popular
English handbook of navigation by John Hamilton Morse in which his
acute mind had detected many blunders which were certain to cause
shipwreck and loss of life if mariners continued to use the treatise.
This work was found to be in need of so radical an overhauling that
in 1802 Bowditch published it under his own name, having corrected
no fewer than eight thousand errors in the tables and calculations,
including such ghastly and incredible mistakes as making 1800 a leap
year in reckoning the tables of the sun’s declination and thereby
throwing luckless shipmasters as many as twenty-three miles out of
their true position at sea. It was declared at the time that several
ships had been lost because of this one error.

Expert opinion hailed the work of Bowditch with such eulogies as the
following:

“It has been pronounced by competent judges to be, in point of
practical utility, second to no work of man ever published. This
apparently extravagant estimate of its importance appears but just,
when we consider the countless millions of treasure and of human lives
which it has conducted and will conduct in safety through the perils
of the ocean. But it is not only the best guide of the mariner in
traversing the ocean; it is also the best instructor and companion
everywhere, containing within itself a complete scientific library for
his study and improvement in his profession. Such a work was as worthy
of the cultured author’s mind as it is illustrative of his character,
unostentatious, yet profoundly scientific and thoroughly practical,
with an effective power and influence of incalculable value.”

At a meeting of the East India Marine Society on May 6, 1801, “to
examine a work called ‘The New American Practical Navigator,’
by Nathaniel Bowditch, a committee of sagacious and experienced
shipmasters, veterans of the seas beyond the Cape of Good Hope and the
Horn, submitted the following report:

“After a full examination of the system of navigation presented to
the Society by one of its members (Mr. Nathaniel Bowditch), they
find that he has corrected many thousand errors in the best European
works of the kind; especially those in the tables for determining
the latitude by two altitudes, in those of difference of latitude
and departure, of the sun’s right ascension of amplitudes, and many
others necessary to the navigator. Mr. Bowditch has likewise in many
instances greatly improved the old methods of calculation, and added
new ones of his own. That of clearing the apparent distance of the
moon, and sun or stars from the effects of parallax and refraction
is peculiarly adapted to the use of seamen in general, and is much
facilitated (as all other methods are in the present work), by the
introduction of a proportion table into that of the corrections of the
moon’s altitude. His table nineteenth, of corrections to be applied in
the lunar calculations has the merit of being the only accurate one
the committee is acquainted with. He has much improved the tables of
latitudes and longitudes of places and has added those of a number on
the American coast hitherto very inaccurately ascertained.

“This work, therefore, is, in the opinion of the committee, highly
deserving of the approbation and encouragement of the Society, not
only as being the most correct and ample now extant, but as being
a genuine American production; and as such they hesitate not to
recommend it to the attention of navigators and of the public at large.

Jonathan Lambert }
Benjamin Carpenter }
John Osgood } Committee
John Gibant }
Jacob Crowninshield }

“Approved, Benjamin Hodges, President.
“Moses Townsend, Secretary.

“Salem, May 13, 1801.”

This report is dry reading for the landsman, but it concerned matters
of the most vital import to many thousand sea captains, who later
blessed the name of this astronomer and mathematician of Salem.

As a shipmaster, Nathaniel Bowditch made a somewhat incongruous figure
among the sturdy, full-blooded, simple-minded seamen of his port
and his time. He was an intellectual prodigy, a thinking machine,
and his tastes were not at all those of the practical navigator and
trader overseas. He served his time at sea, and acquitted himself
successfully, largely because he was trained for the calling of his
father, Habakkuk Bowditch, who had begun his career on shipboard.

The family was in straitened circumstances when Nathaniel came into
the world in 1773, and his period of schooling was exceedingly brief.
At the tender age of seven he was sent to a Salem “seminary of
learning,” the master of which drilled his pupils’ minds by making
them spell at frequent intervals that uncouth monster of words
“honorificabilitudinity.” The Bowditch offspring survived this ordeal
and at twelve years was apprenticed to a ship chandler. In this tarry
environment he learned algebra and “could not sleep after his first
glance at it.” An old British sailor taught the lad what he knew of the
elements of navigation after hours in the ship chandler’s shop. The
precocious love for mathematics had set the lad’s brain on fire and he
reveled in problems which would have baffled the wisest old heads of
Salem.

While Nathaniel was still in his teens his ambition received a
mighty impetus by the discovery of a treasure trove of learning, the
philosophical library of Dr. Richard Kirwan,[36] a famous Irish
scientist. This precious collection of abstruse literature had come to
Salem in a manner highly characteristic of the time and place. While
cruising off the British coast during the Revolution, an audacious
privateer of Beverly snapped up a merchant vessel and took out her
cargo as lawful prize of war. Among the plunder was the library of
this luckless Doctor Kirwan, which he had been in the act of shipping
from Ireland to England. The privateer came home to Beverly and her
booty was sold, according to custom. Several gentlemen of Salem clubbed
together, purchased the books, and used them to found the library of
the Salem Atheneum, which institution lives even unto this day and is
housed in a beautiful new building of colonial design on Essex Street.

Nathaniel Bowditch never forgot his youthful obligation to this source
of learning and wrote in his will:

“It is well known that the valuable scientific library of the
celebrated Dr. Richard Kirwan, was during the Revolutionary War,
captured in the British Channel on its way to Ireland,[37] by a Beverly
privateer and that by the liberal and enlightened views of the owners
of the vessel, the library thus captured was sold at a very low rate,
and in this manner was laid the foundation upon which has since been
established the Philosophical Library so-called, and the present Salem
Atheneum. Thus in early life I found near me a better collection of
Philosophical and Scientific books than could be found in any other
part of the United States nearer than Philadelphia, and by the kindness
of its proprietors I was permitted freely to take the books from that
library and to consult and study them at pleasure. This inestimable
advantage has made me deeply a debtor to the Salem Atheneum, and I do
therefore give to that institution the sum of one thousand dollars, the
income thereof to be forever applied to the promotion of its objects,
and the extension of its usefulness.”

Dr. Richard Kirwan had the shadowy consolation of being compelled to
furnish enlightenment to this hostile port of Salem, but the most
important benefit reaped by this singular privateering adventure was
the stimulus it conveyed to the mind of young Nathaniel Bowditch. He
became wholly submerged in the volumes of the Transactions of the
Royal Society of London. Indeed, he copied one book after another,
making these manuscripts with infinite pains in order that he might
possess them and carry them to sea with him. He was in his teens when
he copied “A complete collection of all the Mathematical Papers of the
Philosophical Transactions; Extracts from various Encyclopedias and
from the Memoirs of the Paris Academy; a complete copy of Emerson’s
Mechanics, a copy of Hamilton’s Conics; extracts from Gravesand’s and
Martyn’s Philosophical Treatise; extracts from Bernoulli, etc., etc.”

At the age of seventeen Bowditch began to learn Latin without a teacher
in order that he might read Newton’s Principia, and when he was old
enough to vote “he was unsurpassed in mathematical attainments by any
one in the Commonwealth.” But he must needs earn his bread and go to
sea, and so in 1795 Nathaniel made his first voyage as captain’s clerk
in the Salem ship _Henry_, Captain Prince, to Mauritius. His sea life
covered a period of nine years, during which he made five voyages, one
of them to Manila in 1796-7, in the ship _Astrea_, as supercargo with
Captain Prince. The _Astrea_ was the first American ship to fly the
stars and stripes in the harbor of Manila, a fact of some historical
worth. The American trade to the Orient was then in its beginnings and
it was Elias Hasket Derby, who, with characteristic enterprise, sent
the _Astrea_ to Manila in search of sugar, pepper and indigo, of which
she fetched home a large and valuable cargo.

Nathaniel Bowditch kept a journal of this voyage as was required by the
laws of the East India Marine Society, and his journal, written in a
precise and delicate hand, is preserved in the Society’s collection of
records. His impressions of the capital city of the Philippines in 1797
read in part as follows:

“The city of Manila is about three or four miles in circumference,
is walled all around, and cannon are placed at proper intervals, but
we were unable to get much information with respect to the state of
the place, as they were shy of giving any information to foreigners.
The buildings within the wall are all of stone, and none except the
churches is more than two stories high, on account of the violent
earthquakes which they generally have at the breaking up of the
monsoons. The month of March is when they most expect them, but on the
fifth of November, 1797, we experienced several violent shocks at about
2 P. M. which came from the northward, and proceeded in a southerly
direction, continuing with violence nearly two minutes. It threw down a
large house half a league from the city, untiled several buildings, and
did much other damage. It was not observed on board the ship lying off
the bar. The motion of the earthquake was quicker than those usual in
America, as the latter are generally preceded by a rumbling noise; the
former was not.

[Illustration: Nathaniel Bowditch’s chart of Salem harbor]

“The suburbs of Manila are very extensive; most of the business is done
there. The houses of the wealthier class are of two stories, built
of bamboo with thatched roofs. No house can be built in the suburbs
without the particular permission of the Governor, fearing if they were
too high an enemy might make use of them, as was the case when the
English took the place formerly, for one of the churches near the walls
was very serviceable to them.

“All the women have a little of the Indian blood in their veins,
except the lady of the Governor and two or three others, though by
a succession of intermarriages with Europeans they have obtained a
fair complexion. The natives (like all other Malays) are excessively
fond of gaming and cock-fighting. A theatre is established for the
latter business from which the government draws an immense revenue,
the diversion being prohibited at any other place. Sometimes there
are five or six thousand spectators, each of whom pays half a real. A
large sum arises from the duties on tobacco and cocoa wine. Tobacco
is prohibited, but if you smuggle any on shore it cannot be sold for
more than the ruling cost in America, notwithstanding the price is very
high. Particular people, licensed by the King, are the only persons
allowed to deal in it.

“All the natives chew _dreca_ and _betel_, though not mixed with opium
as in Batavia. This with chewing and smoking tobacco make their teeth
very black. The segars used by the women, and which they smoke all
day, are made as large as they can possibly get into their mouths. The
natives are about as honest as their neighbors, the Chinese; they stole
several things from us, but by the goodness of the police we recovered
most of them.

“On the second of December, 1797, thieves broke into the house where we
lived, entered the chamber where Captain Prince and myself were asleep,
and carried off a bag containing $1,000 without awakening either
of us, or any of the crew of the long-boat sleeping in an adjoining
chamber.

“The guard boat discovered them as they were escaping and pursued them.
They, in endeavoring to escape, ran afoul of a large boat, which,
upsetting them, the money went to the bottom, and, what was worse, the
bag burst and the money was all scattered in the mud, where the water
was eight feet deep. However, by the honesty of the captain of the
guard, most of it was recovered. The thieves were caught, and, when we
were there in 1800, Mr. Kerr informed us that they had been whipped,
and were to be kept in servitude several years.

“The same day another robbery was committed, equally as daring. The day
the indigo was shipped, the second mate came ashore with several of the
people to see it safe aboard. The boats we had provided, not taking all
of it, we sent the remainder aboard with a black fellow as a guard, who
was esteemed by Mr. Kerr as an honest man, but he had been contriving,
it seems, to steal a couple of boxes. When the cases containing the
indigo had passed the bar, a small boat came aboard with two boxes
filled with chips, stones, etc., appearing in every respect like those
full of indigo, and, pretending that we had put on board two wrong
boxes, they exchanged their boxes for two real boxes of indigo, but, in
bringing them ashore, they were detected and the indigo returned.

“There are great numbers of Chinese at Manila. It is from them most
of the indigo is purchased. They trade considerably with China; their
junks arrive at Manila in January, and all their goods are deposited
in the custom-house. Some of these cargoes are valued at a million of
dollars, the duties on which amounted to nearly $100,000. The Chinese
at Manila retain all the customs of their country, excepting those
respecting religion and a few other things of small moment.”

[Illustration: Captain Benjamin Carpenter of the _Hercules_, 1792]

When the _Astrea_ arrived at Manila on this voyage, Captain Prince was
asked by another shipmaster how he contrived to find his way in the
face of the northeast monsoon by dead reckoning. He replied that “he
had a crew of twelve men, every one of whom could take and work a lunar
observation, as well for all practical purposes, as Sir Isaac Newton
himself, if he were alive.”

During this dialogue Nathaniel Bowditch, the supercargo, who had taught
these sailors their navigation while at sea, “sat as modest as a maid,
saying not a word but holding his slate pencil in his mouth,” according
to Captain Prince who also used to relate that “another person remarked
there was more knowledge of navigation on board that ship than ever
there was in all the vessels that have floated in Manila Bay.”

During his seafaring years this singular mariner, Nathaniel Bowditch,
learned French thoroughly, and studied Italian, Portuguese and Spanish.
One who sailed with him said, “all caught a zeal to learn on board
his ships. The whole crew of twelve men on board the _Astrea_ later
became captains, first and second mates. At sea his practice was to
rise at a very early hour in the morning, and pursue his studies till
breakfast, immediately after which he took a rapid walk for half an
hour, and then went below to his studies till half-past eleven o’clock,
when he returned and walked till twelve o’clock, the hour at which he
commenced his meridian observations. Then came dinner, after which
he was engaged in his studies till five o’clock; then he walked till
tea time, and after tea was at his studies till nine o’clock in the
evening. From this hour till half-past ten o’clock he appeared to have
banished all thought of study, and while walking he would converse in
the most lively manner, giving us useful information, intermixed with
amusing anecdotes, and hearty laughs, making the time delightful to
the officers who walked with him, and who had to quicken their pace
to accompany him. Whenever the heavenly bodies were in distance to get
the longitude, night or day, he was sure to make his observations once
and frequently twice in every twenty-four hours, always preferring to
make them by the moon and stars on account of his eyes. He was often
seen on deck at other times, walking rapidly and apparently in deep
thought, when it was well understood by all on board that he was not
to be disturbed, as we supposed he was solving some difficult problem.
And when he darted below the conclusion was that he had got the idea.
If he was in the fore part of the ship when the idea came to him, he
would actually run to the cabin, and his countenance would give the
expression that he had found a prize.”

In keeping with this picture is the story of Bowditch’s behavior when
during his third voyage, from Cadiz to Alicante, his ship was chased
by a French privateer. The Yankee captain decided to make a fight of
it and Bowditch was assigned to hand powder on deck from the magazine.
One of the officers, going below after the vessel had been cleared for
action found the supercargo sitting on a keg of powder with his slate
in his lap, absorbed in making calculations.

Nathaniel Bowditch had made the sea serve him, both to gain a
livelihood and to test his theories of practical navigation for the
benefit of his fellow seamen. But he did not consider “The Practical
Navigator” to be an achievement by which his intellectual powers should
be measured. His _magnus opus_, the fond labor of his best years was
the translation and commentary of the monumental work of the great
French astronomer, La Place, entitled “_Mécanique Celeste_” (Celestial
Mechanics). So much of his own learning appeared in his exhaustive
notes that the American edition of four volumes was a lasting memorial
to the industry, knowledge and researches of Nathaniel Bowditch,
and was the foremost American achievement in scientific letters
during the early nineteenth century. It won a solid fame for Nathaniel
Bowditch, both at home and abroad. Where one American, however, has
heard of his edition of _Mécanique Celeste_, a thousand have studied
the pages of his “Practical Navigator,” which is a living book to-day.

[Illustration: From the log of the _Hercules_, showing the beautiful
penmanship with which Captain Carpenter adorned his sea journals]

Shortly after he retired from the sea, Doctor Bowditch was elected
president of the Essex Fire and Marine Insurance Company and continued
in that office until 1823, declining professorships at Harvard, West
Point and the University of Virginia. In 1823 he was persuaded to move
his residence to Boston as actuary of the Massachusetts Hospital Life
Insurance Society which position he held until his death in 1836. A
self-taught scientist, a notable benefactor of mankind, Nathaniel
Bowditch was with singular fitness, a son of Salem in the days when
its splendid race of navigators were his fellow-townsmen. He loved the
storied seaport in which he was born, and he was generally beloved
for those very genuine qualities characteristic of the shipmasters
among whom he lived. There was a rare simplicity and an absence of all
false pride in the reasons which he gave to his executors for making a
bequest to the Salem Marine Society.

“He told us, and all our children,” his sons wrote to the officers
of the society, “at the time of executing his will that his father,
Habakkuk Bowditch, for nearly twenty years received from your charity
fund the annual sum of fifteen dollars or thereabouts, so that his own
food and clothing when a boy were in part derived from this source.
Under these circumstances, we felt with him, that he had incurred
a debt of gratitude toward your society which justified and indeed
required from him an acknowledgement in return.”

FOOTNOTES:

[35] The Boston ship _Massachusetts_ sailed for the East Indies in
1790. She was the largest merchant vessel built in the United States up
to that time, and was especially designed and equipped for the Oriental
trade, measuring six hundred tons and carrying a crew of eighty men.
Winthrop L. Marvin’s American Merchant Marine states:

“In view of the importance of the _Massachusetts_ it is astonishing
to learn from Delano’s Narrative that she went to sea without a
chronometer, and without a single officer who could work a lunar
observation. This compelled her to creep down the coast of Africa,
feeling her way along, as it were, by the discolored current. She tried
to sight the Cape Verde Islands to correct her reckoning, but missed
them, and standing too far back toward the East came near bringing up
on the inhospitable sands of South Africa. But the worst miscalculation
of all was the missing of Java Head, that great landmark of East India
voyagers. This blunder compelled the _Massachusetts_ to make at least
fifteen extra degrees of ‘easting’ and cost her about three weeks’
time. If a great ship like the _Massachusetts_ were so ill-provided
with the instruments of navigation, it is inexplicable how the small
ships of poorer owners ever found their way around the Cape of Good
Hope, and through the labyrinths of the East Indian Archipelago.”

[36] Dr. Richard Kirwan (1733-1812) was born in Cloughballymore,
Ireland. He was a distinguished investigator and writer in the fields
of mineralogy, chemistry, and meteorology, a member of the Edinborough
Royal Society, the Royal Irish Academy, and a number of foreign
academies. He received an honorary degree of LL.D. from the University
of Dublin, and declined a baronetcy offered him by Lord Castlereagh.
His works were translated into Russian, German and French. The capture
of Doctor Kirwan’s library was a misfortune of sufficient importance to
find mention in the National Dictionary of Biography which relates:

“In 1776, Kirwan, having conformed to the established church, was
called to the Irish bar, but threw up his studies after ten years, and
pursued scientific studies in London, exchanged for Greek at Cregg
in 1773. He resided in London from 1777 to 1787, and became known to
Priestley, Cavendish, Burke, and Horne Tooke. He corresponded with all
the savants of Europe; his Wednesday evenings in Newman St. were the
resort of strangers of distinction; the Empress Catharine of Russia
sent him her portrait. His library, dispatched from Galway to London
on 5th Sept., 1780, was captured by an American privateer. Elected a
fellow of the Royal Society on 24th Feb. 1780, he received the Copley
medal in 1782 for a series of papers on chemical affinity.”

[37] A probable error of memory as the library was on its way to
England according to other sources of information.

CHAPTER XVI

THE VOYAGES OF NATHANIEL SILSBEE[38]

(1792-1800)

Neither myself nor the chief mate of the ship for that voyage (Mr.
Charles Derby) had attained the age of twenty-one years when we left
home. I was not then twenty years of age, and it was remarked by the
naval officer on taking the ship’s papers from the Custom House that it
was the first instance in which papers had been issued from that office
to a vessel bound to the East Indies, the captain and chief mate of
which were both minors.”

This is what young Nathaniel Silsbee was able to record of the year
1792 when he took command of the new ship _Benjamin_, one hundred and
sixty-one tons, laden with a costly cargo of merchandise and bound out
from Salem for the Cape of Good Hope and India, “with such instructions
as left the management of the voyage very much to my own discretion.”
It was only four years earlier than this that the Salem ship _Atlantic_
had flown the first American flag ever seen in the harbors of Bombay
and Calcutta, and the route to those distant seas was still unfamiliar
to these pioneers who swept round the Cape of Good Hope to explore new
channels of trade on the other side of the world.

In these latter times a nineteen-year-old lad of good family is
probably a college freshman without a shadow of responsibility,
and whose only business care has to do with the allowance provided
by a doting parent. He is a boy, and is ranked as such. When our
forefathers were creating a merchant marine whose achievements form
one of the finest pages of American history, seafaring lads were men
at twenty, ruling their quarterdecks and taming the rude company of
their forecastles by weight of their own merits in brains and pluck and
resourcefulness.

Nathaniel Silsbee, a captain in the India trade at nineteen, was not a
remarkably precocious mariner a century and more ago. He could say of
his own family:

“Connected with the seafaring life of myself and my brothers, there
were some circumstances which do not usually occur in one family. In
the first place each of us commenced that occupation in the capacity of
clerk, myself at the age of fourteen years; my brother William at about
fifteen, and my brother Zachariah at about sixteen and a half years
of age. Each and all of us obtained the command of vessels and the
consignment of their cargoes before attaining the age of twenty years,
viz., myself at the age of eighteen and a half, my brother William at
nineteen and a half, and my brother Zachariah before he was twenty
years old. Each and all of us left off going to sea before reaching
the age of twenty-nine years, viz., myself at twenty-eight and a half;
William at twenty-eight, and Zachariah at twenty-eight and a half
years.”

In other words, these three brothers of Salem had made their fortunes
before they were thirty years old and were ready to stay ashore as
merchants and shipowners, backed by their own capital. A splendid
veteran of their era, Robert Bennet Forbes of Boston pictured his very
similar experience in this manner:

“At this time of my life (1834), at the age of thirty, I had become
gray and imagined myself approaching old age. I had attained the summit
of my ambition. I was what was then thought to be comfortably off
in worldly goods; I had retired from the sea professionally and had
become a merchant; I had contributed something toward the comfort of my
mother; I had paid off large debts contracted in building my ship, and
I began to think more of myself than I ever had done. Looking back to
1824 when I was content in the command of a little ship of 264 tons,
on a salary of six hundred dollars per annum, I conceded that I had
arrived at the acme of my hopes. I had been blessed with success far
beyond my most ardent expectations.

“Beginning in 1817, with a capital consisting of a Testament, a
‘Bowditch,’ quadrant, chest of sea clothes and a mother’s blessing, I
left the paternal mansion full of hope and good resolution, and the
promise of support from my uncles. At the age of sixteen I filled
a man’s place as third mate; at the age of twenty I was promoted
to a command; at the age of twenty-six I commanded my own ship; at
twenty-eight I abandoned the sea as a profession, and at thirty-six was
at the head of the largest American house in China.”

Nathaniel Silsbee, therefore, was in tune with the time he lived
in when at fourteen he embarked on his first voyage, from Salem to
Baltimore as a captain’s clerk in a small schooner. His father had been
an owner of several vessels in the West India trade, but losses at sea
and other commercial misfortunes compelled him to take the boy from
school and launch him in the business of seafaring. Three voyages in
a coaster were followed by several months of idleness during which he
“was uneasy and somewhat impatient” until a chance was offered to ship
as supercargo of the brig _Three Sisters_ bound on one of the first
American voyages around the Cape of Good Hope in the winter of 1788.
His wages for that voyage were five dollars a month, and all the
property which his father could furnish as an “adventure” or private
speculation, was six boxes of codfish worth eighteen dollars, “most of
which perished on the outward passage.”

[Illustration: Pages from the log of the ship _Hercules_, 1792,
remarkable for the beauty of their draftsmanship in pen and ink. These
drawings were made in the log while at sea]

The _Three Sisters_ went to Batavia, thence to China where she was
sold, and her crew came home in another Salem ship, the _Astrea_. Young
Silsbee studied navigation in his spare time at sea, and gained much
profit from the instruction of the captain. His strenuous boyhood seems
remote in time when one finds in his memoirs that “while absent on
that voyage the present constitution and form of the government of the
United States which had been recommended by a convention of delegates
from the several states, held in 1787, was adopted by eleven of the
then thirteen United States, and went into operation on the fourth day
of March, 1789, with George Washington, as President and John Adams as
Vice-President of the United States.”

A week after his return from China Nathaniel was setting out with his
father in a thirty-ton schooner for a coasting trip to Penobscot, these
two with brother William comprising the ship’s company. They made a
successful trading voyage, after which the youthful sailor sailed to
Virginia as captain’s clerk. He was now seventeen, a tough and seasoned
stripling ready to do a man’s work in all weathers. At this age he
obtained a second mate’s berth on a brig bound to Madeira. When she
returned to Salem he was offered the command of her, considerably in
advance of his eighteenth birthday. The death of his mother recalled
him to Salem and deferred his promotion.

In the same year, however, we find him captain of a sloop and off to
the West Indies with specie and merchandise. The boyish skipper was
put to the test, for a succession of furious gales racked his vessel
so that she was sinking under his feet, and he “endured such incessant
and intense anxiety as prevented my having a single moment of sound
sleep for thirteen entire days and nights.” He made a West Indian
port, however, and his vessel was declared unseaworthy by a survey of
shipmasters and carpenters. “At a somewhat later age,” he confesses and
you like him for it, “I should probably have acceded to that decision
and abandoned the vessel, but I then determined otherwise, caused
some repairs to be made on the vessel, which I knew to be entirely
uninsured, invested the funds in West India produce, and proceeded
therewith to Norfolk, and thence to Salem where the vessel was
considered unfit for another voyage, and where I had the good fortune
to be immediately offered by the same owner the charge of a brig and
cargo for the West Indies.”

It was after this next voyage that Captain Silsbee, veteran mariner
that he was at nineteen, was given the ship _Benjamin_ already
mentioned. In those early foreign voyages of one and two years
duration, the captain was compelled to turn his hand to meet an
infinite variety of emergencies. But he usually fought or blundered a
way through with flying colors, impelled by his indomitable confidence
in himself and the need of the occasion. This young shipmaster of ours
had somehow qualified himself as a rough-and-ready surgeon, or at least
he was able to place one successful and difficult operation to his
credit. He was already living up to the advice of another New England
mariner whose code of conduct was: “Always go straight forward, and if
you meet the devil, cut him in two and go between the pieces.” This is
how Captain Silsbee rose to the occasion:

“In an intensely cold and severe storm on the first night after
leaving home, our cook (a colored man somewhat advanced in age)
having preferred his cooking-house on deck to his berth below for a
sleeping place, had his feet so badly frozen as to cause gangreen
to such an extent as to render amputation of all his toes on both
feet absolutely necessary for the preservation of his life. Having
neither surgical skill nor surgical instruments on board the ship,
the operation was a very unpleasant and hazardous one, so much so
that no one on board was willing to undertake the direction of it. I
was most reluctantly compelled to assume, with the aid of the second
mate, the responsibility of performing the surgical operation with no
other instruments than a razor and a pair of scissors, and which, in
consequence of the feeble state of the cook’s health required two days
to accomplish.

“The cook was very desirous to be landed and left at one of the Cape
de Verde Islands, and for that purpose I proceeded to the Island of
St. Jago, where I found an English frigate at anchor. Her surgeon came
on board our ship at my request and examined the cook’s feet and to my
great satisfaction, pronounced the operation well performed, assured
me that there remained no doubt of his recovery, and advised me by
all means to keep him on board ship under my own care in preference
to putting him ashore. With the cook’s approbation I followed the
surgeon’s advice and in the course of a few weeks the cook was able
to resume his duties, recovered his usual health and made several
subsequent voyages.”

After dispatching the business of the cook, the boy skipper proved
his ability as a merchant of quick adaptability and sound judgment.
While on the passage from the Cape of Good Hope to the Isle of France
(Mauritius) he fell in with a French frigate which gave him news of the
beginning of war between France and England. When this news reached the
Isle of France prices rose by leaps and bounds and the cargo of the
Benjamin was promptly sold at a profit that dazzled her commander. As
fast as payments were made he turned the paper currency into Spanish
dollars. Then for six months an embargo was laid on all foreign vessels
in port. Captain Silsbee sat on his quarter deck and refused to worry.
During this time in which his ship lay idle, his Spanish dollars
increased to three times the value of the paper money for which he had
shrewdly exchanged them, while for lack of an outlet the products of
the island had not advanced in cost.

He therefore abandoned his plan of keeping on to Calcutta, sold his
Spanish dollars, loaded his ship with coffee and spices at the Isle of
France, and made a bee line for Salem. He proceeded no farther than
the Cape of Good Hope, however, where he scented another opportunity
to fatten his owner’s pockets. “I found the prospect of a profitable
voyage from thence back to the Isle of France to be such,” said he,
“that I could not consistently with what I conceived to be my duty to
my employer, (although no such project could have been anticipated
by him, and although attended with considerable risk) resist the
temptation to undertake it. At that time the Cape of Good Hope was held
by the Dutch who had joined England in the then existing war against
France, and it so happened that I was the only master of a foreign
vessel then in port of whom a bond had not been required not to proceed
from thence to a French port.... There being two other Salem vessels
in port by which I could send home a part of my cargo, I put on board
those vessels such portion of my cargo as I knew would considerably
more than pay for the whole cost of my ship and cargo at Salem, sold
the residue of the merchandise, and invested the proceeds in a full
cargo of wine and other articles which I knew to be in great demand in
those islands.”

At the Isle of France the captain sold this cargo for three times its
cost, and again loaded for Salem. When he was almost ready to sail, it
was reported that another embargo was to be laid forthwith. Hastily
putting to sea he was obliged to anchor at Bourbon next day to take on
provisions. Here he had a rather mystifying experience which he related
thus:

“Just as I was about stepping from the wharf into my boat the French
Governor of the island ordered me to his presence, which order I
obeyed with strong apprehensions that some restraint was to be put upon
me. On meeting the Governor he asked me, ‘How long do you contemplate
staying in Bourbon?’ My answer was, ‘Not more than a day or two.’
‘Can’t you leave here to-night?’ he asked. I replied, ‘If you wish it.’
He then added, ‘As you had the politeness to call on me this morning,
and as I should be sorry to see you injured, hearken to my advice and
leave here to-night if possible.’ He cautioned me to secrecy, and I was
in my boat and on board my ship as soon as possible after leaving him.
There was a war-brig at anchor in a harbor a little to windward of my
own vessel; toward midnight I had the anchor hove up without noise,
and let the ship adrift without making any sail until by the darkness
of the night we had lost sight of the war-brig, when we made all sail
directly from the land. At daylight the war-brig was sent in pursuit of
us, under a press of sail but fortunately could not overtake us, and
toward night gave up the chase.”

The _Benjamin_ arrived at Salem after a voyage of nineteen months.
Nathaniel Silsbee had earned for his employer, Elias Hasket Derby, a
net profit of more than one hundred per cent. upon the cost of the ship
and cargo. The captain was given five per cent. of the outward, and ten
per cent. of the value of the return cargo, as his share for the voyage
besides his wages, and he landed in Salem with four thousand dollars as
his perquisites, “which placed me in a condition to gratify the most
anxious and at that time almost the only wish of my heart, which was to
increase and secure the comforts of my mother, sisters and brothers.”
And one of his first acts was to purchase the house and land formerly
owned by his father, at a cost of fifteen hundred dollars and placed
the whole of it at his mother’s disposal.

Being now twenty-one years old, and with a capital of two thousand
dollars to risk as an “adventure” of his own account, Captain Silsbee
took the _Benjamin_ to Amsterdam, bound for India, with a cargo double
the value of his first venture in her. He carried with him as clerk
his brother William, aged fifteen, and furnished him with a sum of
money as an “adventure” for his own account. Again the Isle of France
lured him from the path to the Indies, and he sold his cargo there for
“enormously high prices.” The young merchant navigator was so rapidly
finding himself that he loaded his own ship and sent her home in
command of her mate and then bought at the Isle of France another ship
of four hundred tons for ten thousand dollars out of his employer’s
funds. She was a new vessel, the prize of a French privateer and proved
a good investment. Loading her with coffee and cotton and shipping a
new crew he sailed for Salem in the wake of the _Benjamin_.

This homeward voyage was varied by an episode of such frequent
occurrence in that era that it was commonplace. “A short time before
our arrival in Boston,” Captain Silsbee related, “we were for two days
in company with and a few miles from a schooner which we suspected
to be a privateer watching for a favorable opportunity to attack us.
Having on board the ship six guns and twenty-five men, I was determined
to resist, as far as practicable the attack of any small vessel. On the
afternoon of the second day that this vessel had been dogging us, she
bore down upon us with the apparent intention of executing what we had
supposed to be her purpose, which we were, as I imagined, prepared to
meet. But on calling the crew to quarters, I was informed by one of my
officers that there were four or five seamen who were unwilling thus to
expose themselves, alleging that they had neither engaged nor expected
to fight.

[Illustration: Captain Nathaniel Silsbee]

“On hearing this, all hands being on deck, I ordered every passage-way
which led below deck to be securely fastened; then calling to me such
of the crew as had not engaged to fight, I immediately sent them up
the shrouds to repair the ratlin _and to perform other duties
which they had engaged to do_, in the most exposed part of the ship.
Finding themselves thus exposed to greater danger than their shipmates,
they requested, before the schooner had come in gunshot of us, to be
recalled from their situation and allowed to participate in the defense
of the ship, which request was granted. All our six guns were placed on
one side of the ship, and we succeeded by a simultaneous discharge of
the whole of them, as soon as the schooner had approached within reach
of their contents, in causing her to haul off, and hasten from us.”

Captain Silsbee was handling his employers’ ventures so shrewdly that
his own shares in the cargoes was amounting to what seemed to him a
small fortune. At twenty-two years of age, in 1795, he was able to
purchase one-fourth part of a new ship called the _Betsy_. In this
vessel as commander he sailed to Madras, Malaysia and Calcutta and
returned after an absence of seventeen months. While at Madras he was a
witness of and an actor in an incident of the kind which directly led
to the second war between America and Great Britain, a collision at
that time only sixteen years away. He tells it in these words, which
clearly portray the lawless impressment of American seamen which was in
operation on every sea.

“I received a note early one morning from my chief mate that one of my
sailors, Edward Hulen, a fellow townsman whom I had known from boyhood,
had been impressed and taken on board of a British frigate then lying
in port. Receiving this intelligence I immediately went on board my
ship and having there learned all the facts in the case, preceded to
the frigate, where I found Hulen and in his presence was informed
by the first lieutenant of the frigate that he had taken Hulen from
my ship under a peremptory order from his commander to ‘visit every
American ship in port and take from each of them one or more of their
seamen.’ With that information I returned to the shore and called upon
Captain Cook, who commanded the frigate, and sought first by all the
persuasive means that I was capable of using and ultimately by threats
to appeal to the Government of the place to obtain Hulen’s release, but
in vain. I then, with the aid of the senior partner of one of the first
commercial houses of the place, sought the interference and assistance
of the civil authorities of Madras, but without success, it being a
case in which they said they could not interfere.

“In the course of the day I went again to the frigate and in the
presence of the lieutenant, tendered to Hulen the amount of his wages,
of which he requested me to give him only ten dollars and to take
the residue to his mother in Salem, on hearing which the lieutenant
expressed his perfect conviction that Hulen was an American citizen,
accompanied by a strong assurance that if it was in his power to
release him he should not suffer another moment’s detention, adding at
the same time that he doubted if this or any other circumstance would
induce Captain Cook to permit his return to my ship.

“It remained for me only to recommend Hulen to that protection of
the lieutenant which a good seaman deserves, and to submit to the
high-handed insult thus offered to the flag of my country which I had
no means of either preventing or resisting, beyond the expression of
my opinion to Captain Cook in the presence of his officers, and in
terms dictated by the excited state of my feelings. After several years
detention in the British Navy and after the Peace of Amiens, Hulen
returned to Salem and lived to perform services on board privateers
armed in Salem in the late war between this country and England.”

The extraordinary hazards of maritime commerce in the last years of the
eighteenth century are emphasized in the story of the voyages made by
Captain Silsbee to the Mediterranean in his next ship, the _Portland_,
of which he owned one third. In the winter of 1797, he sailed from
Boston with “brother William” as second mate, and stopping at Cadiz,
learned of the decrees of the French government which made liable to
condemnation every vessel of whatever nation, on board of which might
be found any articles of the production or manufacture of Great Britain
or any of its territories. While these decrees greatly increased the
risk of capture in the Mediterranean, they also vastly enhanced the
prices of Colonial merchandise. It seemed a commercial gamble worth the
risk and Nathaniel Silsbee determined to make for Genoa or Leghorn.
First, however, he erased from his nautical instruments the name of
their English maker, put on shore a quantity of English coke from the
cook’s galley, and weeded out everything else which could be considered
as having a British pedigree.

He was no more than five days from Cadiz when a French privateer brig
from Marseilles captured and carried the _Portland_ into Malaga. The
harbor was filled with American and other foreign vessels all flying
the French flag, a depressing picture for the Salem crew. Every one of
the vessels with their cargoes was condemned by the French, except the
good ship _Portland_, Nathaniel Silsbee, master. His escape was due to
his own bulldog persistence and resolute bearing in this grave crisis
of his fortunes.

After anchoring at Malaga no boat was allowed to approach his ship, nor
was he allowed to go ashore or to communicate with anyone until a day
had passed. Then he was taken ashore, under guard of a squad of French
soldiers, to the office of the French consul. The owner and commander
of the privateer were present, and, single-handed, the American
shipmaster was questioned in the most minute manner regarding every
article of merchandise on board his vessel. Where were they produced?
How and by whom imported into the United States? How came they into
the possession of the owners of his ship? In his recollection of this
extraordinary interview Captain Silsbee stated:

“And I was commanded by that mighty man, for at that time the French
consul held the Spanish authorities of the place in as much subjection
as he did the humblest domestic, to answer each and all his lengthy and
precise interrogatories in ‘five words....’

“After the examination was closed the record of it was placed with the
ship’s papers on the shelves of the consular office with similar papers
appertaining to thirty or forty other vessels then under sequestration.
At about eleven o’clock at night I was informed that I might return to
my ship in charge of the same guard which brought me ashore. I then
asked the Consul when I might expect his decision upon my case. He
said the decision must be ‘in turn,’ and that as there were many cases
before mine, which would require possibly two or three months, but
certainly not less than one month, mine could not be decided short of
that time.... After some disputation upon that point I told the Consul
that I would not leave his office, unless taken from thence by force,
until his decision was made. Toward midnight the Consul and his clerk,
together with the owner and officer of the privateer, went out of the
office, leaving me there in charge of two porters and a watchman with
whom I remained during that night, and saw nothing more of the Consul
until about 9 o’clock in the morning. He expressed some surprise at
finding me there, and asked if I could give him a written order to
my officers directing them and the crew to assist in unclosing such
parts of the cargo as would enable a survey which he would immediately
appoint.”

The Yankee skipper cheerfully complied with this encouraging request,
but stood by his guns in the consular office, nor did he budge until
after a siege of twenty-four hours. He then deserted his post only to
seek a notary under guard and enter a formal protest. Late in this
second day the French consul reported that the survey showed every
article of the cargo to be a production of British colonies, and
therefore damned beyond repeal. Silsbee ingenuously replied that he had
expected such a verdict but that along with other false statements,
he begged leave to ask whether _mace_ was considered the product of a
British colony? This appeared to stagger the Consul, and Silsbee sought
his bench and prepared to spend another night in the office. At nine
o’clock in the evening the harassed Consul capitulated, handed the
ship’s papers to the master and told him to take his ship and go to the
devil with her, or anywhere else he pleased.

Although he had been forty hours without sleep, the happy victor
hastened to make ready for sea and escape from Napoleon’s clutches
as soon as ever he could. Head winds baffled him, however, and while
waiting at anchor he called to see the American consul whom he had not
been permitted to visit or send for during his detention. So astonished
was the representative of our infant republic that he refused to
accept the word of the captain until he had seen the French consul in
confirmation. It seemed preposterous that this Salem younker could have
slipped out of the trap while a dozen or more American ships had been
waiting for weeks and months doomed to condemnation. The Frenchman
privately admitted that “the apparent determination of this terrible
fellow not to leave his office until his case was decided, had not been
without some effect on the time and character of his decision.”

It was out of the frying pan into the fire, for soon after reaching
Genoa, a French army entered that port, declared an embargo, and
began to fit out one fleet of the expedition which was to carry
Napoleon’s legions to Egypt. The Generals in charge hired such vessels
as they could and requisitioned such others as they wanted to use as
transports. The _Portland_ being the best and most comfortably fitted
ship at Genoa, was selected, without the consent of her captain, for
the transport of the Staff of the Army. Captain Silsbee failed to
appreciate this honor, and after trying in vain to effect a release,
decided to try to bribe his way clear. He had carried from home
sufficient salt beef and pork for an India voyage, and he accidentally
learned that the Bonaparte expedition was in great need of salted meat
for the transports.

With sound strategy, Captain Silsbee had forty barrels of “salt horse”
conveyed by night to a secure hiding place several miles beyond the
outskirts of the city. Then he called upon the French General and asked
him if he did not want to buy some provisions for the fleet.

“He answered affirmatively,” wrote Captain Silsbee, “and added, ‘you
know it is in my power to take it at my own price.’ I told him he
should have every barrel of it at his own price, or even without
price, if he would release my ship, that those were the terms, and the
only terms on which he could or would have it. The general angrily
threatened to take my provisions and make me regret having insulted
him. Two days later he sent an order for me to appear before him which
I did, when he demanded me to ‘inform him promptly’ where my forty
barrels of provisions were, intimating a doubt of my having it, as his
officers had not been able to find it. I told the General very frankly
that if the ship which I commanded belonged wholly to myself, I might
have felt not only willing but highly gratified to convey a part of
the Staff of such an army on such an expedition, but that a large part
of the ship and the proceeds of a valuable cargo belonged to other
persons who had entrusted their property to my charge.... That avowal
from me was met by a threat from the General to coerce me not only into
a delivery of the provisions, but to the performance of any and every
duty which he might assign to me; not only the ship, but likewise
her captain, officers and crew had been placed under requisition by
the French Republic; a requisition not to be frustrated, he said, by
any human being, while a subaltern officer who was present added with
enthusiasm, ‘Yes, sir, suppose God had one ship here, and the French
wanted it, He must give it.’”

The Salem seafarer gave not an inch, but declared that a release of
the ship was the only price which would drag the “salt horse” from
its hiding place. On the following day, the General sent word that he
was ready to yield to these terms. Napoleon’s veterans could not get
along without salt pork, and Captain Silsbee triumphantly dragged his
forty barrels into town. His ship was restored to him, the General even
promised to pay for the stores, and the hero very rightly summed it
up, “I could not but consider that a more beneficial disposal of forty
barrels of beef and pork had probably never been made than in this
instance.”

During the two years following Nathaniel Silsbee stayed ashore in order
to promote his rapidly growing commercial ventures. He became tired of
the inactivity of life on land, however, and in 1800 bought part of the
ship _Herald_ and loaded her for India with a crew of thirty men and
ten guns. His memoranda of that voyage affords a fresh insight into the
business methods of a typical Salem shipmaster of the old school. The
_Herald_ sailed “with a stock of sixty-three thousand dollars in specie
and merchandise, and with credits authorizing drafts on England or the
United States for about forty thousand dollars, making together over
one hundred thousand dollars, which at that time was considered a very
large stock. Of this, as in my previous voyages to India I furnished,
besides my interest as owner of one fourth part of the vessel and
cargo, five per cent. of the cost of the outward cargo, for which I was
to take ten per cent. of the return cargo at the close of the voyage as
my compensation for transacting the business thereof.”

The master’s account of that voyage contains some spirited passages. He
took with him his other brother, Zachariah, who was now sixteen years
old and eager to follow in the elder’s footsteps. He left Calcutta in
company with four other American ships with the captains of which he
had entered into an agreement to keep company until they should have
passed the southern part of Ceylon. Each of these ships carried from
eight to twelve guns and sailing in fleet formation they expected to
be able to defend themselves against the several French privateers
which were known to be cruising in the Bay of Bengal. Of this squadron
of American Indiamen Captain Nathaniel Silsbee, now an elderly man of
twenty-seven, was designated as the Commodore.

“On the morning of the third day of November,” as he tells it, “two
strange sails were discovered a few leagues to windward of us, one of
which was soon recognized to be the East India Company’s packet ship
_Cornwallis_ of eighteen guns, which had left the river Hoogly at the
same time with us. At about eight o’clock, A. M., the other ship stood
toward the _Cornwallis_, soon after which the latter bore down upon us
under full sail, commencing at the same time a running fight with the
other ship which then displayed French colors. We soon perceived that
they were both plying their sweeps very briskly, that the Frenchman’s
grape was making great havoc on the _Cornwallis_, and that the crew
of the latter ship had cut away her boats and were throwing overboard
their ballast and other articles for the purpose of lightening their
ship and thereby facilitating their escape. The sea was perfectly
smooth, and the wind very light, so much so that it was quite mid-day
before either of the ships was within gunshot. By this time we five
American ships were in a close line, our decks cleared of a large stock
of poultry, (which with their coops could be seen for a considerable
distance around us) and every preparation made to defend ourselves
to the extent of our ability. This display of resistance on our part
seemed to be quite disregarded by the pursuing ship, and she continued
steering directly for my own ship which was in the center of the fleet,
until she was fully and fairly within gunshot, when my own guns were
first opened upon her, which were instantly followed by those of each
and all of the other four ships.

“When the matches were applied to our guns, the French ship was plying
her sweeps, and with studding-sails on both sides, coming directly
upon us; but when the smoke of our guns, caused by repeated broadsides
from each of our ships, had so passed off as to enable us to see her
distinctly, she was close upon the wind and going from us. The captain
of the Cornwallis which was then within hailing distance, expressed
a wish to exchange signals with us, and to keep company while the
French ship was in sight. She was known by him to be _La Gloire_, a
privateer of twenty-two nine-pounders and four hundred men. His request
was complied with and he having lost all his boats, I went on board
his ship where our signals were made known to him and where were the
officers of the _Cornwallis_, who acknowledged the protection which
we had afforded them in the most grateful terms. The _Cornwallis_
continued with us two days, in the course of which the privateer
approached us several times in the night, but finding that we were
awake, hauled off and after the second night we saw no more of her.”

At the close of this voyage, in his twenty-eighth year, Captain
Nathaniel Silsbee was able to say that he had “so far advanced his
pecuniary means as to feel that another voyage might and probably
would enable him to retire from the sea and to change his condition on
shore.” He married the daughter of George Crowninshield and began to
build up a solid station in life as one of the most promising merchants
and citizens of Salem. He had launched his two younger brothers in life
and they were masters of fine ships in the India trade “with as fair
prospects of success as young men thus situated could hope for.”

He made only one long voyage after he had his own home and fireside,
but his interests were weaving to and fro between Salem port and the
faraway harbors of the Orient, the South Seas and Europe. The Embargo
Acts of 1808 and 1812 occasioned him heavy losses, but these were
somewhat repaid by the success of the privateers in which Nathaniel
Silsbee is recorded as holding shares.

By 1815, he had risen to such prominence as a representative American
merchant that he was named by the United States Government as one
of the commissioners to organize the Boston branch of the “Bank of
the United States.” He became one of the Massachusetts delegation
to Congress, and was a United States Senator from 1826 to 1835,
representing his state in company with Daniel Webster.

Dying in 1850, Nathaniel Silsbee left bequeathed to his home town the
memory of his own life as a tribute to the sterling worth and splendid
Americanism of the old-time shipmasters of Salem. Trader and voyager to
the Indies as a captain in his teens, retired with a fortune won from
the sea before he was thirty, playing the man in many immensely trying
and hazardous situations, this one-time Senator from Massachusetts was
a product of the times he lived in.

FOOTNOTES:

[38] Historical Collections of the Essex Institute, Vol. XXXV, Jan.,
1889. _Biographical Notes_: By _Nathaniel Silsbee_. (A paper written by
him, “for the perusal of his family,” between 1836 and 1850, and from
which most of the material for this chapter was obtained.)

CHAPTER XVII

THE VOYAGES OF CAPTAIN RICHARD CLEVELAND

(1791-1820)

Perhaps the finest type of the Salem shipmaster of the age when her
seamen were the vikings of American commerce, was Captain Richard
Cleveland who wrote as capably as he sailed and fought and whose own
record of his voyages inspired the _London Literary Examiner_ to
comment in 1842:[39]

“Few things in De Foe, Dana, or any other truth teller are more
characteristic than Mr. Cleveland’s account of his voyage from Havre to
the Cape of Good Hope. Surely never before was there such an Indiaman
and with such a cargo and such a crew.”

Captain Cleveland was born in 1773 and he reached manhood and the
height of his career of the most romantic adventure when Salem commerce
was also at the zenith of its prosperity. He was the eldest son of a
father worthy to have such a son, Captain Stephen Cleveland, whose life
at sea began when at the age of sixteen he was kidnapped by a British
press gang in the streets of Boston, in 1756. This redoubtable sire
served for several years on board a British frigate, was promoted to
the rank of midshipman and fought the French fleet off the Channel
ports. He had returned to live in Salem when the Revolution began and
became active in fitting out privateers to harry the British flag which
he hated most heartily for having been compelled to serve under it. He
built the _Pilgrim_ brig which alone captured more than fifty British
prizes and was one of the fastest armed ships sent out of Salem. From
the Continental Congress he received a commission only a month after
the Declaration of Independence to command the brig _Despatch_[40] in
a voyage to Bordeaux after military stores and guns for the patriotic
forces. His was the first government vessel to fly the new American
flag in a harbor of Europe and he returned in safety with a cargo which
greatly helped the struggling cause in his country in the early days of
the war.

His son, Richard, hero of this narrative, followed the sea as a matter
of course, being an ambitious Salem lad as well as the son of his
father. At the age of fourteen he entered the counting house of Elias
Hasket Derby, as told in a previous chapter. He learned the mercantile
side of a seafaring life and with the other lads in the employ of
that famous old house, risked his little savings as “adventures” in
the vessels which were sailing to the Far East. His education, beyond
the counting house, was limited to a few years in the public schools
of Salem before he had much more than passed into his teens. Yet this
Richard Cleveland, mariner, by virtue of his native ability and the
influences of the times that bred him, made himself a man of the most
liberal education, in the finest sense of the phrase, and in addition
to this, he could lay claim to more genuine culture than most college
university graduates of to-day.

He was only eighteen when his father thought him old enough to go
to sea. As captain’s clerk, he sailed his first voyage with Captain
Nathaniel Silsbee, and became second mate before the ship returned to
Salem. This was the East Indiaman whose captain was not twenty years
old; the chief mate, nineteen; and Richard Cleveland, second mate,
at the same age. These rosy-cheeked lads carried the _Herald_ to the
Cape of Good Hope, thence into the Indian Ocean when warring powers
and their privateers menaced every neutral vessel. Well might Richard
Cleveland write of this remarkable beginning of his sea life:

“The voyage, thus happily accomplished, may be regarded, when taken in
all its bearings, as a very remarkable one; first, from the extreme
youth of all to whom its management had been entrusted; secondly, from
the foresight, ingenuity, and adroitness manifested in averting and
escaping dangers; in perceiving advantages and turning them to the best
account; and thirdly from the great success attending this judicious
management, as demonstrated by the fact of returning to the owner four
or five times the amount of the original capital. Mr. Derby used to
call us his boys, and boast of our achievements, and well might he do
so, for it is not probable that the annals of the world can furnish
another example of an enterprise, of such magnitude, requiring the
exercise of so much judgment and skill, being conducted by so young a
man, (Nathaniel Silsbee), aided only by still younger advisers, and
accomplished with the most entire success.”

In 1797, at the age of twenty-three, Richard Cleveland was in command
of the bark _Enterprise_ of Salem, bound for Mocha after a cargo of
coffee. He had to abandon this plan, however, after reaching Havre,
and his ship was ordered home. Her young master had no mind to lose
the profits which he had hoped to reap from this venture, wherefore he
decided to remain abroad, to send the ship home in command of the mate,
and not to go back to Salem until he had played for high stakes with
the fortunes of the sea. Thus began a series of voyages and adventures
which were to take him around the globe through seven long years before
he should see home and friends again. At Havre he bought on two years’
credit, a “cutter-sloop” of only forty-three tons, in size no larger
than the yachts whose owners think it venturesome to take them beyond
the sheltered reaches of Long Island Sound on summer cruises.

His plan was, in short, to fit out and freight the absurd cockle shell
of a merchantman for a voyage from Europe to the Cape of Good Hope
and thence to the Isle of France, in the Indian Ocean, a fertile and
prosperous colony which at that time was a Mecca for Yankee ships.

His cutter, the _Caroline_, was driven ashore and wrecked before the
coast of France was passed on his outbound voyage. The dauntless
skipper got her off, however, worked her back to Havre and made repairs
for a second attempt. This experience ought to have convinced any
ordinary mariner that his little craft was not fit for a voyage half
round the world, but Richard Cleveland, turning loss into profit, was
able to note of this disaster:

“My credit, however, has not suffered in the least on this account, for
I have not only found enough to repair the damages, but shall put in
$1,000 more, so that my cargo, although in a vessel of only forty tons,
will amount to $7,000. I now wait only for a wind to put to sea again.”

While at sea during the three months’ voyage to the Cape of Good Hope,
Captain Cleveland described in his journal the crew with which he had
undertaken to navigate the _Caroline_ to her faraway destination. “It
was not until the last hour I was at Havre,” said he, “that I finally
shipped my crew. Fortunately they were all so much in debt as not to
want any time to spend their advance, but were ready at the instant,
and with this motley crew, (who, for aught I knew, were robbers and
pirates), I put to sea.

“At the head of my list is my mate, a Nantucket lad, whom I persuaded
the captain of a ship to discharge from before the mast, and who knew
little or nothing of navigation, but is now capable of conducting the
vessel in case of accident to me. The first of my foremast hands is a
great, surly, crabbed, raw-boned, ignorant Prussian, who is so timid
aloft that the mate has frequently been obliged to do his duty there. I
believe him to be more of a soldier than a sailor, though he has often
assured me that he has been a boatswain’s mate of a Dutch Indiaman,
which I do not believe as he hardly knows how to put two ends of a rope
together. He speaks enough English to be tolerably understood.

“The next in point of consequence is my cook, a good-natured negro and
a tolerable cook, so unused to a vessel that in the smoothest weather
he cannot walk fore and aft without holding onto something with both
hands. This fear proceeds from the fact that he is so tall and slim
that if he should get a cant it might be fatal to him. I did not think
America could furnish such a specimen of the negro race (he is a
native of Savannah), nor did I ever see such a perfect simpleton. It
is impossible to teach him anything, and notwithstanding the frequency
with which we have been obliged to take in and make sail on this long
voyage, he can hardly tell the main-halliards from the mainstay. He one
day took it into his head to learn the compass, and not being permitted
to come on the quarterdeck to learn by the one in the binnacle, he
took off the cover of the till of his chest and with his knife cut
out something that looked like a cartwheel, and wanted me to let him
nail it on the deck to steer by, insisting that he could ‘’teer by him
better ’n tudder one.’

“Next is an English boy of seventeen years old, who from having lately
had the small-pox is feeble and almost blind, a miserable object,
but pity for his misfortunes induces me to make his duty as easy as
possible. Finally I have a little ugly French boy, the very image of a
baboon, who from having served for some time on different privateers,
has all the tricks of a veteran man-of-war’s man, though only thirteen
years old, and by having been in an English prison, has learned enough
of the language to be a proficient in swearing.

“To hear all these fellows quarrelling, (which from not understanding
each other, they are very apt to do) serves to give one a realizing
conception of the confusion of tongues at the Tower of Babel. Nobody
need envy me my four months’ experience with such a set, though they
are now far better than when I first took hold of them.... Absence
has not banished home from my thoughts; indeed I should be worse than
a savage were I to forget such friends as I have, yet such is now my
roving disposition that were it not for meeting them, I doubt if I
should ever return.”

In the last lines quoted, Richard Cleveland, with such a crew on such a
venture, was able to find contentment with his lot. It is evident from
his graphic description that he was the only capable officer or seaman
on board his cutter, yet he navigated her without serious accident to
the Cape of Good Hope, and would not have touched there except for the
urgent need of fresh water. The French Directory had given him official
dispatches to carry to the Isles of France and Bourbon, and while this
private mission might protect him against capture by French privateers,
it laid him open to the grave risk of confiscation by whatever
English authorities he chanced to fall athwart of. He successfully
concealed these dispatches, but the officials of the Cape viewed him
with suspicions for other reasons. They could not but believe that so
hazardous a voyage in so small a craft must be somehow in the secret
behalf of the French government, and although they could find no
evidence after thoroughly overhauling the _Caroline_ and her papers,
they decided to make an end of this audacious voyage by purchasing the
vessel. Of the excitement caused by his arrival at the Cape, Captain
Cleveland relates:

[Illustration: Captain Richard Cleveland]

“The arrival of such a vessel from Europe naturally excited the
curiosity of the inhabitants of the Cape; and the next morning being
calm, we had numerous visitors on board, who could not disguise their
astonishment at the size of the vessel, the boyish appearance of
the master and mate, the queer and unique characters of the two men
and boy who composed the crew, and the length of the passage we had
accomplished. Various were the conjectures of the good people of the
Cape as to the real object of our enterprise. While some viewed it in
its true light as a commercial speculation, others believed that under
a mask we were employed by the French government for the conveyance of
their dispatches, and some even went so far as to declare their belief
that we were French spies, and as such deserving immediate arrest
and confinement. Indeed our enterprise formed the principal theme of
conversation at the Cape during the week after our arrival.”

Captain Cleveland’s private letters, log, and all other documents
found on board were taken ashore to the English admiral by whom
he was treated very politely, “but the extreme importance of the
blustering lieutenants was in the highest degree disgusting.” After
much parleying, the young skipper was given permission to export ten
thousand dollars worth of cargo in another venture. He had realized
a profit on his vessel without going to the Isle of France and was
inclined to think himself well out of an awkward situation when fresh
trouble arose because the merchant to whom he sold his cargo fell afoul
of the Custom House regulations, which entanglement resulted in the
seizure both of the cutter and the goods on board.

Facing ruin through no fault of his own, Captain Cleveland determined
to appeal directly to Lord McCartney, governor of the Cape, explaining
that the loss must fall on him as the luckless merchant could not
make good the losses. “But how to write a suitable letter (to Lord
McCartney) embarrassed me,” said he. “I had no friends with whom to
advise. I was entirely ignorant of the proper manner of addressing a
nobleman, and at the same time was aware of the necessity of conforming
to customary rules. In this dilemma I remembered to have seen, in an
old magazine aboard my vessel, some letters addressed to noblemen.
These I sought as models and they were a useful guide to me. After
completing my letter in my best hand I enclosed it in a neat envelope
and showed it to the admiral’s secretary who appeared to be friendly to
me. He approved of it and advised my taking it myself to his lordship
immediately. As the schoolboy approached his master after having played
truant, so did I approach Lord McCartney on this occasion.”

The frank and straightforward appeal of the boyish American ship master
moved the autocratic governor to interfere and the matter was decided
in favor of the petitioner with trifling loss. “The success of my
letter was the theme of public conversation in the town,” he commented,
“and was the means of procuring me the acquaintance of several
individuals of the first respectability.”

Four months passed before he was able to get passage on a merchant
vessel bound for Batavia, where he intended looking about for another
venture upon which to stake his capital. Finding nothing to his liking
in the Dutch East Indies, Captain Cleveland proceeded to Canton. At
this port he made up his mind to attempt a voyage to the northwest
coast of America to buy furs from the Indians. As soon as this daring
project was fairly under way he wrote home in a much more optimistic
vein than the circumstances warranted:

“We have every possible advantage, a vessel well calculated for inland
navigation, the best articles of trade that can be carried, a linguist
who speaks the Indian language as well as his own, and officers
experienced in the business. Should we fail of success with all these
advantages, it will be very extraordinary ill-fortune, and such as I
don’t choose to expect.”

As a matter of fact, his vessel was a small cutter no larger than the
_Caroline_, and his crew as worthless a set of beachcombing ruffians
as ever disgraced a forecastle. The captain was twenty-five years old
when he set sail from Canton in the winter of 1799, with a cargo of
merchandise worth almost $20,000, representing all his cash and credit.
His only chart for beating up the Chinese coast was a map drawn by a
navigator whom he chanced to meet in port. Until he could weather the
northern end of Formosa his course lay directly in the teeth of the
northwest monsoon, with imminent danger of being stranded or battered
to pieces by the wind. He paid his crew this handsome compliment:

“Having all hands on board twenty-one persons, consisting—except two
Americans—of English, Irish, Swedes and French, but principally the
first, who were runaways from the men-of-war and Indiamen, and two from
a Botany Bay ship who had made their escape, for we were obliged to
take such as we could get, served to complete a list of as accomplished
villains as ever disgraced any country.”

For a month on end the cutter fought her way up the Chinese coast, her
company weary, drenched, and wretched, until the sailors had enough of
such an infernal enterprise, and broke out in a full-fledged mutiny.
With a handful who remained loyal, including the ungainly black cook
previously described, Captain Cleveland locked up the provisions,
mounted two four-pounders on the quarterdeck, crammed them with
grape-shot, and armed his squad with flint-lock muskets and pistols.
A man with a lighted match was stationed beside each cannon, and the
skipper told the mutineers that if they attempted to get provisions or
to come above the hatches, he would blow them overboard. For one whole
day the hostile companies were at a dead-lock, until hunger gnawing,
the mutineers asked that they be put ashore believing that once out of
the vessel they could dictate their own terms.

Captain Cleveland landed and marooned them. For two days the cutter
lay off shore while the mutineers tried to patch up a truce. One man
weakened and was taken aboard. Of what happened as the final chapter of
this grim episode, Captain Cleveland wrote in his journal:

“At nine o’clock (A. M.) we hoisted the colors, fired a 4-pound cannon,
and weighed anchor when they all came out from behind a rock, where
they had doubtless been watching our motions. I then ordered the boat
out, and with my second officer and four hands, well armed, went as
near the beach as the surf would permit. I called them all down to the
water side and told them I was then going away; that I knew there were
several of them desirous of returning to their duty, but were deterred
by the others; that if they would come forward I would protect them,
and would fire at any one that tried to prevent them.

“They replied that they were all ready and willing to return to their
duty, but the ringleaders (whom I had determined not to take on any
account) were more ready than the others, and when they were rejected
they swore none of the others should go, and presented their knives
at the breasts of two of them, and threatened to stab them if they
attempted to do so; a third seemed indifferent and a fourth was lying
drunk on the beach. Having secured three, and one yesterday, which
was four of them, and which, with a little additional precaution, was
securing the success of the expedition, I did not think proper to put
into execution my threat of firing on them.

“After dinner I sent the second officer with four hands, well armed,
to make a last effort, but by this time those whose fate was decided,
had persuaded the others to share it with them, and had carried the
drunken man out of reach, declaring that we dare not go on the coast of
America with so feeble a crew, and we should take them all or none.

“Having now a light breeze from the westward and a favorable current,
I concluded to have no further altercation with them, and immediately
hoisted in the boat and made sail, leaving on the island of Kemoy,
(which is about three hundred and fifty miles northeast of Canton) six
of my most able men. This was such a reduction of our numbers as would
require unceasing vigilance, and extraordinary caution to counteract,
as the risk of being attacked by the Indians was of course increased in
proportion to our diminished power of resistance.”

The mariners in Canton had told Captain Cleveland that he could never
win his way clear of Formosa and into the Pacific during the winter or
monsoon season, but the staunch cutter, after mutiny, stranding, and
fighting her way inch by inch for thirty-one days steered out across
the open ocean. On her northerly course the weather was so heavy that
the seas washed over her day after day, and Captain Cleveland scarcely
knew what it was to wear dry clothes, have a meal cooked in the
wave-drenched galley, or snatch a whole night’s sleep.

After fifty-odd days of racking hardships the cutter fetched the
Northwest coast and anchored in Norfolk Sound. Bulwarks or screens of
hides were rigged along the decks in order to hide from the Indians
the scanty muster-roll of the ship’s company, lest they take her by
boarding. For two months Captain Cleveland cruised among the bays and
inlets along this wilderness coast, trading for sea-otter skins, and
averting hostile attacks by the ablest vigilance, diplomatic dealings,
and a show of armed force when it became necessary.

His hold was nearly filled when his cutter went hard aground on a
sunken ledge, and was tilted, nose under, at an angle of forty-five
degrees. “This position, combined with a rank heel to starboard, made
it impossible to stand on deck,” wrote her skipper. “We therefore
put a number of muskets into the boat, and prepared to make such
resistance in case of attack as could be made by fifteen men crowded
into a sixteen-foot boat. Our situation was now one of the most painful
anxiety, no less from the prospect of losing our vessel and the rich
cargo we had collected with so much toil, than from the apprehension of
being discovered in this defenceless state by any one of the hostile
tribes by whom we were surrounded. A canoe of the largest class,
with thirty warriors well-armed had left us but half an hour before
we struck, and they were now prevented from seeing us only by having
passed around a small island. Should the vessel bilge, there existed
scarcely any other chance for the preservation of our lives than the
precarious one of falling in with some ship before we were discovered
by Indians....

“More than ten hours passed in this agonizing state of suspence,
watching the horizon to discover if any savages were approaching; the
heavens, if there were a cloud that might chance to ruffle the surface
of the water; the vessel, whose occasional cracking seemed to warn us
of destruction; and when the tide began to flow, impatiently observing
its apparently sluggish advance, while I involuntarily consulted my
watch, the hands of which seemed to have forgotten to move.”

The cutter was floated during the following night, conveyed to a
beach and careened until her crew could repair her damaged copper and
planking. Soon after this Captain Cleveland set sail for the return
passage to China, _via_ the Sandwich Islands, and “indeed the criminal
who receives a pardon under the gallows could hardly feel a greater
degree of exultation.” When he arrived at Canton, “several of the
gentlemen who had predicted our destruction from attempting the voyage
at the season we did, presumed, when they saw the cutter arrive, that
we had failed, which indeed they had anticipated from the arrival in
Canton several months before of the mutineers whom we had left on the
coast of China, and the sad stories they told of hardship, danger and
cruel usage.”

Captain Cleveland had secured his sea-otter skins at the rate of one
flint-lock musket for eight prime pelts, and his cargo was worth sixty
thousand dollars in the Canton market. For this return he had risked
eleven thousand dollars, and his share of the profits amounted to
two-thirds of the whole, or forty thousand dollars. He sold the cutter,
and went to Calcutta in her as a passenger, with forty-six thousand
dollars as his capital for another fling at fortune. He had been away
from Salem a little more than two years, and at the age of twenty-five
had wrested from the seas a competence sufficient to have comfortably
supported him ashore. But he had no intention of forsaking the great
game he was playing with such high-hearted assurance.

During the voyage from Canton to Calcutta while the cutter was off
Malacca, “we saw a fleet of eleven Malay proas pass by to the eastward,
from whose view we supposed ourselves to have been screened by the
trees and bushes near which we were lying. On perceiving so great a
number of large proas sailing together, we felt convinced they must
be pirates, and immediately loaded our guns and prepared for defence;
although conscious of the fact that the fearful odds between our crew
of ten men and theirs, which probably exceeded a hundred for each
vessel, left us scarce a ray of hope of successful resistance.

“We watched their progress therefore, with that intense interest which
men may naturally be supposed to feel whose fortunes, liberty and lives
were dependent on the mere chance of their passing by without seeing
us. To our great joy they did so, and when the sails of the last of
the fleet were no longer visible from our deck, and we realized the
certainty of our escape, our feelings of relief were in proportion
to the danger that had threatened us. On arriving at Malacca, the
curiosity of the people was greatly excited to know how we had escaped
the fleet of pirates which had been seen from the town.”

Arriving at Calcutta Captain Cleveland was disappointed in his
expectations of sending home a cargo of goods upon terms which should
swell his profits, so he began to plan a voyage in which the rewards
might be in fairer proportion to the risks he was ready to undertake.
The East India Company forbade communication between Bengal and the
Isle of France, but Captain Cleveland foresaw an opportunity to pick
up at a bargain the rich prizes and cargoes that French privateers
were carrying into the latter port. Therefore, he bought a mite of
a twenty-five ton pilot boat, had her sent to the Danish settlement
of Serampore, put her under the Danish flag, and stole away into the
Indian Ocean. For forty-five days he held on his course blistering
under a tropic sun, and as he ingenuously explained to account for his
foolhardiness: “Pleasing myself with the idea that all will turn out
for the best, time passes as lightly with me as with most people, and
I am persuaded that few people enjoy a greater share of happiness than
myself, if you can conceive of there being any happiness in building
airy castles and pursuing them nearly around the globe till they
vanish, and then engaging in a fresh pursuit.”

The youthful merchant navigator fared safely in his cock-boat to
the Isle of France and was again disappointed in his commercial
air-castles. The privateers had sold their prizes and were winging it
out to sea in search of more British plunder. For ten months he waited
in the hope of a reopening of trade between America and the French
colonies. At length he loaded seven thousand bags of coffee on board a
Danish ship bound for Copenhagen, and sailed as a passenger. With him
went Nathaniel Shaler of Connecticut, a sterling American merchant
whom he had met in the Isle of France and who was a partner in this
coffee adventure to Copenhagen.

They sold their cargo for a large profit, and then began to look
about for a vessel suitable to undertake a voyage to the west coast
of South America, a project which the twain had worked out during
their companionship at sea. They found at Hamburg a fast and roomy
Virginia-built brig, the _Lelia Byrd_, which they bought. Shaler was
made captain by the toss of a coin, Captain Cleveland signing the
ship’s papers as supercargo. While in Hamburg they had formed a warm
friendship with a youthful Polish nobleman, Count de Rousillon, who had
been an aide-de-camp to Kosciusko. His personality was most engaging,
his love of adventure ardent, and his means slender, wherefore he
embraced with enthusiasm the invitation to join the two young Americans
in their voyage to South America. Alas, the glamor of such romance
as was their fortune to enjoy has long since vanished from commerce,
afloat and ashore. They were three seafaring “Musketeers” all under
thirty years of age, setting forth to beard the viceroys of Spain.

Richard Cleveland had now been a cheerful exile from Salem for four
years, following the star of his destiny in almost every ocean,
escaping dangers uncounted with the skin of his teeth and by his
sagacity, resolution and shrewdness finding himself richer for every
audacious voyage. For two and a half years longer, he was to sail in
the _Lelia Byrd_ among the Spanish peoples of the South American coast
before his wanderings should lead him home to Salem.

From Hamburg the brig went to Rio Janeiro where they were not allowed
to trade, and thence doubled Cape Horn and reached Valparaiso in
February in 1802. They were startled and alarmed to find four American
vessels under detention by the Spanish government. After spirited
correspondence with the Captain General at Santiago the _Lelia Byrd_
was permitted to buy supplies sufficient for resuming her voyage and
to sell so much of the cargo as would pay for the same. While at anchor
in the bay, Captain Cleveland and his friends witnessed a tragedy which
convinced them that the sooner they could get to sea the better. The
American ship _Hazard_ of Providence, Captain Rowan, which had touched
for provisions, had on board several hundred muskets shipped in Holland
and consigned to the Northwest Coast. The Governor ordered Captain
Rowan to deliver up these arms as violating treaty stipulations. The
American skipper saw no good reason why he should obey and refused to
let a file of Spanish soldiers on board his ship.

The Governor flew into a violent passion, ordered every American
merchant ashore to be locked up in the castle, and commanded an
eighteen-gun Spanish merchant ship to bring her broadside to bear on
the _Hazard_ and demand Captain Rowan’s surrender under pain of being
sunk at his moorings. The skipper replied that they might fire if they
pleased, and nailed his stars and stripes to his masthead.

Shaler, Rousillon, and Cleveland, happening to be ashore, were
swept up by the Governor’s drag-net order and sent to the castle as
prisoners. Next day they were offered liberty without explanation, but
the indignant trio from the _Lelia Byrd_ refused to be set free until
a proper apology had been made them. It was finally agreed that as
Captain Shaler was nominal master of the brig, he should stay in prison
while his comrades made matters hot for the offending Governor.

This official refused to let them send a messenger to the Captain
General and asked why in the devil they did not put to sea, and be
grateful that they had escaped the dungeons or worse. To which young
Richard Cleveland made reply (which the gifted Count turned into
fluent and fiery Spanish) that they wanted satisfaction for being
locked up without cause, and that Captain Shaler proposed to languish
behind the bars until he was informed why he had been put in. A day
later, the situation remaining in _status quo_, the Governor sent for
Cleveland, asked if he were not second in command and angrily ordered
him to extract his recalcitrant skipper from jail and go to sea on the
instant. The Yankee replied that the apology or explanation was still
lacking, and that the _Lelia Byrd_ was only waiting for her captain who
was a prisoner in the castle.

Meanwhile a letter had arrived from the Captain General ordering
Captain Rowan of the _Hazard_ to deliver up the arms which comprised
part of his cargo, and make a second declaration respecting their
lading. The muskets were sent ashore, and the supercargo sent to the
Governor with the customs certificate made out in Amsterdam. Captain
Rowan did not understand that he was expected to make this report in
person, but the Governor considered himself and his Spanish dignity
again insulted by the failure of the captain to appear.

Early in the morning, two hours before Americans were permitted to
land, and therefore before Captain Rowan could obey another summons,
two hundred Spanish soldiers who were no better than brigands, boarded
the _Hazard_ and took her from an unarmed crew of twenty-three men who
had no forewarning. In the words of Captain Cleveland:

“This was done by order of the Governor, who stood on shore opposite
the vessel and was a witness to the horrid scene of assassination and
rapine that followed. Captain Rowan’s life was saved by the humanity
of the captain of a Spanish brig, who got into the cabin in advance of
the rabble, as he had not time to save himself as the other officer had
done, by retreating to the lazaretto. The plunder which ensued for the
remainder of the day and the following night was such as to lighten the
ship nearly a foot. Nor were the officers of rank backward in taking
part in the pillage; and the custom house guards, far from preventing,
were as eager as the rest in the work of robbery.”

Captain Cleveland rushed to the Governor’s palace and demanded with
forceful Anglo Saxon threats, that he be allowed to send a statement
overland to the Captain General, but he was told that if he did not
want to share the fate of the _Hazard_, he had best put to sea. The
persistence of this indomitable young Yankee at last wore down the
Governor’s resistance, and the message was sent to Santiago by courier.

The answer was to the surprising effect that Captain Cleveland and
his comrades should receive the most complete satisfaction for the
injuries done them, at which Nathaniel Shaler, still cooling his heels
in the castle, consented to emerge with his self-respect untarnished.
After days and days of further complications due to red-tape and an
invincible hostility toward all other than Spanish vessels trading in
those waters, Captain Cleveland and his doughty shipmates were able
to bid a glad farewell to the Governor of Valparaiso, His Illustrious
Excellency, Don Antonio Francisco Garcia Carrasco.

“The notoriety they had attained by these protracted quarrels with
an ignorant, conceited, and pusillanimous official, rendered it
injudicious to attempt to enter any other port of Chili or Peru,”
wherefore the _Lelia Byrd_ was steered for the coast of Mexico, after
gathering these proofs to convince far less astute shipmasters that the
markets for American enterprise on the South American coast were not
up to expectations. They made their first landing at San Blas, where
the subordinate Spanish officials cordially received them. Rousillon
went to the interior capital of Tipec to confer with the Governor, and
alas, this peppery gentleman flew into a rage because his deputy at San
Blas had dared to make a trading agreement with the Yankee brig without
consulting him. Thus was brewed a tempest in a teapot, the upshot of
which was that His Passionate Excellency at Tipec sent word that the
_Lelia Byrd_ must leave port or be attacked by a Spanish gunboat.

The diplomatic Rousillon thereupon undertook to go to the City of
Mexico and solicit permission from the Viceroy to sell a part or the
whole of the cargo. Captain Cleveland, finding the harbor of San Blas
too hot to hold him, sailed for Three Marias Islands, sixty miles to
the westward, there to wait until word was received from his emissary
to the Viceroy. Three weary months passed in this empty fashion, at
the end of which the two captains, Shaler and Cleveland, decided to
risk a return to San Blas in the hope of finding some tidings of the
mysteriously vanished Rousillon. They stole into the coast by night,
and next day saw an Indian in a canoe who paddled out to them and
delivered a letter from their absent comrade. He had succeeded in
obtaining a concession to sell ten thousand dollars worth of goods at
San Blas, and after two weeks of delay this part of the cargo was put
ashore.

The sales dragged on with such interminable waste of time, however,
that it was deemed best to leave Rousillon in Mexico to finish these
transactions. He died before his mission was ended, and his friends and
fellow seafarers mourned the loss of one who had become very dear to
them and who had stood the test of their arduous life together.

The _Lelia Byrd_ next proceeded to San Diego in search of sea-otter
skins.[41] At this port they caught another Spanish Tartar in the
person of the Commandant, Don Manuel Rodriguez, who boarded them with
a file of dragoons, and left a guard on the ship, the sergeant of
which volunteered the discouraging information that the Boston ship
_Alexander_ had left port a few days before, after being robbed by
the Commandant of several hundred sea-otter skins which her captain
had purchased ashore. With this warning Captain Cleveland kept an eye
out for squalls. He was able to obtain several valuable lots of furs,
and made ready to go to sea without more delay. One more consignment
of skins was to be delivered and the night before sailing the first
officer and two men were sent ashore for them. They did not return and
daylight showed the boat hauled out on the beach and the men from the
brig in the hands of a squad of soldiers.

Captain Cleveland manned a boat with his armed sailors, pulled for the
beach and promptly took his men away from their captors. As soon as the
crew was on board, the Commandant’s guard was unceremoniously disarmed,
and with a fair wind the _Lelia Byrd_ moved out to sea. “Before we got
within gunshot of the fort,” wrote Captain Cleveland in his journal,
“they fired a shot ahead of us. We had previously loaded all our guns,
and brought them all on the starboard side. As the tide was running
in strong, we were not abreast the fort—which we passed within musket
shot—till half an hour after receiving the first shot, all of which
time they were playing away upon us; but as soon as we were abreast the
fort we opened upon them, and in ten minutes silenced their battery and
drove everybody out of it. They fired only two guns after we began, and
only six of their shot counted, one of which went through between wind
and water; the others cut the rigging and sails. As soon as we were
clear we landed the guard, who had been in great tribulation lest we
should carry them off.”

Thirty years later Richard Henry Dana, author of Two Years Before
the Mast, found the story of this exploit still current in San Diego
and the neighboring ports and missions. Shortly after the transfer
of California to the United States, Commodore Biddle referred to the
“Battle of San Diego” as giving Captain Cleveland a fair claim to the
governorship of the territory which claim he had won in the _Lelia
Byrd_ long before Fremont’s invasion.[42]

After some further adventures in search of trade along the Mexican
coast the adventurers laid their course for the Sandwich Islands. They
had purchased a horse on the coast and landed the beast on the island
of Owyhee. There were only two European inhabitants on the Sandwich
Islands at that time, John Young and Isaac Davis. Young came on board
the brig and wanted to buy the mare as a present for King Tamaahmaah,
but when his _blasé_ Majesty saw the animal cantering up and down the
beach he expressed little curiosity or interest, although this was the
first animal larger than a pig ever seen by the natives of the Sandwich
Islands. The king’s subjects were wildly excited, however, and when one
of the sailors mounted the mare and tore up and down the beach, the
spectators were much concerned for the rider’s safety, “and rent the
air with shouts of admiration.”

From the Sandwich Islands the _Lelia Byrd_ was carried to China,
arriving off Canton on the 29th of August, 1803. Here the cargo of
sea-otter skins was sold, and the two captains, Shaler and Cleveland,
parted company for the time. Shaler loaded the brig for a return voyage
to the California coast and Richard Cleveland took passage around the
Cape of Good Hope, homeward for Boston.

At the age of thirty years this Salem mariner returned to his kinfolk
and friends after an absence of seven and a half years at sea. He had
left home a lad of twenty-three with two thousand dollars as his total
capital. He had been twice around the world, had accomplished three
most extraordinary voyages in tiny craft, from Europe to the Cape of
Good Hope, from India to the Isle of France and from China to the
Northwest coast of America. He had fought and beaten mutineers and
Spanish gunners by force of arms, his invincible pluck and tenacity
had won him victories over Governors and Viceroys from Africa to the
Mexican coast, he had succeeded in a dozen hazardous undertakings where
a hundred men had failed, and at thirty years of age he had lived
a score of ordinary lives. He had increased his slender capital to
seventy thousand dollars by the cleanest and most admirable exertions,
and as fortunes were counted a hundred years ago, he was a rich man.

The achievements of modern so-called “Captains of Industry,” who amass
millions in wresting, by methods of legalized piracy, the riches that
other men have earned, raise a prodigious clamor of comment, admiring
and otherwise. But, somehow, such an American as Richard Cleveland
seems to be a far more worthy type for admiration, and his deeds loom
in pleasing contrast with those of a railroad wrecker or stock juggler,
even though a fortune of seventy thousand dollars is a bagatelle in the
eyes of the twentieth century.

Captain Cleveland believed that his affairs were so prosperously shaped
that he could retire from the sea. He built him a home in Lancaster,
Mass., where with his wife and brother, his well-stored mind and simple
tastes enjoyed the tranquil life of a New England village. But much
of his fortune was afloat or invested in foreign shipping markets,
and misfortune overtook his ventures one after the other. Three years
after his homecoming he was obliged to go to sea again to win a new
treasure in partnership with his old friend, Nathaniel Shaler. For
almost fifteen years longer he voyaged from one quarter of the globe
to the other, winning large profits only to risk them in more alluring
undertakings, always turning a resolute and undaunted front to whatever
odds overtook him. In his elder years, after a series of cruel maritime
reverses, he wrote as a summary:

“On making an estimate of my losses for the twenty years between 1800
and 1820, I find their aggregate amount to exceed $200,000, though
I never possessed at any one time a sum to exceed $80,000. Under
such losses I have been supported by the consoling reflection that
they had been exclusively my own, and that it is not in the power of
any individual to say, with truth, that I have ever injured him to
the amount of a dollar. With a small annual sum from the Neapolitan
indemnity I have been able to support myself till this was on the point
of ceasing by the cancelling of that debt, when I was so fortunate as
to obtain an office in the Boston Custom House, the duties of which I
hope to perform faithfully and in peace during the few remaining years
or months or days which may be allotted to me on earth.”

From an obituary notice in the _Boston Courier_ of December 8, 1860,
this tribute to the memory of Richard Cleveland is quoted, because it
was written by one who knew him:

“While in the planning of commercial enterprises he showed rare
inventive qualities, and in the execution of them wonderful energy and
perseverance, he was somewhat deficient in those humbler qualities
which enable men to keep and manage what they have earned.... But
this reverse of fortune served to bring out more and more the beauty
of Captain Cleveland’s character, and to give him new claims to
the affection and esteem of his friends. It was gently, patiently,
heroically borne; never a word of complaint was heard from his lips,
never a bitter arraignment of the ways of Providence, never an envious
fling at the prosperity of others. And the wise, kind, cheerful old man
was happy to the end.”

Thus lived and died an American sailor of the olden-time, a brave and
knightly man of an heroic age in his country’s history.

FOOTNOTES:

[39] Captain Cleveland’s “Narrative of Voyages and Commercial
Enterprises” was published in 1842 at Cambridge, Mass. In 1886 appeared
a small volume, “Voyages of a Merchant Navigator,” compiled from his
letters and journals by his son, H. W. S. Cleveland.

[40] See Appendix C.

[41] “Several American trading craft made their appearance on the
California coast this year, creating not a little excitement in some
instances by attempts at smuggling in the success of which the people
were hardly less interested than the Yankee captains. The _Lelia Byrd_
was fitted out at Hamburg by Capt. Richard J. Cleveland, of Salem,
Massachusetts, who had just made a fortune by a four years’ voyage
or series of commercial adventures in the Pacific, during which he
had touched the northern coast of America, but not of California, in
partnership with William Shaler, and sailed in November, 1801.

“An amusing feature of this and other similar narratives is the cool
frankness with which the Americans and English present the evasion of
all Spanish commercial and revenue regulations as an action altogether
praiseworthy, and the efforts of the officials to enforce those
regulations as correspondingly reprehensible.” (From The History of
California, by Herbert Howe Bancroft. Vol II. Page 10.)

[42] “Another version is that of Rodriguez in his report to the
Governor dated April 10th. About the fight the two narratives do not
exactly agree. Rodriguez says that suspicious of contraband trade
he made a round in the evening, surprised the Americans of one boat
trading with Carlos Rosa at La Barranca, arrested them and went on to
the Battery where he seized some goods left in payment for forty otter
skins. Next morning when Cleveland came ashore to see what had become
of the men one of the guards, Antonio Guillean—he was the husband of
the famous old lady of San Gabriel, Eulalia Perez, who died in 1878
at a fabulous old age—came also, escaped, and hastened to warn the
corporal in command of the battery that the Americans were going to
sail without landing the guard. The corporal made ready his guns, and
when the _Lelia Byrd_ started, raised his flag, fired a blank cartridge
and then a shot across her bows as Cleveland says. Then another shot
was fired which struck the hull but did no damage. This may have been
the effective shot.

“Thereupon Sergt. Arce shouted not to fire as they would be put ashore
and the firing ceased. But when the vessel came opposite the fort on
her way out she reopened the fire. The battery followed suit and did
some damage, but stopped firing as soon as the vessel did, no harm
being done to the fort or its defenders. It is, of course, impossible
to reconcile these discrepancies. Rodriguez, an able and honorable
man engaged in the performance of his duty, and making a clear
straightforward report is prima facie entitled to credence against a
disappointed and baffled smuggler.

“Cleveland ridiculed Rodriguez for his exceeding vanity, his absurd
display of a little brief authority, and the characteristic pomp with
which this arrant coxcomb performed his duties. I cannot deny that Don
Manuel may have been somewhat pompous in manner, but the head and front
of his offending in the eye of the Yankees was his interference with
their schemes of contraband trade.” (From The History of California, by
Herbert Howe Bancroft. Vol II, page 11.)

CHAPTER XVIII

THE PRIVATEERS OF 1812

The War of 1812 was a sailors’ war, fought by the United States for
“Free Trade and Sailors’ Rights.” Americans of this century cannot
realize the bitterness of feeling against England which was at white
heat in all the Atlantic seacoastwise towns during a period of forty
years before the second war waged by the young republic against the
mother country. To the men of New England, in the words of Josiah
Quincy, the land was “only a shelter from the storm, a perch on which
they build their eyrie and hide their mate and their young, while they
skim the surface, or hunt in the deep.” In 1806 and 1807, according to
the files of the State Department, six thousand American seamen were
virtual captives in British war vessels. “The detection of an attempt
to notify an American Consul of the presence of Americans on board an
English ship was sure to be followed by a brutal flogging,” writes the
historian McMaster.

President Jefferson shrank from war and sought a retaliatory compromise
in the Embargo of 1808 which forbade the departure of an American
merchant vessel for any foreign port. This measure which paralyzed
American trade, was so fiercely opposed in New England that an
insurrection was feared, and the ports were filled with dismantled
ships, empty warehouses, deserted wharves and starving seamen. When war
came, it was welcomed by forty thousand native American merchant seamen
who, eager for revenge for the wrongs they had suffered, were ready to
crowd the ships of the navy and overflow into the fleets of privateers
that hurried from every deep-water port.

England’s high-handed claims to right of search and impressment and
the continual menace from French and Spanish marauders had developed a
much faster and more powerful class of merchant vessels than had been
armed for service in the Revolution. During the war Salem placed in
commission forty privateers of which more than half had been built in
her own yards. Of these the most famous and successful was the ship
_America_, whose audacious cruising ground was from the English Channel
to the Canary Islands. The art of building fast and beautiful ships
had been so far perfected a hundred years ago that Salem vessels were
crossing the Atlantic in twelve and thirteen days for record passages,
performances which were not surpassed by the famous clipper-packets of
half a century later. The _America_, as shown in the interesting data
collected by B. B. Crowninshield, although built in 1803, was faster
with the wind on her quarter, than such crack racing machines as the
_Vigilant_, _Defender_ and _Columbia_. This noble privateer made a
speed record of thirteen knots, with all her stores, guns, fittings,
boats and bulwarks aboard, which is only one knot behind the record of
the _Defender_, in short spurts, and when stripped in racing trim. The
_America_ frequently averaged better than ten knots for twelve hours on
end, which matches the best day’s run of the _Vigilant_ in her run to
Scotland in the summer of 1894. This privateer, which carried a crew
of one hundred and fifty men and twenty-two guns was no longer than a
modern cup defender.

This splendid fabric of the seas was the fastest Yankee ship afloat
during the War of 1812, and her speed and the admirable seamanship
displayed by her commanders enabled her to cruise in the English
Channel for weeks at a time, to run away from British frigates which
chased her home and back again, and to destroy at least two million
dollars worth of English shipping.

Michael Scott, in “Tom Cringle’s Log” described such a vessel as the
_America_ in the following passage dealing with the fate of a captured
Yankee privateer at the hands of British masters:

“When I had last seen her she was the most beautiful little craft, both
in hull and rigging, that ever delighted the eyes of a sailor; but the
dock-yard riggers and carpenters had fairly bedeviled her—at least so
far as appearances went. First they replaced the light rail on her
gunwale by heavy, solid bulwarks four feet high, surmounted by hammock
nettings at least another foot; so that the symmetrical little vessel,
that formerly floated on the foam light as a sea gull, now looked like
a clumsy, dish-shaped Dutch dogger. Her long slender wands of masts,
which used to swing about as if there were neither shrouds nor stays to
support them, were now as taut and stiff as church steeples, with four
heavy shrouds on a side, and stays, and backstays, and the devil knows
what all.”

The _America_ was built for the merchant service and her career before
the war was not lacking in picturesque flavor. She was the pride of
the great shipping family of Crowninshield, built by Retire Becket of
Salem, under the eye of Captain George Crowninshield, Jr. With a crew
of thirty-five men and ten guns she sailed on her first voyage, to the
Dutch East Indies, in the summer of 1804, commanded by Captain Benjamin
Crowninshield, Jr. Touching at the Isle of Bourbon in the Indian Ocean,
it was learned that a cargo of coffee might be obtained at Mocha in
the Red Sea. The _America_ shifted her course and proceeded to Mocha,
where she dropped anchor only seven years after the _Recovery_ had
first shown the stars and stripes in that port. Having taken on coffee,
goat skins, gum arabic, and sienna, the ship went to Aden carrying as
a passenger Mr. Pringle, the English consul. A few days later Captain
Crowninshield was informed that Mr. Pringle had taken passage for
England from Aden in the ship _Alert_, which had been captured by
Arabs, the captain and fifteen men murdered and the vessel carried off
to India.

Meanwhile a rumor had reached Salem that the _America_, instead of
obeying orders and going to Sumatra had veered away to Mocha after
coffee. The owners had implicitly enjoined Captain Crowninshield after
this imploring fashion:

“Now you’ve broken orders so often, see _for once_ if you can’t mind
them.”

When the ship was sighted off Salem harbor, the owners and some of
their friends hastily put off in a small boat, wholly in the dark as
to where their skipper had been and what he had fetched home, and not
at all easy in their minds. If he had secured coffee, then they stood
to win a small fortune, but if the cargo was pepper, which they had
ordered him to get, well, the bottom had dropped out of the pepper
market a short time before and the prospect was not so pleasing. It
was a sea lottery of the kind that lent excitement to the return of
most Salem ventures beyond the seas. As the owners neared the ship they
began to sniff the wind. They thought they could smell coffee, but the
old salt at the tiller suggested that the fragrant odor might be blown
from a fresh pot of the beverage in the galley, and hopes fell below
par. As soon as they were within fair hailing distance Captain Benjamin
Crowninshield, one of the owners, shouted through a speaking trumpet,
“What’s your cargo?”

“Pep-p-er-r,” came the doleful response from the skipper on the quarter
deck.

“You’re a liar, blast your eye, I smell coffee,” roared back the
agitated owner through his trumpet.

The Captain had had his little joke, and he was effusively forgiven,
for he had brought back a cargo that harvested a clean profit of one
hundred thousand dollars when sold in Holland.

As soon as war was declared the owners of the _America_ hastened the
task of fitting her out as a privateer. Her upper deck was removed,
and her sides filled in with stout oak timber between the planking and
ceiling. Longer yards and royal masts gave her an immense spread of
sail, and, square-rigged on her three masts she was a stately cloud of
canvas when under full sail. Her guns were eighteen long nine-pounders,
two six-pounders, two eighteen-pound carronades, and for small arms,
forty muskets, four blunderbusses, fifty-five pistols, seventy-three
cutlasses, ten top muskets, thirty-six tomahawks or boarding axes, and
thirty-nine boarding pikes.

Her crew of one hundred and fifty men comprised a commander, three
lieutenants, sailing master, three mates, surgeon, purser, captain of
marines, gunner, gunner’s mate, carpenter, carpenter’s mate, steward,
steward’s mate, seven prize masters, armorer, drummer, fifer, three
quartermasters, and one hundred and twenty-two seamen. This was the
organization of a man-of-war of her time, and discipline was maintained
as smartly as in the navy. Flogging was the penalty for offenses among
the seamen, as shown by the record of a court martial on one of her
cruises. A seaman had stolen a pair of shoes from a marine, for which
he was sentenced to a dozen lashes. A poet of the privateer’s gun deck
described this event at some length, including these pithy lines:

“The Boatsw’n pipes all hands to muster,
No time for whining, plea or bluster,
The Judge announces the just sentence
And many stripes produce repentance;

“For the low cur, who’d meanly cozen
A poor Marine, must take his ‘dozen.’”

On her first cruise the _America_ was commanded by Captain Joseph
Ropes, son of that Revolutionary privateersman, Captain David Ropes,
who was killed in a bloody action aboard the _Jack_, off Halifax.
Joseph Ropes was also a kinsman of Nathaniel Hawthorne, and of
Nathaniel Bowditch, the two sons of Salem whose fame is world-wide.
This captain of the _America_ had sailed in her as a merchantman to
the Mediterranean, and it is related that he made so favorable an
impression upon the Sultan of Turkey that the potentate wished to
negotiate through him a commercial treaty with the United States.

Tradition says that the only thing in the world Captain Ropes feared
was reproof from his mother. She hated the sea because the boy’s father
had lost his life upon it, and young Joseph ran away on his first
voyage to the West Indies when he was little past the spankable age. He
took care to send her as a peace offering a barrel of molasses before
he dared return home and face her sorrowing indignation. Captain Ropes
made only one cruise in the _America_, after which he retired from the
sea. He captured six prizes on the Atlantic, valued at $158,000, all of
them merchantmen which could make no resistance to the heavy battery of
the privateer.

Her second cruise was in command of Captain John Kehew, who had been
a first lieutenant under Captain Ropes. The _America_ was at sea four
months and took ten vessels without notable incident. The third,
fourth and fifth cruises of the privateer were entrusted to Captain
James Chever, Jr., who won a name for himself as one of the ablest and
most daring sailors of the war. He had been in the _America_ from her
first voyage to Mocha, when he was an infant of twelve years, acting
as cabin boy. He came of a sterling fighting and seafaring stock. His
father, Captain James Chever, was a lieutenant of the first _Grand
Turk_, privateer during the Revolution, which ship, among other notable
achievements, captured a large cargo of military supplies intended for
Cornwallis. These stores were delivered to Washington and were a great
assistance in the siege of Yorktown. The son rose to be a master of
merchant vessel before he was twenty, and when he was given command of
the _America_ privateer in 1813, he was twenty-two years old, with
one hundred and fifty men to take his orders and one of the finest and
fastest ships afloat to win him fame and fortune.

[Illustration: Captain James W. Chever, commander of the privateer
_America_]

[Illustration: The privateer _America_ under full sail]

From the log of his first cruise in the _America_ the following
extracts are chosen, as showing the daily life and business aboard a
Yankee privateer a century ago:

“Dec. 14 (1813) Latter part, strong breezes and clear weather. At 11 A.
M. saw a sail bearing E. by N. Called all hands and made sail in chase;
and sent up Top Gallant yards. At 3 P. M. coming up with our chase very
fast. He hoisted English colors and hauled up his courses. At half past
3 P. M. we hauled down our English colors; gave him a gun; and hoisted
American colors. Passed within pistol shot of him, to windward, firing
continually; exchanged three broadsides; in a few minutes afterward we
past round his bow and gave him a raking fire. Our guns under water.
There being a great sea and our decks full of water, and perceiving him
to be a light transport of about six hundred tons, mounting 28 or 30
guns and full of men, we concluded if we took him we should not reap
any advantage as he could not be of much value; therefore, thought it
prudent to leave him. During the action received a number of shot,
one of which cut away part of the maintopsail yard. The topsail being
double reefed the shot went through both reefs; another shot went
through our fore topsail; another cut away one of our fore-shrouds.
John McIntire, a marine, while in the act of loading his musket, was
shot through the left breast and expired instantly. From 4 to 6 P. M.
employed sending down the main topsail and yard and getting up another.
At half past six sent up the main topsail; while bending it lost a
man out of the main topmast rigging by the name of Ebenezer Osgood.
It being very dark and a long sea, thought it imprudent to get the
boat out. At 8 set the maintopsail close reefed. Close reefed the fore
topsail and took in the mizzen topsail and mainsail; at 9 took in the
foresail; at 10 took in the fore topsail; at 11 took in the maintopsail
and mizzen staysail and lay to under the fore and main staysail. Strong
gales and cloudy weather. At ½ past 1 A. M. sent down the topgallant
yards. At 3 set the mizzen staysail. At 7 set the fore and mizzen
topsails. A gun bursted.”

“Dec. 25. Commences with light breezes and pleasant weather. At 2 P. M.
took in the staysails and jib. At 3 all hands to quarters; exercise the
guns. At 4 let two reefs out of the topsails. At half past four hands
aft while the carpenter repaired the copper on the cutwater.”

“Jan. 18th. At 1 P. M. coming up with our chase very fast found him to
be a schooner. At 4 P. M. gave him a gun, and he hove to and hoisted
English colors. Boarded him and found him to be the English schooner
_Martha_, Wm. Williams, master, from Waterford, bound for Cadiz.
Cargo dry goods, butter, bacon, Beef, etc. Put on board Wm. C. Hooper
as prize master, with six men and ordered her for America. Took Mr.
Wilson, mate, and three men. Left no one on board of her except the
captain. Sent on board schooner 150 pounds bread, 10 do. chocolate, 4
gallons rum, 110 gallons water. Received from her five firkins butter.
At 6 P. M. parted from her. At 10 hauled up the mainsail.”

In a way, this capturing small merchant vessels, the loss of which
spelled beggary for their masters, seemed a cruel and unnecessary part
of war between nations. It had its stern use however, in crippling
England’s commercial strength, and in employing her navy to protect her
trading fleets. The _America_ swooped among these deep-laden craft like
a hawk in a dove cote, snatching them from convoys, or picking them up
in the English Channel almost within sight of their own shores. Her
logs are filled with such entries as these:

“Jan. 23. He proved to be the British ship _Diana_, George W. Carlton,
master, from London bound for Madeira, cargo, deals. From 2 to 6 P.
M. boats employed in taking our articles from the ship as the captain
contemplated burning her. During the afternoon received on board all
the _Diana’s_ company consisting of 15 in number and one passenger,
likewise a quantity of duck, rigging, etc. At 3 P. M. after taking all
necessary things out of the _Diana_, set fire to her.”

“Jan. 26th. At 2 P. M. saw a sail bearing N.N.W.; called all hands
to make sail in chase. At 3 sent up Royal masts and yards; and set
all necessary sail. At 8 came up with the chase; it proved to be the
British brig _Sovereign_ from Cork bound for Liverpool, John Brown
commander. Took on board the prisoners and put on board Mr. Hall, prize
master with six men and ordered her to America. Her cargo consisted of
coals, crates, butter, etc.”

“Jan. 27th. A number of our men on board the _Sovereign_ fitting a new
foremast and doing other necessary work. At 4 P. M. saw a sail on the
lee bow. Made a signal for our boats and all hands to repair on board.
Instantly got in the boats and made all necessary sail in chase. At 5
nearing the chase very fast. At half past 9 lighted our side lanterns
and called all hands to quarters. At 10 within gunshot of him; Fired
and brought him to. Got out the gig and brought the captain on board
with his papers. She proved to be the British ship _Falcon_, Atkinson,
master, from Liverpool _via_ Lisbon, bound to the Canaries, with a very
valuable cargo of merchandise. At 11 took on board the prisoners. Put
on board Mr. Cleaves as prize master with 12 hands.”

“Jan. 28. At 8 A. M. saw a sail in the lee bow. A signal was made for
the boat and all hands to repair on board. Made sail in chase. At 4 P.
M. discovered him to be a brig. At half past 9 gave him a gun; he not
regarding it soon after gave him another and he rounded to. Got out the
boat and boarded him. The captain came on board with his papers. She
proved to be the British brig _Ann_ of London, Appleton, master, from
Oporto bound to Bayhei in ballast; not being of much value, permitted
him to pass, after putting all our prisoners on board of him, being
forty-six in number including the brig’s crew, and directed him to land
them in Teneriffe and there to report to the proper officer. At 4 P. M.
got all the prisoners on board and ordered him to make sail.”

Prize after prize was thus entered in the log, for the _America_
overhauled everything she sighted and made chase after, and managed
to keep in the track of the richest trade bound to and from England,
nor could British frigates find and drive her off her station. Other
entries for this third cruise include the following:

“Feb. 19th. Coming up with our chase very fast. At ½ past 3 took in
studding sails and Royals. At 4 fired a gun and brought him to and
boarded him. He proved to be the British brig _Sisters_ from Malaga,
cargo wine and fruit, prize to the American privateer, _Young Wasp_ of
Philadelphia. At 5 parted with him.”

“Feb. 20th. All hands to quarters and exercise the great guns,
Boarders, etc. Started two Hogsheads of salt water forward to trim ship
by the stern.”

“Feb. 24th. At 9 A. M. got out the launch to scrub the bottom. All
hands employed in setting up and tarring down the rigging. At 7 P. M.
put all prisoners in Irons for bad Conduct.”

“March 1. At 9 A. M. saw a sail bearing about S.W. Hauled up for him
and set the mainsail, jib and mizzen. At 10 perceived the sail to be
a ship of war, apparently a frigate; wore ship to the N.N.W. Set top
gallant sails, stay sails and top mast studding sails, and sent up the
Royal yards. At ½ past 11 fired a lee gun and hoisted our colors.

“March 2. Lost sight of the ship astern at 1 P. M.

“March 6. At ½ past 2 all hands to quarters for exercise. Got out the
boat and carried an empty water cask from the ship, about 60 yards to
fire at. Blew off one Broadside. All the shots went very near. At 4
went in swimming.”

On this cruise the _America_ took an even dozen prizes. Touching at
Portsmouth, N. H., to gather her crew, which had been dangerously
reduced by manning prizes, the privateer refitted and sailed on her
fourth cruise, Oct. 31st, 1814. This was her only unlucky voyage. She
ran into a submerged derelict at sea, and was so badly damaged that
Captain Chever returned to Salem for repairs before any capture had
been made. Departure was made from Salem for the fifth and last cruise
on Nov. 25, 1814. “On this cruise,” writes B. B. Crowninshield in an
interesting summary of the _America’s_ log, “the sea seemed to be full
of English men-of-war and much of the _America’s_ time was taken up in
dogging and running away from frigates, and the crew no doubt realized
that danger of capture to which they were continually exposed; at all
events the log on Jan. 8th and on each succeeding Sunday records that
‘all hands were called to prayers,’ although prayers were in no way
allowed to interfere with the management of the ship or the furtherance
of the purpose for which she was fitted out. They attended prayers at
intervals before, and had returned thanks for a Merciful Providence
Dec. 11.”

On Feb. 27, the _America_ fell in with the English packet, _Princess
Elizabeth_, of 188 tons, armed with six nine-pound carronades, two long
brass nine-pounders, and manned by thirty-two men. She proved to be
a rarely plucky foeman, and during the hot engagement that followed,
Captain Chever’s crew exhibited a skill in gunnery comparable with that
of the tars of the _Constitution_ and American frigates. Captain Chever
describes the action in these words:

“At half past 4 P. M. saw a sail on our weather bow, made all sail in
chase of her. At ½ past six P. M. lost sight of the above ship. At 9
P. M. wore ship to the S. and E., judging that after he lost sight of
us he would keep his former course to the Eastward. Hauled up our main
course. At 6 A. M. saw the above ship to the west. Wore ship and stood
after him. At 8 A. M. still in chase of the above ship, coming up with
him very fast. He hauled down his signals, fired a gun and hoisted
an English Ensign and Pennant. At the same time we fired a gun and
hoisted English colors. At 9 A. M. nearly on his lee quarter, hauled
down English and hoisted American colors. He immediately bore away
before the wind and gave us a broadside which we returned by giving
him another, when the action became general. At 12 minutes past nine,
seeing his colors hanging overboard, concluded that he had struck and
ceased firing, but in two minutes, seeing his fire, commenced firing
again. At 18 minutes past 9 he surrendered, we receiving no loss on
board the _America_ neither in men, rigging, sails, or hull.

“At ½ past nine boarded him; he proved to be H. B. M. Ship Packet
_Princess Elizabeth_, John Forresdale commander, mounting 8 carriage
guns and 32 men, from Rio Janeiro bound to Falmouth. Her loss was 2
killed and 13 wounded; among the latter was the Capt. by a grape shot
through the thigh. The Packet was very much cut to pieces. She had 8
shot holes between wind and water, 3 nine-pound shot in her mainmast,
just above deck, one in her mizzen mast, and one in her main topmast,
and one in her fore topmast, with his braces, bowlines and part of his
shrouds and stays cut away, and about 700 shot holes thro’ his sails
besides a large number through his bulwarks. On our approaching them
they thought us to be some cunning ship with 12 or 14 guns and the
rest Quakers. But they found their mistake so as to convince them that
Quakers were not silent at all times. Took out her guns, muskets,
pistols, cutlasses, powder and shot on board the _America_, and gave
her up to her original crew, to proceed on to Falmouth, after putting
on board 6 prisoners, and a quantity of bread, as they had on board
only 15 pounds for 25 men. Sent our Doctor on board to dress the
wounded.”

After taking thirteen prizes on this cruise the _America_ returned to
Salem and the last entry in her log reads:

“April 18. (1814.) At 4 P. M. came to with the best bower in seven
fathoms and handed all sails and fired a salute of forty guns. People
all discharged to go on shore. So ends the ship _America’s_ last
cruise.”

During her career as a privateer she had sent safely into port
twenty-seven British vessels, but her captures much exceeded this
number. Six of her prizes were retaken on their way to America and many
more were destroyed at sea. Her officers and crew divided more than one
half million dollars in prize money. More than this, with an American
navy so small that it could not hope to take the offensive against
England’s mighty sea power, the _America_ had played her part well in
crippling that maritime commerce which was the chief source of English
greatness. This beautiful ship never went to sea again. For reasons
unknown and inexplicable at the present time, she was allowed to lay
dismantled alongside Crowninshield’s wharf in Salem until 1831, when
she was sold at auction and broken up. The _Essex Register_ of June
16th of that year contains this melancholy obituary in its advertising
columns:

“Hull, etc. of Ship _America_
AT AUCTION
On Thursday next at 10 o’clock,
(Necessarily postponed from Thursday)
Will be sold by auction at the Crowninshield Wharf,
The Hull of the Privateer Ship _America_,
very heavily copper-fastened, and worthy attention
for breaking up.

Also—about 1000 pounds of Powder,
consisting principally of cannon and musket
cartridges.

A quantity of old Iron, Rigging, old Canvas, Blocks
Spars,—a complete set of Sweeps with a variety of
other articles.

The sale will commence with the materials, June 16.

GEORGE NICHOLS, Auct’r.”

Long after the war Captain Chever, master of a merchant vessel, became
acquainted in the harbor of Valparaiso with Sir James Thompson, captain
of the British frigate _Dublin_. This man-of-war had been fitted out
with the special object of capturing the _America_ in 1813. While
the two captains chatted together in cordial friendliness, Sir James
Thompson fell to telling stories of his service afloat in chase of the
famous Yankee privateer. “I was almost within gunshot of her once, just
as night was coming on,” said he, “but by daylight she had outsailed
the _Dublin_ so devilish fast that she was no more than a speck on the
horizon. And by the way, I wonder if you know who it was commanded
the _America_ on that cruise?” Captain Chever was glad to answer such
an absurdly easy question as this, and his former foeman enjoyed the
singular coincidence of this amicable meeting.

Even during the years of conflict the Yankee privateersman had more
sympathy for than hatred of the prisoners whose ships they took or
destroyed. Far more than the patriot landsman they could feel for these
hapless victims of warfare on the seas, for they had suffered similar
misfortunes at the hands of Englishmen, year after year. In an era of
nominal peace the British navy alone had confiscated more American
vessels than were captured from under the English flag by Yankee
privateers in the War of 1812. And if the merciless ravages of such
fleet sea hawks as the _America_ beggared many a British skipper whose
fate in no way touched the issue of the war, it should be remembered,
on the other hand, that in every American seaport there were broken
captains and ruined homes whose irremediable disasters had been wrought
by British authority.

In order to gain a more intimate realization of the spirit of those
times, it may be worth while to review a typical incident which befell
Captain Richard Cleveland of Salem. In 1806 he was in command of
the ship _Telemaco_ in which he had staked all his cash and credit,
together with the fortune of his friend and partner, Nathaniel Shaler.
Their investment in ship and cargo amounted to more than fifty thousand
dollars won after years of maritime risk and adventure in every sea of
the globe.[43] He sailed from Rio Janeiro for Havana, and said of the
prospects of this voyage in a letter to his wife:

“With what a series of misfortunes have I not been assailed for the
past three years, and with what confidence can I now expect to escape
the pirates in the West Indies? I expect to meet the British ships of
war, but do not fear them, as my business is regular, and such as will
bear the nicest scrutiny by those who act uprightly; but should I meet
with any of those privateers the consequence may be serious as they
respect the property of no one.”

In his published narrative Captain Cleveland made this additional
comment:

“But these were precarious times for neutrals, when the two great
belligerents (England and France) agreed in nothing else than
plundering them.... On the presumption, however, that such neutral
commerce as did not, even in a remote degree, prejudice the interests
of the belligerents would be unmolested, I felt that I had little else
than sea-risk to guard against, and was therefore free from anxiety on
the subject of insurance.”

Near the equator Captain Chever was overhauled by a British frigate,
and later by a sloop of war, the commanders of both of which vessels
satisfied themselves of the legality of his voyage and very civilly
permitted him to go on his way. Convinced that he was in no danger
from this quarter, Captain Cleveland expected a safe arrival in
Havana. Near Martinique he hove in sight of a British fleet, of which
Admiral Cochrane was in command on board the _Ramillies_ seventy-four.
The American shipmaster was summoned on board the flagship, his
papers carefully examined by the captain, and no cause found for his
detention. He was sent aboard his ship, and made sail on his course
with a happy heart. Scarcely was he under way when Admiral Cochrane
signalled him to heave to again, and without deigning to question
him or look at his papers ordered the ship seized and taken to the
Island of Tortola for condemnation proceedings. These formalities
were a farce, the _Telemaco_ was confiscated with her cargo and after
fruitless efforts to obtain a fair hearing, Captain Cleveland wrote:

“I am now on the point of embarking for home, after being completely
stripped of the fruits of many years hard toil.... To have practised
the self-denial incident to leaving my family for so long a time;
to have succeeded in reaching Rio Janeiro after being dismasted and
suffering all the toils and anxieties of a voyage of forty-three days
in that crippled condition; to have surmounted the numerous obstacles
and risks attendant on the peculiarity of the transactions in port; to
have accomplished the business of lading and despatching the vessels in
defiance of great obstacles, and to perceive the fortune almost within
my grasp which would secure me ease and independence for the remainder
of my life, and then, by the irresistible means of brute force, to
see the whole swept off, and myself and family thereby reduced in a
moment from affluence to poverty, must be admitted as a calamity of no
ordinary magnitude.... After the villainy I have seen practised, at
Tortola, by men whose power and riches not only give them a currency
among the most respectable, but make their society even courted, I
blush for the baseness of mankind and almost lament that I am one of
the same species.”

In the list of Salem privateers of 1812, one finds that few of them
were in the same class with the splendid and formidable _America_.
Indeed, some were as audaciously equipped, manned and sailed as the
little craft which put to sea in the Revolution. For example, among the
forty-odd private armed craft hailing from Salem during the latter war,
there were such absurd cock-sparrows as:

_The Active_ 20 tons 2 guns (4 lbs.) 25 men
_Black Vomit_ (boat) 5 ” muskets 16 ”
_Castigator_ (launch) 10 ” 16 lb. carronade 20 ”
_Fame_ 30 ” 26 lb. ” 30 ”
_Orion_ (boat) 5 ” muskets 20 ”
_Phœnix_ 20 ” 16 lb. ” 25 ”
_Terrible_ (boat) 5 ” muskets 16 ”

The schooner _Helen_ was a merchant vessel loaned by her owners to a
crew of volunteers for the special purpose of capturing the _Liverpool
Packet_, a venturesome English privateer which for several months had
made herself the terror of all vessels entering Massachusetts Bay. She
clung to her cruising ground off Cape Cod and evaded the privateers
sent in search of her. At last the seamen of Salem determined to clip
her wings, and the notion was most enthusiastically received. The
_Helen_ was fitted out and seventy volunteers put on board in the
remarkably brief time of four hours. Captains Upton and Tibbetts,
the leaders of the expedition, organized a parade through the Salem
streets, led by a flag bearer, a fifer and drummer, and had not
made the circuit of the town before the full crew was enlisted. Four
six-pounders were borrowed from the privateer _John_, and before
nightfall of the same day the _Helen_ was heading for sea. Some of her
crew leaped aboard as she was leaving the wharf and signed articles
while the schooner was working down the harbor. They failed to overhaul
the _Liverpool Packet_ which had sailed for Halifax to refit, but their
spirit was most praiseworthy. The English privateer was captured later
by another Yankee vessel.

The _Grand Turk_ was one of the finest privateers of the war, an East
India ship of 310 tons, fitted out with eighteen guns and one hundred
and fifty men. Her commanders were Holten J. Breed and Nathan Green who
made brilliantly successful cruises. After one cruise of one hundred
and three days she returned to Salem with only forty-four of her crew
on board, the remainder having been put into prizes of which she had
captured eight, one of them with a cargo invoiced at a hundred and
fifty thousand dollars. Her log describes several astonishing escapes
from British cruisers in which she showed a nimble pair of heels that
won her the name of being one of the fastest armed ships afloat. During
her last cruise, Captain Nathan Green made the following entries:

“Friday, March 10 (1815), at daylight the man at the masthead descried
a sail in the eastern quarter. Called all hands immediately and made
sail in chase. Soon after saw another sail on the weather bow. Still
in pursuit of the chase and approaching her fast. At 6:30 passed very
near the second sail, which was a Portuguese schooner standing W.S.W.
At 7:00 saw third sail three points on our lee bow, the chase a ship.
At 8:00 discovered the third to be a large ship by the wind to the
north and westward. At 10:00 being ¾ of a mile to windward discovered
the chase to be a frigate, endeavoring to decoy us. Tacked ship and
she immediately tacked and made all sail in pursuit of us. Soon
perceived we had the superiority of sailing, displayed the American
flag and fired a shot in defiance. At 11:00 the wind hauled suddenly
to the westward. The frigate received a favorable breeze which caused
her to lay across and nearing us fast. At 11:30, the frigate within
gunshot, got out our sweeps and made considerable progress, although
calm and a short head sea. Frigate commenced firing, got out her boats
and attempted to tack four different times but did not succeed. Hoisted
our colors and gave her a number of shot. A ship to leeward, a frigate
also. At noon swept our brig round with her head to the northward, and
having the wind more favorable, left the chaser considerably. The day
ends with extreme sultry weather and both ships in pursuit of us.

[Illustration: Capt. Holten J. Breed, commander of the privateer _Grand
Turk_]

[Illustration: The privateer _Grand Turk_]

“Saturday, March 11, at dark, frigates using every exertion to near us.

“Sunday, March 12, at 1:30 P. M. saw two sail two points on our lee
bow, soon discovered them to be the two frigates still in pursuit of us
and much favored by the breeze. At 5 P. M. light variable winds with us
and the enemy still holding the breeze. Took to our sweeps. At dark the
enemy’s ships bore S.S.W.

“Monday, March 13, at 2 P. M. the enemy having been out of sight 4½
hours, concluded to get down the foretopmast and replace it with a
new one. All hands busily employed. At 4 descried a second sail ahead
standing for us. At 5:30 got the new foretopmast and top gallant mast
in place, rigging secured, yards aloft and made sail in pursuit of the
latter. At 7 came up and boarded her; she proved to be a Portuguese
brig bound from Bahia to Le Grande with a cargo of salt. Finding
ourselves discovered by the British cruisers, and being greatly
encumbered with prisoners, concluded to release them and accordingly
paroled five British prisoners and discharged ten Spaniards and put
them on board the brig after giving a necessary supply of provisions.

“Saturday, March 18, at 2 P. M., came up and spoke a Portuguese brig
from Africa bound to Rio Janeiro with a cargo of slaves. Filled away in
pursuit of a second sail in the N.W. At 4:30 she hoisted English colors
and commenced firing her stern guns. At 5:20 took in the steering
sails, at the same time she fired a broadside. We opened a fire from
our larboard battery, and at 5:30 she struck her colors. Got out the
boats and boarded her. She proved to be the British brig _Acorn_ from
Liverpool for Rio Janeiro, mounting fourteen cannon and having a cargo
of dry goods. At 5:30 we received the first boat load of goods aboard.
Employed all night in discharging her.

“Sunday, March 19, at daylight saw two frigates and a brig on the lee
beam in chase of us. Took a very full boatload of goods on board,
manned out the prize with Joseph Phippen and eleven men and ordered
her for the United States. As the prize was in a good plight for
sailing, I have great reason to think she escaped. One of the frigates
pursued us for three-quarters of an hour, but finding that she had her
old antagonist gave up the pursuit. Having on board one hundred and
sixty-odd bales, boxes, cases and trunks of goods, which I conceive is
very valuable, and the brig’s copper and rigging being very much out of
repair, and the water scant, concluded to return home with all possible
dispatch. As another inducement I have information of a treaty of peace
being signed at Ghent between the United States and Great Britain, and
only remains to be ratified by the former.

“Wednesday, March 29, at 4 A. M. saw a sail to windward very near us,
and tacked in pursuit of her. At 8:30 came up with and boarded her. She
proved to be a Portuguese ship from Africa bound to Maranham with 474
slaves on board. Paroled and put on board eleven British prisoners.

“Saturday, April 15, boarded the American schooner _Commit_ of and
from Alexandria for Barbadoes with a cargo of flour. They gave us the
joyful tidings of peace between America and England, which produced the
greatest rejoicing throughout the ship’s company.

“Saturday, April 29, 1815, at 7:30 A. M. saw Thatchers Island bearing
N.W. At 8 saw Bakers Island bearing west. At 9:30 came to anchor in
Salem harbor, cleared decks, and saluted the town. This ends the cruise
of 118 days.”

Captain Nathan Green was a modest man, and his log, if taken alone,
would indicate that his escapes from British frigates were most
matter of fact incidents. The fact is, however, that these events of
his cruise were made notable by rarely brilliant feats of seamanship
and calculated daring. The scene of action began off the coast of
Pernambuco, in which port Captain Green had learned that eight English
merchant vessels were making ready to sail. He took prize after prize
in these waters, until the English assembled several cruisers for the
express purpose of capturing the bold privateer. The frigates which
chased him were part of this squadron, and he not only eluded their
combined attempts, but continued to make captures almost in sight of
the enemy. His log shows that the pursuit, in which both the _Grand
Turk_ and the frigate were towed by their boats, and sweeps manned
for a night and a day was as thrilling and arduous a struggle as that
famous escape of the _Constitution_ from a powerful British squadron in
the same war. The two ships were within firing distance of each other
for hours on end, and after a second frigate joined in the hunt, the
_Grand Turk_ managed to keep her distance only by the most prodigious
pluck and skill.

The records of the Salem Marine Society contain the following compact
account of the most spectacular engagement of an illustrious fighting
privateersman of Salem:

“Capt. Benjamin Upton commanded the private armed brig _Montgomery_,
one hundred and sixty-five tons, armed with eighteen guns. While on a
cruise off Surinam, December 5, 1812, at 3 P. M., made a sail standing
northward, which proved to be a large English packet brig with troops.
She hauled up her courses and stood toward the _Montgomery_, which was
prepared to receive her at 7 P. M. After exchanging shots and wearing,
the _Montgomery_ ordered her to send a boat on board, which she refused
to do. Then commenced a terrible conflict. The _Montgomery_ delivered
her broadside, which was returned, and continued till 8 o’clock, when
her antagonist laid the _Montgomery_ aboard on the starboard waist, his
port anchor catching in after gun port, his spritsail yard and jib-boom
sweeping over the waist guns. In this situation the _Montgomery_ kept
up a fire of musketry and such guns as could be brought to bear, which
was returned with musketry by regular platoons of soldiers. In this
way the fight continued for fifty minutes. The _Montgomery_ finally
filled her foretopsail and parted from the enemy, breaking his anchor,
making a hole in the _Montgomery’s_ deck, breaking five stanchions and
staving ten feet of bulwark, with standing rigging much cut up. She
hauled off for repairs, having four men killed and twelve wounded,
among whom were Capt. Upton and Lieut. John Edwards of this society. It
was thought prudent to get north into cooler weather, on account of the
wounded. The enemy stood to the northward after a parting shot. On the
_Montgomery’s_ deck were found three boarding pikes, one musket and two
pots of combustible matter, intended to set fire to the _Montgomery_,
and which succeeded, but was finally extinguished. This was one of the
hardest contests of the war. The _Montgomery_ was afterwards commanded
by Capt. Jos. Strout, and captured by H. M. ship of the line, La Hoge,
and taken to Halifax. When Capt. Strout with his son, who was with
him, were going alongside of the ship in the launch, another son, a
prisoner on board, hailed the father and asked where mother was, which
would have comprised the whole family.”

By the end of the year 1813 the prizes captured by Salem privateers
had been sold for a total amount of more than six hundred thousand
dollars. Many of the finest old mansions of the Salem of to-day, great
square-sided homes of noble and generous aspect, were built in the
decade following the War of 1812, from prize money won by owners of
privateers. While ship owners risked and equipped their vessels for
profit in this stirring business of privateering, the spirit of the
town is to be sought more in such incidents as that of Doctor Bentley’s
ride to Marblehead on a gun carriage. The famous Salem parson was in
the middle of a sermon when Captain George Crowninshield appeared at a
window at the old East Church, and engaged in an agitated but subdued
conversation with Deacon James Brown, whose pew was nearest him. Doctor
Bentley’s sermon halted and he asked:

“Mr. Brown, is there any news?”

“The _Constitution_ has put into Marblehead with two British cruisers
after her, and is in danger of capture,” was the startling reply.

“This is a time for action,” shouted Doctor Bentley. “Let us go to do
what we can to save the _Constitution_, and may God be with us, Amen.”

At the head of his congregation the parson rushed down the aisle and
hurried toward Marblehead. The alarm had spread through the town, and
Captain Joseph Ropes had assembled the Sea Fencibles, a volunteer coast
guard two hundred strong. Doctor Bentley was their chaplain, and his
militant flock hoisted him on board the gun which they were dragging
with them, and thus he rode in state to Marblehead. Meantime, however,
Captain Joseph Perkins, keeper of the Baker Island Light, had put off
to the _Constitution_ in a small boat, and offering his services as
pilot, brought the frigate inside the harbor where she was safe from
pursuit by the _Endymion_ and the _Tenedos_.

The ill-fated duel between the _Chesapeake_ and the _Shannon_ was
fought off Boston harbor, and was witnessed by thousands of people from
Marblehead and Salem who crowded to the nearest headlands. They saw the
Chesapeake strike to the British frigate after a most desperate combat
in which Captain Lawrence was mortally hurt. The captured American ship
was taken to Halifax by the _Shannon_. Soon the news reached Salem
that the commander whose last words, “Don’t give up the Ship,” were
to win him immortality in defeat, was dead in a British port, and the
bronzed sea-dogs of the Salem Marine Society resolved to fetch his
body home in a manner befitting his end. Capt. George Crowninshield
obtained permission from the Government to sail with a flag of truce
for Halifax, and he equipped the brig _Henry_ for this sad and solemn
mission. Her crew was picked from among the shipmasters of Salem, some
of them privateering captains, every man of them a proven deep-water
commander, and thus manned the brig sailed for Halifax. It was such a
crew as never before or since took a vessel out of an American port.
They brought back to Salem the body of Capt. James Lawrence and Lieut.
Augustus Ludlow of the _Chesapeake_, and the brave old seaport saw
their funeral column pass through its quiet and crowded streets. The
pall-bearers bore names, some of which thrill American hearts to-day;
Hull, Stuart, Bainbridge, Blakely, Creighton and Parker, all captains
of the Navy. A Salem newspaper thus describes the ceremonies:

“The day was unclouded, as if no incident should be wanting to crown
the mind with melancholy and woe—the wind blew from the same direction
and the sea presented the same unruffled surface as was exhibited
to our anxious view when on the memorable first day of July, we saw
the immortal Lawrence proudly conducting his ship to action.... The
brig _Henry_, containing the precious relics, clad in sable, lay at
anchor in the harbor. At half-past twelve o’clock they were placed in
barges, and, preceded by a long procession of boats filled with seamen
uniformed in blue jackets and trousers, with a blue ribbon on their
hats bearing the motto of “Free Trade and Sailors’ Rights,” were rowed
by minute-strokes to the end of India Wharf, where the bearers were
ready to receive the honored dead. From the time the boats left the
brig until the bodies were landed, the United States brig _Rattlesnake_
and the brig _Henry_ alternately fired minute guns.

“The immense concourse of citizens which covered the wharves, stores
and house tops to view the boats, the profound silence which pervaded
the atmosphere, broken only by the reverberations of the minute-guns,
rendered this part of the solemnities peculiarly grand and impressive.

“Conspicuous in the procession and in the church were a large number
of naval and military officers, also the Salem Marine and East
India Marine Societies, wearing badges, with the Masonic and other
organizations.

“On arriving at the Meeting house, the coffins were placed in the
center of the church by the seamen who rowed them ashore, and who stood
during the ceremony leaning upon them in an attitude of mourning. The
church was decorated with cypress and evergreen, and the names of
Lawrence and Ludlow appeared in gilded letters in front of the pulpit.

The remains of Lawrence rested in the Salem burying ground until 1849
when they were removed to New York, where in the churchyard of Old
Trinity, his monument bears the line that can never die:

“DON’T GIVE UP THE SHIP.”

FOOTNOTES:

[43] See Chapter XVIII.

CHAPTER XIX

THE TRAGEDY OF THE “FRIENDSHIP”

(1831)

The first American vessel to load pepper on the coast of Sumatra was
the Salem schooner _Rajah_ in 1795, and the last ship under the stars
and stripes to seek a cargo on that coast was the _Australia_ of Salem
in 1860. Between these years the trade with that far off island was
chiefly in the hands of the merchants and shipmasters of Salem. When
the United States frigate _Potomac_ was ordered to the East Indies
seventy-five years ago with instructions to prepare charts and sailing
directions of the Sumatra coast to aid American mariners, her commander
reported that “this duty has been much more ably performed than it
could have been with our limited materials. For this important service
our country is indebted to Captain Charles M. Endicott and Captain
James D. Gillis of Salem, Massachusetts. The former, who was master of
the _Friendship_ when she was seized by the Malays at Qualah Battoo has
been trading on this coast for more than fifteen years, during which
period he has, profitably for his country, filled up the delay incident
to a pepper voyage, by a careful and reliable survey of the coast, of
which no chart was previously extant that could be relied on.”

Captain Endicott of the _Friendship_ not only risked his vessel amid
perils of stranding along these remote and uncharted shores, but
also encountered the graver menaces involved in trading with savage
and treacherous people who were continually on the alert to murder
the crews and capture the ships of these dauntless American traders.
Notwithstanding all of Captain Endicott’s precautions and shrewdness
born of long experience, he was at length overtaken by the fate which
befell others of these pioneers in Malaysian waters. The story of
the tragedy of the _Friendship_ is typical of the adventures of the
Salem shipmasters of the long ago, and Captain Endicott, like many of
his fellow mariners, possessed the gift of writing such a narrative
in a clean-cut, and vigorous fashion which makes it well worth while
presenting in his own words. Perhaps because they told of things
simply as they had known and seen and done them, without straining
after literary effect, these old-fashioned sea captains of Salem were
singularly capable writers, self-taught and educated as they were,
jumping from school to the forecastle at twelve or fourteen years of
age.

For the entertainment of his comrades and friends of Salem, Captain
Endicott put pen to paper and told them what had happened to him
and his ship on the coast of Sumatra in the year of 1831. Somewhat
condensed, this virile chapter of salt water history runs as follows:

“The ship _Friendship_, of this place, under my command, sailed from
Salem for the west coast of Sumatra, with a crew of seventeen men,
including officers and seamen, on the 26th of May, 1830. On the 22d
September following we touched first at the port of Qualah Battoo
(_i.e._, in English, Rocky River), in Lat. 3.48 m. North. This place
is inhabited by natives from the Pedir coast, on the north of the
island (of Sumatra), as well as Acheenise, and is therefore governed
jointly by a Pedir and an Acheenise Rajah. We remained here for the
purposes of trade, until the 5th of November following, at which time,
having obtained all the pepper of the old crop, and the new pepper not
coming in until March or April, we left that port, and in prosecution
of our voyage visited several others, and finally returned to Pulo Kio
(_i.e._, in English, Wood Island), about two miles from Qualah Battoo,
the latter part of January, 1831, intending to remain there until the
coming in of the pepper crop.

“One bright moonlight night, shortly after our arrival at this place,
I was awakened by the watch informing me that a native boat was
approaching the ship in a very stealthy manner, and under suspicious
circumstances. I immediately repaired on deck, and saw the boat
directly in our wake under the stern, the most obvious way to conceal
herself from our observation, and gradually approaching us with the
utmost caution, without the least noise or apparent propelling power,
the oars being struck so lightly in the water that its surface was
scarcely ruffled. Having watched their proceedings a few minutes, we
became convinced it was a reconnoitering party, sent to ascertain how
good a look-out was kept on board the ship, and intending to surprise
us for no good purpose.

“We therefore hailed them in their own dialect, asking them where they
came from, what they wanted, and why they were approaching the ship in
such a tiger-like manner. We could see that all was instantly life and
animation on board her, and after a few moments we received an answer
that they were friends from Qualah Battoo, with a load of smuggled
pepper, which they were desirous to dispose of to us. We, however,
positively forbade them to advance any nearer the ship, or to come
alongside; but, after considerable discussion, we at length gave our
consent for them to come _abreast_ the ship at a respectful distance,
and we would send some of our own men on board to ascertain if their
story was correct, and if there was nothing suspicious about her, on
their giving up their side arms we would rig a whip upon the main
yard, and in this way take on board their pepper, and allow one man to
come on board ship to look after it.

[Illustration: An old broadside, relating the incidents of the battle
of Qualah Battoo]

“All our own crew had, in the mean time, been mustered and armed, and
a portion of them placed as sentinels on each side the gangway. In
this manner we passed on board some fifty or sixty bags of pepper. We
were afterwards informed by the second officer, that while this was
going forward, the chief officer, who subsequently lost his life, was
secretly scoffing at these precautions, attributing them to cowardice,
and boasting he could clear the decks of a hundred such fellows with a
single handspike. This boat, we ascertained, was sent by a young man
named Po Qualah, the son of the Pedir Rajah, for the express purpose
which we had suspected; the pepper having been put on board merely as
an excuse in case they should be discovered. It was only a sort of
parachute, let off to see from what quarter the wind blew, as a guide
for their evil designs upon us.

“Ascertaining, however, by this artifice, that the ship was too
vigilantly guarded, at least in the night, to be thus surprised, they
set themselves at work to devise another plan to decoy us to Qualah
Battoo, in which, I am sorry to say, they were more successful.

“A few days after this occurrence, a deputation was sent to invite
us to Qualah Battoo, representing that the new crop of pepper was
beginning to make its appearance, and they could now furnish us with
from one or two hundred bags per day, and would no doubt be enabled
to complete loading the ship in the course of forty days. Being in
pursuit of a cargo, and having been always on friendly terms with the
natives of this place, whom I did not consider worse than those of
other parts of the coast, and feeling beside some security from the
fact that we had already been warned by some of our old friends not to
place too much confidence in any of them, we considered the danger but
trifling, and therefore concluded a contract with them, and proceeded
at once with the ship to Qualah Battoo.

“Strict regulations were then established for the security and
protection of the ship. In the absence of the captain, not more than
two Malays were to be permitted on board at the same time; and no
boats should be allowed to approach her in the night time upon any
pretence whatever, without calling an officer. Then mustering all
hands upon the quarterdeck, I made a few remarks, acquainting them
with my apprehensions, and impressing on their minds the importance
of a good look-out, particularly in the night, and expressed my firm
conviction, that vigilance alone would prevent the surprise and
capture of the ship, and the sacrifice of all our lives. Having thus
done all we could to guard against surprise, and put the ship in as
good a state of defence as possible, keeping her entire armament in
good and efficient order, and firing every night an eight o’clock gun,
to apprise the natives that we were not sleeping upon our posts, we
commenced taking in pepper, and so continued for three or four days,
the Malays appearing very friendly.

“On Monday, February 7, 1831, early in the morning, while we were
at breakfast, my old and tried friend, Po Adam, a native well-known
to traders on this coast, came on board in a small canoe from his
residence at Pulo Kio, in order to proceed on shore in the ship’s
boat, which shortly after started with the second officer, four seamen
and myself. On our way Po Adam expressed much anxiety for the safety
of the ship, and also an entire want of confidence in Mr. Knight, the
first officer, remarking in his broken English, ‘_he no look sharp, no
understand Malay-man_.’

“On being asked if he _really_ believed his countrymen would dare to
attack the ship, he replied in the affirmative. I then observed to
the second officer that it certainly behooved us, the boat’s crew,
who were more exposed than any of the ship’s company, to be on our
guard against surprise and proposed when we next came on shore to come
prepared to defend ourselves.

“When we reached the landing we were kindly received, as usual. The
natives were bringing in pepper very slowly; only now and then a
single Malay would make his appearance with a bag upon his head, and
it was not until nearly three o’clock in the afternoon that sufficient
was collected to commence weighing; and between three and four o’clock
the first boat started from the shore. The natives were, however,
still bringing in pepper, with a promise of another boat load during
the day. This was a mere subterfuge to keep us on shore.

“As the boat was passing out of the river, I noticed her stop off one
of the points, and believing it to be the object of her crew to steal
pepper, and secrete it among the neighboring high grass, two men were
sent down to look after them. They soon returned, remarking that there
appeared to be nothing wrong. The ship lay about three-fourths of a
mile from the shore, and between the scale-house and the beach there
was a piece of rising ground, so that standing at the scales we could
just see the ship’s topgallant yards.

“I had observed a vessel in the offing in the course of the day,
apparently approaching this place or Soosoo, and, being at leisure, I
walked towards the beach to ascertain if she had hoisted any national
colours. The instant I had proceeded far enough to see our ship’s
hull, I observed that the pepper-boat, which was at this time within
two or three hundred feet of her, appeared to contain a large number
of men. My suspicions were instantly aroused, and I returned to
question the men who were sent down to the mouth of the river.

“I was then informed, for the first time, that as they had approached
the boat six or seven Malays jumped up from the high grass and rushed
on board her; and as she passed out of the river, they saw her take
in from a passing ferry boat about the same number; but as they all
appeared to be ‘_youngsters_,’ to use their own expression, they did
not think the circumstance of sufficient importance to mention it.
They were reprimanded for such an omission of duty, accompanied with
the remark:

“‘Your youngsters, as you call them, will, I suspect, be found old
enough in iniquity, to capture the ship, if once admitted upon her
decks.’

“The words of Po Adam, that morning, that ‘_Mr. Knight no look sharp,
no understand Malay-man_,’ now struck me with their full force and a
fearful foreboding, and I appealed to Mr. Barry, the second officer,
for his opinion as to what would be Mr. Knight’s probable course,
remarking ‘_he certainly will not disobey his orders_.’ Mr. Barry,
however, expressed his fears as to the result, remarking he knew so
well the contempt which Mr. Knight entertained for these people,
‘that he will probably conclude your precautions to be altogether
unnecessary, and that he can allow them to come on board with
impunity, without your ever knowing anything of the circumstances, and
no harm will come of it.’

“This view of the case certainly did not allay my anxiety, and I
observed, ‘if your predictions prove correct, the ship is taken,’ but
concluding it to be altogether too late for us on shore to render any
assistance to the ship, and still clinging to the hope that Mr. Knight
would, after all, be faithful to his trust, Mr. Barry and two men were
directed to walk towards the beach without any apparent concern, and
watch the movements on board.

“I should have remarked, that on my own way up the beach, just before
I passed near a tree under the shade of which a group of ten or twelve
natives were apparently holding a consultation, all conversation
ceased. The object of this meeting, as I was afterwards informed, was
to consider whether it would be better to kill us _before_ attempting
to take the ship or _afterwards_; and the conclusion arrived at was
to be sure of the ship _first_, the killing of us appearing to them
as easy, to use their own simile, as cutting off the heads of so many
fowls; the manner _how_ had already been decided, the time _when_ was
all there was to be considered—a native having been already appointed,
and the price fixed for the assassination of each of the boat’s crew.
The price set upon my life was one thousand dollars, for the second
officer’s, five hundred dollars, and for each of the seamen one
hundred dollars.

“As soon as Mr. Barry has reached an elevation where he could fairly
see the ship’s hull, he turned short round, and walked, without
hastening his steps, directly towards me—passing me, however, without
discovering any emotion, and said, ‘there is trouble on board, sir.’

“To the question ‘What did you see?’ he replied, ‘men jumping
overboard.’

“Convinced at once, of our own perilous situation, and that our escape
depended on extremely cautious and judicious management, I answered:

“‘We must show no alarm, but muster the men, and order them into the
boat.’

“We deliberately pushed off from the shore, the Malays having no
suspicion of our design, thinking it to be our intention, by our
apparently unconcerned manner, to cross the river for a stroll in the
opposite Bazar as was our frequent custom. The moment the boat’s stern
had left the bank of the river, Po Adam sprang into her in a great
state of excitement, to whom I exclaimed:

“‘What! do you come, too, Adam?’

“He answered: ‘You got trouble, Captain, if they kill you, must kill
Po Adam first.’

“He suggested we should steer the boat as far as possible from the
western bank of the river, which was here not more than one hundred
feet wide, when I remarked to the boat’s crew:

“‘Now spring to your oars, my lads, for your lives, or we are all dead
men.’

“Adam exhibited the utmost alarm and consternation, encouraging my men
to exert themselves, and talking English and Acheenise both in the
same breath—now exclaiming in Acheenise, ‘di-yoong di yoong hi!’ And
then exhorting them to ‘pull, pull strong!’

“As we doubled one of the points we saw hundreds of natives rushing
towards the river’s mouth, brandishing their weapons, and otherwise
menacing us. Adam, upon seeing this, was struck with dismay, and
exclaimed ‘if got blunderbuss will kill all,’ but luckily they were
not provided with that weapon.

“A ferry-boat was next discovered with ten or twelve Malays in her,
armed with long spears, evidently waiting to intercept us. I ordered
Mr. Barry into the bows of the boat, with Adam’s sword, to make
demonstrations, and also to con the boat in such a manner as to run
down the ferry boat, which I concluded was our only chance to escape.
With headlong impetuosity we were rushing towards our antagonist,
nerved with the feeling of desperation. With profound stillness and
breathless anxiety we awaited the moment of collision.

“The points of their pikes could be plainly seen. Already I observed
Mr. Barry with his sword raised, as if in the act of striking. But
when we had approached within some twenty feet, her crew appeared
completely panic-struck, and made an effort to get out of our way.
It was, however, a close shave—so close that one of their spears was
actually over the stern of our boat. The Malays on the bank of the
river appeared frantic at our escape, and ran into the water to their
armpits in their endeavors to intercept us, waving their swords above
their heads, and shouting at the top of their voices.

“We had now time calmly to contemplate the scene through which we
had just passed, with hearts, I trust, grateful to God for his
kind protection and safe guidance in the midst of its perils. This
was the part of their plan, otherwise well conceived, which was
defective—they had taken no measures to prevent our escape from the
shore, never doubting for a moment that our lives were at their
disposal, unprotected and defenceless as they saw us.

“Our doomed ship lay tranquilly in the roads, with sails furled, and
a pepper boat alongside, with a multitude of natives in every part of
her, and none of her own crew visible, with the exception of a man on
the top gallant yard, and some ten or twelve heads just even with the
surface of the water.

“The pirates were conspicuous in every corner of the _Friendship’s_
deck, waving their cloths, and making signals of success to the
natives on shore. My first impulse was to propose boarding her but I
was very properly reminded that if the ship with her full armament had
been taken with so many of her crew on board, we could do nothing in
our unarmed state toward her recapture.

“We continued, however, to row towards the ship until we could see
the Malays pointing her muskets at us from the quarterdeck, and they
appeared also to be clearing away the stern chasers, which we knew to
be loaded to their muzzles with grape and langrage. At this moment,
three large Malay boats crowded with men were seen coming out of
the river, directly towards us. While debating whether it would not
be best to proceed at once to Muckie for assistance, which was some
twenty-five miles distant, where we knew two or three American vessels
were laying, heavy clouds commenced rolling down over the mountains,
and the rumbling of distant thunder, and sharp flashes of lightning
gave sure indications that the land wind would be accompanied with
deluges of rain, rendering the night one of Egyptian darkness, in
which it would be almost impossible to grope our way safely along
shore towards that place.

“Under these discouraging prospects, Po Adam advised us to proceed to
Pulo Kio, and take shelter in his fort. Submitting ourselves almost
wholly to his guidance, we at once pulled away for that place, but
before we reached it his heart failed him, and he represented his
fort as not sufficiently strong to resist a vigorous assault, and he
would not therefore be responsible for our lives, but suggested we
should proceed to Soosoo, some two miles further from the scene of
the outrage. We accordingly proceeded for Soosoo river, which we had
scarcely entered when Po Adam’s confidence again forsook him, and he
advised us not to land. We therefore only filled a keg with water from
the river and came out over the bar, intending to make the best of our
way to Muckie.

“The night now came on dark and lowering, and just as we left Soosoo
river, the land wind, which had been some time retarded by a strong
sea breeze overtook us, accompanied with heavy thunder and torrents
of rain, which came pelting down upon our unprotected heads. Sharp
flashes of lightning occasionally shot across the gloom, which
rendered the scene still more fearful. We double manned two of the
oars with Mr. Barry and Po Adam, and I did the best I could to keep
the boat’s head down the coast, it being impossible to see any
object on shore, or even to hear the surf by which we could judge
our distance from it. Having proceeded in this way until we began to
think ourselves near North Tallapow, off which was a dangerous shoal,
it became a matter of concern how we should keep clear of it. We
frequently laid upon our oars and listened, to ascertain if we could
hear it break. Directly we felt the boat lifted upon a high wave,
which we knew must be the roller upon this shoal, which passing, broke
with a fearful crash some three or four hundred feet from us.

“Having thus providentially passed this dangerous spot in safety, the
weather began to clear a little, and here and there a star appeared.
The off shore wind, too, became more steady and the rain ceased.
We ripped up some gunny bags which were left in the boat, and tied
them together for a sail, under which we found the boat bounded along
quite briskly; we therefore laid in our oars, all hands being quite
exhausted, and proceeded in this way the rest of the distance to
Muckie, where we arrived at about one o’clock, A. M.

“We found here the ship _James Monroe_, Porter, of New York, brig
_Governor Endicott_, Jenks, of Salem, and brig _Palmer_, Powers,
of Boston. On approaching the roads, we were first hailed from the
_Governor Endicott_, and to the question ‘What boat is that?’ the
response was ‘the _Friendship_, from Qualah Battoo,’ which answer
was immediately followed with the question ‘Is that _you_, Capt.
Endicott,’ ‘Yes,’ was the answer, ‘with all that are left of us.’

“Having communicated with the other vessels, their commanders repaired
on board the _Governor Endicott_, when it was instantly concluded to
proceed with their vessels to Qualah Battoo, and endeavor to recover
the ship. These vessels were laying with most of their sails unbent,
but their decks were quickly all life and animation, and the work
of bending sails proceeded so rapidly that before 3 o’clock all the
vessels were out of the roads and heading up the coast towards Qualah
Battoo. It was our intention to throw as many of the crews of the
_Governor Endicott_ and _Palmer_ on board the _James Monroe_, as could
be prudently spared, she being the largest vessel, and proceed with
her directly into the roads, and lay her alongside the _Friendship_,
and carry her by boarding—the other vessels following at a short
distance. But as soon as we had completed all our arrangements, and
while we were yet several miles outside the port, the sea breeze
began to fail us, with indications that the land wind, like that of
the day before, would be accompanied with heavy rain. We, however,
stood on towards the place until the off shore wind and rain reached
us when all three vessels were obliged to anchor and suspend further
operations until the next morning.

“Before dark I had taken the bearings of the ship by compass,
intending, if circumstances favored it, to propose a descent upon her
during the night; but the heavy rain continued the most part of it and
we were baffled in that design.

“Daylight found us upon the decks of the _Monroe_, watching for the
ship, which, in the indistinct light, could not be discovered in the
roads. The horizon in the offing was also searched unsuccessfully with
our glasses, but we at last discovered her close in shore, far to the
westward of her late anchorage, inside a large cluster of dangerous
shoals, to which position, as it then appeared, the Malays must have
removed her during the night. One thing was certain we could not carry
out our design of running her alongside in her present situation; the
navigation would be too dangerous for either of the ships. At this
moment we saw a prou, or Malay trading craft, approaching the roads
from the westward, with which I communicated, hired a canoe, and sent
a messenger on shore to inform the Rajahs that if they would give the
ship up peaceably to us we would not molest them, otherwise we should
fire both upon her and the town.

“After waiting a considerable time for the return of the messenger,
during which we could see boats loaded with plunder passing close in
shore from the ship, this delay seemed only a subterfuge to gain time,
and we fired a gun across the bows of one of them. In a few minutes
the canoe which we had sent on shore was seen putting off. The answer
received, however, was one of defiance: ‘that they should not give her
up so easily, but we might take her _if we could_.’

[Illustration: The _Glide_ (See Chapter XXVI)]

[Illustration: The _Friendship_]

“All three vessels then opened fire upon the town and ship, which was
returned by the forts on shore, the Malays also firing our ship’s guns
at us. The first shot from one of the forts passed between the masts
of the _Governor Endicott_, not ten feet above the heads of the
crew, and the second struck the water just under her counter. This
vessel had been kedged in close to the shore within point blank shot
of the fort, with springs upon her cable, determined on making every
gun tell. The spirited manner in which their fire was returned soon
silenced this fort, which mounted six six-pounders and several small
brass pieces.

“It appeared afterward, by the testimony of one of my crew, who was
confined here, that the firing was so effectual that it dismounted
their guns and split the carriages. The other two forts, situated at
a greater distance from the beach, continued firing, and no progress
was made towards recapturing the ship, which, after all, was our only
object. It was now between three and four o’clock, and it was certain
that if the Malays were allowed to hold possession of the ship much
longer, they would either get her on shore or burn her. We then held
a council of war on board the _Monroe_, and concluded to board her
with as large a force as we could carry in three boats; and that the
command of the expedition should, of course, devolve upon me. At this
juncture the ship ceased firing. We observed a column of smoke rise
from her decks abreast the mainmast, and there appeared to be great
confusion on board. We subsequently ascertained that they had blown
themselves up by setting fire to an open keg of powder from which they
were loading the guns after having expended all the cartridges.

“The ship lay with her port side towards us, and, with the intention
of getting out of the range of her guns, we pulled to the westward
at an angle of some 33 deg., until we opened her starboard bow, when
we bore up in three divisions for boarding, one at each gangway, and
the other over the bows. We were now before the wind, and two oars
in each boat were sufficient to propel them; the rest of the crew,
armed to the teeth with muskets, cutlasses and pistols, sat quietly
in their places, with their muskets pointed at the ship as the boats
approached.

“The Malays now, for the first time, seemed to comprehend our
design, and as we neared the ship, were struck with consternation,
and commenced deserting her with all possible dispatch, and in the
greatest confusion. The numerous boats of all descriptions alongside
were immediately filled, and the others jumped overboard and swam for
the shore. When we reached the ship, there was to all appearances no
one on board. Still fearing some treachery, we approached her with
the same caution, and boarded her, cutlasses in hand. Having reached
her decks and finding them deserted, before we laid aside our arms a
strict search was made with instructions to cut down any who should be
found and give no quarter. But she was completely forsaken—not a soul
on board.

“Her appearance, at the time we boarded her defies description;
suffice it to say, every part of her bore ample testimony to the
violence and destruction with which she had been visited. That
many lives had been sacrificed her blood-stained decks abundantly
testified. We found her within pistol shot of the beach, with most
of her sails cut loose and flying from the yards. Why they had not
succeeded in their attempts to get her on shore, was soon apparent.
A riding turn on the chain around the windlass, which they were not
sailors enough to clear, had no doubt prevented it. There had been
evidently a fruitless attempt to cut it off. While we were clearing
the chain, and preparing to kedge the ship off into the roads, the
Malays, still bent upon annoying us and unwilling to abandon their
prize, were seen drawing a gun over the sandy beach upon a drag
directly under our stern, which, being fired, it jumped off the
carriage and was abandoned. It was the work of a short time for us
to kedge the ship off into deep water and anchor her in comparative
security alongside the other ships in the roads.

“The next morning a canoe was seen approaching the _James Monroe_ from
Pulo Kio, with five or six men in her whom we took, as a matter of
course, to be natives; but we were soon hailed from that ship, and
informed that four of the number were a part of our own crew. Their
haggard and squalid appearance bespoke what they had suffered. It
would seem impossible that in the space of four days, men could, by
any casualty, so entirely lose their identity. It was only by asking
their names that I knew any of them. They were without clothing
other than loose pieces of cotton cloth thrown over their persons,
their hair matted, their bodies crisped and burnt in large, running
blisters, besides having been nearly devoured by musquitos, the poison
of whose stings had left evident traces of its virulence; their flesh
wasted away, and even the very tones of their voices changed. They had
been wandering about in the jungle without food ever since the ship
was taken. Their account of the capture of the ship was as follows:

“When the pepper-boat came alongside, it was observed by the crew that
all on board her were strangers. They were also better dressed than
boatmen generally, all of them having on white or yellow jackets, and
new ivory-handled kreises. No notice appeared to be taken of these
suspicious circumstances by the mate, and all except two men, who were
left to pass up pepper, were admitted indiscriminately to come on
board. One of the crew, named Wm. Parnell, who was stationed at the
gangway to pass along pepper, made some remark, to call the mate’s
attention to the number of natives on board, and was answered in a
gruff manner, and asked if he was afraid. ‘No,’ replied the man, ‘not
afraid, but I know it to be contrary to the regulations of the ship.’

“He was ordered, with an oath, to pass along pepper and mind his own
business. The natives were also seen by the crew sharpening their
kreises upon the grindstone which stood upon the forecastle, and a
man named Chester, who was subsequently killed while starting pepper
down the fore hatch, asked them in pantomime what so many of them
wanted on board and was answered in the same way, that they came off
to see the ship. He was heard by one of the crew to say, ‘we must look
out you do not come for anything worse,’ at the same time drawing a
handspike within his reach.

The Malays had distributed themselves about the decks in the most
advantageous manner for an attack, and at some preconcerted signal
a simultaneous assault upon the crew was made in every part of the
ship. Two Malays were seen by the steward to rush with their kreises
upon Mr. Knight, who was very badly stabbed in the back and side,
the weapons appearing to be buried in his body up to their very
hilts. Chester at the fore hatch, notwithstanding his distrust and
precaution, was killed outright and supposed to have fallen into the
hold. The steward at the galley was also badly wounded, and was only
saved from death by the kreis striking hard against a short rib, which
took the force of the blow. Of the two men on the stage over the
ship’s side, one was killed and the other so badly wounded as to be
made a cripple for life.

“The chief officer was seen, after he was stabbed, to rush aft upon
the starboard side of the quarterdeck and endeavor to get a boarding
pike out of the beckets abreast the mizzen rigging, where he was met
by Parnell to whom he exclaimed, ‘_do your duty_.’ At the same instant
two or three Malays rushed upon him and he was afterwards seen lying
dead near the same spot, with a boarding pike under him.

“On the instant the crew found the ship attacked, they attempted to
get aft into the cabin for arms but the Malays had placed a guard
on each side of the companionway which prevented them; they then
rushed forward for handspikes and were again intercepted; and being
completely bewildered, surprised and defenceless, and knowing that
several of their shipmates had already been killed outright before
their eyes, and others wounded, all who could swim plunged overboard,
and the others took to the rigging or crept over the bows out of
sight. The decks were now cleared and the pirates had full possession
of the ship.

“The men in the water then consulted together what they should do,
concluding it certain death to return to the ship; and they determined
it would be the safest to swim on shore, and secrete themselves in the
jungle; but as they approached it they observed the beach about Qualah
Battoo lined with natives, and they proceeded more to the westward
and landed upon a point called Ouj’ong Lamah Moodah nearly two miles
distant from the ship. On their way they had divested themselves of
every article of clothing, and they were entirely naked at the time
they landed.

“As it was not yet dark, they sought safety and seclusion in the
jungle, from whence they emerged as soon as they thought it safe, and
walked upon the beach in the direction of Cape Felix and Annalaboo,
intending to make the best of their way to the latter place, with
the hope of meeting there some American vessel. At daylight they
sought a hiding-place again in the bushes, but it afforded them only
a partial protection from the scorching rays of the sun from which,
being entirely naked, they experienced the most dreadful effects.
Hunger and thirst began also to make demands upon them; but no food
could anywhere be found. They tried to eat grass, but their stomachs
refused it. They found a few husks of the cocoanut, which they chewed,
endeavoring to extract some nourishment from them but in vain.

“They staid in their hiding-place the whole of this day, and saw
Malays passing along the beach but were afraid to discover themselves.
At night they pursued their journey again, during which they passed
several small streams, where they slaked their thirst but obtained
no food. About midnight they came to a very broad river, which they
did not venture to cross. The current was very rapid, and having been
thirty-six hours without food of any kind, they did not dare attempt
swimming it. Here, then, they were put completely _hors de combat_;
they found for want of food their energies were fast giving way, and
still they believed their lives depended on not being discovered.

“Since further progress towards Annalaboo appeared impossible, they
resolved to retrace their steps, endeavor to pass Qualah Battoo in
the night without being discovered and reach the hospitable residence
of Po Adam, at Pulo Kio. They accordingly took up their line of march
towards that place, and reached, as they supposed, the neighborhood of
Cape Felix by the morning, when they again retreated to the jungle,
where they lay concealed another day, being Wednesday, the day of the
recapture of the ship, but at too great distance to hear the firing.
At night they again resumed their journey, and having reached the spot
where the Malays landed in so much haste when they deserted the ship,
they found the beach covered with canoes, a circumstance which aroused
their suspicions but for which they were at a loss to account.

“They now concluded to take a canoe as the most certain way of passing
Qualah Battoo without discovery, and so proceed to Pulo Kio. As they
passed the roads, they heard one of the ship’s bells strike the hour,
and the well-known cry of ‘_All’s Well_,’ but fearing it was some
decoy of the natives, they would not approach her but proceeded on
their way, and landed at Pulo Kio, secreting themselves once more in
the jungle, near the residence of Po Adam until the morning, when four
naked and half-famished white men were seen to emerge from the bushes
and approach his fort with feeble steps. As soon as recognized they
were welcomed by him with the strongest demonstrations of delight;
slapping his hands, shouting at the top of his lungs, and in the
exuberance of his joy committing all kinds of extravagances. They
now heard of the recapture of the ship, and the escape of the boat’s
crew on shore, who, it had never occurred to them, were not already
numbered with the dead.

“Having refreshed themselves (being the first food they had tasted in
seventy-two hours), they were conveyed by Adam and his men on board
the _James Monroe_ in the pitiful condition of which we have before
spoken.

“In the course of the latter part of the same day, another canoe,
with a white flag displayed, was observed approaching the fleet from
the direction of Qualah Battoo, containing three or four Chinamen
who informed us that four of our own men, two of whom were wounded,
one very severely, were at their houses on shore, where their wounds
had been dressed and they had been otherwise cared for; and that we
could ransom them of the Rajahs at ten dollars each. To this I readily
agreed, and they were soon brought off to the ship in a sampan, and
proved to be Charles Converse and Gregorie Pedechio, seamen, Lorenzo
Migell, cook, and William Francis, steward.

“Converse was laid out at full length upon a board, as if dead,
evidently very badly wounded. The story of the poor fellow was a sad
one. He, with John Davis, being the two tallest men in the ship, were
on the stage over the side when she was attacked. Their first impulse
was, to gain the ship’s decks, but they were defeated in this design
by the pirates who stood guard over the gangway and making repeated
thrusts at them. They then made a desperate attempt to pass over the
pepper-boat, and thus gain the water, in doing which they were both
most severely wounded. Having reached the water, Converse swam round
to the ship’s bows and grasped the chain, to which he clung as well
as he was able, being badly crippled in one of his hands, with other
severe wounds in various parts of his body. When it became dark, he
crawled up over the bows as well as his exhausted strength from the
loss of blood would permit, and crept to the foot of the forecastle
stairs, where he supposed he must have fainted, and fell prostrate
upon the floor without the power of moving himself one inch further.

“The Malays believing him dead, took no heed of him, but traveled
up and down over his body the whole night. Upon attempting to pass
over the boat, after being foiled in his endeavor to reach the ship’s
decks, a native made a pass at his head with his ‘_parrung_,’ a weapon
resembling most a butcher’s cleaver, which he warded off by throwing
up his naked arm, and the force of the blow fell upon the outerpart of
his hand, severing all the bones and sinews belonging to three of his
fingers, and leaving untouched only the fore finger and thumb. Besides
this he received a kreis wound in the back which must have penetrated
to the stomach, for he bled from his mouth the most part of the night.
He was likewise very badly wounded just below the groin, which came so
nearly through the leg as to discolor the flesh upon the inside.

“Wonderful, however, to relate, notwithstanding the want of proper
medical advice, and with nothing but the unskillful treatment of three
or four shipmasters, the thermometer ranging all the time, from 85
to 90 deg., this man recovered from his wounds, but in his crippled
hand he carried the marks of Malay perfidy to his watery grave, having
been drowned at sea from on board of the brig _Fair America_, in the
winter of 1833-4, which was, no doubt, occasioned by this wound which
unfitted him for holding on properly while aloft.

“The fate of his companion Davis, was a tragical one. He could not
swim, and after reaching the water was seen to struggle hard to gain
the boat’s tackle-fall at the stern, to which he clung until the
Malays dropped the pepper boat astern, when he was observed apparently
imploring mercy at their hands, which the wretches did not heed, but
butchered him upon the spot.

“Gregory was the man seen aloft when we had cleared the river,
cutting strange antics which we did not at the time comprehend. By
his account, when he reached the fore topgallant yard, the pirates
commenced firing the ship’s muskets at him, which he dodged by getting
over the front side of the yard and sail and down upon the collar of
the stay, and then reversing the movement. John Masury related that
after being wounded in the side, he crept over the bows of the ship
and down upon an anchor, where he was sometime employed in dodging the
thrusts of a boarding pike in the hands of a Malay, until the arrival
of a reinforcement from the shore when every one fearing lest he
should not get his full share of plunder, ceased further to molest the
wounded.

“The ship, the first night after her capture, according to the
testimony of these men, was a perfect pandemonium, and a Babel of
the most discordant sounds. The ceaseless moaning of the surf upon
the adjacent shore, the heavy peals of thunder, and sharp flashings
of lightning directly over their heads, the sighing of the wind in
wild discords through the rigging, like the wailings of woe from the
_manes_ of their murdered shipmates; and all this intermingled with
the more earthly sounds of the squealing of pigs, the screeching of
fowls, the cackling of roosters, the unintelligible jargon of the
natives, jangling and vociferating, with horrible laughter, shouts
and yells, in every part of her, and in the boats alongside carrying
off plunder, their black figures unexpectedly darting forth from
every unseen quarter, as if rising up and again disappearing through
the decks, and gambolling about in the dark, must have been like a
saturnalia of demons.

“It is the general impression that Malays, being Musselmen, have a
holy horror of swine, as unclean animals; the very touch of which
imposes many ablutions and abstinence from food for several days
together, but, according to the testimony of my men, it was perfectly
marvellous how they handled those on board our ship, going in their
pens, seizing, struggling, and actually embracing them, until they
succeeded in throwing every one overboard.

“The morning succeeding the capture of the _Friendship_, affairs on
board appeared to be getting to be a little more settled, when several
Chinamen came off and performed the part of good Samaritans, taking
the wounded men on shore to their houses, and dressing their wounds
with some simple remedies which at least kept down inflammation. In
doing this, however, they were obliged to barricade their dwellings,
to guard them against the insulting annoyances of the natives.

“Qualah Battoo bazar that day presented a ludicrous spectacle. Almost
every Malay was decked out in a white, blue, red, checked, or striped
shirt, or some other European article of dress or manufacture stolen
from the ship, not even excepting the woolen table cloth belonging
to the cabin, which was seen displayed over the shoulders of a
native, all seemingly quite proud of their appearance, and strutting
about with solemn gravity and oriental self-complacency. Their novel
and grotesque appearance could not fail to suggest the idea that a
tribe of monkeys had made a descent upon some unfortunate clothing
establishment, and each had seized and carried off whatever article of
dress was most suited to his taste and fancy.

“The ship was now once more in our possession, with what remained of
her cargo and crew. She was rifled of almost every movable article
on board, and scarcely anything but her pepper remaining. Of our
outward cargo every dollar of specie, and every pound of opium had, of
course, become a prey to them. All her spare sails and rigging were
gone—not a needle or ball of twine, palm, marling spike, or piece
of rope were left! All our charts, chronometers and other nautical
instruments—all our clothing and bedding, were also gone; as well as
our cabin furniture and small stores of every description. Our ship’s
provisions, such as beef, pork and most of our bread, had, however,
been spared. Of our armament nothing but the large guns remained.
Every pistol, musket, cutlass, and boarding pike, with our entire
stock of powder, had been taken.

“With assistance from the other vessels we immediately began making
the necessary preparations to leave the port with all possible
dispatch, but owing to much rainy weather we did not accomplish it for
three days after recapturing the ship, when we finally succeeded in
leaving the place in company with the fleet bound for South Tallapow,
where we arrived on the fourteenth of February. When we landed at
this place with the other masters and supercargoes, we were followed
through the streets of the bazar by the natives in great crowds,
exulting and hooting, with exclamations similar to these:

“‘Who great man now, Malay or American?’ ‘How many man American dead?’
‘How many man Malay dead?’

“We now commenced in good earnest to prepare our ship for sea. Our
voyage had been broken up, and there was nothing left for us but to
return to the United States. We finally left Muckie, whither we had
already proceeded, on the twenty-seventh of February, for Pulo Kio
(accompanied by the ship _Delphos_, Capt. James D. Gillis, and the
_Gov. Endicott_, Capt. Jenks), where I was yet in hopes to recover
some of my nautical instruments. With the assistance of Po Adam, I
succeeded in obtaining, for a moderate sum, my sextant and one of my
chronometers, which enabled me to navigate the ship. We sailed from
Pulo Kio on the fourth of March, and arrived at Salem on the sixteenth
of July.

“The intense interest and excitement caused by our arrival home may
still be remembered. It being nearly calm, as we approached the harbor
we were boarded several miles outside by crowds of people, all anxious
to learn the most minute particulars of our sad misfortune, the news
of which had proceeded us by the arrival of a China ship at New York
which we had met at St. Helena. The curiosity of some of our visitors
was so great that they would not be satisfied until they knew the
exact spot where every man stood, who was either killed or wounded.
Even the casing of the cabin, so much cut up in search of money or
other valuables, was an object of the greatest interest.

“But the feeling of presumptuous exultation and proud defiance
exhibited by the natives, was of brief duration. The avenger was
at hand. In something less than a year after this outrage, the
U. S. Frigate, _Potomac_, Com. Downes, appeared off the port of
Qualah Battoo, and anchored in the outer roads, disguised as a
merchantman. Every boat which visited her from the shore was detained
that her character might not be made known to the natives. Several
amusing anecdotes were told, of the fear and terror exhibited in
the countenances of the natives, when they so unexpectedly found
themselves imprisoned within the wooden walls of the _Potomac_,
surrounded by such a formidable armament, which bespoke the errand
that had attracted her to their shores. They prostrated themselves at
full length upon her decks, trembling in the most violent manner, and
appearing to think nothing but certain death awaited them.

“A reconnoitering party was first sent on shore, professedly for the
purpose of traffic. But when they approached, the natives came down
to the beach in such numbers that it excited their suspicions that
the frigate’s character and errand had somehow preceded her, and it
was considered prudent not to land. Having, therefore, examined the
situation of the forts and the means of defence, they returned to
the _Potomac_. The same night some 300 men, under the guidance of
Mr. Barry, the former second officer of the _Friendship_, who was
assistant sailing-master of the frigate, landed to the westward of the
place with the intention of surprising the forts and the town, but
by some unaccountable delay the morning was just breaking when the
detachment had effected a landing, and as they were marching along the
beach towards the nearest fort, a Malay came out of it, by whom they
were discovered and an alarm given.

“They pushed on, however, and captured the forts by storm after some
hard fighting, and set fire to the town which was burnt to ashes. The
natives, not even excepting the women, fought with great desperation,
many of whom would not yield until shot down or sabred on the spot.
The next day the frigate was dropped in within gunshot, and bombarded
the place, to impress them with the power and ability of the United
States to avenge any act of piracy or other indignity offered by them
to her flag.

“When I visited the coast again, some five months after this event, I
found the deportment of the natives materially changed. There was now
no longer exhibited either arrogance or proud defiance. All appeared
impressed with the irresistible power of a nation that could send such
tremendous engines of war as the _Potomac_ frigate upon their shores
to avenge any wrongs committed upon its vessels, and that it would
be better policy for them to attend to their pepper plantations and
cultivate the arts of peace, than subject themselves to such severe
retribution as had followed this act of piracy upon the _Friendship_.

“Perhaps, in justice to Po Adam, I ought to remark that the account
circulated by his countrymen of his conniving at, if not being
actually connected with this piracy (a falsehood with which they found
the means of deceiving several American shipmasters soon after the
affair), is a base calumny against a worthy man, and has no foundation
whatever in truth. The property he had in my possession on board the
ship, in gold ornaments of various kinds, besides money, amounting to
several thousand dollars, all of which he lost by the capture of the
ship and never recovered, bears ample testimony to the falsity of
this charge. His countrymen also worked upon the avarice and cupidity
of the king by misrepresentations of his exertions to recover the
ship, thereby preventing them from making him a present of her which
they pretended was their intention. His sable majesty, in consequence,
absolved every one of Po Adam’s debtors, all along the coast, from
paying him their debts. He also confiscated all his property he could
find, such as fishing-boats, nets and lines and other fishing tackle,
and appropriated the proceeds to his own use, so that Po Adam was at
once reduced to penury. All this was in accordance with commodore
Bieulieu’s account, upwards of two hundred years before, viz: ‘If they
ever _suspect_ that any one bears them an ill will, they endeavor to
ruin him by false accusations.’

“The king also sent a small schooner down the coast, soon after, to
reap further vengeance upon Po Adam. Arriving at Pulo Kio, while Adam
was absent, they rifled his fort of everything valuable and even took
the ornaments, such as armlets and anklets, off the person of his
wife. Intelligence having been conveyed to Po Adam of this outrage, he
arrived home the night before the schooner had left the harbor, and
incensed, as it was natural he should be, at such base and cowardly
treatment, he immediately opened a fire upon her and sunk her in nine
feet of water. She was afterwards fished up by the _Potomac_ frigate
and converted into firewood.

“We do not know if Po Adam is now living, but some sixteen years
since, we saw a letter from him to one of our eminent merchants,
Joseph Peabody, Esq., of Salem, Mass., asking for assistance from
our citizens and stating truthfully all the facts in his case. I
endeavored at the time, through our representative to Congress, to
bring the matter before that body but from some cause it did not
succeed, and the poor fellow has been allowed to _live_, if not _die_,
in his penury. We will, however, permit him to state his own case, in
his own language, which he does in the following letter, written at
his own dictation:

“‘Qualah Battoo, 7th October, 1841. Some years have passed since
the capture of the _Friendship_, commanded by my old friend, Capt.
Endicott.

“‘It perhaps is not known to you, that, by saving the life of
Capt. Endicott, and the ship itself from destruction, I became, in
consequence, a victim to the hatred and vengeance of my misguided
countrymen; some time since, the last of my property was set on fire
and destroyed, and now, for having been the steadfast friend of
Americans, I am not only destitute, but an object of derision to my
countrymen.

“‘You, who are so wealthy and so prosperous, I have thought, that, if
acquainted with these distressing circumstances, you would not turn a
deaf ear to my present condition.

“‘I address myself to you, because through my agency many of your
ships have obtained cargoes, but I respectfully beg that you will
have the kindness to state my case to the rich pepper merchants of
Salem and Boston, firmly believing that from their generosity, and
your own, I shall not have reason to regret the warm and sincere
friendship ever displayed towards your Captains, and all other
Americans, trading on this Coast....

“‘Wishing you, Sir, and your old companions in the Sumatra trade, and
their Captains, health and prosperity, and trusting that, before many
moons I shall, through your assistance, be released from my present
wretched condition, believe me very respectfully,

“‘Your faithful servant,

“(Signed) ‘PO ADAM’ (in Arabic characters).”

CHAPTER XX

EARLY SOUTH SEA VOYAGES

(1832)

Fifty years ago two English missionaries in the Fijis wrote a book in
which they said that the traffic in sandalwood, tortoise-shell and
beche-de-mer among those islands “has been, and still is chiefly in
the hands of Americans from the port of Salem.” No corner of the Seven
Seas seems to have been too hostile or remote to be overlooked by the
shipmasters of old Salem in their quest for trade. The first vessels
of the East India Company to touch at the Fijis made a beginning of
that commerce a little more than a hundred years ago. No more than four
years after their pioneer voyage, however, Captain William Richardson
in the Salem bark _Active_ was trading with the natives and continuing
his voyage to Canton in 1811. During the next half century the
untutored people of the Fijis pictured the map of America as consisting
mostly of a place called Salem whose ships and sailors were seldom
absent from their palm-fringed beaches.

When Commodore Wilkes sailed on his exploring expedition of the
South Seas in 1840, his pilot and interpreter was Captain Benjamin
Vandeford of Salem. He died on the way home from this famous cruise
and Commodore Wilkes wrote of him: “He had formerly been in command
of various vessels sailing from Salem, and had made many voyages to
the Fiji Islands. During our stay there he was particularly useful in
superintending all trade carried on to supply the ship.” It was another
Salem skipper of renown, Captain John H. Eagleston, who carried one of
Commodore Wilkes’ vessels safely into port in 1840 among the Fijis by
reason of his intimate knowledge of those waters.

South Sea trading in that era was a romance of commerce, crowded with
perilous adventure. The brig _Charles Doggett_ of Salem, commanded
by Captain George Batchelder was lying off Kandora in the Fijis in
1833, when her crew was attacked by natives. Five of the seamen and
the mate were killed and most of the others wounded. On her way to
Manila in the same voyage the brig touched at the Pelew Islands and was
again attacked, in which affray a cabin boy was killed. The _Charles
Doggett_ had previously played a part in one of the most romantic
chapters of ocean history, the mutiny of the _Bounty_. In 1831, Captain
William Driver took the brig to Tahiti whither, a short time before,
the _Bounty_ colony had been transported by the British Government
from its first home on Pitcairn Island. There were eighty-seven of
these descendants of the original mutineers, and they had been taken
to Tahiti at their own request to seek a more fertile and habitable
island. They were an Utopian colony, virtuous, and intensely pious, and
soon disgusted with the voluptuous immoralities of the Tahitians, they
became homesick for the isolated peace of Pitcairn Island, and begged
to be carried back. When Captain Driver found them they besought him to
take them away from Tahiti, and he embarked them for Pitcairn Island,
fourteen hundred miles away. They had been gone only nine months and
they rejoiced with touching eagerness and affection at seeing their old
home again. Captain Driver went on his way in the _Charles Doggett_,
with the satisfaction of having done a kindly deed for one of the most
singularly attractive and picturesque communities known in modern
history.[44]

Another kind of sea-story was woven in the loss of the Salem ship
_Glide_ which was wrecked at Tacanova in 1832, after her company had
been set upon by natives with the loss of two seamen. The South Sea
Islands were very primitive in those days, and the narrative of the
_Glide_ as told by one of her crew portrays customs, conditions and
adventures which have long since vanished. The _Glide_ was owned by the
famous Salem shipping merchant Joseph Peabody, and commanded by Captain
Henry Archer. She sailed for the South Pacific in 1829, with a crew of
young men hailing from her home port. While at New Zealand a journal
kept on board records that “the presence of several English whale ships
helped to relieve the most timid of us from any feeling of insecurity
because of the treachery of the natives. Among the visitors on board
was a chief supposed to have been concerned in the massacre of the ship
_Boyd’s_ crew in the Bay of Islands. Some of the particulars of this
tragedy were related to us by foreigners resident at New Zealand. The
chief was a man of very powerful frame, and of an exceedingly repulsive
appearance. The cook said: ‘There, that fellow looks as though he could
devour any of us without salt.’”

[Illustration: Captain Driver]

[Illustration: Letter to Captain Driver from the “Bounty” Colonists
after he had carried them from Tahiti back to Pitcairn Island. (See
foot note on page 538.)]

A little later in the voyage the _Glide_ hit a reef and her captain
decided that she must be hove down and repaired. How small these
old-time vessels were is shown in this process of heaving them down,
or careening on some sandy beach when their hulls needed cleaning or
repairs. In the Peabody Museum of Salem there is a painting done by
one of the crew, of the Salem brig _Eunice_ which was hauled ashore
on a South Sea island. After stripping, emptying her and caulking her
seams, the crew discovered that it was a task beyond their strength to
launch her again. What did they do but assemble all the spare timber,
cut down trees and hew planks, and after incredible exertion build a
huge cask around the brig’s dismantled hull. It was more of a cylinder
than a cask, however, from which the bow and stern of the craft
extended. Lines were passed to her boats and the windlass called into
action as she lay at anchor close to the beach.

Then with hawsers rigged around the great cask, every possible purchase
was obtained, and slowly the brig began to roll over and over toward
the sea, exactly as a barrel is rolled down the skids into a warehouse.
In this unique and amazing fashion the stout _Eunice_ was trundled into
deep water. As soon as she was afloat, the planking which encased her
was stripped off and she was found to be uninjured. Then her masts were
stepped and rigged, her ballast, stores and cargo put aboard, and she
sailed away for Salem. The painting of this ingenious incident tells
the story more convincingly than the description.

The account of the heaving down of the _Glide_ is not so unusual as
this but it throws an interesting light upon the problems of these
resourceful mariners of other days. “To heave down the ship was an
undertaking requiring great caution and ability,” the journal relates.
“A large ship to be entirely dismantled; a large part of her cargo
to be conveyed ashore; a floating stage of spars and loose timbers
constructed alongside; ourselves surrounded by cannibals, scores
of which were continually about the vessel and looking as if they
meditated mischief. It was well for the _Glide_ that her captain not
only knew the ropes but had been a ship carpenter and could use an
axe. He had not, like many masters of vessels nowadays, climbed up to
the captain’s berth through the cabin window. He was fully equal to
this emergency.”

The ship, having been hove down without mishap, was made ready for
opening a trade in beche-de-mer, a species of sea slug, which was dried
and carried to China as a delicacy in high repute among the people of
that country. A safe anchorage was found, and the king of the nearest
tribe “made pliable” by numerous gifts after which a contract was made
with him for gathering the cargo. He assembled his people and set them
at work erecting on the beach the row of buildings needed for storing
and curing the sea slugs.

When this was done the warriors of nearby friendly tribes began to
appear in canoes, bringing their wives and children. They built huts
along the beach until an uproarious village had sprung up. Its people
bartered tortoise shell, hogs and vegetables for iron tools, and
whales’ teeth, and helped gather beche-de-mer in the shallow water
along the reefs. Two of the ship’s officers and perhaps a dozen of the
crew lived ashore for the purpose of curing the cargo. Their plant was
rather imposing, consisting of a “Batter House,” a hundred feet long by
thirty wide in which the fish was spread and smoked; the “Trade House”
in which were stored muskets, pistols, cutlasses, cloth, iron-ware,
beads, etc., and the “Pot House” which contained the great kettles
used for boiling the unsavory mess. In putting up these buildings the
king would make a hundred of his islanders toil a week on end for a
musket—and he kept the musket.

“The business aboard, the din of industry ashore, the coming and going
of boats and the plying of hundreds of canoes to and from the sea reef,
gave much animation to things,” writes the chronicler of this voyage of
the _Glide_.

“Indeed I could not but regard the scene, among islands so little
known to the world, as highly creditable to the commercial enterprise
of the merchants engaged in the trade. Where next, thought I, will
Salem vessels sail? North or south, around Good Hope or the Horn, we
find them, officered and manned by Salem men. The _Glide’s_ company
were thirty men, most of whom were young, strong and active, a force
sufficient with our muskets, pistols, cutlasses, etc., to resist any
attack from the natives. Though without a profusion of ornamental work,
the _Glide_ was a beautiful model, as strong as oak and ship carpenters
could make her. At anchor in the harbor of Miambooa, she had a warlike
appearance. Heavy cannon loaded with a cannister and grape shot
projected from the port holes on each side. In each top was a chest
of arms and ammunition. On deck and below, weapons of defense were so
arranged as to be available at short notice. Boarding nettings eight or
ten feet high were triced up around the ship by tackles, and whipping
lines suspended from the ends of the lower yardarms.”

Before the journal deals with the tragedy and loss of the _Glide_, the
author jots down such bits of information as this:

“One of the most powerful chiefs on this island (Overlau) at the time
of our visiting it, was Mr. David Whepley, an American, and, I believe,
a native of New Bedford, whence he had sailed some years before in a
whale ship. For some cause, on the arrival of the vessel here, he took
sudden leave and ultimately became distinguished among the natives. He
was a young man apparently about thirty years of age.”

The career of a trader in the South Seas three-quarters of a century
ago was enlivened by incidents like the following:

“When passing within a few miles of Pennrhyn’s Island, we noticed some
canoes filled with savages coming off to the ship. Wishing to procure
some grass for our live-stock, we hove to and awaited their approach.
Their numbers and strength made it prudent to put ourselves in a
defensive position; each man was armed and our cannon, loaded with
grape-shot, were run out at the port holes.

“Presently there were alongside fifty or sixty of the most repulsive
monsters that I ever beheld; very tall, of complexion unmixed black,
with coarse stiff hair like dog’s bristles, and their language, if
such it was, more resembling dogs barking than articulate speech.
Their whole aspect was truly terrific. They were not permitted to
come on board, but only to clamber up the sides of the vessel. The
ship’s channels fore and aft on both sides were filled with them. The
_Glide’s_ company was armed, yet our situation was very perilous.

“Whilst Captain Archer was selecting some articles of trade, a spear
was hurled at him by a savage standing in the larboard mizzen channels.
I stood within four or five feet of the captain, and saw the savage,
but his movement was so quick that I could not in season give the
alarm. The captain was leaning over the larboard hencoop, his back was
toward the savage, and but for a providential turning of his head, the
spear would have pierced his neck. As it was, it grazed his neck and
inflicted a slight wound.

“This seemed to be a signal for attack; the savages became exceedingly
clamorous. The captain commanded ‘Fire.’ It was a fearful order and
fearfully obeyed. Five or six savages, among them the one who had
hurled the spear, were shot and fell back with a death shriek into the
sea. Others were severely wounded by our boarding pikes, and cutlasses.
Two or three of the crew were slightly injured in keeping the natives
from the deck. Had the captain’s orders been a moment delayed, the
savages must have gained the better of us. As soon as the captain’s
order had been given I let go the weather main-brace. A six knot breeze
was blowing and the yards having been quickly rounded, the motion was
soon sufficient to embarrass the savages, and we were enabled to drive
them from the ship.

“As the _Glide_ moved on, we left them astern in the utmost confusion.
Their situation was truly pitiable. The sun had set; there was a heavy
sea, and the wind was freshening. They were five miles from their
island. Some were swimming about hither and thither to recover their
canoes which had been upset by the ship’s progress; some went soon
to the bottom, and others who had gained their canoes sat hideously
bemoaning the desolation around them. Their eyes rolled wildly as they
hurled their spears toward the ship, and they howled and gnashed their
teeth like so many fiends of darkness. We passed within a mile of the
island, and observed numerous fires kindled along the shore, probably
as beacons to guide back the natives who had attacked us.”

Captain Archer’s ship filled her hold with beche-de-mer and took it
to Manila, returning to the Fijis for a second cargo. Arriving once
more at the island of Overlau, the first and third officers with part
of the crew were sent in a boat to Lakamba, an island twenty-five
miles distant to conduct the traffic in beche-de-mer. Because of shoal
water the ship could not follow them and she carried on a trade at
her anchorage in tortoise shell and sandal wood. “Knowing that on
the completion of our second cargo,” reads the journal, “we were to
leave the Fijis, the party at Lakamba worked with zeal. The men aboard
ship were no less industrious. The armorer and his mate manufactured
knives, chisels, and other cutlery for exchange. The carpenter was busy
at his bench. Above some were repairing the rigging; on deck others
were mending sails, and making matting bags to pack beche-de-mer. The
sun shone not on a more faithful crew. The captain traded with the
natives when they came alongside, and directed all matters aboard. Thus
prosperously passed several weeks.

“We were frequently visited by David Whepley, the American chieftain
at Overlau; sometimes accompanied by two or three of his warriors. He
was usually dressed as a sailor and had with him a loaded rifle whose
good qualities were the main topic of his conversation. He also told us
much concerning his singular life, and his adopted people, over whom
he seemed to have great influence owing to his superior wisdom, and
the good terms existing between him and the powerful king of Bou. The
king of Bou sometimes visited us. When this old chief, whose complexion
was darkness visible out of which peered two deep-set glaring eyeballs
with a grizzly beard tapering to a point a foot below his chin, came
alongside in his large double canoe, the spectacle was impressive. This
canoe was of curious and imposing structure, able to hold a hundred or
more persons, with a triangular matting sail as large as the _Glide’s_
maintopsail. He was accompanied by forty or fifty vigorous black
warriors, huge but symmetrical in build, with elegant white turbans on
their heads, and ornaments hanging from their ears. They were girt with
some white tapas, and held massive clubs and spears which they use with
terrible effect.

“One morning about forty of the savages of Overlau brought some
fruit off the ship, ostensibly for trade. Only two or three of them
were allowed to come on board at a time. Nine or ten of the crew
were variously occupied in different parts of the ship. The armorer
and myself were at work together on the forecastle. In a short time
our suspicions were excited by seeing our visitors engaged in close
conversation among themselves, and counting the men, ‘_Rua_, _Tolo_,
_Va_, _Leema_, _Ono_, _Vetu_,’ etc. (one, two, three, four, five, six,
seven, etc.). The armorer was going aft to inform the captain of the
circumstances when our second officer, on looking over the ship’s side,
saw some savages busily passing up weapons to others standing in the
channels. The men aloft, having also perceived this manoeuvre, hurried
down on deck and discharged a volley of musketry over the heads of the
visitors which dispersed them. Some leaped into the sea, others into
their canoes, and swam or paddled ashore in great consternation.”

But the company of the _Glide_ were not to escape scot-free from the
hostility of the Fijians. A few days after the foregoing incident, the
second officer, carpenter, and six of the foremast hands were sent
ashore to cut an anchor-stalk of timber. As usual, the boat was well
supplied with arms and ammunition. A boy of the party was left in
charge of the boat on the beach, and the others went into the nearest
woods. Presently a score of natives appeared and tried to trade, but
the sailors were too busy to deal with them, whereupon they sauntered
off to the beach and began to annoy the lad who had been left behind.
Before long they were stealing articles from the boat and the young
sentinel raised an alarm.

“The men hearing the cry were making for the boat,” relates the diarist
of the _Glide_, “when the savages in a body rushed towards them. Our
sailors, levelling their loaded muskets, retreated backward to the
beach, avoiding with great difficulty the clubs and spears hurled
at them. Thus all but two reached the boat. One of these as he came
down to the water’s edge, imprudently discharged his musket, and was
instantly attacked and overpowered. He succeeded in throwing himself
into the water, and after swimming a few strokes was seen to lift his
head streaming with blood, and with his hand beckon feebly for the boat
which, amidst the excitement, had been shoved off into deep water. He
was followed by the savages, again attacked, dragged ashore and slain.
The other unfortunate man rushed from the woods, hewing his way with
the butt of his musket through the crowd of savages and fell dead on
the beach.

“Whilst the crew on board was busily engaged in washing decks, the
fearful war-cry of the natives fell upon our ears. David Whepley, who
was sitting with some members of his tribe upon the taffrail, cried
out, ‘There is trouble with your shipmates ashore.’ Seeing the flash
and hearing the report of the musket, I ran aft to give the alarm to
Captain Archer who hastened on deck and after scanning the beach with
the glass, ordered a boat away in which Whepley himself went.

“Our feeling may be imagined as we went over the ship’s side and
watched in silence the first boat making towards us, having on
board only six of the eight men who had left the ship. Who had been
left behind we knew not, until on a nearer approach one of the crew
exclaimed: ‘I do not see Derby or Knight.’[45]

“The lifeless bodies of the two men were found by the second boat’s
company lying on the beach stripped of their clothing and dreadfully
mangled. They were wrapped in garments, brought on board and laid out
upon the quarterdeck. About eleven o’clock of the same day they were
committed to the care of David Whepley, who carried them to his end of
the island and buried them. Although no funeral services were formally
held, yet in the hearts of all that looked upon the dead, and walked
the deck in sadness, were solemn thoughts of death and earnest hopes
that this severe and unexpected stroke might influence for good our
after lives.”

Not long after this tragedy the _Glide_ sailed for the island of
Miambooa, which was destined to be the scene of her loss. The story
of the wreck and the experience of the survivors among a tribe of
singularly friendly Fijis seems worthy a place in the history of Salem
seafarers.

“Every boat load of beche-de-mer that came off from the shore (at
Miambooa),” runs the story, “was greeted with joy, for it added
something to the cargo which was fast being completed. Friendly
relations existed between the natives and ourselves, so that the trade
was undisturbed. The ship was in good order and we were almost ready
to leave the islands. At evening the officers walked the quarterdeck
with lighter step, and the crew, well and happy, assembled upon the
forecastle which resounded with their mirth and songs. One of these
songs was ‘Home Sweet Home,’ and under a clear starlit sky, enjoying
after hard work the grateful ocean breeze, the inspiring chorus of this
song burst forth from our hearts, and recalled to memory long past and
distant scenes. Our shipmates ashore also caught our pealing chorus as
it floated over the still water to their ears and they sent it back to
the ship like an echo.

“On March 31, (1831), the sky began to lower, and sudden gusts of wind
blowing violently down the high land which eastward overhangs the town
of Bonne Rarah, caused the ship to careen and gave token of a coming
storm. The signal guns at their usual hour announced ‘all’s well,’ but
in the gloomy light the wind increased to hurricane force and after
making a gallant fight of it the _Glide_ dragged her anchors and was
driven on a reef. The crew got ashore in daylight, but after being
twenty-two months absent from port, was wrecked the _Glide_, one of the
stateliest ships that ever sailed from Salem.”

“Among those who left the ship in the same party with me,” wrote our
survivor, “was a young man who communicated to me some interesting
particulars of his life. His name was William Carey. He had sailed,
some years before, from Nantucket in the whale-ship _Oreno_, which
was wrecked near Turtle Island, one of the Fijis. The officers and
crew escaped from the wreck, but Carey, noticing a disturbance between
his shipmates and the natives, concealed himself, fearing the issue.
He remained in safe seclusion two or three days, not venturing to go
out lest he should suffer what he supposed to be and _what_ was, the
fate of his companions, and he stealthily crept from his concealment
in search of food. He was seen by a native, and, conscious of being
discovered, he seated himself on a rock, and turning his back toward
the savage, awaited the result in powerless despair. The native
approached him, bade him rise and conducted him to the Boore.[46] The
natives held an animated conference at which it was decided to spare
his life, and he was taken by the chief into his family, and ever
afterwards well provided for and kindly treated.

“Several years after the loss of the _Oreno_, the Salem ship _Clay_,
Captain Vandeford, of Salem, arrived at the same island. Carey’s
acquaintance with the language and customs of the natives enabled him
to render important services in the way of trade. After the departure
of the _Clay_ from the islands Carey shipped on board the brig _Quill_,
Captain Kinsman of Salem. With this vessel he remained until her cargo
was completed when he was induced to take a berth in the _Glide_. Thus
was he twice wrecked at the Fijis, and twice subjected to a residence
among the savages without meanwhile visiting home.

“In the course of two or three days after the wreck of the _Glide_, the
king permitted a part of the crew with several natives to go off to
the ship to get the salt provisions and bread. Fifty or sixty savages
were ransacking the wreck in every part, stripping the rigging from the
spars, unhinging the cabin doors, hacking timber to extract nails and
spikes, beating in barrels and hogsheads, dragging up our chests from
the forecastle, jabbering all the while like monkeys yet working with
the steady gravity of old caulkers. The sight was painful, yet their
eagerness to outdo each other in securing booty was amusing.

“In my chest was a small package of letters valuable to me alone, which
I was now, in my misfortune, especially desirous to keep. As I went
towards the chest to get them I was repulsed by a savage who raised
his club over my head and bade me begone or he would slay me. ‘_Sah-
lago, sah- senga, ne- lago, sah- moke._’ I desisted from my purpose,
and in a few minutes saw my chest with every token of home in it
tumbled over the ship’s side.

“Our beche-de-mer about half filled the hold and by the bilging of
the ship, had become a putrid mass. At the foot of the mainmast was
a barrel of cast iron axes whose position the natives had somehow
learned. Their desire for this tempting prize overcame their reluctance
to use the only means of securing it, and down they dove into the
loathsome mass at the risk of suffocation, often plunging in vain
several times and crawling back on deck covered with slime. One
native in diving came in contact with some mortar formed by a cask of
lime that was broken by the motion of the ship. Grasping a handful
he returned dripping with beche-de-mer and asked what the strange
substance was. ‘The white man’s bread,’ answered one of the crew. The
native took a large mouthful which well nigh strangled him and spat it
out with many wry faces and ludicrous motions amid the loud laughter of
his friends.

“Soon after the complete plundering of the ship, a council respecting
us was held in the Boore by the king, priests and warriors. It was
told me that on the arrival of the first boat’s company at Bonne
Rarah, the captain was thus questioned by the king. ‘Should Fijians be
cast ashore among your people, how would you treat them?’ ‘Kindly,’
was the reply. ‘Then,’ rejoined the king, ‘I will treat you kindly.
Go with your men to the Boore, and I will protect you.’ Nevertheless
the consultation caused us many misgivings. The king urged that our
services would be very valuable in showing them the use of muskets and
in repairing them, in making bullets, etc. One chief thought that we
should eat too much, and hence prudently suggested our being dispatched
at once. The high priest arose to give his judgment, which was awaited
with great interest. This man was very black, of monstrous size, and
most unpleasant to look at. He recommended that they make hogs of us,
alluding to the practice of killing these animals by blows on the head,
cooking and eating them. This advice was consistent with the reputation
of this priest. It was said that on the morning before the wreck of
the ship, he stood outside his hut yelling and writhing. The natives
declared that he shouted or bewitched the vessel ashore.

“After much discussion the better counsel of the king prevailed. The
decision was made known to us all by natives who ran and embraced us
crying ‘_Sambooloa booloa papalangi_.’ (The white men will not be hurt.)

“Soon after the breaking up of the council the king as a reassurance
of his favor, returned to us a few of our belongings. His method of
distribution showed either his supreme contempt for maritime rank or
a great error in valuation, for whilst to the crew generally he gave
garments or other things very needful and acceptable, upon Captain
Archer he bestowed with the utmost dignity and condescension a wornout
chart and a useless fragment of an old flannel shirt. The interest
of the king in our welfare constantly showed itself during our three
months’ residence at Bonne Rarah. Almost daily he looked in upon us
to learn our wants, and kept in his house for our sole use quantities
of tea, coffee and tobacco, which he distributed to us as need
required. If we met him in our walks about the village the salutations
‘_sah-andra, touronga-lib_,’ (welcome king), ‘_sah-andra papalangi_,’
(welcome white man), were amicably exchanged. There was withal about
him a dignity which well comported with his kingly character, and
showed that any violations of loyalty on the part of the natives or of
due respect on ours would not go unpunished.

“On the 28th of March, Captain Archer, Carey and two or three of our
men sailed in our boat by the king’s consent, to the island of Bou,
the capital of the Fijis. This, our first separation, though on many
accounts painful, was prudently planned, as a vessel was rumored to be
in the vicinity of Bou. After exchanging farewells and cheers of mutual
encouragement they started on their perilous adventure of sailing two
hundred miles in a small boat, exposed to many dangers, and, not the
least, attacks from savages.

“The singular use made of our clothing by the natives was often
ludicrous. Some wore our jackets buttoned down behind, others had on
our trousers wrong side before; one little fellow strutted along in a
ruffled shirt which had belonged to one of the officers, the ruffles
flaring on his back. Amongst the booty from the ship were many casks
of powder, of whose explosive nature the natives had little knowledge.
In one dwelling which we visited were a large number of kegs of powder
promiscuously placed on the floor, in the centre of which a fire was
kindled. The family was cooking their usual food, loose powder was
scattered about, and the proprietor himself, dressed in a sailor’s
jacket and with a Scotch cap on his head, sat on a keg of powder before
the fire, composedly smoking his pipe. We were somewhat amazed at the
sight. Indeed it may be doubted whether Damocles himself (whose famous
sword has become much blunted by its frequent use in illustration) had
more cause to be ill at ease at his feast than we had while paying
our native friend the civilities of the season. Our visit was not
protracted and we took leave before the dinner in preparation was ready
to be eaten.

“Occasionally we invited the king to share our provisions with us.
Whenever he was graciously pleased to accept the invitation he brought
with him a chair, plate, knife and fork (which he had obtained from
the ship), and after seating himself with becoming dignity, grasped
the knife in his left hand at such an angle that as soon as one piece
of food entered his mouth two fell back upon his plate. He also used
his fork as a toothpick, thus confirming the notion that this practice
comports better with the manners of savage than of civilized life.

“An odd volume of Shakespeare saved from the wreck, moved us to get up
a dramatic entertainment, the subject of which was the voyage of the
_Glide_. The play began with the captain engaged in shipping a crew
at a sailor’s boarding house, and holding forth all those eloquent
attractions usually set off by this class of men. Following this scene
were various mishaps of the voyage. The king and a crowd of natives
were seated before us on mats, and paid wondering attention, at a loss
to understand most of our sayings and doings until in the course of
the play, our arrival at the Fijis was pictured. The trafficking and
haggling with the natives was mimicked by an officer, playing the part
of a Fijian, and a common sailor as the trading master. Our drift was
more clearly comprehended now, and the progress of the action more
eagerly watched. And when the efforts of the natives to cheat us were
baffled, the sense of the whole matter flashed upon the audience, and
the Boore resounded with an uproar of savage delight. Through the
remainder of the play, involving the wreck and our hospitable reception
by the king, to whom and his people many compliments were paid by the
actors, we were followed with intense interest, and at the close by
expressions of royal satisfaction.”

The life of these islanders, as enjoyed by the crew of the _Glide_ was
a kind of tropical idyl, and the white trader had not yet blighted
them with rum and disease. Our sailor narrator wrote of this Eden into
which he was cast by a kindly fate: “One day, I was invited by a chief,
whom I had frequently visited, to accompany him on an excursion to the
interior of the island. We passed through a defile of the mountains,
and then struck into a well-beaten path leading through a rather
uneven region. The beautiful diversity of prospect from the higher
portions of our course, the mild air of the delightful day, birds of
brilliant plumage singing in the trees about us, the ripe and grateful
fruit easily procured, patches of sugar cane here and there pleasant
to see and taste, agreeable conversation, and the kind civilities of
natives whom we met, made our walk the source of intense and various
enjoyment.

“At sunset, we reached our journey’s end, a small village of about
thirty rudely constructed huts, and were heartily welcomed by the chief
of the tribe, who conducted us to his house, and soon set before us
a repast of baked pig, fruit and vegetables. In the evening, about
twenty natives, invited by our host, assembled, among whom were several
that I had seen on board the ship, and who recognized me with apparent
delight. A general conversation was held, relating, beside many other
topics, to the lost ship, the white men and their country, throughout
which it was gratifying to observe mutual kindness and courtesy
prevailed. The social party was highly interesting, occasionally
enlivened with good-humored mirth.

“In the morning we visited the Boore, which was similarly constructed,
though in every respect inferior, to that at Bonne Rarah. In the centre
of the apartment, where we held the religious ceremonies, which were
about to commence when we reached the building, was a very large bowl
of _angona_ or _avaroot_, of which, after being properly prepared, all
the natives assembled repeatedly partook, the intervals between the
potations being occupied by the priest pronouncing certain forms of
speech, to which the audience who were seated around the apartment, now
and then responded. Near the door were arranged in open sight, several
small, round blocks of wood, singularly ornamented with sennit and
carved work, to which the natives, as they came in and retired, made
low obeisance. As usual, no females were present. After the conclusion
of the service, which held an hour, we rambled about the village,
being kindly welcomed wherever we called; and, at length, returned to
the house of the hospitable chief, whence, having partaken of another
ample feast, and thanked our host for his kind attention, we departed
for Bonne Rarah. My excursion surprised both me and my shipmates, to
whom I gave an account of it, for we had previously heard much said of
the ferocity of the inland savages.

“In the latter part of April, a festival which we were kindly invited
to attend, was held at a village about forty miles from Bonne Rarah.
As the place, though on the island of Tacanova, was easiest of access
by sailing, my shipmates, it was determined, should accompany the king
in his double canoe; and I went with the chief with whom I had made
the inland excursion, in his single canoe. My patron I found to be
very loquacious, for, instead of our holding a pleasant conversation
together, he took upon himself to give me a lecture of what was to
be expected at the coming festival, diversifying his discourse with
‘_solib_,’ grand feast; ‘_leebo_, _leebo_,’ great, great; ‘_benacka_,
_benacka_,’ good, good; ‘_mungety-leelo_,’ plenty of provisions;
‘_pookah_,’ pigs; ‘_ouvie_,’ yams; ‘_aooto_,’ bread-fruit; ‘_boondy_,’
plantains, all which expressions, of course, deeply impressed my
imagination. Now and then he asked, whether I comprehended what he
said. Whatever was my response, he was none the less talkative, for
when he questioned me, ‘_sah gala guego_,’ do you understand? if I
answered ‘_sah- senga_,’ no, he labored long and hard to make his
meaning clear to my mind; and, if my reply was ‘_sah gala qu ow_,’ ‘I
do understand,’ he took courage from the honest confession, and at once
proceeded to give me more information.

“Soon after sunset, having landed at a small island midway between
Bonne Rarah and the place to which we were bound, we were well received
by the natives, who conducted us to their Boore, near the top of a
high hill, and presently furnished us with a generous repast. Here,
in less than an hour, the report of our arrival drew together many
savages, from whose evident astonishment, as they gazed upon me, I
conjectured that most of them had never seen a white man. Though we
were kindly invited to spend the night here, yet the curiosity of the
natives made them reluctant to retire from the Boore, and leave us to
sleep. Our singular situation, exposure to attacks from savages, over
whom kindness and ferocity hold rule by turns, and a consciousness
of our almost complete helplessness in such a case, occasioned in me
unquiet feelings, which, in truth, were not allayed by my dear friend,
the cannibal-chief, who frequently started up from his mat in great
excitement, and paced rapidly to and fro, with his war-club at his
side. The chief, at length, explained his singular conduct by telling
me that the savages designed to detain me on their island, and that he
had been anxiously devising some way to defeat their purpose. At his
suggestion, early in the morning, before the natives were stirring,
we silently left the Boore. I placed myself on the chief’s broad
shoulders, and held in one hand his war-club, and in the other his
canoe-paddle. Thus we stole softly down the steep hill, and when we
came to the beach, to our amazement, our canoe was no where to be seen.
The chief in the height of his vexation, brandished his club towards
the Boore, and poured forth a torrent of imprecation. Fearful that
his wild anger would soon arouse the natives, I looked about for the
canoe, and after careful search, found it secreted in a thicket near
the shore. We dragged it with difficulty to the water, hoisted our
three-cornered sail, and unmolested sailed away from the island.

“The sun had just risen, when we reached the landing-place, about a
mile from the spot chosen for the festival. We were among the first
comers. On the glittering waves at some distance, we saw hundreds of
canoes, some boldly advancing on the open sea, others more wary keeping
nearer the shore, and others now and then emerging into sight from
behind points of land and small islands, all bound, with their shouting
crews, for the general feast. They soon drew nearer and companies of
natives from neighboring islands and remote villages of Tacanova,
landed, in quick succession, at the beach, and made the hills echo with
their loud rejoicing.

“The plain selected for the feast was of many acres, covered with
liveliest verdure, surrounded by groves in which were many fruit trees,
and through it coursed brooks of pure water from adjacent highlands.
In its centre was a pyramid, apparently eight feet square at the
base, and tapering fifteen feet to a point of yams; and near it was
a smaller one, of _angona_ root. Hanging from gnarled branches of
ironwood trees, in another part of the field, were large quantities of
plantains, cocoanuts and bread-fruit. At one end were several pens,
filled with swine, of which there were at least a hundred, while the
men, profusely anointed with cocoanut oil, decorated with garlands of
beads and flowers, having on their heads very large white turbans and
around their waists elegant _maros_, were proudly strutting about the
place, displaying their fashionable attire; and the women were meekly
and laboriously cooking food.

“After the completed preparation, the different tribes of the numerous
assemblage arranged themselves on the grass in semicircles, about ten
paces in front of which were seated their respective king, chiefs and
priests, and between these dignitaries and the people were placed
their appointed provisions. The tribes all first drank _angona_, and
then, four or five natives, who attended each tribe as waiters, began
dividing the food, and another taking on a plantain leaf a parcel of
it, advanced to the master of the feast for the division, and asked
‘quotha,’ (for whom), when the name of some one being spoken aloud,
the person thus designated clapped his hands to make known his
position, and, being at once supplied with his portion, began eating it
with strips of bamboo sharpened on one edge and pointed. This ceremony
was repeated until all received their shares, reference being made to
rank in the order of distribution.

“In the afternoon two or three hundred young females, wearing girdles
of variegated grass and leaves, and necklaces of colored beads and
flowers, danced with liveliest and modest mien across the plain, loudly
singing and waving beautiful fans over their heads with easy uniformity
and grace; and then adroitly wheeling about, retraced their way, with
fans flourishing in the air, echoing song and sprightly dance.

“Next came forward a party of men, with hair frizzled in the highest
style of Fijian art, tapering beards, long _tapas_ of snowy native
cloth, contrasting with their own swarthy color and trailing on the
grass, their arms and faces shining with cocoanut oil, carrying
their stout and polished war-clubs; and, having arranged themselves
in two divisions, a pace apart, in open distance, they raised with
united voices a piercing war song, in time with which all made the
same impressive gestures. Now they bent back their bodies, elevating
their war-clubs in the air, in seeming preparation for attack; then,
with faces of determined courage, lifting higher their shrill, fierce
chorus, all leaped as one man onward, as if about to meet a furious
foe; and, at last, as if they had achieved a noble victory changing
to triumphal notes their yell of onset, with fiend-like grimaces they
danced wildly about in a thousand intricate and changeful steps.

“Our company, being requested by several chiefs, on the second day of
the festival, to amuse in our turn the assembled crowds, concluded to
perform a few military manoeuvres. We chose one of us captain, recalled
what we knew of soldiers’ tactics, and keeping time by a whistled
tune, in lack of better accompaniment, advanced in open order, and
charged bayonets; marched with muskets shouldered in lock-step and
solid column; formed a hollow square, and, finally wheeled into line.
All our movements were watched with eager eyes by the natives who
expressed their pleasure by loud plaudits, to which, of course, like
true soldiers, we gave slight heed, but with face unmoved, proceeded
through the manual exercise. When the order came ‘make ready—aim—fire,’
one of our muskets happening to be loaded, discharged its contents over
the heads of scores of seated savages, whose dismay now equalled their
previous approbation. Their earnest inquiries were hardly evaded by
assuring them that the piece was overcharged with powder.

“Towards evening the festival was concluded and the company began to
disperse. Those who had sailed to the place, started to the shore where
the canoes were secured and embarked in their little fleets in various
directions. Our party sailed in pleasant company with others bound for
Bonne Rarah. When we came within a few miles of this town, a burning
object was discovered on the water, which, on a nearer approach, we
found to be our beautiful ship to which fire had been set by the
savages who had remained behind for the sake of her iron work. This
was a sad conclusion to the enjoyment experienced at the festival. The
satisfaction that we had felt in looking out from our lonely abode upon
the hull of the _Glide_ was now taken away, and we felt more than ever
deprived of remembrances of home.

“A few weeks after the departure for Bou of Captain Archer, a large
double canoe arrived at Bonne Rarah, from which we learned that the
captain and his party were safe; that the brig _Niagara_, Capt. Brown,
of Salem, had been wrecked on a reef midway between Overlau and Bou and
that her crew were now staying at this latter island. Thus, the two
only vessels at the Fijis at this time were wrecked on the same day,
and in the same storm; and, very remarkably, no member of either crew
was afterwards slain by the natives.

“A part of the crew, with our second officer and Mr. Carey, left us on
the return of this canoe to Bou, thus reducing our number to sixteen
men. The separation seemed like bidding a mutual farewell for life,
narrowed the circle in which our spirits were chiefly sustained by
common sympathies and hopes, and deepened that feeling of loneliness
which previously parting with others had occasioned. To miss a single
face which we were wont to see, was deeply felt. The officers and
crew of the _Glide_, once held together by duties on shipboard,
and, afterwards by the still stronger community of suffering, were
dispersing in various directions whilst the lot of those who went away,
and of those who staid behind was enshrouded by the same cloud of dark
uncertainty. Some were about to suffer many more trials before reaching
home; and of the return of others to their native land there has yet
been no account.”

Strangely enough the journal of the wreck of the _Glide_ ends in this
abrupt fashion as if it were “to be continued in our next.” Curious
to learn in what manner the crew was rescued from its long exile in
the Fijis a search was begun among the log-books of other Salem ships
trading with those islands in the thirties. It was like hunting a
needle in a haystack, but the mystery was uncovered by the log of the
bark _Peru_ of Salem, Captain John H. Eagleston. Under date of June
7th, 1831, he wrote while among the Fiji Islands:

“Visited by a double canoe with about 50 natives, and a boat from a
town called Lebouka. Got 9 turtle out of the canoe, 3 for a musket. Was
informed by the chiefs in the canoe of Captain Archer of ship _Glide_
being cast away at Muddy-vater and Captain Brown in the _Niagara_ at
Bou, and that they had lost everything belonging to them. Which I had
every reason to believe as the canoe had several trunks and chests in
it. Got up the boarding netting. At 3 A. M. sent the whale boat up to
Bou, with the interpreter and 5 Lebouka men with a large present to
the king and a letter to Captain Brown which was from his wife. People
employed in putting arms in order.

“June 8—at 9 A. M. our boat returned from Bou with 2 boats in company
which belonged to the Brig. Took on board Captain Brown, Captain
Vandeford, officers and crew of the Brig (_Niagara_) and 2 officers and
2 men belonging to the _Glide_. Most of them belonging to Salem and in
all 15. Many of them without shirts to their backs or shoes to their
feet and some with a small part of a pair of trousers. On learning that
Captain Archer had left Bou a few days before for Goro, he being in
distress and suffering, I thought it my duty to send word to him that I
was here.

“June 10th. Archer with 2 of his men came from Bou.”

The whereabouts of the other men of the _Glide_ being discovered in
this way, they were later picked up and brought home, and their story
ended happily, as it should, for they deserved fairer prospects after
the ill-fortune which laid them by the heels in the Fijis as those
islands were in those far away years when the white man had first found
them out.

FOOTNOTES:

[44] The following letter was sent to Capt. Driver and signed by George
H. Nobbs, Teacher, and three of his fellow-voyagers of the company of
the Bounty:

“Pitcairns Island,
Sept. 3rd., 1830.

This is to certify that Captain Driver of the Brig Chas. Doggett of
Salem carried sixty-five of the inhabitants of Pitcairn Island from
Tahiti back to their native land during which passage Capt. Driver
behaved with the greatest kindness and humanity becoming a man and a
Christian, and as we can never remunerate him for the kindness we have
received, we sincerely hope that through the blessing of the Almighty
he will reap that reward which infallibly attends the Christian.”

[45] Joshua Derby and Enoch Knight, both of Salem. By a most
extraordinary coincidence, this Enoch Knight’s brother, who was first
officer of the ship _Friendship_ of Salem, Captain Endicott, was killed
in the same month of the same year by the natives of Qualah Battoo on
the coast of Sumatra when the vessel was captured by Malay savages.

[46] The council-house and temple.

CHAPTER XXI

THE LAST PIRATES OF THE SPANISH MAIN

(1832)

In December of 1906 died Captain Thomas Fuller, the oldest shipmaster
of Salem, in his ninety-fourth year. He was the survivor of an era on
the sea that seems to belong with ancient history. Before 1830 he was a
cabin boy in a brig of less than a hundred tons in the Cuban trade. At
eighteen he was sailing to South America and Europe, and his shipmates,
then in the prime of life, were veterans of the fighting privateers of
the War of 1812. He lived well into the twentieth century to tell the
tale of the last piracy of the Spanish Main, for he was one of the crew
of the brig _Mexican_. Captured by a swarthy band of cut-throats in
their “rakish, black schooner,” while on a voyage to Rio Janeiro, the
_Mexican_ carried the period of organized piracy down to the year 1832.
Six of the pirates were hanged in Boston three years later, and their
punishment finished for good and all, a peril to American shipping
which had preyed along the coast for two full centuries.

The _Mexican_ sailed from Salem on the 29th of August, 1832, commanded
by Captain John G. Butman and owned by Joseph Peabody. She was a brig
of two hundred and twenty-seven tons register, with a crew of thirteen
men, including able seaman Thomas Fuller, nineteen years old. There was
also on board as a seaman, John Battis of Salem, who before his death
many years after, wrote down his memories of the voyage at the request
of his son. His story is the most complete account of the famous
piracy that has come down to us, and in part it runs as follows:

“I was at Peabody’s store house on the morning of the day of sailing
and others of the crew came soon after. After waiting quite a while,
it was suggested that we go after the cook, Ridgely, who then boarded
with a Mrs. Ranson, a colored woman living on Becket street, so we set
out to find him. He was at home but disinclined to go, as he wished to
pass one more Sunday home. However, after some persuading he got ready,
and we all started out of the gate together. A black hen was in the
yard and as we came out the bird flew upon the fence, and flapping her
wings, gave a loud crow. The cook was wild with terror, and insisted
that something was going to happen; that such a sign meant harm, and he
ran about in search of a stone to knock out the brains of the offending
biped. The poor darkey did not succeed in his murderous design, but
followed us grumbling.

“At about ten o’clock we mustered all present and accounted for, and
commenced to carry the specie, with which we were to purchase our
return cargo, on board the brig. We carried aboard twenty thousand
dollars in silver, in ten boxes of two thousand dollars each; we also
had about one hundred bags of saltpetre and one hundred chests of tea.
The silver was stored in the ‘run’ under the cabin floor, and there was
not a man aboard but knew where the money was stored.

[Illustration: Captain Thomas Fuller, last survivor of the crew of the
brig _Mexican_ (Died Dec., 1906)]

[Illustration: The brig _Mexican_ attacked by pirates, 1832]

“At last everything being ready we hove anchor and stood out to sea
in the face of a southeast wind. As soon as we got outside and stowed
anchor we cleared ship and the captain called all hands and divided the
crew into watches. I was in the first mate’s watch and young Thomas
Fuller was in the captain’s watch. On account of the several acts of
piracy previously committed on Salem ships, Captain Butman undoubtedly
feared, or perhaps had a premonition of a like happening to his
vessel, for the next day while he was aft at work on the main rigging,
I heard the captain and first mate talking about pirates. The captain
said he would fight a long while before he’d give his money up. They
had a long talk together, and he seemed to be very much worried. I
think it was the next day after this conversation between Captain
Butman and Mr. Reed that I was at the wheel steering when the captain
came and spoke to me. He asked me how I felt about leaving home, and I
replied that I felt the same as ever, ‘all right.’ I learned afterwards
that he put this question to the rest of the crew.

“We sailed along without anything occurring worthy of note until the
night of the nineteenth of September. After supper we were all sitting
together during the dog-watch (this being between six and eight o’clock
P. M.) when all seemed bent on telling pirate yarns, and of course
got more or less excited. I went below at twelve o’clock and at four
next morning my watch was called. Upon coming on deck the first mate
came forward and said that we must keep a sharp look-out, as there was
a vessel ’round, and that she had crossed our stern and gone to the
leeward. I took a seat between the knight-heads, and had been sitting
there but a few minutes when a vessel crossed our bows, and went to the
windward of us.

“We were going at a pretty good rate at the time. I sang out and the
mate came forward with a glass, but said he could not make her out.
I told him he would see her to the windward at daylight. At dawn we
discovered a topsail schooner about five miles off our weather quarter,
standing on the wind on the same tack we were. The wind was light, at
south southwest, and we were standing about southeast. At seven o’clock
the captain came on deck and this was the first he knew of the schooner
being about us.

“I was at the wheel when the captain came out of the cabin; he looked
toward the schooner, and as soon as he perceived her, he reached and
took his glass and went into the main-top. He came down and closing
his glass, said: ‘That is the very man I’ve been looking for. I can
count thirty men on his deck.’ He also said that he saw one man on her
fore-top-gallant yard, looking out, and that he was very suspicious of
her. He then ordered us to set all sail (as the schooner didn’t seem to
sail very fast), thinking we might get away from her.

“While I was up loosing the main-royal I sat on the yard, and let them
hoist me up to the truck so that I could have a good look around. I saw
another vessel, a brig, to the eastward of us, way ahead and reported
it. The schooner had in the meanwhile sailed very fast, for when I
started in to come down she was off our beam. From all appearances and
her manner of sailing we concluded afterwards that she had a drag out.
We then went to breakfast, the schooner kept ahead of us, and appeared
to be after the other vessel. Then the captain altered the brig’s
course, tacking to the westward, keeping a little off from the wind to
make good way through the water to get clear of her if possible. After
breakfast when we came on deck the schooner was coming down on us under
a full press of sail. I noticed two kegs of powder alongside our two
short carronades, the only guns we had. Our means of defense, however,
proved utterly worthless, as the shot was a number of sizes too large
for the gun.

“A few moments before this, the schooner had fired a shot at us to
heave to, which Captain Butman was on the point of doing as I came on
deck. The schooner then hoisted patriotic colors (Columbian flag),
backed her main topsail, and laid to about half a mile to the windward.
She was a long, low, straight topsail schooner of about one hundred and
fifty tons burthen, painted black with a narrow white streak, a large
figure-head with a horn of plenty painted white; masts raked aft, and
a large main-top-mast, a regular Baltimore clipper. We could not see
any name. She carried thirty or more men, with a long thirty-two pound
swivel amidships, with four brass guns, two on each side.

“A hail came in English from the schooner, asking us where we were from
and where bound and what our cargo was. Captain Butman replied ‘tea and
saltpetre.’ The same voice from the schooner then hailed us for the
captain to lower a boat and come alongside and bring him his papers.
The boat was got ready and Captain Butman and four men—Jack Ardissone,
Thomas Fuller, Benjamin Larcom and Fred Trask—got in and pulled to the
schooner. When they started Captain Butman shook hands with the mate,
Mr. Reed, and told him to do the best he could if he never saw him
again.

“The _Mexican’s_ boat pulled up to the gangway of the schooner but
they ordered it to go to the forechains where five of the pirates
jumped into our boat, not permitting any of our men to go on board
the schooner and pushed off, ordering the captain back to the brig.
They were armed with pistols in their belts and long knives up their
sleeves. While at the schooner’s side, after getting into our boat,
one of the pirates asked their captain in Spanish what they should do
with us, and his answer was: ‘Dead cats don’t mew—have her thoroughly
searched, and bring aboard all you can—you know what to do with them.’
The orders of the captain of the schooner being in Spanish, were
understood by only one of the _Mexican’s_ crew then in the boat, namely
Ardissone, who burst into tears, and in broken English declared that
all was over with them.

“It was related by one of our crew that while the _Mexican’s_ boat
was at the forechains of the schooner, the brig before mentioned was
plainly seen to the eastward, and the remark was made to Thomas Fuller
that it would be a good thing to shove off and pull for the other
vessel in sight, to which proposition Fuller scornfully answered ‘I
will do no such things. I will stay and take my chances with the boys.’

“Our boat returned to the brig and Captain Butman and the five pirates
came on board; two of them went down in the cabin with us, and the
other three loafed around on deck. Our first mate came up from the
cabin and told us to muster aft and get the money up. Luscomb and I,
being near the companionway, started to go down into the cabin when
we met the boatswain of the pirate coming up, who gave the signal
for attack. The three pirates on deck sprang on Luscomb and myself,
striking at us with the long knives across our heads. A Scotch hat I
happened to have on with a large cotton handkerchief inside, saved me
from a severe wounding as both were cut through and through. Our mate,
Mr. Reed, here interfered and attempted to stop them from assaulting us
whereupon they turned on him.

“We then went down into the cabin and into the run; there were eight
of us in all; six of our men then went back into the cabin, and the
steward and myself were ordered to pass the money up which we did, to
the cabin floor, and our crew then took it and carried it on deck. In
the meantime, the pirate officer in charge (the third mate) had hailed
the schooner and told them they had found what they were looking for.
The schooner then sent a launch containing sixteen men, which came
alongside and they boarded us. They made the crew pass the boxes of
money down into the boat, and it was then conveyed on board the pirate.

“The launch came back with about a dozen more men, and the search began
in earnest. Nine of them rushed down into the cabin where the captain,
Jack Ardissone, and myself were standing. They beat the captain with
their long knives, and battered a speaking trumpet to pieces over his
head and shoulders. Seeing we could do nothing, I made a break to reach
the deck by jumping out of the cabin window, thinking I could get
there by grasping hold of the boat’s davits and pulling myself on deck.
Jack Ardissone, divining my movement, caught my foot as I was jumping
and saved me, as I should probably have missed my calculation and
gone overboard. Jack and I then ran and the pirates after both of us,
leaving the captain whom they continued to beat and abuse, demanding
more money. We ran into the steerage. Jack, not calculating the break
of the deck, soon went over into the hold and I on top of him. For some
reason the pirates gave up the chase before they reached the break
between the decks, or they would have gone down with us. By the fall
Jack broke two of his ribs. Under deck we had a clean sweep, there
being no cargo, so we could go from one end of the vessel to the other.

“The crew then got together in the forecastle and stayed there. We
hadn’t been there long before the mate, Mr. Reed, came rushing down,
chased by the boatswain of the pirate, demanding his money. The mate
then told Luscomb to go and get his money, which he had previously
given Luscomb to stow away for him in some safe place; there were two
hundred dollars in specie, and Luscomb had put it under the wood in the
hold. Luscomb went and got it, brought it up and gave it to the pirate,
who untied the bag, took a handful out, retied the bag, and went up
on deck and threw the handful of money overboard so that those on the
schooner could see that they had found more money.

“Then the pirates went to Captain Butman and told him that if they
found any more money which we hadn’t surrendered, they would cut all
our throats. I must have followed them into the cabin, for I heard
them tell the captain this. Previous to this, we of the crew found
that we had about fifty dollars, which we secured by putting into the
pickle keg, and this was secretly placed in the breast-hook forward.
On hearing this threat made to the captain I ran back and informed
the crew what I had heard, and we took the money out of my keg and
dropped it down the air-streak, which is the space between the inside
and outside planking. It went way down into the keelson. Our carpenter
afterwards located its exact position and recovered every cent of
it. Strange to say the first thing they searched on coming below was
the pickle keg. The search of our effects by the pirates was pretty
thorough, and they took all new clothes, tobacco, etc. In the cabin
they searched the captain’s chest, but failed to get at seven hundred
dollars which he had concealed in the false bottom; they had previously
taken from him several dollars which he had in his pocket, and his gold
watch, and had also relieved the mate of his watch.

“About noon it appeared to be very quiet on deck, we having been
between decks ever since the real searching party came on board. We all
agreed not to go on deck again and to make resistance with sticks of
wood if they attempted to come down, determined to sell our lives as
dearly as possible. Being somewhat curious, I thought I’d peep up and
see what they were doing; as I did so, a cocked pistol was pressed to
my head, and I was ordered to come on deck and went, expecting to be
thrown overboard. One took me by the collar and held me out at arm’s
length to plunge a knife into me. I looked him right in the eye and he
dropped his knife and ordered me to get the doors of the forecastle
which were below. I went down and got them, but they did not seem to
understand how they were to be used, and they made me come up and ship
them. There were three of them and as I was letting the last one in I
caught the gleam of a cutlass being drawn, so taking the top of the
door on my stomach, I turned a quick somersault and went down head
first into the forecastle. The cutlass came down, but did not find me;
it went into the companionway quite a depth. Then they hauled the
slide over and fastened it, and we were all locked below.

“They fastened the aft companionway leading down into the cabin,
locking our officers below as well. From noises that came from
overhead, we were convinced that the pirates had begun a work of
destruction. All running rigging, including tiller ropes, was cut,
sails slashed into ribbons, spars cut loose, ship’s instruments and all
movable articles on which they could lay their hands were demolished,
the yards were tumbled down and we could hear the main-boom swinging
from side to side. They then, as appears by later developments, filled
the caboose or cook’s galley, with combustibles, consisting of tar,
tarred rope-yarn, oakum, etc., setting fire to the same, and lowered
the dismantled mainsail so that it rested on top of the caboose.

“In this horrible suspense we waited for an hour or more when all
became quiet save the wash of the sea against the brig. All this time
the crew had been cooped up in the darkness of the forecastle, of
course unable to speculate as to what would be the next move of the
enemy, or how soon death would come to each and all of us.

“Finally at about three o’clock in the afternoon, Thomas Fuller came
running forward and informed us that the pirates were leaving the
ship. One after another of the crew made their way to the cabin and on
peering out of the two small stern windows saw the pirates pulling for
the schooner. Captain Butman was at this time standing on the cabin
table, looking out from a small skylight, the one means of egress the
pirates had neglected to fasten. We told him that from the odor of
smoke, we believed they had fired the brig. He said he knew it and
ordered us to remain quiet. He then stepped down from the table and for
several moments knelt in prayer, after which he calmly told us to go
forward and he would call us when he wanted us.

“We had not been in the forecastle long before he called us back, and
directed that we get all buckets under deck and fill them with water
from casks in the hold. On our return he again opened the skylight and
drew himself up on deck. We then handed him a small bucket of water,
and he crept along the rail in the direction of the caboose, keeping
well under the rail in order to escape observation from the schooner.
The fire was just breaking through the top of the caboose when he
arrived in time to throw several handfuls of water on top so as to
keep it under. This he continued to do for a long time, not daring to
extinguish it immediately lest the pirates should notice the absence of
smoke and know that their plan for our destruction had been frustrated.

“When the fire had been reduced to a reasonable degree of safety, he
came and opened the aft companionway and let us all up. The schooner,
being a fast sailer, was in the distance about hull down. The fire in
the caboose was allowed to burn in a smouldering condition for perhaps
a half-hour or more, keeping up a dense smoke. By this time the pirate
schooner was well nigh out of sight, or nearly topsails under, to the
eastward. On looking about us, we found the _Mexican_ in a bad plight,
all sails, halyards and running gear were cut, headsails dragging in
the water, and on account of the tiller ropes being cut loose, the brig
was rolling about in the trough of the sea. We at once set to work
repairing damages as speedily as possible and before dark had bent new
sails and repaired our running gear to a great extent.

“Fortunately through the shrewdness and foresight of Captain Butman,
our most valuable ship instruments, compass, quadrant, sextant, etc.,
had escaped destruction. It seems that immediately on discovering the
true character of the stranger, he had placed them in the steerage
and covered them with a quantity of oakum. This the pirates somehow
overlooked in their search, although they passed and repassed it
continually during their visit.

“The brig was then put before the wind, steering north, and as by the
intervention of Divine Providence, a strong wind came up, which before
dark developed into a heavy squall with thunder and lightning, so we
let the brig go before the fury of the wind, not taking in a stitch of
canvas. We steered north until next morning, when the brig’s course was
altered, and we stood due west, tacking off and on several courses for
a day or two, when finally a homeward course was taken which was kept
up until we reached Salem, October 12, 1832.”

Thus ends the narrative of able seaman, John Battis. If the valor
of Captain Butman and his crew be questioned, in that they made no
resistance, it must be remembered that they were under the guns of the
pirate which could have sunk the _Mexican_ at the slightest sign of
trouble aboard the brig. And although the decks of the _Mexican_ were
not stained with the slaughter of her crew, it is certain that her
captors expected to burn them alive. These nineteenth century pirates
were not a gentle brood, even though they did not always make their
victims walk a plank. In 1829, only three years before the capture of
the _Mexican_, the brig _New Priscilla_ of Salem was found apparently
abandoned within a day’s sail of Havana. The boarding party from the
ship that sighted her found a boy of Salem, a lad in his teens, spiked
to the deck, an act of wanton torture committed after every other soul
on board had been thrown overboard.

The capture of the pirates of the _Mexican_ was an extraordinary
manifestation of the long arm of Justice. A short time after the
return of the brig to Salem, the ship _Gleaner_ sailed for the African
coast. Her commander, Captain Hunt happened to carry with him a copy
of the _Essex Register_ which under a date of October, 1832, contained
the statement of Captain Butman in which he described in detail the
model, rig and appearance of the pirate schooner. Captain Hunt perused
the statement with lively interest and without doubt kept a weather
eye out for a rakish black schooner with a white streak, as he laid
his course to the southward. He touched at the island of St. Thomas
and while at anchor in the harbor saw a topsail schooner come in from
seaward. The stranger anchored nearby, and Captain Hunt sat on his
quarterdeck with a copy of the _Essex Register_ in his fist. The more
he studied, first the journal and then the schooner, the stronger
grew his suspicions that this was the sea robber which had gutted the
_Mexican_. There was her “large main-top-mast, but with no yards or
sail on it,” “her mainsail very square at the head, sails made with
split cloth and all new,” and “the large gun on a pivot amidships,” the
brass twelve-pounders gleaming from her side, and “about seventy men
who appeared to be chiefly Spaniards and mulattos.”

Having digested these facts, Captain Hunt went ashore and confided in
an old friend. These two invented an excuse for boarding the schooner,
and there on the deck they spied two spars painted black which had
been stolen from the _Mexican_. Captain Butman had told Captain Hunt
about these black spars before they parted in Salem. The latter at once
decided to slip his cable that night, take the _Gleaner_ to sea and run
down to the nearest station where he might find English war vessels.
There was a leak somewhere, for just before dark, the suspicious
schooner made sail and under a heavy press of canvas fled for the open
sea. As she passed within hailing distance of the Gleaner a hoarse
voice shouted in broken English that if he ventured to take his brig to
sea that night, he and his crew would have their throats slitted before
daylight.

Captain Hunt stayed in harbor, but his chagrin was lightened when he
saw a British frigate come in almost before the schooner had sailed
beyond sight. Manning a boat he hurried aboard the frigate, and told
her commander what he knew about the _Mexican_ and what he more than
guessed about the rakish schooner. The frigate put about and made sail
in chase but the pirate eluded her in the night and laid a course for
the African coast.

Shortly after this, the British war brig _Curlew_, Captain Henry D.
Trotter, was cruising on the west coast of Africa, and through the
officers of the frigate which had chased the pirate out off St. Thomas,
she received the story of the _Mexican_ and a description of the
schooner. Captain Trotter cogitated and recalled the appearance of a
schooner he had recently noticed at anchor in the River Nazareth on the
African coast where slavers were wont to hover. The description seemed
to fit so closely that the _Curlew_ sailed at once to investigate. When
she reached the mouth of the river, Captain Trotter with a force of
forty men in boats went upstream, and pulled alongside the schooner at
daybreak, ready to take her by storm. The pirates, however, scrambled
into their own boats, after setting fire to their schooner and escaped
to the shore where they took refuge in the swamps and could not be
found. A few days after a prize crew had been put aboard the schooner
she was accidentally blown up, killing two officers and two men of the
_Curlew_. The mysterious rakish schooner therefore vanishes from the
story with a melodramatic finale.

The stranded pirates meantime had sought the protection of a native
king, who promised to surrender them when the demand came from Captain
Trotter. After much difficulty, four of the pirates were taken in this
region. Five more were captured after they had fled to Fernando Po, and
the vigilance of the British navy swelled the list with seven more of
the ruffians who were run down at St. Thomas. The pirates were first
taken to England, and surrendered to the United States Government for
trial in 1834. On August twenty-seventh of that year the British brig
of war _Savage_ entered Salem harbor with a consignment of sixteen
full-fledged pirates to be delivered to the local authorities.

There was not a British flag in Salem, and the informal reception
committee was compelled to ask the British commander for an ensign
which might be raised on shore in honor of the visit. The pirates
were landed at Crowninshield’s Wharf and taken in carriages to the
Town Hall. Twelve of them, all handcuffed together, were arraigned at
the bar for examination, and “their plea of not guilty was reiterated
with great vociferation and much gesticulation and heat.” One of them,
Perez, had confessed soon after capture, and his statement was read.
The _Pinda_, for so the schooner was named, had sailed from Havana with
the intention of making a slaving voyage to Africa. When twenty days
out they fell in with an American brig (the _Mexican_), which they
boarded with pistols and knives. After robbing her, they scuttled and
burned an English brig, and then sailed for Africa.

“The hall was crowded to suffocation,” says the Salem _Gazette_ of that
date, “with persons eager to behold the visages of a gang of pirates,
that terror and bugbear of the inhabitants of a navigating community.
It is a case, so far as we recollect, altogether without precedent
to have a band of sixteen pirates placed at the bar at one time and
charged with the commission of the same crime.”

The sixteen pirates of the _Pinda_ were taken to Boston to await trial
in the United States Court. While in prison they seem to have inspired
as much sympathy as hostility. In fact, from all accounts they were as
mild-mannered a band of cut-throats as ever scuttled a ship. A writer
in the Boston _Post_, September 2, 1834, has left these touches of
personal description:

“Having heard a terrific description of the Spaniards now confined in
Leverett Street jail on a charge of piracy, we availed ourselves of
our right of _entree_ and took a birdseye glance at the monsters of
the deep but were somewhat surprised to find them small and ordinary
looking men, extremely civil and good-natured, with a free dash of
humor in their conversation and easy indifference to their situation.
The first in importance as well as in appearance is the Captain,
Pedro Gibert, a Castilian 38 years old, and the son of a merchant. In
appearance he did not come quite up to our standard for the leader of
a brave band of buccaneers, although a pleasant and rather a handsome
mariner.”

Captain Pedro Gibert is further described as having “a round face,
ample and straight nose, and a full but not fierce black eye.”
Francisco Ruiz the carpenter, was “only five feet three inches high,
and though not very ferocious of aspect will never be hung for his
good looks.” Antonio Farrer, a native African had several seams on his
face resembling sabre gashes. These were tattoo marks, on each cheek a
chain of diamond-shaped links, and branded on the forehead to resemble
an ornamental band or coronet. With a red handkerchief bound about his
head Antonio must have been ferocious in action.

In October, November, 1835, the trial was begun before Justice Joseph
Story and District Judge John Davis. The prisoners at the bar were
Captain Gibert, Bernado de Soto, first mate; Francisco Ruiz, Nicola
Costa, Antonio Farrer, Manuel Boyga, Domingo de Guzman, Juan Antonio
Portana, Manuel Castillo, Angel Garcia, Jose Velasquez, and Juan
Montenegro. Manuel Delgardo was not present. He had committed suicide
in the Boston jail some time before.

The pirates conducted themselves with a dignity and courage that showed
them to be no mongrel breed of outlaw, and their finish was worthy
of better careers. The trial lasted two weeks and the evidence, both
direct and circumstantial was of the strongest kind against seven of
the pirates. Five were acquitted after proving to the satisfaction of
the jury that they had not been on board the _Pinda_ at the time of the
_Mexican_ affair. Thomas Fuller of Salem was a witness, and he upset
the decorum of the court in a scandalous manner. When asked to identify
the prisoners he stepped up to one of them and shouted:

“You’re the scoundrel that was first over the rail and you knocked me
endwise with the flat of a cutlass. Take that.”

The impetuous young witness caught the prisoner on the jaw with a fist
like an oaken billet and drove him spinning across the room by way of
emphatic identification.

Before sentence was pronounced Captain Gibert rose and said in Spanish:

“I am innocent of the crime—I am innocent.” With that he presented
a statement drawn up by himself in a “remarkably well written hand”
which he desired might be read. After denouncing the traitor Perez,
who had turned State’s evidence, the captain stated that Delgardo,
before he had cut his throat in jail, had avowed his determination to
commit suicide because his extorted and false confession had involved
the lives of his companions. He alleged that his boatswain had been
poisoned by Captain Trotter on Fernando Po for denying the robbery, and
had exclaimed just before his death:

“‘The knaves have given me poison. My entrails are burning,’ after
which he expired foaming at the mouth.”

The first mate, de Soto, presented a paper addressed to the presiding
“Senor,” in which he protested his innocence, “before the tribunal,
before the whole universe, and before the Omnipotent Being.” He
went on to say that he was born at Corunna where his father was an
administrator of the ecclesiastical rank; that he had devoted himself
to the study of navigation from the age of fourteen, and at twenty-two
had “by dint of assiduity passed successfully through his examinations
and reached the grade of captain, or first pilot, in the India course.
He had shortly after espoused the daughter of an old and respectable
family.”

(At this point the clerk, Mr. Childs became much affected, shed tears
and was obliged for a time to resign the reading of the document to Mr.
Bodlam.)

The memorial of Bernado de Soto closed in this wise:

“Nevertheless I say no more than that they (the witnesses) have acted
on vain presumption and I forgive them. But let them not think it will
be so with my parents and my friends who will cry to God continually
for vengeance on those who have sacrificed my life while innocent.”

Manuel Castillo, the Peruvian, “who had a noble Rolla countenance,”
exclaimed with upraised hands:

“I am innocent in the presence of the Supreme Being of this Assembly,
and of the Universe. I swear it and I desire the court will receive my
memorial.”

The mate de Soto obtained a respite after telling the following story
which investigation proved to be true:

He had been master of a vessel which made a voyage from Havana to
Philadelphia in 1831, and was consigned to a “respectable house there.”
During the return voyage to Havana he discovered the ship _Minerva_
ashore on one of the Bahama reefs, and on fire. The passengers and crew
were clinging to the masts and yards. He approached the wreck at great
danger to himself and vessel and took off seventy-two persons, whom he
carried safely to Havana. He was presented with a silver cup by the
insurance office at Philadelphia as token of their appreciation of his
bravery and self-sacrifice. The ship _Minerva_ belonged in Salem, and
the records showed that the rescue performed by de Soto had been even
more gallant than he pictured it to the Court. For this service to
humanity he escaped the death penalty for his later act of piracy and
was subsequently pardoned by President Andrew Jackson.

When his comrades were called for sentence by Judge Story they showed
the same firmness, self-possession and demeanor of innocence which had
marked their conduct throughout the trial. The death sentence for the
crime of piracy on the high seas was announced in these words:

“The sentence is that you and each of you, for the crime whereof you
severally stand convicted, be severally decreed, taken and adjudged to
be pirates and felons, and that each of you be severally hung by the
neck until you be severally dead. And that the marshal of this District
of Massachusetts or his Deputy, do on peril of what may fall thereon,
cause execution to be done upon you and each of you severally on the
11th day of March next ensueing, between the hours of 9 and 12 of the
same day; that you be now taken from hence to the jail in Boston in the
District aforesaid, from whence you came; there or in some other safe
and convenient jail within the District to be closely kept until the
day of execution; and from thence to be taken on the day appointed for
the execution as aforesaid to the place aforesaid; there to be hanged
until you are severally dead. I earnestly recommend to each of you to
employ the intermediate period in sober reflection upon your past life,
and conduct, and by prayers and penitence and religious exercises to
seek the favor of Almighty God for any sins and crimes which you may
have committed. And for this purpose I earnestly recommend to you to
seek the aid and assistance of the Ministers of our holy religion of
the denominations of Christians to which you severally belong. And in
bidding you, so far as I can presume to know, an eternal farewell,
I offer up my earnest prayer that Almighty God may in his infinite
goodness, have mercy on your souls.”

The Salem _Gazette_ records that “after the sentence was read in
English by the Judge, it was translated into Spanish. Captain Gibert
did not waver a particle from his most extraordinary firmness of
manner, and the commanding dignity of all his movements. The muscles
of de Soto’s face quivered, and he seemed subdued. Castillo looked
the same high scorn with which he appears to have regarded the whole
proceeding. The rest gave no particular indication of their feelings.
The Judge ordered the prisoners to be remanded and they were ironed and
carried out of court, the crowd assembled being much excited by this
moving scene. Immediately after pronouncing the sentence Judge Story
left the court, appearing deeply affected by the painful duty which he
has evidently most reluctantly performed under the highest sense of
responsibility.”

The local chronicle thus closes the story of the piracy of the
_Mexican_, six months after the trial:

“Five of the pirates, the captain and four of the crew were executed
this morning at half past ten. We have already mentioned the temporary
reprieve of the mate de Soto on account of rescuing the crew of an
American vessel, and of Ruiz, the carpenter, on the score of insanity.
They were accompanied to the gallows by a Spanish priest, but none
of them made any confession or expressed any contrition. They all
protested their innocence to the last. Last night Captain Gibert was
discovered with a piece of glass with which he intended to commit
suicide. And one of the men (Boyga) cut his throat with a piece of tin,
and was so much weakened by loss of blood that he was supported to
the gallows, and seated in a chair on the drop when it fell. It would
seem from their conduct that they retained hopes of pardon to the last
moment.”

De Soto, the mate, who escaped the noose, returned to Cuba and was
for many years in the merchant marine in those waters. More than a
generation after the _Mexican_ affair, a Salem shipmaster, Captain
Nicholas Snell, had occasion to take a steamer that traded between
Havana and Matanzas. He had attended the trial of the pirates in Boston
and he recognized the captain of the steamer as de Soto. The former
buccaneer and the Salem captain became friends and before they parted
de Soto related the story of the _Pinda’s_ voyage. He said that he had
shipped aboard her at Havana where she was represented as a slaver.
Once at sea, however, he discovered that the _Pinda_ was a pirate, and
that he must share her fortune. He frankly discussed the capture of
the _Mexican_, and threw an unholy light upon the character of Captain
Gibert. The night after the capture the officers of the _Pinda_ were
drinking recklessly in the cabin, and one of the mates held up his
glass of rum and shouted: “Here’s to the squirming Yankees.”

The captain had taken it for granted that the crew of the _Mexican_
had been killed to a man before the brig was set on fire, and when
the truth came out, he was fairly beside himself. With black oaths
he sprang on deck, put his vessel about, and for two days cruised in
search of the _Mexican_, swearing to slay every man on board if he
could overhaul her in order to insure the safety of his own precious
neck. In truth, that gale with thunder and lightning before which
the _Mexican_ drove all that thick night was seaman John Battis’
“intervention of Divine Providence.”

When the word was brought to Salem that de Soto was to be found on the
Cuban coast, more than one Salem skipper, when voyaging to Havana or
Matanzas, took the trouble to find the former pirate and spin a yarn or
two with him over a cool glass and a long, black cigar.

CHAPTER XXII

GENERAL FREDERICK TOWNSEND WARD[47]

(_Leader of the Chinese “Ever Victorious Army”_)

The career of Frederick Townsend Ward flashes across the later day
history of Salem like a meteor. After a youth crowded with astonishing
adventure this merchant sailor and soldier of fortune became the
organizer and first leader of the “Ever Victorious Army” of the Chinese
Imperial forces in the Tai-ping Rebellion and was killed while storming
a walled city at the head of his troops in his thirtieth year. So
memorable were his services in this, the most disastrous armed conflict
of modern times, that to this day his ashes which rest at Sung Kiang,
are yearly honored by offerings of incense and solemn rites. A temple
and a shrine mark his burial place and by an edict of their Emperor the
Chinese people are commanded forever to worship and do reverence to the
spirit of this foreign soldier who died ten thousand miles away from
the New England seaport in which he was born and where his forefathers
sleep.

In this extraordinary man were focused at white heat the spirit of high
adventure and the compelling desire to seek far distant seas and play
the game of life for high stakes which had made Salem famous in her
golden age. Frederick Townsend Ward came of old seafaring stock which
had fought and sailed through one generation after another for more
than two centuries of Salem history. As far away as 1639 his ancestor,
Miles Ward, had been a commissioned officer at the siege of Louisburg
and had served with Wolfe at the storming of Quebec. His paternal
grandfather, Gamaliel Hodges Ward, of a family of fifteen children, had
one brother who served as a lieutenant in the American navy during the
War of 1812 and another who was naval officer of the Port of Salem.
This grandfather married Priscilla Lambert Townsend, thus uniting
three strains of militant seafaring blood. Captain Moses Townsend had
died in England as a prisoner of war during the Revolution, his son of
fifteen sharing his captivity as a patriotic seaman. On the records
of the Salem Marine Society, founded in 1766, are the names of nine
Wards and three Lamberts, and among the members of the Salem East India
Marine Society are to be found six Wards, six Hodges and a Townsend
all of whom must have doubled Cape Horn or the Cape of Good Hope as
shipmasters or supercargoes in order to qualify for admission to the
Society.

The father of Frederick Townsend Ward was a shipmaster and the son
born in 1831 passed his boyhood in Salem at a time when, although
the world-wide commerce had begun to ebb, the old town still had its
schools of navigation, its nautical instrument dealers, its shipyards
and ropewalks, its East India warehouses, its sailors’ lodging houses,
dance halls and slop shops crowded along the water front. The wharves
were still thronged with the activities of voyagers inbound from and
outbound to the uttermost parts of the earth. Although the railroads
had begun to build up the larger deep water ports and to sap the
life of such lesser ports as Salem, yet even in those days to be born
in Salem was to be born a sailor. The harbor still knew the fleets
which kept it in touch with scores of remote and romantic ports and
the marvelous tales of sea-tanned sailors tempted boyhood to dream of
exploring regions little known in books.

“The stick the schoolboy whittled shaped itself into a hull, a rudder,
a bowsprit or a boom. When in school he drew lines on his slate to
relieve the tedium of the rule of three, his sketches took form in
yards and shrouds and bob-stays. Give him a box of water colors and the
private signals of the East India merchants were its earliest products.
If he were too little to pull a pair of oars, he sculled a dory with
one, and he was no more than in breeches when he knew every ring-bolt,
block and gasket from cutwater to stern-post of the East Indiamen
discharging at Derby Wharf. If he could muster a few shillings, some
kindly mariner took charge of them as a venture and brought him home in
a twelve month or so their value trebled in nutmegs or pepper-corns or
gum copal. If, on leaving school, he did not ship before the mast he
tried to sail as cabin boy or ship’s clerk, or supercargo.

“When he had won his fight on the sea and came at last to live in
comfort on shore, if he built himself a den in which to doze and smoke
and read and chat, it was apt to be shaped like a ship’s cabin, to have
a swinging light overhead, transoms for bunks, and spyglass, compass
and barometer handy. The dust and cobwebs under the eaves of his attic
concealed camphor and cedar trunks stuffed with camel’s hair shawls,
pongee silks and seersucker suits. A log or two of sandalwood, brought
home for dunnage, might sizzle on the andirons and fill his house with
the spicy breath of Arabia.

“When a family returned from residence in foreign lands it was not
unusual for them to bring Chinese cooks, nurse maids and house
servants. The high-bred Parsee merchant with his lofty head-dress of
figured taffeta and buckram was no stranger in Salem, nor was the
turbanned Indian or Arab unknown.”

Such was the atmosphere in which young Frederick Townsend Ward was
reared and the spirit of the place lured his daring and romantic fancy
to dream of enterprises on blue water. He sailed in all kinds of small
craft about Salem harbor before he was in his teens and was noted as
the boldest lad and best seaman of the company of ardent friends whom
he chose as his companions. He sought and found employment at sea when
he was no more than fifteen years old and it sounds extraordinary in
these times to learn that at this age he went out on his first voyage
as second mate of the clipper ship _Hamilton_ bound from New York to
China. This stripling mate of fifteen years was placed in a position
of authority over his watch of rugged forecastle hands, some of whom
had been going to sea before he was born. Young Ward’s father was
known as a stern disciplinarian of the quarterdeck, and the son won a
reputation for the same quality of resourceful manhood. His captain
found him to be a smart, efficient and capable officer and so reported
him to the owners of the ship. At eighteen years of age he was first
mate of the ship _Russell Glover_ commanded by his father, on a voyage
from New York to San Francisco. In the latter port the ship was laid
up for a long time and young Ward was kept on board as ship-keeper.
His impetuous temperament could not long endure such monotony as this
and it was at San Francisco that he forsook the sea for a time to
lose himself in a haze of stormy adventures as a soldier of fortune
in Spanish American countries. It is known that during this period he
gained the friendship of Garibaldi, who for eleven years previous to
1848 had been fighting in behalf of the revolutionary cause of Brazil.

[Illustration: Frederick T. Ward.[signature]]

In 1851, at the age of twenty, the family records show that Ward was
sailing as first mate of a bark from San Francisco to Shanghai where
he left the ship and took a berth for a short time, on board one of
the vessels moored in the river to prevent opium smuggling. In the
following year he appears in the American merchant service once more as
first mate of the ship _Gold Hunter_ from Shanghai to Tehuantepec.

Upon reaching Nicaragua his restless temperament must have impelled
him to leave the quarterdeck, for somewhat later than this he joined
a filibustering expedition of William Walker. The tragic history of
this attempt to found an empire in Central America need not be told
in detail. If Walker had succeeded he would have been called a man of
military genius and a farsighted maker of destinies. He was shot by
order of a drum-head court martial at daybreak on September 3, 1860,
and the shattered remnants of his force were brought home to New York
in the United States ship _Wabash_.

Frederick Townsend Ward could not have remained long with Walker,
however, for from Central America he made his way into Mexico and is
said to have been offered a command in the Mexican army. His plans seem
to have gone all wrong, for he set out penniless and alone to cross
the country to lower California. Back in San Francisco once more he
took a berth as first officer of the clipper ship _Westward Ho_ of New
York. It is claimed that between 1854 and 1856 Ward was on the Crimea
as lieutenant in the French army, fighting against the Russians. His
sister has related that she was at boarding school during that period
and that Frederick called on her there to take his leave, as he told
her, “on his way to the Crimean War,” but the dates are conflicting.

This page of his life, like those immediately preceding it, is more or
less vague so far as details are concerned. It is certain, however,
that Frederick Townsend Ward was picking up here and there as a soldier
of fortune a knowledge of men and of military matters which were to
stand him in service when the grand chance offered. He landed at
Shanghai in the autumn of 1859, probably as first mate of an American
sailing ship. He was without money, without influence and without
prospects, but he was determined to carve a place for himself among the
Chinese people. The Tai-ping Rebellion had begun in 1851 and had raged
for eight years when Ward landed at Shanghai. This tremendous upheaval
which was to continue six more years, and to cost the lives of twenty
millions of Chinese, was threatening Shanghai and repeated attempts had
been made to invest and capture this great port of foreign commerce and
shipping.

The Imperial Government had been unable to make effective headway
against the vast hordes of rebels who had flocked to the standards
of the Rebel leader, who called himself the “Heavenly King of the
Great Dynasty of the Heavenly Kingdom.” By 1860 the Tai-pings had
swept across the populous and fertile regions of two of the three
watercourses of China and their chief end now was to regain the mastery
of the Yang-tsze Kiang. The destruction of property and population
within the three months since their sally from the captured metropolis
of Nanking, revived the stories told of the devastation caused by
Attilla and Tamerlane. In August of this year Shanghai was threatened
by a force of somewhat less than twenty thousand rebels and would have
been captured if it had not been protected by British and French troops
landed to protect the foreign interests of the port.

Ward was twenty-seven years old at this time and found his first
employment as an officer on one of the river steamers which plied up
and down the Yang-tsze. He showed his mettle while engaged in this
traffic, for a merchant of Shanghai who took passage on Ward’s steamer,
relates that she grounded and was in danger of capture by Chinese
pirates. The captain believed that destruction was so certain that he
talked of suicide. Ward took his place, put heart into the crew, stood
the pirates off and got the steamer afloat.

Meanwhile the foreign merchants and bankers of Shanghai were working
hand in hand with the natives to strengthen the defense of the city.
Large amounts of money were raised to equip gunboats and artillery and
a foreign contingent was drilling as a volunteer infantry force. Ward
obtained a commission as first officer of the American-built gunboat
_Confucius_, which was one of a flotilla organized to fight the rebels
on the water. His commander, Captain Gough, made young Ward acquainted
with an influential Chinese banker, Taki, who co-operated in behalf of
the Chinese Imperial Government with the foreign residents of Shanghai
who were furnishing arms and gunboats and money to attack the rebels.
Ward made a brilliant record as a fighting officer in this gunboat
service and won the admiration and confidence of this Taki, who was the
confidential adviser of Li Hung Chang, then fast coming into prominence
as the strong man of the demoralized Manchu Government at Peking.

Douglas, the British biographer of Li Hung Chang, has placed it to the
credit of the great Viceroy that he should have been astute enough to
recognize the ability of this young American wanderer who appeared upon
the scene from nowhere in particular. This writer states that Ward was
given employment as a military officer by the Association of Patriotic
Merchants of Shanghai “at Li’s instigation.” It is certain that Ward
did not let the grass grow under his feet. The Imperialists were in
desperate straits and were seeking foreign aid. Wasting no words,
Ward submitted a proposition to the Government through Taki, that he
would, for a large cash price, undertake the capture of Sung Kiang, the
capital city of the Shanghai district, and a great rebel stronghold,
a few miles up the Yang-tzse. Once in possession of Sung Kiang he
would make it his headquarters for operations by land and water, as a
diversion to draw the Tai-pings away from Shanghai.

This audacious proposition was accepted and funds were granted to make
a beginning. A company of one hundred foreigners was enlisted by Ward,
his recruits being picked from among the deserters and discharged
seamen and other desperate riffraff of the naval and merchant fleets.
With this handful of men hammered into some kind of discipline and well
armed, Ward led the way to the walls of Sung Kiang beyond which the
rebels were mustered in thousands. A desperate assault was made, but
Ward had no artillery and could not batter a breach in the great walls.
His men tried to take the place by a straight assault, but were beaten
back, the motley legion badly cut up, and compelled to straggle back to
Shanghai.

Ward paid off and discharged this company and recruited his next force
largely from among the native sailors of Manila who were always to
be found in Shanghai. With only two white officers and less than one
hundred men the American adventurer made a second attack on the rebel
stronghold and surprising the garrison at night managed to open one
of the gates and charge into the city. The Tai-pings were unable to
withstand the headlong assault of this small column and surrendered
the place, which was looted and the plunder given to the men who had
captured it.

Ward had carried out his contract and the Chinese Imperial Treasurer
paid him his price. He had established a base and a fortress to hold
and there were funds in his war chest. His success attracted many
capable foreign fighting men and his force grew until General Frederick
Townsend Ward was able to organize a formidable body of drilled
soldiers to which the name of Chang-Shing Kiun, or “Ever Victorious
Force,” was given by the Chinese. Its composition was heterogeneous,
but the energy, tact and discipline of the leader soon molded it into
something like a martial corps, able to serve as a nucleus for training
a native army.

“Foreigners generally looked down upon the undertaking and many of the
allied naval and military officers regarded it with doubt and dislike.
It had to prove its character by works, but the successive defeats of
the insurgents during the year 1862 at Kiangsu and Chehkiang clearly
demonstrated the might of those drilled men over ten times their number
of undisciplined braves.

“Soon after his first success General Ward decided to move against
Tsing-pu, a Rebel stronghold thirty miles from his base. The
flower of his fighting force for this expedition consisted of five
drill-masters and twenty-five deserters, mostly English, whom he had
secretly enlisted at Shanghai. Added to these was his small command
of Manila-men, now two hundred in number and a body of five thousand
Chinese from the highly paid, picked troops of the foremost Chinese
general, Li Ai Tang, a corps distinguished by the title of “Imperial
Braves.”[48]

In September of 1861 Ward launched this force against Tsing-pu,
which was garrisoned by two thousand rebels, who were commanded by
a brilliant English officer named Savage. The defense conducted by
this opposing soldier of fortune was so successful that Ward’s little
army was crumpled up by volleys of musketry poured from the walls and
totally defeated in an engagement which lasted not more than a quarter
of an hour. Half of the attacking force was killed or wounded and Ward
himself was five times hit by bullets. While he was under the surgeon’s
care in Shanghai he gave it out that his force had been disbanded
because the foreign allies set up the claim that he had been guilty of
a breach of neutrality. His enlistments and drills went on in secret,
however, and his chief supporter, Taki, put him in possession of
several batteries of artillery.

When Ward was allowed to leave the hospital he mustered all the men he
could find of his old corps and made ready to take the field. Again
he sallied out against Tsing-pu, but the second attack was even more
disastrous than the first. He lost his guns and his gunboats and many
of his men and returned to his headquarters at Sung Kiang beaten and
discredited. Taki, representing the Imperial Government, had lost
confidence in Ward as a soldier, but Li Hung Chang still had faith in
him and was ready to support him in further movements.

Ward’s funds were at a low ebb at this time, for Admiral Sir James
Hope, of the British Navy, put him under arrest and held him a close
prisoner on the flagship _Chesapeake_. The Admiral made an effort to
bring Ward to trial on the charge of recruiting deserters from the
British Navy, but the American soldier proved that he was a naturalized
subject of China and the Admiral had no other resource than to keep
this troublesome interloper a prisoner on board the flagship. He made
his escape by jumping overboard and swimming ashore. After a series of
thrilling adventures he once more returned to the task of recruiting
British deserters for his garrison at Sung Kiang.

The jealousy and animosities of the British and other foreign naval men
soon led Ward to change his tactics and he bent his efforts to recruit
a native force to be commanded by European officers and drilled in the
European school of arms. Neither the Imperial Government of China, nor
its European allies could take exceptions to these methods and Sung
Kiang became a military school for the training of the first modern
Chinese Army.

“On a personal inspection of the Camp of Instruction at Sung Kiang to
which he had been invited, Sir James Hope was well received by the
troops and reported favorably. He saw, for the first time in his life,
a large force of native Chinamen paraded in European uniforms and
showing themselves expert in European drill. In view of such results
and of the possibilities which they disclosed, he found it best to
wink at the harboring of a few deserters from his fleet, and Ward was
promised every facility in his new attempt.

“In the opening months of 1862 the time had come when the Allies were
ready to throw off the mask of nominal neutrality, and to take open
ground against the Rebellion. Humanity and civilization itself seemed
to demand it. The Tai-ping movement was a little past its zenith, but
still most disastrous to commerce and to the general interests of China
as most foreigners saw them. The compact between the Imperialists and
the Rebels had provided that the latter should not come within thirty
miles of Shanghai and that the Allies should not interfere within that
radius. It was limited to a year and the limit had expired. Ward at
this time commanded a force of ten thousand men. He seems at last to
have come to terms of perfect understanding with the authorities, both
native and foreign.

“On February 21, 1862, General Ward took the offensive with a thousand
men, supported by Admiral Hope and the French Admiral Protet, in a
movement to enforce the observances of the thirty-mile limit. This
movement involved many encounters and was a brilliant success. From it
Ward won great credit for his courage and strategic sense, together
with the high appreciation of both his naval supporters. Of the six
thousand Rebels who were expected to make of the fortified town they
were defending an impregnable fortress, a large part were captured and
turned over to the mercies of the Shanghai Imperialists, who proceeded
to decapitate them, with every circumstance of barbarity, in the public
square of the city. Ward succeeded in arresting the slaughter as soon
as it was brought to his knowledge.

“This victory was hailed with great enthusiasm, and earned for Ward’s
corps the compliments of an Imperial decree. Its numbers were doubled,
and Admiral Hope found it in his great heart to forgive his quondam
prisoner and to praise him warmly. In March, 1862, a memorial to the
British Consul-General from representative citizens of Shanghai, shows
that progress was making, though slowly, for the relief of the port.

“At this time Ward discovered that the Rebel leaders were contracting
for gunboats in the United States. On learning from him this fact, Li
Hung Chang made an effective protest to the American Minister, and
applauded the loyalty which prompted Ward’s information and which
defeated the Rebel plan. But gunboats and implements of war were a
necessity to both parties and Ward, through his brother who had joined
him in China, and through his father, now a ship broker in New York,
was in a position to supply the Imperialists with muskets, artillery
and river steamers, and this he did.

“On April 26th, an attack was planned on a strong walled town twenty
miles from Shanghai. A half-dozen armed steamers and transports
furnished by the Allies, together with thirty little Chinese gunboats,
moved up the river in support of Ward’s force, which consisted of three
battalions with howitzers, and of a body of three thousand Chinese
troops. The city fell and was looted, mainly, it was charged, by French
sailors.

“On May 6th, the English and French Admirals took their turn at the
work and the French Admiral Protet, universally esteemed, was killed.
A bronze statue commemorates the distinguished Frenchman at Shanghai,
and Imperial honors were accorded him in an edict commanding gifts
“to comfort the departed soul of the faithful,” and sacrifices to be
arranged by Li Hung Chang, “to the _manes_ of the French Admiral.” A
detachment of the “Ever Conquering Legion” was present at the military
mass celebrated in his honor at the Cathedral of Shanghai.

“On May 13th, Ward made his fourth attempt to capture Tsing-pu and
this time with complete success. No looting was permitted. Ward
received in hand the stipulated thirty thousand taels as the price of
this important capture, returning at the head of his victorious troops
to the Sung Kiang headquarters. He had now equipped his men with arms
bought from the English Army in India and with Prussian rifles. He had
been supported in this attack by English and French troops and by a
French gunboat carrying a heavy rifled gun which, after a three hours’
bombardment, effected a breach and let in his force. But his men were
later dislodged by an overwhelming Rebel horde, after a most creditable
defense.

“General Ward and his troops earned great distinction in an action
on May 19th. Ward’s ambition at this time seems to have been to lead
a corps of twenty-five thousand men of all arms, and to be empowered
by the Emperor to operate with a free hand, independently of English
and French Allies, and to be responsible directly to him. The London
_Times_, in a notice of his death, intimates that he had achieved this
object.

“At last, in August, 1862, he started out without support for a fifth
attack upon the stronghold of Tsing-pu. A reward was offered for the
first man to enter the city and a Manila-man, Macanaya, General Ward’s
devoted aid-de-camp, secured it. The ‘Legion’ succeeded at last in
taking and holding the town. Probably this was the action so feelingly
described by the one great captain among all the hosts enlisted under
the Rebel flag. He complains that Li Hung Chang was employing “devil
soldiers” against him, and found it necessary to march in person
against these “Foreign Devils” at the head of ten thousand picked men.
“Imagine it,” he says, “a thousand devils keeping in check my ten
thousand men! Who could put up with such a thing!”

“Ward’s relations with Taki were at this time most cordial, and they
were now joint owners of two American-built gunboats. With other
gunboats chartered by them, the banker and General Ward—he was now a
Chinese Admiral as well—fitted out an expedition against the river
pirates. Bombarding failed to dislodge them from their stockades, but
Ward disembarked a force and they fled before him.

“Ward’s success in disciplining the Chinese was beginning to stimulate
the Allies. The French in turn raised a native legion and put a French
officer at the head of it, and when an expedition was organized against
a force of Rebels threatening Ning Po, with the support of Captain
Rhoderick Dhu commanding the _Encounter_ whose draught of water forbade
a near approach, a French lieutenant leading a corps of the new
Franco-Chinese contingent was taken into action on board the river boat
_Confucius_, while Ward’s men, in equal numbers, were towed in launches
up the river by the British gunboat _Hardy_. At the end of a six hours’
struggle Ward fell back with the loss of eight officers and a hundred
and fifty men. Next day the attack was renewed with success and the
Rebels fled to Tsz Ki.”

The story now approaches the closing scene of Ward’s career. He was
now ordered to Ning Po to take command. The order reached him at dusk.
Late as the hour was, he at once paraded his troops, reviewed them, and
expressed the highest satisfaction with accouterments and drill. He was
never to marshal them again. More devoted following no captain ever
had. It was their pride to be known as “Ward’s disciplined Chinese.” He
reached Ning Po with only the life-guard of Manila-men who were always
near him, and at once made his dispositions for driving the Rebels out
of Tsz Ki.

On the morning of September 20th he took five or six hundred men up
the river and opened an attack on the fort at Tsz Ki with howitzers. A
storming party passed him on its approach to the wall it was to scale,
and he said to Captain Cook who led it: “You must do it with a rush, or
we shall fail, for they are very numerous.” He was shot and carried
to the rear before the scaling ladders could be placed. His command
was largely made up of troops which were strangers to him, and it has
been hinted that he may have been shot by his own men. The assault
prevailed. Tsz Ki fell, and the Legion held the town.

Ward’s comrade in arms, Forrester, has thus described the closing scene:

“‘We now turned our attention to Tsz Ki. Ward being anxious to capture
the city with the least possible delay, we started out together to
reconnoitre the field. We had become so accustomed to the enemy’s
fire that we had grown somewhat careless. While we were standing
together inspecting the position Ward put his hand suddenly to his
side and exclaimed: ‘I have been hit.’ A brief investigation showed
that the wound was a serious one, and I had him carried on board the
_Hardy_ where surgical attendance was promptly given. I then held a
consultation with the officers of the expedition. It was decided to
carry out Ward’s plan and attack the city at once. Ladders were quickly
thrown across the moat which were then drawn over and placed against
the walls, and, before the garrison fully recognized what we were
about, our troops were in possession of the city.

“‘As soon as I had my troops properly housed and posted, I set out with
General Ward for Ning Po. Arrived there, the General was removed to
the house of Doctor Parker, a resident physician, and every precaution
taken. But he had been gradually sinking, and he died that night.

“‘Early the next morning I ordered his body conveyed on board the
_Confucius_, that we might reach Shanghai at the earliest possible
moment. The captain of the boat (Lynch by name, afterwards with Semmes
in the _Alabama_) proved insubordinate. At nine o’clock we were ten
miles out at sea and short of coal. I had the captain put in irons
and turned over the command to the lieutenant. We were then in such
a strong current that I gave up hope of getting the steamer back to
Ning Po, determined rather to work our way to a port near Shanghai.
By the middle of the afternoon we ran alongside a British ship flying
Dent and Company’s flag. I knew this firm to be warm supporters of the
Imperial Government, and so had no hesitance in boarding the vessel and
obtaining a supply of coal. The funeral of General Ward at Shanghai was
a most impressive one. A great number of civil and military officers
accompanied his body to Sung Kiang, where it was interred with great
pomp, and enjoyed the extraordinary honor of a resting place in the
Confucian Temple.”

Captain Rhoderick Dhu, of the flagship _Encounter_, in transmitting
Lieutenant Bogle’s report of Ward’s death to Sir James Hope, wrote: “It
is now my painful duty to inform you that General Ward, while directing
the assault, fell, mortally wounded. The _Hardy_ brought him down
the same evening to Ning Po, and he died the next morning in Doctor
Parker’s house. During a short acquaintance with General Ward I have
learned to appreciate him much, and I fear his death will cast a gloom
over the Imperial cause in China, of which he was the stay and prop.”

How cordially Sir James responded to these generous sentiments from
a gallant British sailor appears from his dispatch to Minister
Burlingame, transmitting the announcement of Ward’s death, which the
American Minister embodied in his dispatch to Washington:

“I am sure you will be much grieved to hear of poor Ward’s death. The
Chinese Government have lost a very able and gallant servant, who has
rendered them much faithful service, and whom it will not be easy for
them to replace.”

Of the events immediately following the death of Frederick Townsend
Ward and the appointment of Colonel Peter Gordon (“Chinese” Gordon) to
the command of the “Ever Victorious Legion,” Dr. S. Wells Williams in
his monumental work, The Middle Kingdom, writes as follows:

“The death of General Ward deprived the Imperialists of an able leader.
The career of this man had been a strange one, but his success in
training his men was endorsed by honorable dealings with the mandarins
who had reported well of him at Peking. He was buried at Sung Kiang,
where a shrine was erected to his memory and incense is burned before
him to this day.”

It was difficult to find a successor, and the command was entrusted
to his second, an American named Burgevine, who was accepted by the
Chinese, but proved to be incapable. He was superseded by Holland and
Cooke, Englishmen, and in April, 1863, the entire command was placed
under Colonel Peter Gordon of the British army.

“During the interval between May, 1860, when Ward took Sung Kiang, and
April 6, 1863, when Gordon took Fushan, the best manner of combining
native and foreign troops was gradually developed as they became more
and more acquainted with each other and learned to respect discipline
as an earnest of success. Such a motley force has seldom if ever been
seen, and the enormous preponderance of Chinese troops would have
perhaps been an element of danger had they been left idle for a long
time. The bravery of the “Ever Victorious” force in the presence of
the enemy had gradually won the confidence of the Allies, as well
as the Chinese officials in whose pay it was; and when it operated
in connection with the French and British contingent in driving the
Tai-pings out of Ning Po prefecture, the real worth of Ward’s drill was
made manifest.”

General Gordon won a far greater fame in China than Frederick Townsend
Ward, but the Salem soldier of fortune might have done much bigger
things than the inscrutable fates permitted if he had been suffered
to live his allotted years. He was cut off in the flower of his youth,
in the flush and glory of romantic success against the most desperate
odds, and he had played the game of life astonishingly well.

Until death overtook Ward at thirty his career singularly paralleled
that of “Chinese” Gordon. Gordon served as a lieutenant in the Crimean
War before he was twenty; next acquitted himself most ably on the
Russo-Turkish frontier in Asia; began his career in China at the age of
twenty-seven and had won his fame in the Tai-ping Rebellion at thirty.

The Chinese tributes to Ward’s memory were both eloquent and sincere,
and as presented in official decrees make a unique tribute from
an alien people, such as has been bestowed by China upon no other
American. The death of Ward was conveyed to the notice of the Emperor
of China by Li Hung Chang, whose memorial read:

“Li Hung Chang, Governor of Kiangse, on the 6th day of the intercalary
8th moon, in the first year of the reign Tungche, memorializes the
Throne.... It appears that Brigadier Ward is a citizen of New York, in
the United States, who in the tenth year of the reign Hienfung came
to China. Afterwards he was employed by Wuhyu, Taotai of Shanghai, to
take command of a contingent of men from India to follow the regular
army in the attack on Kiating and Taet’sang, and twice to the capture
of Sung Kiang, as well as to the repeated attack on Tsing-pu, where,
leading his officers and men, he was several times seriously wounded.
Later, after the contingent of Indians had, by an Imperial decree, been
dismissed, Ward petitioned the Taotai, stating that he was willing to
become a Chinese subject; whereupon Wuhyu retained him and gave him
command of the Ever Victorious Army, to support the Imperial troops in
the defence of Sung Kiang.

“In the first moon of the present year Ward defeated, with 500 troops,
above 100,000 rebels at Yin-hai-pang, Tien-mashan, and other places
in the Prefecture of Sung Kiang. Thus with few he overcame the many;
a meritorious deed that is very rare. Again he arranged for the
destruction of the rebel fortifications of Kau Keaou, Sian t’ang,
Chow-pu, Nanking, Che-ling, Wang-keasze, and Lung-chuan, having the
coöperation of British and French troops. From a petition of Wuhyu it
appears that in the early part of spring of the present year, Sung
Kiang and Shanghai were threatened by the rebels, and that the turning
away of the danger and the maintenance of tranquility in those places
was chiefly due to the exertions of Ward.

“By Imperial favor he was repeatedly promoted—from the fourth rank
with the peacock’s feather to the decorations of the third rank, again
to the rank of titulary Futsiang, Brigadier, and again to Futsiang
gazetted for employment in office; and praise was repeatedly bestowed
on him by your Majesty’s decree. From the time of the arrival of
Your Majesty’s Minister, Li Hung Chang, at Shanghai, to take charge
of affairs, this Futsiang Ward was in all respects obedient to the
orders he received, and whether he received orders to harass the city
of Kinshwanei or to force back the rebels at Linho, he was everywhere
successful. Still further, he bent all his energy on the recapture of
Tsing-pu, and was absorbed in a plan for sweeping away the rebels from
Soochan. Such loyalty and valor, issuing from his natural disposition,
is extraordinary when compared with these virtues of the best officers
of China; and among foreign officers it is not easy to find one worthy
of equal honor.

“Your Majesty’s Minister, Li Hung Chang, has already ordered Wuhyu and
others to deck Ward’s body with a Chinese uniform, to provide good
sepulture, and to bury him at Sung Kiang, in order to complete the
recompense for his valiant defence of the dynasty. Brigadier Ward’s
military services at Sung Kiang and Ning Po are conspicuous. At this
time he lost his life by a wound from a musket ball. We owe him our
respect, and our deep regret. It is appropriate, therefore, to entreat
that your Gracious Majesty do order the Board of Rites to take into
consideration suitable posthumous rewards to be bestowed on him, Ward;
and that both at Ning Po and at Sung Kiang sacrificial altars be
erected to appease the manes of this loyal man.

“In addition to the communication made to the Tsungli Yamen, your
memorialist, Li Hung Chang, consulted Tseng Kwo Fan, Governor General
of the Two Kiang, and Tso-Tsung-Lang, Governor of Chehkiang, with
regard to the recapture of Tsze Kee by the rebels, and their spying out
the approaches to the city of Ning Po; also with regard to the newly
appointed acting Taotai of Ning Po, She Chengeh, putting this city in
a state of defence, and the levying of contributions at Shanghai, to
be forwarded to Ning Po; and further, with regard to Brigadier Ward’s
recapture from the rebels of Tsz Ki, where he perished from a wound by
a musket ball, and for which reason Your Majesty is entreated to bestow
on him posthumous honours; and finally, with regard to dispatching with
all haste this memorial, and laying it before Your Majesty’s Sacred
Glance for approval and further instruction.”

With a promptness unusual in Oriental procedure, this memorial was
followed in twelve days by the issue of an Imperial Edict, of which the
record obtained for the Essex Institute at the Tsung-li-Yamen in Peking
by the late Minister Conger, is as follows:

“The following Imperial Rescript was received on the 18th day of the
Intercalary Eighth Moon of the First Year of the Reign of Tung Chih.

“Li Hung Chang in a memorial has acquainted Us of the death of
Brigadier Ward, who perished from the effects of a bullet-wound
received at the capture of Tsz-Ki, and has asked Our sanction for the
building of a temple to him as a sincere expression of Our sorrow at
his death. Ward was a native of the United States of America. Having
desired to become a Chinese subject, and offered his services to Us,
he joined the Imperial Troops at Shanghai, and took Kading, Tai-Tsan,
and Sung Kiang, and later defeated the rebels at Yin-hai-pang,
Tien-ma-shan, and other parts, in the district of Sung Kiang. He
also, in company with other foreign officers, destroyed the rebel
fortifications at Kaou-Keaou and elsewhere. We, admiring his repeated
victories, had been pleased to confer upon him special marks of Our
favor, and to promote him to the rank of Futsiang gazetted for service.

“According to the present memorial of Li Hung Chang, Ward having
learned of the designs upon Ning Po of the Chi-Kiang rebels who were in
possession of Tsz-Ki, at once advanced with the Ever Victorious Army to
destroy them. While in person conducting the movements he was fatally
wounded in the chest by a rebel bullet fired from the top of the city
wall. The bullet came out through his back. It grew dark to the General
instantly, and he fell. The City of Tsz-Ki was already taken by his
Ever Victorious Army. Ward returned to Ning-Po, where he died of his
wound the next day.

“We have read the memorial, and feel that Brigadier Ward, a man
of heroic disposition, a soldier without dishonor, deserves Our
commendation and compassion. Li Hung Chang has already ordered Wu-Shi
and others to attend to the proper rites of sepulture, and We now
direct the two Prefects that special temples to his memory be built at
Ning Po and Sung Kiang. Let this case still be submitted to the Board
of Rites, who will propose to Us further honors so as to show our
extraordinary consideration towards him, and also that his loyal spirit
may rest in peace. This from the Emperor! Respect it!”

On October 27, 1862, Minister Burlingame forwarded to Washington his
official communication announcing Ward’s death, which read as follows:

“Legation of the United States,
“Peking, Oct. 27, 1862.

“Sir: It is my painful duty to inform you of the death of General
Ward, an American, who had risen by his capacity and courage to the
highest rank in the Chinese service. He was shot and mortally wounded
while reconnoitering, before its capture, Tsz-Ki, a place near
Ning-Po. The incidents attending his wound and death please find in
the edict of the Emperor.

“General Ward was originally from Salem, Massachusetts, where he has
relatives still living, and had seen service in Mexico, the Crimea,
and, he was sorry to say, with the notorious Walker.

“He fought countless battles, at the head of a Chinese force called
into existence and trained by himself, and always with success.

“Indeed, he taught the Chinese their strength, and laid the
foundations of the only force with which their government can hope to
defeat the rebellion.

“Before General Ward died, when on board of her Majesty’s steamer
_Hardy_, he made his will, and named Admiral Sir James Hope and myself
his executors.

“In a letter communicating the fact to me, Sir James writes:

“‘I am sure you will be much grieved to hear of poor Ward’s death.

“‘The Chinese government have lost a very able and gallant servant,
who has rendered them much faithful service, and whom it will not be
easy for them to replace.’

“On account of my absence from Shanghai, I shall authorize our consul,
George F. Seward, Esq., to act for me.

“General Ward was a man of great wealth, and in a letter to me the
last probably he ever wrote, he proposed through me to contribute
ten thousand taels to the government of the United States, to aid in
maintaining the Union, but before I could respond to his patriotic
letter he died.

“Let this wish, though unexecuted, find worthy record in the archives
of his native land, to show that neither self-exile nor foreign
service, nor the incidents of a stormy life, could extinguish from the
breast of this wandering child of the republic the fires of a truly
loyal heart.

“After Ward’s death, fearing that his force might dissolve and be lost
to the cause of order, I hastened by express to inform the Chinese
government of my desire that an American might be selected to fill his
place, and was so fortunate, against considerable opposition, as to
secure the appointment of Colonel Burgevine.

“He had taken part, with Ward, in all the conflicts, and common fame
spoke well of him.

“Mr. Bruce, the British minister, as far as I know, did not antagonize
me, and the gallant Sir James Hope favored the selection of Burgevine.
Others did not.

“I felt that it was no more than fair that an American should command
the foreign-trained Chinese on land, as the English through Osborne,
would command the same quality of force on sea. Do not understand by
the above that in this, or in any case, I have pushed the American
interests to the extent of any disagreement. On the contrary, by
the avowal of an open and friendly policy, and proceeding on the
declaration that the interests of the Western nations are identical,
I have been met by the representatives of the other treaty powers in
a corresponding spirit, and we are now working together in a sincere
effort to strengthen the cause of civilization in the East.

“I have the honor to be your obedient servant,

“ANSON BURLINGAME.

“Hon. William H. Seward,
“Secretary of State, Washington.”

The Imperial edict called forth from Secretary of State Seward this
feeling response:

“You will express to Prince Kung the President’s sincere satisfaction
with the honors which the Emperor of China has decreed to be paid
to the memory of our distinguished fellow citizen. He fell while
illustrating the fame of his country in an untried, distant, and
perilous field. His too early death will, therefore, be deeply mourned
by the American people.”

The whole correspondence was called for by the United States Senate,
upon motion of Senator Sumner, and was duly transmitted under cover of
a message from President Lincoln.

Of the proposed memorial temples, one has been erected and was
dedicated with impressive ceremonies on March 10, 1877. It is still
guarded with religious care and is the scene of elaborate rites on each
New Year’s Day in February.

The consecration of this temple was described in the _North China Mail_
as follows:

“The dedication of the Tsze t’ang, or Memorial Hall, recently erected
by Feng, Taotai of Shanghai, at Sung Kiang in commemoration of the late
General Ward, of the “Ever Victorious Army,” was performed on Saturday,
with religious rites, in accordance with Chinese custom in such cases.
The Taotai had, through the United States Consul-General, expressed
his intention of conducting the ceremony himself, and requested that a
limited number of invitations should be given to persons interested,
to accompany him. The Customs’ cruiser ‘Kwashing,’ Captain Anderson,
was prepared to convey His Excellency and his guests, and seven a.
m. was the hour fixed to commence the trip up the river Hwangpoo.
Precisely at that time there were assembled at the Custom House jetty
Consul General Myers, Dr. Yates, Dr. Macgowan, Dr. Kreyer; Mr. P. G.
von Mollendorff of the German Consulate, the Hon. H. N. Shore, of H. M.
S. _Lapwing_, Captain Ditmar, of the German corvette _Louise_, Mr. C.
Deighton-Braysher and a few others, but the start was not made until
about 8.10 in consequence of the non-arrival of the Taotai before that
hour. By the time breakfast was over, the vessel had sped considerably
beyond the well-known Seven-mile Reach; and presently Ming-hong was
sighted, nearly opposite to which is the creek leading to Nai-jow, the
scene of the fight in which the French Admiral Protet, to whose memory
a statue stands in the compound of the French Municipal Hall, received
his death wound. The reaches of the river beyond this place were new
to all on board except Mr. Deighton-Braysher, who kindly undertook to
pilot the vessel from Ming-hong to the mouth of the Sung Kiang Creek;
and he also lightened the tedium of the voyage by pointing out and
describing the scenes of greatest interest in connection with the
Tai-ping rebellion, this part of the country having been overrun by the
rebels. Feck-shung was next reached, opposite to which is the creek
up which H. B. M.’s gunboat _Stirling_ was navigated to attack the
stronghold known as Yeh-sieh, which she quickly demolished.

“There not being sufficient depth of water in the Sung Kiang creek to
float the _Kwashing_, she was anchored off its mouth, and some Chinese
houseboats and a couple of steam launches, provided by the Taotai’s
directions, were brought alongside. The passengers being trans-shipped
to the houseboats, were soon spinning up the creek, towed by one of
the steam launches, the distance to the city of Sung Kiang, from the
river, being about four miles. The creek becomes very narrow as the
city is neared, and is spanned not far from the walls by one of those
light-looking, picturesque stone bridges for the construction of which
the Chinese are famous. Here, on both banks, the people had assembled
in large numbers, and it soon became evident that the sight of so many
foreigners together was a novelty to them, and the Taotai’s bodyguard
were useful in clearing a way along the bank to where some dozen or
so of sedans with bearers were in waiting for the guests. The Taotai
and others having taken their seats, the procession moved off amid
the banging of crackers and bombs, and the animated gesticulations
of the people, numbers of whom kept up with it to the scene of the
day’s ceremony. The way led along a narrow road through the suburbs,
skirting the wall of the city, until the gate was reached through which
the city was entered. A wide expanse of unoccupied ground had first
to be crossed, which before the rebellion was covered with houses.
Here and there ruins of houses are still to be seen, but the greater
part of the waste is scattered over with grass-grown mounds and heaps
of refuse, presenting a dreary aspect. The way next led along the
bank of a small creek and past the yamen of some military mandarin,
a large and peculiar building, or rather series of buildings, having
all the appearance of huge cages, each being enclosed with very lofty
rail fencing, and differing in several respects from the architecture
of any official residence in the vicinity of Shanghai. Several
unpretentious-looking pilaus were also passed enroute, and in the
distance, to the right, a lofty pagoda was visible. The Memorial Hall
was at length reached, surrounded by a low wall of considerable extent,
and entered by a gateway in the usual joss-house style.

“Turning sharply to the right after leaving the gateway, the main
building is at once seen to be very similar in construction to the open
hall facing the entrance to the Mixed Court in the Maloo. Immediately
opposite the open front stands the shrine containing the memorial
tablet of the deceased General; blue in colour with the inscription in
gold. Facing this are two small square tower-like structures, on which
are other inscriptions testifying to the merits of the deceased and
stating that the Memorial Hall was erected by Feng Taotai, by Imperial
command. Passing round the back of the shrine, a large square space is
reached, in the centre of which is the grave-mound beneath which are
the deceased’s remains and also the stone that used to mark the site of
the grave. The surrounding space is thickly planted with young trees
and shrubs.

“At the Hall the Taotai, on alighting from his chair, was met and
greeted by the magistrate of the district of Sung Kiang. A number of
other officials of lesser grade were present; and numerous soldiers, in
addition to the Taotai’s bodyguard thronged the compound. The greetings
over, the Taotai led the way to the shrine, and both he and the other
dignitaries then donned their official robes. Although it was broad
daylight, twelve lighted lamps were suspended from the roof, eight in
one row and one at each of the four corners of the shrine. Besides
these, there were four large red wax candles burning, and incense
sticks smouldering. The ceremony being one of sacrifice there were
offered to the manes of the deceased the entire carcass of a goat, a
large pig, a small roasted pig, a ham, seven pairs of ducks, pairs of
fowls, etc., and about twenty dishes of fruits, confectionery, and
vegetables, these being also in pairs.

“The Taotai and the two district magistrates being fully attired, they
advanced to the front of the shrine, and in obedience to the direction
of a sort of master of the ceremonies the Taotai commenced the oblation
by offering several small cups of wine, which were deposited on a
shelf in front of the tablet. Then, all three kneeling, the Taotai
stretched forth his hand towards the tablet, and offered the food, the
mandarins subsequently bowing their heads nine times to the ground.
A little music was also played, and the ceremony, which scarcely
occupied twenty minutes, was concluded by loud discharges of fireworks
and the crash of gongs. It cannot be said to have been impressive,
though its novelty and picturesqueness were beyond dispute; but it was
interesting from the fact of its being intended to honour the memory of
a foreigner, and including precisely the same observance awarded in the
case of high Chinese officials.

“At the conclusion of the ceremony, the whole of the food offerings
were packed away in boxes, slung on poles, and taken back to the ship,
thence to be re-conveyed to the Taotai’s yamen.

“There was no speaking either at the grave or in the Temple, except by
Dr. Macgowan, who as a private citizen said a few words to the Taotai
in Chinese, apropos of the occasion, and, after three photographic
negatives of the scene in and around the Temple had been taken, haste
was made for the return trip in order to reach home before dark.

“On the return passage down the creek, the Taotai read from a paper he
held in his hand, the following statement, which was translated as he
proceeded by Dr. Kreyer: ‘I remember reading the rescript in the Peking
_Gazette_ of how the late Emperor regretted General Ward’s death. At
that time I was only a Chuyen (recipient of a second-class literary
degree), and did not know I should ever be Taotai of Shanghai and live
to take part in the dedication of a temple to Ward’s memory. When Ward
came to China it was thought in this district that the whole country
had been lost to the rebels—that, in fact, it could not be recovered.
But owing to the exertions of Ward, the rebels were defeated and the
country saved. The cities and places that were captured were Kading,
Tai-Tsan, Sung Kiang, Ming-liu-ping, Tien-mashan, Kau Shan, Sian T’ang,
Chow-pu, Che-ling, Wang Keasze, Lung-chau—all these being retaken by
Ward before Li Hung Chang came on the scene. After Li came into these
districts Ward retook Kinshan-wei, Liu Ho, Tsing-pu, and Tsz Kzi. The
greatest credit was therefore due to General Ward, as nearly all those
places were re-captured by him long before Li Hung Chang came here. The
name of General Ward was such a terror that whenever the rebels heard
that he was coming they ran away without fighting. General Ward’s idea
was to go straight on to Soo-chow, and retake that city; but before
going there he marched to Ning Po, and at Tsz Ki, a little town about
fifteen miles distant from Ning Po, he was shot by the enemy. His
Chinese clothes were changed for foreign ones at Ning Po, where he
died, his body being brought to Sung Kiang for burial. The Imperial
intention is to build two large temples to his memory—one at Sung Kiang
and the other at Tsz Ki, where he received his death wound, and in
each of which his statue will be placed. All this is intended to be in
accordance with Li Hung Chang’s petition to the Throne, and with the
Imperial rescript, issued in the first year of Tsung-chi, 8th moon,
18th day.’ In conclusion, the Taotai said, in answer to a question by
Mr. Consul-General Myers, that the sole credit of Shanghai not having
been taken by the rebels was due to General Ward. It was also explained
that the present small temple at Sung Kiang was only a temporary
structure, and would be replaced as soon as possible by a large and
permanent one.”

“The two inscriptions on columns at the right and left of the entrance
to the shrine have been thus rendered into English:

“A wonderful hero from beyond the seas, the fame of whose deserving
loyalty reaches round the world, has sprinkled China with his azure
blood.”

“A happy seat among the clouds,” (the ancient name of Sung Kiang means
‘among the clouds’) “and Temples standing for a thousand Springs, make
known to all his faithful heart.”

Arthur D. Coulter, an American mining engineer, recently visited the
temple and shrine of Frederick Townsend Ward and described the scene as
follows:

“Toward the eastern end of the walled city stands one of the most
beautiful pagodas to be found anywhere in the Orient. It is perfectly
preserved, and overlooks the country for many miles. Passing toward
the eastern gate and crossing the mouth of the canal which follows
the city wall by an arched bridge—one of those typical stone bridges,
finely cut and very old, which span the canal—the way leads toward
the military grounds, at the present time occupied by a considerable
force of Chinese soldiers, and it is in the vicinity of this fort that
Ward’s resting-place is located and where his shrine is built. The
place seems to have been fittingly selected by the Chinese to give a
military setting to this memorial of their military saviour. A wide
path along the bank of the canal leads by the beautiful bamboo groves
a distance of about three hundred yards from the walled city to the
soldiers’ compound. The temple proper is situated within a hundred feet
of the outer walls of the fort. It is built on a plot of ground which
has been maintained as an open park. In accordance with the Chinese
idea of filial piety a grave must be maintained above ground. In almost
all instances among the better classes the receiving vaults are built
of brick or stone and covered with tiling, and these are maintained for
many years, the obligation being handed down from father to son.

“The temple compound which has been dedicated to Ward stands within
four walls built of brick. These walls are about ten feet in height
and well preserved. The area is about one hundred feet square. At the
main entrance of the compound is built the caretaker’s house. He, with
his wife and family, are maintained by the Chinese Government as they
have been since the building of the shrine. Immediately after passing
through the caretaker’s rooms, one comes into an open courtyard facing
the temple proper, which is built across the middle of the hollow
square formed by the enclosure walls. Entrance to the temple proper
is through three doors, which, when open, leave the shrine or altar
exposed to view from the outside. This is in accordance with the
prevailing arrangement of temples throughout the Empire.

“The altar stands about ten feet removed from the door which it
faces, and is about six feet wide by ten feet high. Across from this
altar is a space paved with brick throughout, in a very good state of
preservation and well kept. The most important decorations are the
tablet and the writing in Chinese which adorn the sides and top of the
altar. On the top of the altar may be seen the braziers for the burning
of joss and incense by the Taos priests. The attendance upon the
temple by the Mandarins and Officials of Mandatories from the Chinese
Government has been maintained since the building of the shrine.
They are commanded to appear there during each month for worship.
Immediately behind is a door leading out to what may be correctly
termed the graveyard. This is an open space surrounded on the one side
by the walls of the temple and on the other three sides by the walls of
the compound already described. In the central background, away from
the temple, is located the mound where Ward’s remains were placed.
Behind this mound, and on both sides, extending out to the side walls,
the ground is covered with a thick growth of young bamboo trees, making
a very beautiful setting for the grave.

“The memory of Ward is held sacred to this day by those with whom
or with whose fathers he was closely associated. He had endeared
himself to the Taotai and the Chinese people principally through his
military career and his more personal relations with Shanghai. The full
significance of Ward’s martyrdom for the Chinese people has not been
forgotten to this day by this class of Chinese.”

FOOTNOTES:

[47] This sketch of the life of Frederick Townsend Ward is taken for
the most part, from the Essex Institute Historical Collections, Vol.
XLIV, Jan. 1908, to which Hon. Robert S. Rantoul contributed a most
complete and authoritative account of General Ward’s family history
and achievements. Mr. Rantoul included also the Chinese decrees, and
other documentary material which are made use of as Chapter XXX of this
book, and the author desires to make clear his obligations, both to the
researches and literary labor of Mr. Rantoul and to the Essex Institute
for permission to make use of this material as properly belonging in a
record of the deeds of the Salem men of seafaring stock and training.

[48] The Middle Kingdom, by S. Wells Williams.

CHAPTER XXIII

THE EBBING OF THE TIDE

When the Embargo of 1807 was proclaimed as a counter-blow to England’s
“unofficial war on American commerce and her wholesale impressment of
American seamen,” the house-flags of Salem merchants flew over one
hundred and fifty-two vessels engaged in foreign trade. The Embargo
fell with blighting effects upon this imposing fleet and the allied
activities interwoven throughout the life and business of the town,
and the square-riggers lay empty and idle at the wharves. In 1808 the
foreign commerce of the United States decreased from $246,000,000 to
$79,000,000, and a British visitor, writing of New York, described what
might have been seen in Salem:

“The port indeed was full of ships, but they were dismantled and laid
up; their decks were cleared, their hatches fastened down, and scarcely
a sailor was to be found on board. Not a box, bale, cask, barrel, or
package was to be seen upon the wharves. Many of the counting houses
were shut up or advertised to be let, and the few solitary merchants,
clerks and porters, and laborers that were to be seen, were walking
about with their hands in their pockets. The coffee houses were almost
empty; the streets near the waterside were almost deserted; the grass
had begun to grow upon the wharves.”

The Embargo was removed in the spring of 1809 and Yankee ships hastened
to spread their white wings on every sea. Salem merchants loaded their
vessels with merchandise and dispatched them to skim the cream of the
European market. It was out of the frying-pan into the fire, however,
for Napoleon had set a wicked trap for these argosies and so ordered it
that all American shipping found in the ports of France, Spain, Italy,
Denmark, Prussia and Norway was confiscated and plundered under flimsy
pretext of violations of paper blockades, and what not, of which these
unsuspecting American shipmasters were wholly unaware. Thiers states
that Napoleon wrote to the Prussian Government:

“Let the American ships enter your ports. Seize them afterwards. You
shall deliver the cargoes to me, and I will take them in part payment
of the Prussian war debt.”

John Quincy Adams declared that fifty American vessels were thus taken
in Norway and Denmark. In 1809-10, fifty-one of our ships were seized
in the ports of France, forty-four in the ports of Spain, twenty-eight
in Naples, and eleven in Holland, with a total loss to helpless
American owners of at least ten million dollars. Felt’s Annals of
Salem states that “on the 19th of August (1809), the ship _Francis_,
Capt. William Haskell, arrives. She was purchased of the Neapolitan
government by our consul there, to bring home the crews of American
vessels confiscated by their order. Two hundred and fourteen persons
came in her, many of whom belonged to this town. Their treatment is
said to have been very cruel. The amount of Salem vessels and their
cargoes condemned at Naples was 783,000 dollars.”

The stout-hearted merchants of Salem rallied bravely and when the
War of 1812 began, they owned one hundred and twenty-six ships,
fifty-eight of them East Indiamen. The war played havoc with this
fleet, notwithstanding the activity of Salem privateers, and in 1815,
there were left only fifty-seven of these ships in foreign commerce, a
loss of a hundred sail in seven years. The tide had begun to ebb, the
golden age was waning, and yet in 1816 the Salem Custom House cleared
forty-two square-riggers for the East Indies and other ports of the
Orient. But the pioneering, pathfinding era was almost over, except for
ventures to the South Seas, Madagascar, and some of the ports of Africa
and South America. The trade with the Orient in which Salem ships had
blazed the way was now shared with the ships of other American ports.

The richest decade in this picturesque and adventurous traffic with the
coasts and islands of strange, far-distant climes had been from 1800
to 1810, during which the duties paid on foreign cargoes amounted to
$7,272,633, and the entries numbered 1,758, or an average of almost
three ships a day signalling their homecoming from beyond seas.

During the years from 1820 to 1840 Salem continued to hold fast to her
foreign trade, although overshadowed by Boston, and the old warehouses
on the wharves were filled with the products of Zanzibar, Sumatra,
Calcutta, Manila, Leghorn, the Rio Grande, Cayenne, Siam, Ceylon, and
the Gold Coast. In 1850 the beginning of the end was in sight, and the
“foreign entries” from Nova Scotia far outnumbered those from all the
other ports in which the natives had once believed the map of America
to consist chiefly of a vast commercial metropolis called Salem. The
end of the history of the port, except for coastwise trade may be read
in the Custom House records, as follows:

“In 1860 the foreign entries were: from Nova Scotia 215, Java 7, Africa
25, Cayenne 10, Montevideo 2, Zanzibar 4, Surinam 2, Rio Grande 2,
Buenos Ayres 2, and one each from Mozambique, Shields, Sunderland, Port
Praya, Newcastle and Trapani.

“In 1870 the foreign entries were: from the British provinces 117,
Cayenne 3, Newcastle 2, and one each from Zanzibar, Rio Grande, Cape
Verde Islands, and Sunderland.

“In 1878 the foreign entries were: from the British Provinces 53, and
none from any other ports.”

Although in these latter days the romances of shipping had somewhat
departed, yet now and then a Salem square-rigger brought home a tale
to remind the old salts of the thrilling days of yore. There was the
_Sumatra_, for example, Captain Peter Silver, which came from Batavia
in 1842. While at sea she fell in with a bark which flew signals of
distress yet appeared to be in good order below and aloft. There was
no crew on deck, however, no living soul to be seen except a woman
who implored help with frantic gestures. Running down close, Captain
Silver made out the vessel to be the _Kilmars_ of Glasgow, and he sent
a boat aboard to pick off the lone woman. She proved to be a girl,
only eighteen years old, wife of the master of the bark, almost out of
her wits with hysteria and exhaustion. She said that the _Kilmars_ had
sailed from Batavia two months previously with a cargo of sugar for
Europe. The crew, shipped in the Dutch East Indies, were a desperate
and unruly lot of beachcombers, several of them released convicts.

A few days before the _Sumatra_ came in sight, the captain of the
Scotch bark had discovered that his crew was planning mutiny and were
about to make their attack and gain possession of the vessel after
ridding themselves of the officers. This captain was a man of the right
mettle, for he promptly picked out the ringleader, charged him with
the conspiracy, and after a brisk encounter shot him with a pistol,
and removed him from the scene for the time. The mates were suspected
of disaffection and the captain succeeded in locking them in the after
cabin, after which he sailed into his crew, drove all hands below and
fastened the hatches over them. The decks being cleared in this most
gallant fashion, the captain, with the help of two boys undertook to
navigate the bark back to Batavia.

This proved to be a bigger undertaking than he could handle, and
while passing in sight of land, the captain decided to go ashore in a
boat with the two boys and find help, the weather being calm and the
mutineers securely bottled up below. He expected to be gone no more
than a few hours, but the day passed, night came down, and his boat
was missing. The young wife was alone, distraught and helpless, and
she took her stand by the rail, determined to throw herself overboard
if the mutineers should regain the deck. Next morning she sighted the
_Sumatra_ and was saved. But while the crew of the _Sumatra_ was making
sail to resume the voyage, no more than a few minutes after the boat
had fetched the girl on board, the ruffians confined on the bark broke
out from their prison, swarmed on deck, and took possession of their
bark.

Captain Peter Silver of the _Sumatra_ was not disposed to give them
a battle, and they got the _Kilmars_ under way and steered off on a
course of their own. Upon reaching Batavia Captain Silver landed the
young wife and gave her in charge of the Dutch officials who took care
of her with sympathetic hospitality and sent her home to her kinfolk
in Scotland. Sometime later the _Kilmars_ entered the port of Angier
where the mutineers were promptly captured and tried, and the bark was
returned to her owners.

The captain of the _Kilmars_ and the two boys were picked up adrift in
the Straits of Sunda, and it was discovered that he had become insane
from overwork and anxiety which explained why he had abandoned his wife
and set off to find help on a strange coast. He was later restored to
health and it is presumed that this plucky shipmaster, his girl wife
and his bark were safely reunited after being parted from one another
under these very extraordinary circumstances.

[Illustration:

From the oil painting by Edgar Parker

Captain John Bertram]

It is a coincidence worth noting that the first commanding figure
in the maritime history of Salem, Philip English, was born in the
Isle of Jersey, and that John Bertram, the last of the race of
great shipping merchants of the port hailed from the same island. Two
centuries intervened between their careers, John Bertram living until
1882, and witnessing the passing of the foreign commerce of Salem and
the coming of the age of steam upon the high seas. As a young man he
saw an average of a hundred square-rigged ships a year come home to
Salem from the Orient, Africa, South America, Europe and the South Sea
Islands. In his latter years he saw this noble commerce dwindle and
American seamen vanish until in 1870 the bark _Glide_ from Zanzibar
recorded the last entry in the Salem Custom House of a vessel from
beyond the Cape of Good Hope, and, in 1877, the Schooner _Mattie F._
crept in from South America as the last vessel to fetch home a cargo
from anywhere overseas. The Manila trade had become a memory in 1858,
the farewell voyage to Sumatra was made in 1860. Until the end of
the century Salem shipowners were interested in the trade with the
Philippines and other distant ports, but their vessels departed from
and came back to Boston.[49] The Salem firm of Silsbee, Pickman and
Allen built a fleet of fast and noble ships for the hemp trade, among
them the _Sooloo_, _Panay_ and _Mindoro_, but they never knew their own
port, and in 1896 the last of this fleet, the _Mindoro_, was towed to
Derby Wharf in Salem harbor to rot in idleness until she was cut down
to a coal barge.

John Bertram deserved to be classed with the older generation of Elias
Hasket Derby and Joseph Peabody, because he possessed the same high
qualities of foresight, daring and sagacity, a type of the militant
leader of commerce on the firing line of civilization. Like theirs,
his was a splendid American spirit which created, builded, and won its
rewards by virtue of native ability inspired and impelled by the genius
of its time and place. He was in a privateer in the War of 1812, and
lived to see his country’s flag almost vanish from blue water, its
superb merchant marine dwindle to almost nothing, but while it was in
its glory he played well his part in carrying the stars and stripes,
over his own ships, wherever the mariners of other nations went to seek
commerce. This John Bertram came to Salem in his boyhood and in 1813
was sailing out of Boston as a cabin boy in the schooner _Monkey_. A
little later shipping out of Charleston in a privateer, he was taken
prisoner and confined in British prison ships at Bermuda and Barbadoes.
Having learned to speak French in his early years on the Isle of Jersey
he persuaded his captors that he was a French subject and was released
but was again captured and carried off to England while homeward bound
to Salem. His was the usual story of lads with brains and ambition in
that era, at first a sailor and shipmaster, then an owner of vessels
and a merchant on shore.

John Bertram served a long apprenticeship before he forsook the
quarterdeck. In 1824 he sailed for St. Helena in the chartered schooner
_General Brewer_, and when a few days at sea overhauled the Salem brig
_Elizabeth_, Captain Story, also headed for St. Helena. Commerce was
a picturesque speculation then, and each of these skippers was eager
to make port first with his cargo and snatch the market away from his
rival.

The weather was calm, the wind was light, and Captain Bertram invited
Captain Story to come on board and have a cup of tea, or something
stronger. The skippers twain sat on deck and eyed each other while they
yarned, each assuring the other that he was bound to Pernambuco. St.
Helena? Nonsense! Captain Story was rowed back to his brig, the two
vessels made sail and jogged on their course. When nightfall came,
however, John Bertram threw his whole deck load of lumber overboard in
order to lighten his schooner and put her in her best trim for sailing,
cracked on all the canvas he could carry, and let her drive for St.
Helena as if the devil were after him. He beat the _Elizabeth_ to port
so handsomely that his cargo had been sold at fancy prices and he was
standing out of the harbor, homeward bound when the brig came creeping
in with a very long-faced Captain Story striding her poop.

Soon after this Captain Bertram determined to go after a share of the
South American trade, and after a voyage to the Cape of Good Hope in
the _Velocity_, he carried her to the Rio Grande and the Coast of
Patagonia to trade in hides. He went ashore, leaving Captain W. B.
Smith to pick up hides during short coastwise voyages, and finding
the adventures prosperous, bought a Salem brig at Pernambuco and kept
both vessels busy. For three years Captain Bertram lived on the coast
of Patagonia directing the operations of his little fleet and taking
this exile as a routine part of the education of an American shipping
merchant.

After his return to Salem his activities were shifted to Zanzibar
where the American flag was almost unknown. Madagascar had been opened
to American trade in 1821 by the Salem brig _Beulah_ on her way home
from Mocha. Zanzibar was a small settlement with no foreign trade,
gum-copal, the principal staple product, being carried to India in the
Sultan’s vessels. In 1826 the Salem brig _Ann_ called at Zanzibar and
showed the natives the first American flag they had ever seen, but no
attempt was made to establish commerce with the port until John Bertram
set sail in the _Black Warrior_ in 1830. He scented a pioneering voyage
with gum-copal as the prize, an import in great demand by makers of
varnish and up to that time imported by way of India at great cost.
When the _Black Warrior_ arrived at Zanzibar the Sultan was on the
point of dispatching a vessel loaded with the coveted gum-copal to
India, but this typical Salem navigator would not let such a chance
slip through his fingers. He boarded the Sultan and made him an offer
in shining silver dollars for the cargo, and the dazzled potentate set
his slaves at work to transfer the cargo to the hold of the _Black
Warrior_.

Thence John Bertram sailed home, and sold his gum-copal for a handsome
profit. Other ships followed in his wake and for many years the
Zanzibar trade in gum-copal was chiefly carried on in ships out of
Salem which controlled the supply of this commodity as it had won and
held the pepper trade with Sumatra and the coffee trade with Mocha
during an earlier generation.

When the news of the California gold discoveries swept the East like
wildfire in 1848, John Bertram was one of the first shipowners to grasp
the possibilities of the trade around Cape Horn to San Francisco.
Before the end of 1848 he had sent out a ship to carry the advance
guards of the argonauts. This bark _Eliza_ cleared from Derby Wharf
in December with assorted cargo and passengers, and was cheered by
an excited crowd which swarmed among the East India warehouses and
listened to the departing gold-seekers sing in lusty chorus the
“California Song” which later became the favorite ditty of many a
ship’s company bound round the Horn. It ran to the tune of “Oh!
Susannah” and carried such sentiments as these:

“I come from Salem City
With my wash-bowl on my knee;
I’m going to California
The gold dust for to see.
It rained all day the day I left,
The weather it was dry;
The sun so hot I froze to death,
Oh, brother, don’t you cry.

CHORUS

Oh, California;
That’s the land for me,
I’m going to California
With my wash-bowl on my knee.[50]

For this roaring California trade John Bertram and his partners built
a famous American clipper, the _John Bertram_, of eleven hundred tons,
at East Boston. The remarkable feature of this undertaking was that the
ship was launched sixty days after the laying of her keel and _ninety
days_ from the time the workmen first laid tools to the timbers she was
sailing out of Boston harbor with a full cargo, bound to San Francisco.
The _John Bertram_ was a staunch, able, and splendidly built ship,
notwithstanding this feat of record-breaking construction. Thirty years
after her maiden voyage she was still afloat in the deep-water trade,
although under a foreign flag, a fine memorial of the skill and honesty
of New England shipbuilders.

After winning a handsome fortune in his shipping enterprises John
Bertram had foresight and wisdom to perceive that American ships
in foreign trade were doomed to make a losing fight. Their day was
past. He turned his energies into other and more profitable channels,
and keeping pace with the march of the times, engaged in railroad
development and manufacturing enterprises, a shipping merchant of the
old school who adapted himself to new conditions with a large measure
of success. Much of his fortune he gave to benefit his town of Salem
in which his extensive philanthropies keep his memory green.

In 1869, Robert S. Rantoul of Salem, while writing of the town’s
maritime history made this brave attempt to convince himself that her
glory had not yet departed:

“While our packets ply to New York and our steam tug puffs and screams
about the harbor; while marine railways are busy and shipyards launch
bigger merchantmen than ever; while coal comes in upwards of four
hundred colliers yearly, and our boarding officers report more than
fifteen hundred arrivals,[51] while our fishing fleets go forth,
and our whalers still cruise the waters of the Indian Ocean and the
North Pacific, while we turn over $100,000 to $125,000 per year to
the Federal Treasury from import duties and enter a large part of the
dates, gum, spices, ivory, ebony and sheepskins brought into this
country, it is no time yet to despair of this most ancient seaport of
the United States of America.”

This was in a way, a swan-song for the death of Salem romance. The
one steam tug which “screamed about the harbor,” was the forerunner
of a host of her kind which should trouble the landlocked harbor that
once swarmed with privateers and East Indiamen. The coal barge and
the coasting schooner were henceforth to huddle in sight of crumbling
Derby Wharf, and the fluttering drone of the spindles in the cotton
mill to be heard along the waterfront where the decks of the stately
square-riggers had echoed to the roaring chanties of “Whiskey Johnny,”
“Blow the Man Down,” and “We’re Off for the Rio Grande.”

Nathaniel Hawthorne wrote an epitaph of Salem as a deep-water seaport,
and thus it appeared to him, the greatest of its children, as he viewed
it sixty years ago:

“In my native town of Salem, at the head of what, half a century ago,
in the days of old King Derby, was a bustling wharf, but which is
now burdened with decayed wooden warehouses, and exhibits few or no
symptoms of commercial life; except, perhaps, a bark or brig, half way
down its melancholy length, discharging hides; or, nearer at hand, a
Nova Scotia schooner pitching out her cargo of firewood—at the head,
I say, of this dilapidated wharf, which the tide often overflows, and
along which, at the base and in the rear of the row of buildings,
the track of many languid years is seen in a border of unthrifty
grass—here, with a view from its front windows adown the not very
enlivening prospect, and thence across the harbor, stands a spacious
edifice of brick....

“The pavement round about the above-described edifice—which we may as
well name at once as the Custom House of the port—has grass enough
growing in its chinks to show that it has not, of late days, been worn
by any multitudinous resort of business. In some months of the year,
however, there often chances a forenoon when affairs move onward with
a livelier tread. Such occasions might remind the elderly citizen
of that period before the last war with England, when Salem was a
port by itself; not scorned, as she is now, by her own merchants and
shipowners, who permit her wharves to crumble to ruin, while their
ventures go to swell, needlessly and imperceptibly, the mighty flood
of commerce at New York or Boston. On some such morning, when three
or four vessels happen to have arrived at once—usually from Africa or
South America—or to be on the verge of their departure thitherward,
there is a sound of frequent feet, passing briskly up and down the
granite steps. Here before his own wife has greeted him, you may greet
the sea-flushed shipmaster, just in port, with his vessel’s papers
under his arm in a tarnished tin box. Here, too, comes his owner,
cheerful or somber, gracious or in the sulks, accordingly as his scheme
of the now accomplished voyage has been realized in merchandise that
will readily be turned into gold, or has buried him under a bulk of
commodities such as nobody will care to rid him of....”

It is unmanly to mourn over old, dead days as better than the present
times, to say that men were stronger, simpler, braver in the beginning
of this Republic. Every age or generation, however, hammers out in
the stress of its day’s work some refined metal of experience, some
peculiarly significant heritage to help posterity in its struggle to
perpetuate the things most worth while. It was not the rich freightage
of silks, spices, ivory and tea which the ships of Salem fetched home,
nor the fortunes which built the stately mansions of the elm-shaded
streets, that made this race of seamen worthy of a page in the history
of their country’s rise to greatness. They did their duty, daringly and
cheerfully, in peace and in war. They let their deeds speak for them,
and they bore themselves as “gentlemen unafraid,” in adversity and
with manly modesty in prosperity. They believed in their country and
they fought for her rights, without swashbuckling or empty words. They
helped one another, and their community worked hand in hand with them,
on honor, to insure the safety of their perilous ventures. The men who
wove the duck, the sailmakers who fashioned it to bend to the yards,
the blacksmith, the rigger, the carpenter, and the instrument-maker did
honest work, all co-operating to build and fit the ship their neighbor
was to command so that she might weather the hardest blow and do credit
to those who made and sailed her.

[Illustration:

From the oil painting by Edgar Parker

Captain John Bertram]

[Illustration: Ship _Sooloo_, Capt. Charles H. Allen, Jr., bound for
San Francisco, June 1, 1861]

Every shipmaster had as good a chance as any other to win a fortune.
Independence, self-reliance, initiative and ambition were fostered. It
was clean-handed competition, aggressive, but with a fair chance for
all. Whether it was the _Atlantic_ daring to show American colors to
the East India Company in Calcutta in 1788, or the _Endeavor_, with
Captain David Elwell on her quarterdeck making the first passage
of an American ship through the Straits of Magellan in 1824, or the
_Margaret_ at anchor in Nagasaki harbor half a century before another
American vessel visited a port of Japan, these adventurers of commerce
were red-blooded frontiersmen of blue water, as truly and thoroughly
American in spirit and ambition as the strong men who pushed into the
western wilderness to carve out new empire for their countrymen.

Judged by the standards of this age, these seamen had their faults.
They saw no great wrong in taking cargoes of New England rum to poison
the black tribes of Africa, and the schooner _Sally and Polly_ of Salem
was winging it to Senegal as early as 1789. Rum, gunpowder and tobacco
outbound, hides, palm oil, gold dust and ivory homeward, were staples
of a busy commerce until late into the last century. But the pioneering
trade to the Orient, which was the glory of the port, was free from the
stain of debasing the natives for gain.

Salem is proud of its past, but mightily interested in its present.
Its population is four times as great as when it was the foremost
foreign seaport of the United States and its activities have veered
into manufacturing channels. But as has happened to many other New
England cities of the purest American pedigree, a flood of immigration
from Europe and Canada has swept into Salem to swarm in its mills and
factories. Along the harbor front the fine old square mansions from
which the lords of the shipping gazed down at their teeming wharves are
tenanted by toilers of many alien nations. But the stately, pillared
Custom House, alas, no more than a memorial of vanished greatness,
stands at the head of Derby Wharf to remind the passer-by, not only of
its immortal surveyor, Nathaniel Hawthorne, but also of an age of which
the civic seal of Salem bears witness in its motto, “_Divitis Indiae
usque ad ultimum sinum_” (To the farthest port of the rich East.)

FOOTNOTES:

[49] “July 1, 1833. Nearly half our commercial capital is employed in
other ports. During the past year there sailed from Salem 14 ships,
10 of them for India, 2 on whaling voyages to the Pacific; 5 barks, 4
of which for India; 94 brigs, 14 of them for India; and 23 schooners.
Fourteen ships, 6 barks, 27 brigs and 6 schooners belonging to this
place sailed from other ports on foreign voyages.” (Felt’s Annals of
Salem.)

[50] Captain John H. Eagleston took the brigantine _Mary and Ellen_
out to California two months ahead of the _Eliza_, in October, 1848,
loading with a general cargo to sell to the gold-seekers. While at San
Francisco in June, 1849, he met the _Eliza_, and later wrote, in an
account of the voyage:

“On board the _Eliza_ there were quite a number of passengers. Several
of these remaining in San Francisco, pitched their tent in Happy
Valley where Mr. Jonathan Nichols, stored as he was with fun and
song, assisted by his social and free-hearted companions, made their
quarters at all times inviting and pleasant. I was often with them, and
under the beautiful evening sky, the echoes of good singing pleased
the squatters that composed the little beehive villages which dotted
the valley, especially ‘The Washbowl on my Knee,’ which was the usual
wind-up.”

[51] Coastwise schooners and vessels from the Canadian provinces.

APPENDIX

APPENDIX

LISTS OF THE PRIVATE ARMED SHIPS OF SALEM IN THE REVOLUTION AND THE WAR
OF 1812

The following list of the armed ships of Salem from 1776 to 1783
includes both privateers and letters-of-marque. As defined in
international law “letters-of-marque” as issued by a Government are
privateering commissions, but in practice a distinction was made
between the two classes of ships. A privateer cruised in pursuit of
the enemy’s commerce and went to sea for no other purpose, while a
letter-of-marque vessel carried a cargo to a destined port or ports,
taking prizes if they came in her way and defending herself against the
enemy as a regularly commissioned private ship of war under heavy bonds
to her government to obey the rules of warfare.

_The Naval Records of the Revolution_, as compiled and published by the
Library of Congress, contains a list of the letters-of-marque issued
by the Government, and includes no fewer than one hundred and ninety
of these commissions granted to Salem shipowners, and commanders,
designating them all as “private armed ships of war.” The most accurate
catalogues of this kind that were compiled many years ago by local
historians and shipmasters agree upon one hundred and fifty-eight
as the total number of vessels of all kinds which actually engaged
in privateering out of the port of Salem during the Revolution. The
Government records show, however, that this reckoning falls far short
of the total number of craft commissioned by means of letters-of-marque
to prey upon England’s commerce as private ships of war. Even these
Government records are not complete, however, the names of several
well-known privateers being absent from the list, while on the other
hand the name of one vessel may be recorded two, three, or four times,
a new commission being granted and a new bond demanded when the ship,
schooner, or brig changed commanders or owners. The bond required in
all cases was in the sum of $20,000.

From the _Naval Records of the Revolution_, and from all lists made
and preserved in Salem archives and from other sources the following
catalogue has been compiled, as the most nearly complete record of
the private armed ships of Salem during the Revolution that has been
published:

_Name_ _Class_ _Commander_ _Guns_ _Men_
_Active_ brigantine {William Ross 14 60
{Johnson Briggs
_Adventure_ brig {J. Gardner 4 10
{Jonathan Tucker
_America_ schooner Geo. Williams 8 80
_Atalanta_ brig Cornelius Thompson 10 25
_American Hero_ ship William Fairfield 16 25
_Astrea_ ship John Derby 20 50
_Aurora_ brigantine Geo. Williams, Jr. 6 12
_Aurora_ brig —— Caldwell 10 75
_Black Prince_ ship Nathaniel West 18 160
_Banter_ sloop Henry White 8 50
_Belisaurus_ ship
_Bloodhound_ brig 14 55
_Brutus_ ship John Leach 18 100
_Bunker Hill_ ship John Turner 20 110
_Blackbird_ schooner William Groves 8 20
_Black Snake_ sloop William Carelton 12 60
_Bloom_ schooner Silas Smith 6 25
_Beaver_ schooner 10 swivels
_Bowdoin_ sloop 8
_Buckaneer_ ship Jeremiah Hacker 18 150
_Centipede_ schooner 6
_Charming Polly_ brig D. Bigelow
_Captain_ brigantine John Donaldson 10 45
{Johnson Briggs
_Cato_ brig {James Pickman 16 60
{Jesse Fearson
_Chace_ brigantine Cornelius Thompson 10 35
_Concord_ brig Ephraim Emerton
_Cutter_ schooner {Silas Smith 8 20
{Joseph Strout
_Cutter_ brigantine Geo. Ashby, Jr 10 45
_Cicero_ ship Hugh Hill 20 100
_Commerce_ sloop John Baptist Millet 10 25
_Commerce_ brigantine Ephraim Emerton 6 12
_Columbia_ schooner J. Greeley 12 30
_Comet_ brigantine Samuel Waters 6 15
_Comet_ schooner Richard Eldredge 9 29
_Creature Terrible_ brig Robert Richardson 14 43
_Catchall_ schooner Moses Chase 6 15
_Civil Usage_ brig {Greag Powers 14 45
{Peter Martin
_Congress_ ship David Ropes 20 130
_Cyrus_ ship Jonathan Mason, Jr 10 20
_Dispatch_ ship John Felt 10 60
{David Ropes
{William Gray
_Dolphin_ schooner {Greag Powers 8 30
{David Felt, Jr.
{Frank Benson
_Dart_ schooner Zenas Cook 6 22
_Delight_ schooner J. Temple 4 40
_Don Galvez_ brig Silas Jones 6 16
_Disdain_ ship William Patterson 20 100
_Diana_ brigantine Robert Barker 6 16
_Defense_ brigantine John Barr 10 16
_Eagle_ brig John Leach 20 110
_Exchange_ ship {Simon Forrester 20 60
{John Collins
_Experiment_ brigantine Samuel Ingersoll 6 14
_Essex_ ship John Cathcart 20 150
_Elizabeth_ brig {Clifford Byrne 4 10
{Ichabod Clarke
_Exchange_ schooner Henry Tibbetts 2 15
_Franklin_ ship Silas Deval 18 25
_Fame_ brig Samuel Hobbs 16 50
_Freedom_ brig Benjamin Ober 7 15
_Fortune_ brig Benjamin Ives 14 60
_Favourite_ brigantine William Patterson 11 50
_Fanny_ brigantine Samuel Tucker 4 12
_Felicity_ brig 8 20
_Flying Fish_ brigantine {John Gavett
{Anthony Divers
_Fly_ schooner {Christopher Babbidge 6 25
{William Mallory
_Fox_ schooner {Jeremiah Lansvay 6 75
{Jonathan Neall
_Friendship_ ship Gideon Henfield 6 20
_General Putnam_ schooner S. Mascotte 8 66
_General Gates_ brig —— Skinner 8
_General Lincoln_ brig John Carnes
_General Greene_ ship Aaron Crowell 16 90
_Grand Turk_ ship {Thomas Simmons 28 140
{Joseph Pratt
_Grey Hound_ schooner {Jacob Wilds 8 35
{John Cooke
_Good Luck_ ship Jonathan Neall 8 20
_General Galvez_ ship Thomas Smith 18 40
_Griffin_ brig Gideon Henfield
_Gamecock_ schooner Richard Smith 8 30
_General
Montgomery_ brigantine Samuel Hobbs 14 60
_Harlequin_ schooner Jonathan Tucker 6 16
_Hornet_ schooner Robert Brookhouse 10 swivels
_Henry_ schooner John Baptist Millet 4 10
_Hasket & John_ brig Benjamin Crowninshield
_Hero_ brig Silas Smith 12 50
_Hynde_ brig Francis Boardman 8 16
_Hector_ ship John Carnes 18 150
_Hector_ schooner John Cartright 6 15
_Hope_ schooner Robert Wormsted 8 25
_Hyder Alley_ brigantine Francis Boardman 8 16
_Hind_ brigantine Benjamin Dunham 8 16
{Nathaniel Coit Webb 8 25
_Hazard_ sloop-schooner {Benjamin Knight
{Edward Smith, Jr.
{Hugh Helme
_Hound_ brig John Adkinson 14 50
_Harkey_ galley Phineas Smith 2 18
_Hawke_ schooner {John Barbaroux 6 15
{Jacob Wilde
_Iris_ ship Robert Rantoul 9 18

_Jack_ ship David Ropes 14 60
_Junius Brutus_ ship John Brooks 20 120
_Jason_ ship Charles Hamilton 16 70
_Julius Caesar_ ship {Thomas Benson 14 40
{Jonathan Haraden
_Junius_ ship Nathaniel West 10 25
_Juno_ brig John Felt 12 16
_Jackall_ schooner {Adam Wellman 8 45
{Thomas Holmes
_James_ ship John Clarke 11 25
_John_ ship Jonathan Ingersoll
_Jupiter_ ship William Orne 14 40
_Joseph_ brig Henry Higginson 8 15
_Kendrick_ ship Thomas Benson 18 100
{John Augusta Dunn
_Languedock_ schooner {Reuben Yoemens 4 25
{Jeremiah Hegerty
_Lexington_ brig David Smith, Jr. 10 20
{George Ashby
_Lively_ brig {John Augusta Dunn 8 35
{Nathaniel Brookhouse
_Live Oak_ sloop Samuel Tucker 6 20
_Lion_ brig {Jonathan Mason 16 50
{Benjamin Warren
_Lark_ schooner N. Tilden 10 swivels
_Lee_ schooner Daniel Waters
_Lincoln_ brig John Carnes
_Louis le Grande_ ship 18 100
_Lucy_ brig S. Clay 12 25
_Liberty_ sloop Eben Pierce 6 25
_Manete_ schooner John Daccaretta 6 10
_Marquis de
Lafayette_ ship {Ebenezer Reed 10 100
{John Buffington
_Mermaid_ brig Jonathan Tucker 14 30
_Minerva_ sloop Nehemiah Buffington 6 10
_Massachusetts_ brig {John Fisk 16 30
{Jonathan Haraden
_Mars_ ship William Woodbury 16 75
_Monmouth_ brigantine David Ingersoll 6 20
_Montgomery_ brigantine {John Carnes 8 20
{James Barr, Jr.
_Morning Star_ sloop Francis Roch 8 12

_Macaroni_ brig 14
_New Adventure_ brig Jonathan Neall 14 50
_Nancy_ schooner George Leach 6 25
{William Woodbury, Jr.
_Neptune_ ship {Hugh Smith 14 65
{Silas Smith
{Benjamin Cole
_Oliver Cromwell_ ship {Nathaniel West 16 100
{James Barr, Jr.
_Pallas_ ship Gamaliel Hodges 10 20
_Panther_ schooner Samuel Masury 8 35
_Patty_ sloop Nathan Nichols 4 16
{Simon Forrester
_Patty_ ship {John Derby 8 20
{David Smith
_Penguin_ schooner Samuel Foster 10 40
_Pickering_ ship Jonathan Haraden 16 50
_Porus_ ship Samuel Crowell 22 100
_Pilgrim_ ship Joseph Robinson 18 100
_Pompey_ schooner Silas Smith
_Putnam_ ship Nathan Brown 18 90
_Plato_ brig
_Pompey_ schooner W. Thomas 6
_Port Packet_ ship Simon Forrester 8 20
_Race Horse_ schooner Alexander Story 8 25
_Rainbow_ schooner Oliver Webb 6 25
_Rattlesnake_ ship Mark Clark 20 85
_Raven_ schooner David Needham 12 40
_Recovery_ brigantine {Samuel Ingersoll
{William Dennis
_Revenge_ schooner {Benjamin Knight 8 40
{Samuel Foster
_Revolt_ brig Henry Phelps 8 20
_Resolution_ schooner Joseph Trask 8 20
_Roebuck_ ship Gideon Henfield 14 90
{Joshua Grafton
_Romulus_ brig {Joseph Waters 14 25
{Thomas Palfrey
_Rover_ ship James Barr, Jr. 24 100
_Rover_ schooner Thomas Morgridge 10 30
_Retaliation_ brig E. Giles 10 70
_Revenge_ sloop Benjamin Dean 10
_Ranger_ schooner Thomas Simmons 10 20
_Rambler_ brig Benjamin Lovett 16 40
_Rhodes_ brig N. Buffington 20 90
_Resolution_ ship Samuel West 20 130
_Robust_ ship Jonathan Tucker 12 25
_Salem_ brig {Henry Williams 12 30
{Edward Stanley
_Salem Packet_ ship {Joseph Cooke 12 30
{John Brewer
_Satisfaction_ schooner Edward Stanley 6 30
_Speedwell_ brigantine John Murphy 10 50
_Scourge_ brigantine —— Parker 20 80
_Sharke_ sloop 10 swivels
_Spanish Packet_ ship Thomas Dalling 10 20
_Sturdy Beggar_ brig {Daniel Hathorne 8 60
{Edward Rowland
_Shaker_ brig —— Stacey 6 40
_Spitfire_ schooner William Perkins 11 20
_Spy_ schooner Thomas Philips 8 20
_Surprize_ schooner {Nathaniel Perkins 8 35
{Germain Langevain
_Surprize_ brig Benjamin Cole 14 70
_Swift_ brig Israel Johnson 14 70
_Scorpion_ schooner Israel Thorndike 16 60
_Swett_ schooner Joseph Fearson 12
_Spring Bird_ schooner John Patten 4 25
_Saucy Jack_ schooner
_Tartar_ schooner Thomas Dexter 10 18
_Thomas_ ship Francis Boardman 10 20
_Thrasher_ schooner Benjamin Cole 8 30
_Titus_ sloop John Buchmore 4 11
_Two Brothers_ ship {William Gray 25
{Daniel Sanders
_Tyger_ brig Samuel Crowell 14 70
_Thorn_ ship Samuel Tucker
_Trenton_ ship Joseph Nati 12
_True American_ schooner Israel Thorndike 6 50
{John Blackler
_Union_ schooner {Jonathan Gardner, 3d. 8 25
{Isaac Smith
_Union_ sloop John Fearson 6 30
_Venus_ ship Thomas Nicholson 10 20
_Viper_ ship {Jonathan Neall 14 65
{Benjamin Hilton
_Washington_ brig Edmond Lewis 7 15
_Willing Maid_ schooner John Savage 4 25
_Wild Cat_ brig Daniel Ropes 14 75
_Warren_ schooner I. Thorndike 6 50
_William_ schooner Joseph Fearson 8 25

PRIVATE ARMED SHIPS OF SALEM IN THE WAR OF 1812

_Name_ _Class_ _Commander_ _Guns_ _Men_
_Active_ schooner Benjamin Patterson 12 25
_Alexander_ ship T. Williams, Jr. 18 140
_Alfred_ ship Benjamin Crowninshield 16 110
{Joseph Ropes
_America_ ship {John Kehoe 20 150
{Jas. W. Chever
_Black Vomit_ boat John Upton muskets 16
_Buckskin_ schooner I. Bray 5 50
_Cadet_ schooner William Calley 2 40
_Castigator_ launch {Stephen G. Clarke 6 20
{Spencer Hall
{John Upton
_Cossack_ schooner {Wm. Davis 1 45
{Abner Poland
_Dart_ schooner {T. Symonds 2 40
{John Green
_Diomede_ schooner Jacob Crowninshield 3 100
_Dolphin_ schooner Jacob Endicott 1 70
_Enterprize_ schooner John R. Morgan 4 100
_Fair Trader_ schooner John R. Morgan 1 35
{Abner Poland
_Fame_ schooner {John Upton 2 30
{—— Webb
_Frolic_ schooner Nathan Green 1 60
{J. B. H. Ordione
_Galliniper_ schooner {Timothy Wellman 1 30
{Andrew Tucker
_General Putnam_ schooner John Evans 2 60
_General Stark_ schooner John Evans 3 50
_Grand Turk_ brig {Holten J. Breed 18 150
{Nathan Green
_Growler_ schooner Samuel B. Graves 105
_Helen_ schooner {Nathaniel Lindsay 4 70
{John Upton
_Halkar_ boat {John Kehoe muskets 16
{Samuel Lamson
_Jefferson_ sloop {S. Giles Downie 1 20
{T. Wellman, Jr.
_John_ ship {James Fairfield
{Benjamin Crowninshield
_John & George_ schooner John Sinclair, Jr. 1 50
_Lizard_ schooner Samuel Loring 2 30
_Montgomery_ brig {Holten J. Breed 10 100
{Ben. Upton
_Onion_ boat {John Upton muskets 20
{Jonathan Blythe
_Owl_ boat William Duncan muskets 14
_Phoenix_ schooner Stephenson Richards 1 25
_Polly_ sloop Samuel C. Hardy 1 60
_Recovery_ schooner Joseph Peele 2 20
_Regulator_ schooner James Mansfield 50
_Revenge_ schooner John Sinclair, Jr. 1 50
_Scorpion_ sloop Stephenson Richards 1 20
_Swift_ schooner Harney Choate 1 25
_Swiftsure_ launch {Stephen Clarke 1 20
{Charles Berry
_Terrible_ boat John Green muskets 10
_Viper_ schooner Joseph Preston 1 20
_Wasp_ sloop Ernest A. Erwin 2 35

RECAPITULATION

REVOLUTIONARY WAR

Ships 56
Brigs and Brigantines 69
Sloops 14
Schooners 56
Galley 1
———
196
Total number of guns 1,965
Total number of men 7,631
Total number of vessels 196

WAR OF 1812

Ships 4
Brigs and Brigantines 2
Sloops 4
Schooners 21
——
31
Total number of guns 147
Total number of men 2,081
Total number of vessels 31

INDEX

INDEX

_Active_, bark, Captain Richardson, diverting tale of a green
seaman, 219;
first American trader in the Fijis, 406.

Adams, President John, address to Congress urging protection of
maritime
commerce, 229.

_Adventure_, brig, founders at sea, marvelous escape of her captain,
33.

Adventures, list of, sent in Salem ships to the Orient, 188-89.

Atheneum, Salem, founded with library captured by privateer, 302.

_America_, privateer in War of 1812;
her trading voyages to the Red Sea, 355;
fighting equipment and complement, 357;
first cruise in command of Captain Joseph Ropes, 357;
second cruise under Captain James Kehew, 358;
log of cruises in command of Captain James Chever, 359-62;
fight with packet _Princess Elizabeth_, 364.

Archer, Captain Henry, wreck of his ship _Glide_ in Fijis, 408.

Ashton, Philip, journal of captivity among pirates, 44-57.

_Astrea_, first American ship to visit Manila, 304.

_Atlantic_, first ship to show American colors to East India
Company, 494.

Bancroft, Hubert Howe, version of Captain Richard Cleveland’s sea
fight
with Spanish at San Diego, 349.

Barbary Pirates, attacks on Salem commerce and seamen held in bondage
(1661), 22;
appeal posted in Salem for funds to ransom captives from, 226.

Barney, Lieutenant Joshua, escape from Mill Prison, 131-33.

Barr, James, commanding privateer _Rover_, 65.

Battis, John, narrative of the piracy of the brig _Mexican_, 432-50.

Beal, Captain John, capture of his ship _Essex_ by French privateers
(1690), 21.

Bentley, Rev. William, diary of; account of Madame Susannah Hathorne’s
recollections of witchcraft persecutions, 26;
loss of ship _Brutus_, 220;
rides to Marblehead on a gun-carriage to help save the
_Constitution_, 375.

_Betsey_, schooner, taken by French frigate (1759), 31.

Boardman, Francis, his quaint sea journals, 35;
his poetry, 37;
his superstitions, 38.

Bertram, John, the last great shipping merchant of Salem, 487;
his ventures to South America and Zanzibar, 489-90.

_John Bertram_, ship, built and launched in sixty days for California
trade, 491.

Bowditch, Nathaniel, his precocious youth as a prodigy of learning,
301;
sea life and voyages including journal of stay in Manila, 304-9;
his “Practical Navigator,” 299;
honors paid him after death, 298;
his bequest to Salem Marine Society, 309.

Bowditch, William, held in bondage by Barbary pirates (1700), 22.

Breed, Holten J., captain of privateer _Grand Turk_, 370.

Briggs, Enos, master builder of the _Essex_ frigate, 232.

Burlingame, Anson, U. S. Minister to China, his account of the death
of Frederick Townsend Ward, 472-4.

Butman, Captain John G., commander of brig _Mexican_, 431.

Carey, William, his life as a castaway in the Fijis, 417.

Carnes, Captain Jonathan, fetches home first cargoes of wild pepper
from Sumatra (1795), 185.

_Caroline_, cutter, hazardous voyage of Captain Richard Cleveland
in, 332-35.

Chever, Captain James, his brilliant career as a privateersman,
358-66.

Chronometer, invention and perfection of, 293-94.

Cleveland, George, journal of voyage to Japan (1800), 257-63.

Cleveland, Captain Richard, his recollections of methods and
enterprises of typical Salem merchants, 174;
journal and description of his voyages, 329;
obituary notice of, 352;
captured in ship _Telemaco_, by a British frigate, 367.

_Cleopatra’s Barge_, first American yacht, voyage of, 207-13.

Commerce, decline of foreign, 17;
British restrictions on American, 29.

Conant, Roger, his settlement of Salem, 18.

Crowninshield, six brothers at sea, 204;
Benjamin W., Secretary of Navy, 205;
George, builds first American yacht, 206;
his notable voyage to the Mediterranean, 207-241;
brings body of Captain James Lawrence from Halifax in brig
_Henry_, 376;
Benjamin, Jr., voyage to Mocha in _America_, 355.

Custom House, Nathaniel Hawthorne’s description of, 17, 492-3;
decline of shipping business, 484.

Dana, Richard Henry, mentions exploits of Captain Richard Cleveland
on coast of Lower California, 348.

Derby, Elias Hasket, foremost in equipping Salem privateers of
Revolution, 96;
sends _Grand Turk_ on first American voyage to Cape of Good Hope,
173;
recaptures schooner _Amity_ and restores her to her skipper, 177;
education as a merchant and successful voyages, 181-2;
sends _Astrea_ on first American voyage to Manila (1796), 186;
contributes $10,000 to building _Essex_ frigate, 231.

Derby, Elias Hasket, Jr., narrative of the brilliant voyage of the
_Mount Vernon_ (1799), 190-92.

Derby, Captain John, carries first news of Lexington and Concord to
England in _Quero_, 159-69;
one of owners of ship _Columbia_ which explored Northwest coast and
discovered Columbia River, 170.

Derby, Captain Richard, voyage to the West Indies in the _Volante_
(1741); copy of instructions from owners, 30.

Derby, Captain Samuel, voyage to Japan in _Margaret_ (1800), 257.

Derby Wharf, its privateering activity during Revolution, 64;
its vanished greatness, 17.

_Desire_, West Indiaman, first ship trading from Salem (1640), 20.

DeSoto, pirate, gallant rescue of crew of _Minerva_, 447.

Devereux, Captain James, voyage to Japan in _Franklin_ (1799), 252-6.

Dike Anthony, master mariner, frozen to death with crew after
shipwreck
on Cape Cod, 32.

_Doggett, Charles_, brig, carries descendants of _Bounty_ mutineers
from Tahiti to Pitcairn Island, 407.

Driver, Captain Michael, his misfortunes at the hands of privateers
and freebooters, 31.

Driver, Captain William (see _Charles Doggett_, brig), 407.

Dutch intercourse with Japan in 1799, 251.

Eagleston, Captain John H., career in South Seas, 407;
rescues crew of _Glide_ in Fijis, 429.

East India Marine Society, history and purpose, 10;
resolutions adopted at death of Nathaniel Bowditch, 298;
report of committee to examine “Practical Navigator,” 300.

Embargo, disastrous effects of, 482-3.

Endicott, Captain Chas. M., capture of his vessel, the _Friendship_,
by Malay pirates, 378.

Endicott, John, first governor of colony, 18.

_Endeavor_, first American ship to pass through Straits of
Magellan, 494.

English, Philip, first great shipping merchant of Salem;
copy of bill of lading, 24;
his mansion, 25;
trial of his wife for witchcraft, 25-28;
letter of instructions to one of his shipmasters (1722), 28.

_Essex_, ship, loses boatswain in sea fight (1695), 21.

_Essex_, frigate, popular subscription raised to build, 231;
details of her building, 233;
dimensions, 295;
first American war vessel to pass Cape of Good Hope, 239;
fight with the _Phoebe_ and the _Cherub_, 241-46;
broadside ballad describing her gallant end, 247.

_Exchange_, ketch, taken by French ship off Block Island (1695), 21.

Fairfield, William, letter written on board a Salem slaver, 222.

_Fellowship_, ketch, taken by French privateers (1690), 21.

Felt, Captain John, defies British at North Bridge, 158.

Forbes, Robert Bennet, his reminiscences of life at sea, 203, 312.

Fox, Ebenezer, an account of recruiting for State cruiser in
Revolution, 68.

_Franklin_, ship, voyage to Japan (1799), 252-6.

_Friendship_, tragedy of the, 378.

Fuller, Captain Thomas, seaman in brig _Mexican_, 431;
captured by pirates, 434;
incident of trial of pirates, 446.

Gardner, Samuel, diary of voyage to Gibraltar (1759), 33-5.

_Gazette, Salem_, denounciation of Boston Massacre, 150;
account of Lexington and Concord fights, 166;
description of launching of frigate _Essex_, 233;
trial of pirates of _Pinda_, 444.

Gage, General Thomas, transfers seat of Colonial government from
Boston to Salem, 151-53.

_George_, ship, remarkably successful career of, 198-9.

Gillis, Captain James D., his services to navigation, 378.

_Glide_, wreck of, 408.

Gordon, “Chinese,” 467.

_Grand Turk_, ship, first American vessel at Cape of Good Hope, 173.

_Grand Turk_, privateer of 1812, log of cruises under Captain Nathan
Green, 370.

Gray, William, lieutenant of privateer _Jack_ (1782), 74;
owns great fleet of ships in foreign trade, 202;
contributes $10,000 to building _Essex_ frigate, 231.

Guam, description of (1801), 279.

Haraden, Jonathan, privateersman, first commission as lieutenant of
_Tyrannicide_, 78;
commands the _Pickering_ in spectacular battle with the
_Achilles_, 80;
captures three British armed vessels in one engagement, 85;
stories of his gallantry and brilliant seamanship, 87-89;
his fight with the king’s packet, 90;
makes rigging for _Essex_ frigate in his rope-walk, 233.

Haswell, William, journal of a voyage to Guam, 274.

Hawthorne, Nathaniel, in the Salem Custom House, 6;
his father’s log, 7;
descriptions of Salem as a decaying port, 492.

Heaving down a ship, description of, 409.

Henry of Portugal, Prince, encourages improvement in science of
navigation, 290.

Howe, Captain Ephriam, lives eight months alone on a desolate
island, 32.

Ingersoll, Captain Jonathan, makes first American voyage to Cape of
Good Hope, 176.

Insurance, marine, premium rates of eighteenth century, 30.

Jones, John Paul, proclamation calling for seamen for _Ranger_, 72;
ballad celebrating escape of _Ranger_ from British squadron, 71.

Kehew, Captain John, commanding privateer _America_, 358.

Kirwan, Dr. Richard, capture of his library by Beverly privateer, 302.

Lawrence, Captain James, commander of _Chesapeake_, his funeral in
Salem, 376.

Laurens, Henry, United States Minister to Holland, his capture and
imprisonment, 126.

Li Hung Chang, his official tribute to memory of Ward, 469.

Leslie, Colonel, his retreat from North Bridge, Salem, 154.

Little, Captain Luther, adventures as a merchant sailor, 98;
on board the _Protector_ in her fight with the _Admiral Duff_, 142.

McHenry, James, Secretary of War, letter urging naval measures to
protect American commerce, 230.

Magellan, journal of his discovery of the Marianne Islands (Guam),
273.

Manila, first American voyage to, journal of Nathaniel Bowditch, 304.

Manley, Captain John, dashing career as naval officer and capture by
British frigate, 119;
challenges fellow prisoner to duel, 128.

Marine Museum, unique relics and collections in, 14.

_Marquis de Somereulas_, ship, rescues remnant of company of English
transport, 217.

Martineau, Harriet, describes Salem of seventy-five years ago, 13.

Mason, Colonel David, takes leading part in opposing British at North
Bridge, 156.

_Minerva_, ship, gallant rescue of her crew by pirate de Soto, 447.

_Montgomery_, privateer, fight with English packet, 374.

_Morse, Prof._, Edward S., director of Peabody Museum, 16.

Navigation, early instruments and methods of, 290.

_New Priscilla_, brig, crew butchered by pirates, 441.

North Bridge, Salem, scene of first armed clash of Revolution, 154.

Orne, Captain Joseph, slain with his crew by Arabs, 216.

Osgood, John, lieutenant of privateer _Fame_, quells mutiny, 94;
captured by British frigate, 95.

Peabody, Joseph, career as shipping merchant, 197;
repulse of British boarding party on _Ranger_, 199.

Perkins & Co., letter to agents in Canton, showing immense reward of
commercial daring, 202.

Perkins, Thomas, supercargo, letter of instructions, 182-4.

Pickering, Timothy, takes part in affair with British at North
Bridge, 154.

_Pilgrim_, ship, fight with Spanish frigate, 96.

Pirates, expedition against (1689), 41;
ketch _Margaret_ destroyed by, 42;
brigantine _Charles_ captured by Quelch, 43;
execution of Quelch and others, 44;
notarial records describe encounter of ship _Hopewell_ with, 43;
protest of Captain John Shattuck relating capture by, 45;
adventures of Philip Ashton while in the hands of Ned Low, 46-59;
fiendish cruelty of, 441;
capture of brig _Mexican_, 434;
trial and execution of eleven pirates, 444-49.

Porter, Captain David, takes command of _Essex_ frigate, 240;
fights the _Phoebe_ and the _Cherub_, 241-47.

Ports, foreign, in which Salem ships traded (1810-1830), 15.

_Potomac_, frigate, bombardment of Malay settlement of Qualah
Battoo, 402.

Preble, Captain Edward, first commander of _Essex_ frigate, 236.

Privateers, number of Salem vessels in Revolution, 58;
copy of bill of sale of prize shares, 64;
recruiting with fife and drum, 67;
tavern bill for rendezvous of crew, 68;
in War of 1812, 353;
small craft employed, 499;
articles of agreement, 65;
list of Salem privateers in Revolution, 500;
in War of 1812, 506.

_Quero_, schooner, carries first news to England of _Lexington_ and
_Concord_ fights, 159.

_Quill_, brig, Captain Kinsman, in South Seas, 434.

Rantoul, Robert S., narrative and documents concerning General
Frederick Townsend Ward, 451;
eulogy of Salem commerce, 492.

_Register, Essex_, account of piracy of Mexican, 442.

Richardson, Captain William, voyage to the Fijis, 406.

Rousillon, Count de, voyages and adventures with Captain Richard
Cleveland, 343.

Ropes, Captain David, death in privateering action, 72;
Captain Joseph, commander of privateer _America_ in War of 1812,
357.

Rowan, Captain, plunder of his ship by Governor of Valparaiso, 347.

_Rubicon_, ship, captain’s sentimental cipher in log, 213.

Russell, William, capture in ship _Jason_, 119;
account of life in Old Mill Prison, reenlistment and captivity in
the
_Jersey_ prison ship, 143;
untimely death, 148.

_Sailor’s Vade Mecum_, instructions for preparing merchant ships for
action, 60.

Salem Marine Society, its foundation and records, 11-12.

_Salem Packet_, captures French ship, 21.

_Scorpion_, privateer schooner, quaint log of, 76.

Silver, Captain Peter, rescues skipper’s wife from bark _Kilmars_,
485.

Silsbee, Nathaniel, beginning of his sea life at fourteen, 311;
a captain at eighteen, 313;
commands ship _Benjamin_ on voyage to the Orient at nineteen, 314;
encounters a privateer, 318;
impressment of one of his seamen by British frigate, 319;
his ship _Portland_ confiscated by the French at Malaga, and
released
because of his remarkable sagacity and courage, 321;
commands a merchant fleet in attack by French privateer, 326;
United States Senator from Massachusetts, 328.

Snell, Captain Nicholas, his meeting with pirate de Soto, 449.

Story, Justice Joseph, trial of pirates of _Pinda_, 445.

_Success_, letter of marque, singular entry in log of, 76.

Thoreau, Henry D., describes the business of a successful Salem
shipping merchant, 187.

Tory, letter from a, describing conditions in Salem during
Revolution, 93.

Turner, Captain John, captures British ship after hard fight, 96.

Upton, Captain Benjamin, his desperate fight in privateer
_Montgomery_, 374.

Vandeford, Captain Benjamin, in the South Seas as pilot for Commodore
Wilkes, 406;
at the Fijis in ship _Clay_, 418.

Ward, Frederick Townsend, his forebears, 452;
life as a mariner, 454;
with Walker, the filibuster, 455;
leader of the Chinese “Ever Victorious Army,” 458;
death in battle, 465;
tributes of foreign officers to his valor, 466;
Imperial decree deifying his memory, 468;
dedication of Chinese temple in his honor, 474.

Warehouses, cargoes that filled them a century ago, 16.

Waters, John, bill of sale of privateering shares, 65.

Weld, Dr. Charles G., gift of building to Peabody Academy, 15.

West, Captain Ebenezer, biography of, 179;
Captain Edward, 180;
Captain Nathaniel, 181.

Whepley, David, his life among the Fiji Islanders, 411.

Wilkes, Commodore, in the South Seas, 406.

Young, John, one of first white men to dwell in Sandwich Islands, 349.

Transcriber’s Notes

pg 19 Changed: yoemanry for the most part
to: yeomanry for the most part

pg 34 Changed: 28—Gibralter—Went on shore.
to: 28—Gibraltar—Went on shore.

pg 34 Changed: attacked by 3 of the piratical Tereffa
to: attacked by 3 of the piratical Teriffa

pg 87 Changed: he went after the consort and look her
to: he went after the consort and took her

pg 221 Changed: he was downed or eaten by crocodiles
to: he was drowned or eaten by crocodiles

pg 224 Changed: their spirits than the Africians
to: their spirits than the Africans

pg 224 Changed: they might obtain full caroges
to: they might obtain full cargoes

pg 316 Changed: He proceded no farther than the Cape
to: He proceeded no farther than the Cape

pg 368 Changed: by the irresistable means of brute force
to: by the irresistible means of brute force

pg 426 Changed: profusely annointed with cocoanut oil
to: profusely anointed with cocoanut oil

pg 474 Changed: persons interested, to accomnany him
to: persons interested, to accompany him