*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 52815 ***

Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/philadelphiahous00hodg


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).





THE PHILADELPHIA HOUSEWIFE,

Or,

Family Receipt Book.

by

AUNT MARY.







[Illustration]

Philadelphia:
J. B. Lippincott & Co.
1855.


Entered according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1855,
By J. P. Lippincott & Co.,
In the Clerk’s Office of the District Court, in and for the
Eastern District of Pennsylvania.




PREFACE.


As the health of a family depends more upon the quality of their
food than upon any other cause whatever, it is a public benefaction
to give good advice upon this subject. That this advice may be most
widely beneficial, it should have reference to the material and the
preparation of food; and in both these respects, regard should be had
to economy. The rich, who are able to provide the most choice and
expensive articles of diet, frequently fail in having them prepared
for the table in an agreeable and healthful manner; and the poor, and
even those in moderate circumstances, are not only not generally well
informed as to healthful and nutritious articles of food, which may be
purchased at moderate expense, but when procured, they more generally
err in the healthful preparation of them, mistaking high seasoning and
rich mixtures for delicious and wholesome food. It is to aid the family
in procuring and preparing their food according to their means, and
with a view to elegance, taste, and health, that the authoress of this
book has been induced to publish these receipts and the accompanying
advice and reflections. She does this at the solicitation of many heads
of families, and with the confidence of knowledge founded on long
personal experience. This is the only source of reliable knowledge on
the subject of procuring and preparing healthful food, in good taste,
and with elegance and economy.

But proper materials may be obtained for food, and the cook may
understand how to prepare them; yet she will fail if she does not have
the kitchen furnished with proper articles for culinary purposes. Each
of these articles should be kept in its proper place, and scrupulously
clean, while every thing should be done with exactness, and at the
proper time.

The authoress has the greatest confidence that the circulation of this
book will promote elegance and comfort in wealthy families, and economy
and health in families of moderate means.




THE

FAMILY RECEIPT BOOK.


TO PREPARE AND TO SELECT BEEF, MUTTON, LAMB, VEAL, AND BACON.

White meats, such as veal, mutton, and lamb, should be washed as
quickly as possible, or the juices of the meat will be extracted by
the water. Fresh beef should never be washed, but well scraped with a
clean knife twice over; any soiled parts which cannot be scraped must
be cut off. If the bones are soiled, saw off the part with the meat
saw. Salted meat should be well washed in three or four waters, and
soaked at least fifteen minutes in cold water, before putting it down
to boil. The pot should be filled with cold water, and boil slowly till
done, according to the size of the meat, or allow a quarter of an hour
for every pound of the meat; quick boiling will make the meat hard and
insipid. Be careful that it does not stop boiling, or the meat will be
injured; remove the scum frequently. People are not generally aware of
the injurious effects from eating the flesh of diseased animals. It
has been my practice to choose beef from the whiteness of the fat, and
always object to it if a dark shade of yellow; let the fat be clear
and thick, and the beef smooth and close; if otherwise, it is old. The
flesh of a young ox should be a good red, and have a smooth and open
grain, and feel tender. Pork may be judged by the thinness of the skin,
and by pinching the lean; if young, it will break. When clammy, it is
not fit for use. Fresh pork will be always cool and smooth. The fat of
mutton should be white and firm, and the lean a good colour. If the
vein in the neck of lamb has a greenish cast, it is stale: it should be
of a bluish hue.

BACON.--The lean should be of a good colour, and tender, and firm on
the bone, the fat should be firm and of a red tinge, and the rind thin.
Try a ham by putting a sharp knife in under the bone. If the smell
is agreeable, the ham is good; if otherwise, and the knife soiled,
reject it. Veal,--The whitest is the most juicy, having been made so
by frequent bleeding: the flesh of a bull calf is firmest, but of a
darker colour. Old and diseased meat will shrink very much in cooking.
Hams and tongues, if they are old and hard, should be put to soak in
warm water the night before they are boiled. A large ham will take from
four to six hours to boil, and a tongue will take nearly as long. They
should be kept constantly boiling, and well skimmed: put them down in
plenty of cold water. Fish should always be boiled in hot water with a
little salt in it: let them boil slowly.

Wild fowls do not require as much cooking as tame. They should be done
before a brisk fire, and be constantly basted. Wild ducks will cook
sufficiently in a quarter of an hour; pheasants in twenty minutes. A
large turkey will take from two hours and a half to three hours. Hen
turkeys are the best for boiling. The time will depend on the size: if
a large one, it will take two hours and a half, and should be boiled
in a cloth. All meats when roasting should be put some distance from
the fire, and brought gradually nearer; the more they are turned and
basted, the more juicy they will be. Vegetables should be freshly
gathered; they are much sweeter and more healthy, if cooked as soon as
taken out of the ground. When potatoes are to be fried, throw them in
water with plenty of ice in it after slicing. This will make them crisp.


BEEF SOUP, THIN.

Wash and scrape well a shin of beef, put it down early in the morning
in plenty of cold water, with a piece of veal, and a small piece of
lean ham; let it boil slowly one hour, and skim it well; then add two
carrots, washed, scraped, and cut fine, six potatoes, four onions, and
one turnip; some horse-radish cut in small pieces; season with black
and cayenne pepper, and salt to your taste: about half an hour before
it is done, put in a bunch of sweet herbs, parsley, and a little
celery cut in small pieces. You can either strain it or send it to
table with the vegetables in it.


ANOTHER BEEF SOUP.

Boil a shin of beef the day before it is wanted. The next day put on
your stock, after removing the fat from the top of it; then put in
a tea-cup of barley, wash and cut up two carrots, three onions, one
turnip, three tomatoes, put in parsley and the usual pot herbs, twenty
minutes before it is done; season with cayenne and black pepper and
salt to your taste.


VEAL SOUP.

Put into the soup kettle a small piece of ham; wash and cut up four
onions; put them into the pot with the ham, and six quarts of water;
let it boil slowly an hour and a half, then put in a shin of veal;
let it boil an hour and a half longer; then take out the ham; skim
off the grease as it rises; beat up in a gill of good cream, two
table-spoonsful of flour, and the yolks of two eggs very light; and
then add the soup; season with parsley, pepper, and salt, and serve up.


MUTTON BROTH.

Scrape and wash clean a breast of mutton; put it down in the soup
kettle to boil with five quarts of water, put in a small cup of barley,
or two tablespoonsful of rice; let it boil slowly three hours and
thirty minutes; skim it well; add carrots, a turnip, an onion, and a
little parsley cut up; let it boil forty minutes longer; season with
pepper and salt; serve hot. The carrots should be grated.


CHICKEN BROTH.

Chicken broth may be made in the same way. Some persons prefer rice,
but rice is used in so many ways, that barley is more uncommon as
well as more nutritious. Noodles or vermicelli can be substituted, if
preferred.


CHICKEN SOUP.

Put a pair of chickens in the soup kettle, with five quarts of water,
one large carrot grated, and let it boil; skim off the grease as it
rises: after it has boiled three hours take out the chickens, and
strain the liquor through a sieve; put it in the kettle again; add the
vermicelli after it has boiled an hour, an onion chopped small, some
pepper and salt, a few blades of mace, a little parsley cut fine. If
you like, just before it is served up, add a small bunch of thyme.


OYSTER SOUP.

Strain the liquor from a hundred oysters into the soup kettle; add
a quart of milk, a little mace, cloves, pepper and salt, with a
little rolled cracker; boil 20 minutes; then put in the oysters; stir
frequently: fifteen minutes after the oysters are in, serve it up.


MOCK TURTLE SOUP.

Clean very well a calf’s head, take out the eyes, cut off the nose; let
it soak for ten minutes; then put it down with five quarts of water,
a small piece of ham, four onions, and some salt; let these boil till
tender, or till the meat will leave the bones; then strain it; add
cloves, nutmeg, parsley, and thyme; let it stew slowly for an hour; add
a small piece of butter rubbed in flour, some wine and mushroom catsup.
You can then put the meat in or send the soup to table without it, as
preferred.


CALF’S HEAD SOUP.

Prepare as above. Then put down the head and liver in six quarts of
water; let them boil till tender; take them up; cut the meat in small
pieces; be careful to take out all the bones; then put the meat into
the liquor with three onions, some cloves, mace, and nutmeg, pepper,
black and cayenne, and salt; set this on the fire; let it simmer gently
an hour: just before taking it up, add a little butter rubbed in flour,
and some wine.


OX-TAIL SOUP.

Wash and joint two ox-tails; pour over them in a soup kettle five
quarts of water; when it comes to a boil skim it, and add some salt,
three onions, two carrots cut fine, three turnips, four potatoes, a
large bunch of pot herbs, some cayenne pepper, and a little rice flour;
boil slowly for three hours, but do not put in the vegetables till
after it has been boiling two hours: half an hour before you take it
up, add a little celery cut up fine.


MULLAGATAWNY SOUP.

This soup is always made of the same materials, only varying in
quantity. Brown in some butter six or eight onions; fry some pieces of
rabbits and chicken; lay it upon the onions; have ready some stock,
boiling hot; let it simmer gently for an hour and a quarter; then
strain it through a sieve; add two quarts more of stock, and let it
stew; mix with it three tea-spoonsful of currie powder, and two of
brown flour with a little cold water; let it boil slowly for half an
hour. If preferred, the juice of a lemon may be strained into it.


OCHRA SOUP.

Wash well a dozen and a half young ochras; slice them thin, three
onions chopped fine; pour on these five quarts of water early in the
morning with pepper and salt; let this stew slowly two hours; then
put in a piece of veal and a piece of lean bacon, with seven or eight
tomatoes, skinned and sliced; boil it till it is thick; serve hot to
table.


CATFISH SOUP.

Take one large catfish, clean it well, cut off the head; then cut the
fish in half; put it in a pot with two onions, and a bunch of parsley
cut up fine, and some pepper and salt; put in a quart of water, and
stew slowly till the fish is tender; then add a pint of milk and a
quart of water; let this all simmer for half an hour; roll a piece of
butter in a little flour: in twenty minutes after the butter and flour
go in, it will be sufficiently done.


DRIED PEA SOUP.

Wash a quart of dried peas well; put them in four quarts of water to
soak over night; early in the morning place it over the fire in your
soup kettle; when it has boiled three hours, put in a small piece of
salt pork; add some salt, pepper, and two chopped onions; after it
has boiled some time take out the pork; mash the peas, and strain the
liquor through a sieve into a kettle; put the pork in again; skim off
the fat; let it boil one hour; serve up hot with toast.


GREEN PEA SOUP.

Shell a quart of green peas; wash them, and put them down to boil with
three quarts of water and a little salt; when it has boiled slowly
an hour and a half, season with pepper and a little butter rolled in
flour: boiling a few of the pods with the peas is an improvement.


BEAN SOUP.

Wash the beans and soak them over night; in the morning throw off the
water, and put down the beans with five quarts of water and a small
piece of salt pork; let it boil till the beans are perfectly soft; then
take out the pork and either strain the soup, or send it to table with
the beans in, as preferred.


CLAM SOUP.

Wash the shells of a peck of clams carefully; put them to boil in two
quarts of cold water; when the shells have opened, take off the liquor;
return it to the soup kettle; take the clams out of the shells, put
them in the pot with the seasoning; a little salt and pepper; rub in
a small piece of butter, a dessert spoonful of flour; stir constantly
till boiling hot; add some parsley chopped fine, and a pint of milk.


FISH.

Fresh fish are easily told by the redness of their gills. If the gills
are white or the flesh is not hard to the touch, reject them. They are
not fresh. Fish should be sent to table as soon as cooked. Broiled fish
should be sprinkled with salt before broiling. When boiled, should have
salt in the water.


TO BAKE A SHAD.

Shad should be fat. Clean it well, take out the inside and the gills.
Score and salt the fish, make a dressing of bread, butter, pepper,
salt, parsley, thyme and sweet marjoram; fill the fish with this; tie
it up and put it in a pan with some water: dredge the fish with flour,
let it cook slowly, baste it often; when nearly done, add some mushroom
catsup to the gravy; season to your taste with pepper and salt. Take it
up very carefully: bake half an hour.


TO BROIL A SHAD.

Cut it down the back, sprinkle it with pepper and salt, grease your
gridiron well, and put it down on the flesh side first. Let it be well
done. Send hot to table.


FRESH COD BOILED.

Clean and wash it well; put it down to boil in the fish kettle. It
will cook in half an hour; take it up carefully, garnish the dish with
hard-boiled egg, and serve with egg sauce. All boiled fish should have
salt in the water, or the fish will be insipid.


TO BOIL HALIBUT.

Sprinkle it with salt, tie it up in a cloth, put it in the kettle in
boiling water; let it boil slowly till done, which will depend upon the
size, allowing eight minutes to a pound.


TO FRY HALIBUT.

Cut it into small pieces, season it with pepper and salt, dip it in the
yolk of egg, then into rolled cracker: fry in hot lard, and serve it up.


TURBOT.

Turbot is one of the most delicious fish we have, when properly
prepared and served. It must be washed with the greatest care, and cut
down the middle of the back, on the dark side of the fish. Have your
kettle perfectly clean; put your fish into boiling water, enough to
cover it, with two table spoonsful of salt; let it boil slowly, skim it
frequently. It will cook sufficiently in twenty minutes: drain and dish
it; serve up hot with butter and egg sauce, or any other preferred.


TROUT.

Trout should be fried as perch.


TO BOIL STURGEON.

Sturgeon may be boiled as rock fish, and served up with the same
sauces. It is very good with spiced vinegar poured over when cold.


TO PICKLE FRESH HERRING.

First scale and clean them well, cut off the heads, put salt, pepper
and cloves in the vinegar; boil it, and when cold, pour over the fish
in a stone jar; set the jar on a warm stove for half a day; then put
them in a cold place.


TO BOIL SHEEP’S HEAD.

Sheep’s head is one of the most delicate fish, and should be boiled as
rock fish; to be eaten with egg sauce, walnut catsup, or harvey sauce.


SEA BASS.

Sea bass are good either fried or boiled.


HADDOCK.

Haddock must be well cleaned and emptied of its contents; take out the
gills and wash them inside and out with particular care; lay them in
warm water a little salted; drop in a small piece of saltpetre; skim
the water frequently, and let them simmer from ten to fifteen minutes:
serve hot with egg and other sauces to your taste.


TO DRESS A SALT COD.

Put your fish in water over night to soak; add a little vinegar to the
water; wash it well: it should not boil, but simmer slowly for half an
hour, or till tender: to be eaten with egg sauce and mashed potatoes:
when cold, mix with mashed potatoes: dip them in egg, and fry them in
hot lard.


TO PICKLE SALT SALMON.

Put it to soak over night; in the morning clean the scales and put it
down to boil for ten minutes; take it up, and put it in a stone crock;
boil some vinegar with a little mace, whole pepper and allspice; pour
over the fish, and when perfectly cold, cover and set it away: this
will keep for a length of time, and is a nice relish for tea.


TO BOIL FRESH SALMON.

Tie it up in a cloth and put it in the kettle with boiling water; let
it boil slowly, allowing ten minutes to each pound; sprinkle it with
salt before putting it in the cloth; to be eaten with egg sauce and
walnut catsup, or with fish sauce.


TO BOIL FRESH MACKEREL.

Sprinkle it with salt after cleaning: tie it in a cloth, and boil as
other fish. It will boil sufficiently well in twenty-five minutes;
serve with egg sauce.


TO BOIL ROCK FISH.

Clean and wash it well, tie it up in a cloth, boil it in water and
salt; let it boil gently according to the size: one weighing six pounds
will cook in half an hour. Garnish the dish with hard-boiled egg; to be
eaten with egg sauce.


TO FRY ROCK FISH.

To fry rock fish, dip them in Indian meal and fry in hot lard; score
them and season with pepper and salt before you fry them.


TO FRY PERCH.

Clean them well, and sprinkle with pepper and salt, and fry in lard;
scoring them and dipping them in Indian meal before frying.


TO FRY SMELTS.

These little fish must be drawn at the gills, as they must not be
opened: they are a very delicate fish: season them with salt; beat
up the yolk of egg very light, dip them in the egg; then in grated
cracker; fry in hot lard; serve hot.


LOBSTERS AND CRABS.

After washing them, put them alive in a pot of boiling water. Lobsters
will boil in forty minutes, or longer, if they are very large. Crabs
thirty minutes. Dress them with the yolk of hard-boiled eggs, oil,
pepper, salt, and mustard.


TO STEW CLAMS.

Take equal quantities of the liquor and new milk; stew it, and when
it comes to a boil, stir in the clams; season with pepper, salt and
parsley.


TO FRY CLAMS.

Strain them; then make a batter of the yolks of two eggs, two
table-spoonsful of flour, and a little milk; put them in and fry in hot
lard.


TO STEW CRABS.

Put them into a pot of boiling water for ten minutes; then take out
the meat and put it down with the juice that runs out, and very little
water, pepper, salt, and butter; a few minutes will cook them.


LOBSTER STEWED.

Proceed as for crabs. Cut them into small pieces; then stew for a few
minutes; season with cayenne pepper, salt and butter.


OYSTERS BROILED.

Take them from the shell and broil on an oyster iron; season with a
little pepper, salt, and butter; serve them hot.


TO ROAST OYSTERS IN THE SHELL.

Wash off the shells and place them on a large oyster gridiron; put it
over the coals; turn them once: ten minutes will cook them.


TO PICKLE OYSTERS.

Put the oysters on in the juice, and boil them plump; then take the
oysters out; add half as much vinegar as juice, a little mace, and
some grains of pepper, to your taste; boil this slowly; pour over the
oysters, and they are done.


TO STEW OYSTERS.

Take a hundred oysters; put them in a stew pan, with boiling water
enough to cover them; stir them till they are plump; then take them out
with a strainer; add half as much juice as there is water in the pot,
with some mace, whole grains of pepper, and salt, half pint of cream,
and piece of butter; two crackers rolled very fine, which sprinkle in;
then put in the oysters, and keep stirring for a few minutes, when they
will be done.


OYSTER PIE.

Make a puff paste; put some around the sides of a deep dish. Have a
hundred good oysters; take each oyster out of the liquor with a wooden
spoon or fork; mash as fine as possible the yolks of two hard-boiled
eggs. Put in a layer of oysters, over which strew a little of the egg
with some mace and whole grains of pepper; then another layer of
oysters with the egg, and spice as above, and so fill up the dish till
the oysters are all in; strew a little butter on the top: then place
precisely in the centre of the pie a small egg cup, so as to prevent
the top paste touching the liquor; strain the liquor, and put in
according to your judgment; cut a cross in the centre of the paste, and
open it to let the steam escape; let it bake slowly. If you find the
paste getting too brown, put a sheet of white paper over the top. If
the oysters are fresh, add some salt.


OYSTER FRITTERS.

Make a batter in the usual way; have your lard boiling hot; drop in a
spoonful of batter with an oyster in it, and let them brown; turn them
once, so that each side may brown.


SCOLLOPED OYSTERS.

Put well buttered toasted bread around the sides of a deep dish; put in
the oysters; season with salt, pepper, mace, and butter; strain into it
a little of the liquor; strew bread crumbs over it, and bake in a quick
oven.


TERRAPINS.

Wash them very well; then put them into a pot of boiling water; let
them stay till you can easily take off the toe nails and the skin; take
off the bottom shell; be careful in taking out the sand bag and the
gall; (the gall is in the liver) cut the terrapins up; save all the
juice which runs out in cutting; take out the eggs; put the terrapins
down to stew; season with cayenne pepper, salt; roll a piece of butter
in flour and mix in; add some wine, and drop in the eggs just before
taking them up. The quantity of wine and butter depends very much upon
the taste of the cook; but a quarter of a pound to two terrapins will
be sufficient; and half a pint of wine to four or five terrapins.


TO FRY TRIPE.

Have some lard boiling hot; cut your tripe in pieces three inches
square; dip them in butter and fry.


TO PREPARE A RENNET.

A rennet is the stomach of the calf. As soon as the calf is killed,
take it; wash it very quickly, and cover it with salt; let it lie three
or four days; then stretch it on sticks; hang it up to dry: when dry,
put it in a bag, and set it in a dry place to keep.


TO MAKE SMEARCASE OR COTTAGE CHEESE.

Keep thick milk near the fire till the whey has risen; pour it in a
muslin bag, and hang it in the shade for twelve hours; then take it out
and dress it with pepper, salt, and cream.




Sauces.


MELTED BUTTER.

Have half a pint of water boiling hot; roll a lump of butter the size
of an egg into three teaspoonsful of flour; when you have the butter
perfectly smooth remove the water from the fire, and stir your butter
in till every particle is dissolved. If this is carefully done, the
sauce will be perfectly smooth; then boil ten minutes.


EGG SAUCE.

Boil two or three eggs hard, cut them up fine, and put them in the
drawn butter as above.


CAPER AND NASTURTIAN SAUCE.

Caper and nasturtian sauce is made in the same way, always remembering
to cut the nasturtians in half: pickled cucumbers may be used in the
same manner, cut up small.


OYSTER SAUCE.

Oyster sauce is made in the same manner, only putting the flour and
butter into the oyster juice instead of water; either cut the oysters
in half or send to table whole; season with mace and whole pepper.


ONION SAUCE.

Take small white onions; put them down to stew with a little water and
salt; when nearly done, which will be in twenty minutes, drain off the
water; then add milk or cream; let them simmer gently; rub a little
flour and butter on a plate, and stir in.


MINT SAUCE.

Wash well a bunch of mint; chop it up fine; put it in your sauce dish
with a little vinegar and sugar; to be eaten with lamb.


CELERY SAUCE.

The celery must be washed, cut up and boiled till it is tender; have
some milk boiling hot, roll very smoothly a little butter and flour,
stir till the butter is all melted, then put in the celery; send hot to
table.


LOBSTER SAUCE.

Put on to boil a pint of water with a little mace, black peppers whole,
and some mustard seed; let it boil until the water is sharp; then
strain off the water and put it on to boil with salt and some butter
rubbed in flour; cut up some lobster, and dress it with this sauce.


MUSHROOM SAUCE.

Pick and wash some mushrooms; cut them up in a stew pan with pepper,
salt and a little water and mace; let them stew twenty or thirty
minutes; rub in very little flour and butter.


WINE SAUCE.

Beat up a piece of butter, then add the yolks of three eggs, and some
sugar, wine and brandy; put this on the fire, stirring it all the time;
as soon as it is boiling hot, take it off: this sauce is for puddings.


ANOTHER WINE SAUCE.

The quantity of the ingredients depends on the quantity of the article
you make. Have equal quantities of wine and water, and a little brandy
boiling hot, into which put some butter and sugar well beaten; season
with nutmeg, and as soon as boiling hot take from the fire, and send to
table.


CREAM SAUCE.

Sweeten to your taste some good sweet cream; season with nutmeg or rose
water; this is good sauce for apple dumplings.


PEPPER SAUCE.

Take twenty-five peppers cut very fine, one root of horse-radish
grated, two tablespoonsful of salt and a tablespoonful of mustard seed,
a tablespoonful of cloves, the same of allspice, a little mace; boil
the spices in the vinegar, and pour over the peppers, mixing all well
together; put in bottles or jars, and cork it.


CELERY VINEGAR.

Bruise a pint of celery seed; after putting it into your bottles,
fill them with strong cider vinegar; set it away for a month, not
forgetting to shake it every day: it will then be fit for use.


GRAVY FOR ROAST TURKEY AND CHICKENS.

Boil the liver and gizzard with a little salt; when done, chop them up
fine; mix with the water they were boiled in, some of the drippings
in the bottom of the oven, a very little brown flour, then add the
giblets: season to your taste.


VEAL GRAVY.

Take some of the drippings in the bottom of your oven, to which add
some boiling water; put it on to boil, season with pepper, salt, and a
little brown sugar and flour; send hot to table.


VENISON SAUCE.

Take equal quantities of claret and currant jelly, and some brown
sugar; put it down and let it stew till thick; send hot to table; this
sauce is very good for venison or roast leg of mutton.


APPLE DUMPLING SAUCE ANOTHER WAY.

Beat loaf sugar and butter to a cream as light as possible, and stir
slowly into it one wine glass of brandy. An excellent cold sauce for
apple dumplings or fritters.


APPLE SAUCE.

Pare a quarter of a peck of ripe green pippins; cut them in quarters
and core them; then put them in a pipkin or earthen pitcher, with a
little water to stew slowly; shake the pipkin or pitcher frequently;
do not put a spoon in; it might break them when nearly done: put in a
little loaf sugar; shake them several times; when done, pour them into
a dish without breaking: serve up cold or hot.


CRANBERRY SAUCE.

Wash and pick four quarts of cranberries; put them in a bell-metal
kettle with one quart of water to stew slowly: when half done, add two
pounds of brown sugar: every berry must be broken with a spoon before
it comes off the fire: stir frequently. Another way would be to add
more sugar and strain it through a fine cullender, and set it away in
forms to cool: this we would call cranberry jelly.


TO STEW DRIED FRUIT.

Dried fruit should be well washed in three or four different waters,
and put to soak over night in the water in which you intend stewing
them; to four quarts of fruit, put water enough to cover them, so that
none need be added while cooking: season and sweeten to your taste.
Some persons like dried orange peel in peaches.


TO ROAST BEEF.

Scrape till clean the fat, the lean, and the bones of the beef. If any
soil remain on the bones, saw it off with a beef saw. It can be more
thoroughly cleaned in this way than in any other. It spoils beef to
wash it. Spit it and put it in a tin kitchen before the fire, with a
half pint of water in the bottom of the kitchen; do not set it close to
the fire at first, but bring it gradually nearer; turn, and baste it
every few minutes. It should be cooked slowly. When nearly done, season
with black and cayenne pepper and salt. The habit of dredging beef with
flour is a very bad one. Flour is no improvement to beef. Ten pounds of
beef will roast, before a good fire, in two hours. For the gravy, pour
off the grease, add a little water, pepper and salt; send to table in a
gravy boat. This receipt will answer for any part of the beef that is
fit to roast. Garnish with horse-radish, grated. All roasts should be
well skewered to the spit.


BEEF STEAKS.

The sirloin is the best. Cut the steak half an inch thick; put it on
a gridiron over clear coals; turn it very often; when half done, put
it on a dish and squeeze as much of the juice out as possible; put it
back; season with pepper and salt. When done, place it in the dish with
the juice; add a spoonful of water, and if you prefer, a small piece of
butter: send to the table immediately.


TO STEW BEEF.

Cut all the meat from cold roast beef; put the bones down with some
water, pepper, salt, onions, carrots and potatoes, all cut up: a little
brown stock will improve it: let it stew till all of the vegetables
are done; then take out the bones, cut your meat in small pieces, rub
a piece of butter in flour and stir in: put the meat in till it is hot
through; then dish it.


BEEF A LA MODE.

Chop fine some parsley, thyme and onions; add some grated bread,
nutmeg, cloves, pepper and salt, with the yolks of three eggs beaten;
take out the bone and fill the space with these ingredients well mixed;
make holes in the lean part and stuff it; bind it firmly with tape; put
it into an iron pot, sufficiently large to hold it, cover it with water
and let it stew slowly for three hours. Make a gravy of the liquor it
was stewed in with a half pint of red wine and mushroom catsup; rub a
little butter in flour, and let it simmer five minutes; then take it up.


A BRISKET OF BEEF BAKED.

Take a brisket, say ten pounds; make a dressing of ham, parsley,
oysters, seasoned with pounded cloves, pepper, salt and nutmeg, and the
yolk of two eggs well beaten; make holes in the beef and stuff it; put
it in a pan with a little water and half a pint of wine; bake it three
hours; send hot to table. Garnish with sliced lemons.


BEEF STEAK PIE.

Stew some tender pieces of beef, cut it up in small pieces, season with
pepper and salt; have some good paste in a deep dish, into which put
the pieces of beef with some gravy; put on a cover and bake.


TO BOIL CORN BEEF.

Wash it well, and soak it thirty or forty minutes; put it down to boil
in plenty of cold water: let it boil slowly, and skim often.


A BEEF’S HEART.

Cut the heart open; let it soak in cold water for a few moments, then
take out the ventricles; put it down to boil; when nearly done, take it
up: make a dressing of small pieces of ham, pepper, salt, parsley, and
some beef chopped fine; make incisions with a knife; stuff and bake it;
pour a pint of the water in which it was boiled in the pan for gravy,
and thicken it with browned flour and butter.


DIRECTIONS FOR COOKING THE DIFFERENT PARTS OF VEAL.

The fore quarter, the rack, and breast, are best boiled. The fillet or
leg is very good stuffed and baked. The loin should be roasted. The
knuckle is proper for soup, also the neck and shoulder.


TO ROAST A LOIN OF VEAL.

Wash it well, and put it in a tin kitchen some distance from the fire;
when it is hot through, place it nearer to the fire; baste it well;
when nearly done, dredge it with flour; add pepper and salt; the time
it takes to cook will depend on the size of the loin; put half a pint
of water in the tin kitchen when you set it to the fire; garnish the
dish with sliced lemons.


VEAL CUTLETS.

Cut the cutlets half an inch thick; have some cracker rolled with
pepper, salt, and nutmeg; dip your cutlets in the yolk of egg well
beaten; then in grated cracker; fry in hot lard slowly till done, then
take them up: make the gravy by pouring a pint of cream with some
chopped parsley in the pan in which it has been cooked; season with
grated nutmeg: garnish your dish with curled parsley.


BAKED FILLET OF VEAL.

Take the leg or fillet of veal; wash it well; cut off the shank and
trim it, so that it will sit nicely in the pan; make a stuffing of
bread crumbs, pepper, salt, parsley and nutmeg, some butter and the
yolks of eggs; stuff the fillet and bake it: put a little water in the
pan, and some mushroom catsup in the gravy.


TO STEW VEAL.

Cut your veal in small pieces; slice three onions; fry them in butter;
then put the veal down with a little water, pepper, salt, nutmeg and
parsley; rub some butter in flour; put in the gravy with lemon juice or
catsup.


MOCK TURTLE OR CALF’S HEAD.

Clean the head well; let it soak for a few minutes in cold water; take
out the lower jaw, the nose and the eyes: then put it down to boil;
skim it well, and when the bones will fall from the meat, cut the meat
in small pieces; take out carefully all the small bones; have some
onions chopped fine, nutmeg, mace, cloves, pepper, salt, bread crumbs,
butter and egg, all well mixed together; put these nicely arranged in
a pan with some of the gravy; put egg and butter on the top; bake it
twenty minutes in an oven; when done, take it up; season the gravy with
red wine and mushroom catsup.


TO STEW CALF’S FEET.

Have your feet nicely cleaned and cut in two; boil them till tender;
take out the large bones; put them down to stew with some of the liquor
they were boiled in, pepper, salt and parsley chopped fine; rub a
dessert spoonful of butter in two of flour, and stir in. Garnish your
dish with curled parsley.


SWEET-BREADS.

Sweet-breads must always be parboiled. Have a dressing of bread crumbs,
pepper, salt, parsley and butter; stuff the sweet breads and roast; or
fry them like oysters, cutting them into small pieces.


SWEET-BREAD AND OYSTER PIE.

Stew the sweet-breads till tender; have a dish lined with a good paste;
cut the sweet-bread up in small pieces; put some in the paste with some
oysters, pepper, salt, butter and the yolks of eggs boiled hard and
mashed fine; then another layer of sweet bread and oysters till your
dish is full; put on a top paste and bake; cut a cross in the middle,
and turn it back to let the steam escape: send hot to table. Have a
small egg-cup in the centre of the pie, to keep the upper crust from
touching the liquor.


TO ROAST A LOIN OF MUTTON.

Wash it well, and put it down in the tin kitchen, with a little water
and salt in the bottom of the kitchen; baste and turn it well; a loin
will cook in an hour and a half: send hot to table, to be eaten with
currant jelly.


TO ROAST A LEG OF MUTTON.

Wash it well; take off the flank; make incisions an inch apart in it
with a sharp knife; stuff it with some onions boiled for five minutes,
and some sage leaves, both chopped fine, with black and cayenne pepper
and salt, and bread crumbs; moisten the crumbs with a little melted
butter; turn and baste it frequently.


TO STEW LAMB WITH PEAS.

Cut the lamb in pieces the size of a chop; put them down to stew with a
little water, pepper, salt and mace; add some young peas; let this cook
slowly till done: add some butter before you take it from the fire.


STEAKS OF MUTTON.

Have your slices a quarter of an inch thick; dip them in boiling lard,
then into grated bread seasoned with pepper and salt, and broil on a
gridiron, first rubbing off the bars with lard, that none may drip or
cause a smell. These are also very good dressed like veal cutlets.


MUTTON CHOPS.

Take off some of the fat and broil quickly, turning them often; when
done, season with pepper and salt, but no butter.


TO BOIL A BREAST OF MUTTON.

Crack the joints; boil slowly; put a little salt in the water; when
done, dish and pour drawn butter, with parsley chopped fine over it.


TO SALT A LEG OF MUTTON.

Rub the leg well with salt; let it remain two or three days; then chip
it fine, and fry in butter like chipped beef.


TO DRESS MUTTON LIKE VENISON.

Rub a leg of mutton well with allspice and black pepper pounded fine;
let it remain four or five days, when it will be fit to cook: wash off
the spices before you put it down to roast; put into the gravy some
wine and currant jelly.


MUTTON CHOPS LIKE VENISON.

Sprinkle your chops with pepper, salt and mustard; have ready some
boiling lard; put your chops in and fry a light brown; make a gravy and
season it with wine and currant jelly; pour the gravy over the chops,
and send hot to the table.


TO STEW MUTTON WITH MUSHROOMS.

Cut some mutton about two inches square; stew it with some mushrooms;
add a little water, pepper, salt, and a small piece of butter rolled in
flour; send hot to the table.


TO STEW MUTTON.

Cut up in small pieces two carrots, one turnip, four potatoes, and
three tomatoes; put them down to stew with a little water, pepper and
salt: when they are nearly done cut up some mutton, and add to the
stew, with some fried onions; let it simmer for a few minutes: serve up
hot.


TO BOIL A LEG OF MUTTON.

Scrape and wash well a leg of mutton; put it on the fire in cold water
and a little salt; when done, (which will be in an hour and a half or
two hours according to the size,) serve with drawn butter and capers,
or pickled cucumbers cut up in small pieces.


TO STEW MUTTON LIKE VENISON.

Take some pieces of tender mutton; put it down to stew with two whole
onions, some cloves, pepper and salt; when half done, add some red
wine, currant jelly and mushroom catsup.


KIDNEYS.

Kidneys must be well washed; boil for ten minutes; take them from the
fire; cut them up; season with pepper, salt, and dredge well with
flour; have some boiling lard; put them in, stirring them often; when
done, make a gravy; add some wine, and pour over the kidneys.


ROLOGEE.

Take the thin piece which comes on the leg or loin of veal; wrap up in
it cloves and mace, pepper and salt; roll it up and tie it tight in a
cloth; boil it well; then put it under a press; when cold, cut it in
thin slices for tea.


FONDUS.

Put in a stew pan a quart of water and a piece of butter; stir in flour
to make a batter; beat it well all the time it is on the fire; have
some grated cheese with five eggs, beat all well; drop with a spoon on
buttered tins and bake.


LIVER.

Liver should not be washed: cut in thin slices, and fried in hot lard.


TO ROAST A PIG.

Let your pig be cleaned very well; boil the liver; chop it up with
onion, sage, bread crumbs, pepper, salt and parsley; moisten with a
little butter; stuff the pig well with it, sew it up, spit it and put
it in a tin kitchen before the fire to roast. Put some salt and water
in the tin kitchen, with which baste the pig well; as soon as the skin
gets hard, baste it well with lard; turn it, but do not baste it with
the water again. A pig will take from two to three hours to cook; pour
off the fat from the gravy; season with pepper and salt; add a little
water, if necessary, and browned flour.


TO ROAST PORK.

Let the piece you intend cooking lie two hours in salt and water; then
cut the skin in squares, set it before the fire with salt water and
finely powdered sage in the bottom of the kitchen, baste, and turn it
often.


TO FRY PIG’S FEET.

Have your feet well cleaned; let them lie over night in salt and water;
then put them on to boil: when they are tender, take out the large
bones; dredge them in flour seasoned with pepper and salt, and fry in
hot lard. Another way to cook pig’s feet is to boil them, and dress
like terrapins.


A PIG’S HEAD.

Clean the head well, cut off the ears and nose, take out the eyes; put
it down to boil with the liver; when done, take it up, put the head
in a dripping pan with some of the liquor; the liver chopped up fine,
seasoned with onions, pepper, salt and parsley; spread some yolk of egg
over the head, upon which sprinkle bread crumbs: bake half an hour; add
some catsup to the gravy. Send hot to the table.


TO MAKE SCRAPPLE.

Some of the pieces that will not do for any other purpose will make
scrapple. Boil them in plenty of water, season with pepper and salt,
take out all the bones, and strain the liquor; put the liquor back in
the pot and thicken with Indian meal; stir it till done; turn it into
bowls to cool; cut in slices and fry. Send hot to the table.


TO CURE BEEF.

Rub the pieces well with saltpetre, salt, and brown sugar; let it
lie two days in a tub; make a pickle and pour over it: it will be
sufficiently cured in eight days. When wanted for summer use, let it
remain in brine between three or four weeks; then hang it up to dry;
smoke very little.


TO SOUSE PIG’S FEET.

Clean well the feet, and let them lie in salt and water over night,
then boil till tender; take out the large bones, cut them down the
middle; dip them in flour and fry in hot lard, or, pick out all the
bones; season with pepper and salt, and if liked, some vinegar; heat
them for a few moments when required.


TO CURE BEEF’S TONGUES.

Rub each tongue well with brown sugar and saltpetre; have ready an
earthen crock or wooden vessel; put into it a layer of salt, then a
tongue, then a layer of salt, and so on till they are all in; after
they have been in three days, remove them and put the tongues which
were in the bottom of the vessel on top: they will make their own
pickle.


TO BOIL HAM.

If a ham is old and hard, it should soak over night; if not, wash it
well, and put it down in plenty of cold water: the water should be well
skimmed while boiling.


TO BOIL A STUFFED HAM.

Make incisions in the ham with a knife; have ready some mint chopped
fine, with which fill them; then boil for five or six hours; trim, but
do not skin it.


TO BAKE A BOILED HAM.

First, boil till done; then skin and trim it; spread the yolk of egg
over, then sprinkle with finely rolled cracker, and put in the oven
for a few minutes; or, you may boil, skin it, and ornament with black
pepper: a ham will keep much better, and will retain the juice, if the
skin is not taken off.


TO CURE HAMS AND SHOULDERS.

Cut up your hogs, take out the chine from the neck to the tail, cut the
hams, shoulders, and middlings; have some finely powdered saltpetre;
rub a tablespoonful in each ham for some minutes, then rub it well with
salt and brown sugar; let them lie on a board some distance apart for
three days, to draw off the blood; have a molasses barrel; sprinkle the
bottom with salt and put in your hams with the skins down; sprinkle
with salt, and so on till you have the barrel full; make a strong
pickle that will bear an egg; pour over them, cover, and let them
remain in pickle for five weeks, then hang them up with the hock down
to preserve the juice. The shoulders will not require to be in pickle
so long; it is not necessary to put saltpetre on the middlings; the
jowls will be ready to hang up in two weeks, shoulders and middlings in
four: they should be smoked but three times a week till done; if smoked
too much, they will be hard. Before the weather gets warm, take them
down and rub well with hickory ashes.


TO BOIL AND FREEZE CHINE.

After the chines have been in pickle a week or ten days, boil them and
let them freeze. They are considered a great delicacy.


TO MAKE SAUSAGE MEAT.

Take the tender pieces of pork, lean and fat, one third fat and two
thirds lean, season with salt and pepper, and those that are for
immediate use are improved by putting in some sage finely pulverized,
but if kept too long, it will have a musty taste. If sausage meat is
put in to skins, laid for ten days in pickle, then hung up and smoked a
little, they will keep all summer. Those that are not put into skins,
should be put into stone crocks, and have lard run over the top to
exclude the air.


HOG’S HEAD CHEESE.

Wash the heads well, take off the ears and nose, and remove the eyes;
boil them till tender, and all the bones come out; then take it up,
carefully taking out all the bones; cut up the meat very fine: then
season with pepper and salt; put this back again into the pot with the
liquor; let it simmer slowly for half an hour, pour into bowls, and set
it away to cool; cut in slices for the table.


TO ROAST A GOOSE.

Wash the goose well; make a stuffing of two thirds onions and one
third sage leaves, pepper, salt and butter; fill the goose, and put it
down to roast in the tin kitchen with some salt and water; baste it
frequently. A large goose will take an hour and a half to cook: make
a gravy with the giblets hashed; season with pepper and salt. Some
persons prefer the dressing made of potatoes. Ducks are done in the
same way, but will cook in half an hour: to be eaten with cranberry
sauce.


TO ROAST A TURKEY.

Wash and clean the turkey well; make a dressing of bread, butter,
pepper and salt; fill your turkey; have some boiling water in the
bottom of the tin kitchen: when half done, sprinkle with pepper and
salt, baste and turn it often, make a gravy with the giblets hashed;
season with pepper and salt; stir a little brown flour in the gravy;
send it to table in a gravy boat. A large turkey will take three hours
to roast.


TO BOIL A TURKEY.

Wash your turkey well, and let it lie a few minutes in salt and water;
put it on in cold water with a little rice; skim it and let it boil
slowly, but constantly, till done; make a filling of bread, butter,
pepper, salt, and some whole oysters, and a few slices of lemon. It is
better to put the turkey in a cloth. A large turkey will boil in two
hours; to be eaten with oyster or celery sauce.


TO ROAST CHICKENS.

Make a dressing, as for turkey; set them some distance from the fire
at first, but move them gradually closer: they will roast in an hour:
baste them well; make a gravy of the giblets, some of the drippings
in the bottom of the kitchen, and some of the water the giblets were
boiled in: season with pepper and salt.


TO FRY CHICKENS.

Wash them well and cut them up; wipe them dry. Have ready some rolled
crackers seasoned with pepper, salt and parsley; first dip the pieces
in the yolk of an egg, then in the cracker; have ready some boiling
lard; put in and fry a light-brown; make a gravy with cream, parsley,
nutmeg, pepper and salt.


TO STEW CHICKENS.

Put the chickens down with a little water, pepper, salt and a little
mace: when half done, add some cream, butter, rolled in flour, and
parsley cut up. Dish the chickens and pour the gravy over them.


TO BROIL CHICKENS.

Wash the chickens well, cut them down the back, and broil on a gridiron
over hot coals: when nearly done, season with pepper and salt, and when
done, baste them with butter.


TO BAKE CHICKENS.

Prepare, as for boiling; put them in a bake pan with water, pepper
and salt; baste them well: when nearly done, baste them with butter
and dredge with flour; make a gravy of the giblets, and add to the
drippings.


CHICKEN PIE.

Wash the chickens; cut them up and stew them with a little water, salt
and mace; when done, make a paste; put it round the sides of the dish;
then put in the chickens; season to your taste, with pepper, salt and
hard-boiled egg, some butter rolled in flour; pour in some of the
liquor, and put on the top paste; cut a hole in the centre, and turn
back the paste to let the steam escape; place a small cup in the middle
of the pie.


TO BOIL CHICKENS.

Make a filling of bread, butter, pepper and salt; put your chickens in
a cloth, and boil them till done, which will be in an hour; make egg
sauce, which pour over the chickens; garnish the dish with parsley;
send some celery sauce in the gravy boat to the table.


TO STEW DUCKS.

Put the ducks down to stew with a little stock and some onions, pepper
and salt; let them simmer gently till they are done, adding a little
cream and butter; make a dressing of sage and onions, with which fill
the ducks: set them in the oven to brown.


TO COOK CHICKENS WITH CURRY.

Cut up the chickens, wash them clean, put them in a stew pan with a
little water and salt; keep them covered closely till they are done;
brown some onions in butter, then put in the chickens with a little
pepper and curry powder; let the chickens brown in the butter; when
brown, put in the liquor, and let all stew for five minutes.


TO COOK CHICKENS IN BATTER.

Make a batter; cut up the chickens; stew them with a little pepper,
salt and parsley: when nearly done, take it up; put it in a buttered
dish; pour the batter round, and bake.




Game.


TO FRY RABBITS.

Skin the rabbit; cut it up and wash it; dip it in flour seasoned with
pepper and salt; cut up some onions, and fry.


TO STEW RABBITS.

Skin it; cut it up, as for frying; put it down with a little water,
pepper, salt and a little butter rolled in flour.


WILD DUCKS.

When the ducks are picked, wash them as little as possible: roast
twenty minutes. Some persons make a filling of bread, butter, pepper
and salt; but the proper way is to cook them without filling; baste
them very often and turn rapidly; put a little water in the bottom of
the oven.


TO ROAST WOODCOCK OR SNIPE.

Pick them very carefully, but do not draw them; they will cook
sufficiently in ten or fifteen minutes; have some toast on a dish, upon
which put the birds.


TO ROAST PHEASANTS.

Roast them before a brisk fire, turning and basting all the time with a
little butter; have some water in the bottom of the roaster: after they
have cooked five minutes, add some salt.


PARTRIDGES.

Pick them very carefully: draw them, and roast before a quick fire,
fifteen or twenty minutes.


PIGEONS.

Make a filling of bread crumbs, pepper, salt and parsley; baste them
well: they will cook in twenty minutes.


PEPPER POT.

Clean well two sets of calves’ feet; put them into a pot with three or
four pounds of tripe and six quarts of water, and some cayenne pepper;
cover them and let them boil till perfectly tender; strain the liquid,
and cut the tripe in small pieces; put it in the liquid with some salt,
three sliced onions, two potatoes, sweet marjoram, parsley and thyme
cut up fine, and some small round dumplings made of butter and flour;
send hot to the table.


TO MAKE NOODLES FOR SOUP.

Beat three or four eggs, (the yolks only) make them into a stiff paste
with flour; roll out very thin and let it dry; it should be made
several hours before they are wanted for the soup; when quite dry roll
up, and cut in very thin strips; shake them apart, and put them in the
soup.


TO MAKE CROQUETS.

Chop up fine any kind of cold meat, fowl, ham, and pork; mix all well
together; add salt and pepper, and mustard to the taste, some grated
bread, butter and catsup; make them into cakes; dip them in the yolk
of egg, and fry in hot lard.


SPANISH OLIO.

Put into a soup kettle one pound of beef, half a pound of mutton, half
a chicken, salt, pepper and a very little water; let it stew slowly for
two hours; then put in four apples, two pears pared and cut up, three
tomatoes, a bunch of mint chopped, two onions, lima beans and any kind
of vegetables you may prefer; let them all stew slowly two or three
hours longer; send hot to the table.


MACARONI.

Wash a little macaroni, and boil in water till it is tender, which
will be in half an hour; drain it; butter your dish and put a layer of
macaroni in, upon which put salt, cheese, butter and mustard, a little
of each; then macaroni, and so on till the dish is full. Parmesan
cheese is the best, but any other kind will answer.


TO MAKE POLENTA.

Take cold chicken or meat of any kind and stew it; when done cut it up.
Have potatoes mashed, which put around the sides and bottom of the dish
about half an inch thick; then put in your stew with the liquor; season
with pepper and salt; spread some macaroni which has been boiled on the
top of the dish, with grated cheese, butter, pepper and salt; bake, and
bring to table in the dish in which it is baked.


CHICKEN SALAD.

One pair of chickens, eight bunches of celery, six eggs, one dessert
spoonful of mustard, nearly a bottle of oil, pepper and salt. Boil the
chickens; take off the skins: cut them up in small pieces; sprinkle
them with pepper, salt and vinegar, and let them lie three hours;
moisten the mustard with vinegar; then pour in the oil, a few drops
at a time, and keep constantly stirring it; have the eggs boiled
hard; mash them up with a little vinegar, and then mix with the oil;
cut up your celery very fine and throw it into cold water; when the
ingredients are all ready, mix the chicken and celery; (after draining
it) then pour the dressing over it. Curl some pieces of celery by
cutting it up about an inch and throwing it into cold water, with which
garnish the dish.


ITALIAN MACARONI.

Break the macaroni into pieces two inches long; boil it in hot water,
with a little butter, pepper and salt; when done, drain it on a napkin;
then put a layer of macaroni on the bottom of a dish; pour over it some
hot tomato sauce; then some grated cheese, and so on, until the dish is
full; the cheese being on the top; put it in the oven a few minutes,
and serve it hot.


MACARONI WITH CREAM.

Boil half a pound of macaroni in hot water, and when done cut it into
pieces; put it into a pan with a quarter of a pound of butter, two
ounces of grated cheese, and half a gill of cream; add a little pepper,
salt and mustard; shake it over the fire until well mixed and quite
hot; dish it, and garnish with pieces of puff paste cut in diamonds.


OMELETTE WITH CHEESE.

Beat six eggs very light; add to them two tablespoonsful of cream,
butter the size of a walnut, a spoonful of chopped parsley, some pepper
and salt, two ounces of grated cheese; beat all well together, and pour
into a pan in which butter is melting; let it cook until a light brown;
then fold up and dish for the table. Shake the pan while the omelet is
doing.


OMELETTE WITH OYSTERS.

Beat six eggs separately, very light; add to the yolks a little
mustard, cayenne pepper and salt; mix this with the whites; pour it
into a pan in which butter is melting, and cook till a light brown.
Before folding, have a few nicely scolloped oysters and lay between;
shake the pan about till the omelet is done.


EGG TOAST.

Toast four slices of bread, a light brown; butter them well, and
sprinkle on a little salt. Poach four eggs in muffin rings to retain
their shape; place one on each slice of toast, and send to the table.


CROQUETTES OF SWEET-BREADS.

Take six sweet-breads, and after being well washed stew them until
done; when cold cut them into small pieces; season with pepper, salt,
a grated nutmeg, and a little mushroom catsup; stir them over the fire
a few minutes; then spread them on a dish to cool; the croquettes must
then be shaped; rolled in egg and bread crumbs, and fried in lard.


TO BOIL EGGS.

Boiling eggs depends upon the person for whom you cook. Two minutes and
a half will boil to suit most persons: if you want them very soft, two
minutes will answer. If hard, they will take ten minutes.


TO FRY EGGS.

Have the lard hot, but not boiling; put in the eggs one at a time; when
done, send hot to table.


TO POACH EGGS.

Have ready a pan of boiling water with muffin rings, into which put the
eggs, one in each ring; let them remain on the fire till the whites are
firm.


SCRAMBLED EGGS.

Beat the eggs with pepper, salt, parsley and chives; have some butter
in a saucepan; as soon as it has melted put in the eggs; stir till they
are done.


OMELET SOUFFLE.

Beat the eggs separately till very light; then mix them: add sugar and
lemon peel to your taste; have some melted butter in a pan; pour in the
eggs; and when baked, sift some powdered sugar over it and send it hot
to the table.


OMELET.

Separate five eggs; beat them very light; season the yolks with pepper,
salt and parsley; have some butter hot in a pan; put in the omelet;
stir the whites in just before you put it in the pan; you can put in
ham, oysters, onions, chives, or any thing you prefer. Keep the pan
moving till the omelet is done; a little cream is an improvement.




Vegetables.


TO DRESS SALAD.

The lettuce should be gathered early in the morning; pick and wash it
well; let it lie in water till required: then drain the water from it.
Have eggs boiled hard, oil, mustard, pepper and salt, according to
taste. Ornament with slices of hard-boiled eggs.


CAULIFLOWER.

Get those that are hard and white; cut off the stalk; take off the
outside leaves; put it down to boil in hot water, with a little salt:
a large one will take half an hour. Do not let it boil too much: eat
with drawn butter.


PARSNIPS.

Scrape and wash them: cover them with water, and let them boil till
tender, which will be from one to two hours: send to table with butter,
pepper and salt, or fry them brown.


CARROTS.

Let them be scraped and washed; boil them; try them with a fork; if
they are tender, they are done; dress with drawn butter.


TURNIPS.

Pare, wash and cut up; put them on to boil; when done, take them up;
mash them in a tin pan: season with pepper, salt, and butter; send hot
to table.


SALSIFY OR OYSTER PLANT.

Wash and scrape them well; put them down to boil; when soft, mash and
season with pepper and salt: make a batter of milk, flour and egg. Mix
all well together; drop them the size of oysters with a tablespoon, and
fry them a light brown.


TO BOIL POTATOES.

Have the water boiling. Put in the potatoes; let them boil till nearly
done, then pour off the water and throw in some salt; uncover the
saucepan and set them on the back part of the stove. If the potatoes
are boiled fast, the skin will crack before they are done. For mashed
potatoes, pare them before you boil them; when done, mash them with a
small piece of butter, a cup of cream, and a little salt. Another way
to boil old potatoes is to pare them around the middle, before you boil
them, and throw in a little salt. When potatoes are young, scrape and
boil them; when done, pour off the water and dress them with a little
cream, butter, pepper and salt.


TO FRY POTATOES.

Pare large potatoes; cut them lengthwise: cut them into four pieces,
of about a quarter of an inch thick. Have some butter boiling hot into
which put the potatoes; keep turning them till they are done. Sprinkle
a little salt on them before sending them to table.


TO STEW POTATOES.

Slice the potatoes and put them down to boil, with just enough water to
cover them; when nearly done, pour off the water, and add milk and a
lump of butter rolled in flour, parsley and salt.


MASHED POTATOES.

You can make mashed potatoes into any shape you wish them. Touch them
over with the yolk of egg, and put them in an oven to brown.


TO ROAST POTATOES.

Large potatoes will roast in an hour. Do not put them too near the
fire, or they will burn before they are cooked. Sweet potatoes, if they
are large, will take an hour and a half to roast.


TO FRY SWEET POTATOES.

Parboil them, then peel; cut them in slices, and fry in butter: send
them hot to table.


TO BOIL SWEET POTATOES.

Have them as nearly of a size as possible. Put them in boiling water;
as soon as they are done, (which will depend upon the size,) pour off
the water; then lay them on the back part of the stove, where they will
dry, but not burn. Some persons parboil them, cut them in two, and
broil them over a gridiron.


SPINACH.

Take great care in picking it; wash it well, and put it in a steamer
with a little salt. It will cook in twenty minutes. Have some toast on
a dish; put your spinach on the toast, and some poached eggs on the top.


TO BOIL GREENS.

Cabbage sprouts are better boiled with a piece of pork or bacon. Eat
with hard-boiled eggs, and if cooked without the meat, have drawn
butter or vinegar.


LIMA BEANS.

Lima beans will require about three quarters of an hour to boil. Put
them on in cold water; when done, drain them: season with pepper, salt
and butter.


STRING BEANS.

String and cut them down the middle; put them down in as little water
as you can cook them in, without burning them: do not strain off the
water, but let them cook till nearly all the water has evaporated:
season with butter, pepper and salt, and send to table.


PEAS.

Shell and wash the peas. Cook them just as the beans. This is the best
way to cook peas and beans; or you can boil them in the common way, and
drain off the water: season with butter, pepper and salt.


ASPARAGUS.

Scrape and wash the asparagus; tie it up in bunches; and put it on to
boil in water in which there is some salt; it requires about fifteen
minutes to boil it, and it must not remain in the water after it is
done. Have some bread nicely toasted, on which place it, and pour over
drawn butter. A better way is to cook it in just as little water as
possible; do not pour off the water, but let it evaporate as much as
possible; then season with butter, pepper and salt, and send to table
with the liquor around it. This is the German manner of cooking beans,
peas, and asparagus.


TO FRICASEE CORN.

Have young corn cut from the cob. Save the juice; put it down to stew
with pepper, salt, and a little cream; roll a lump of butter in flour,
and stir in. If the corn is young, it will cook in twenty minutes. Corn
will boil in half an hour; put it in boiling water, and take it up as
soon as done.


TO KEEP CORN FOR WINTER.

Get the corn when young. Boil it ten minutes; a longer time would
injure it; cut it from the cob; spread it on dishes, and put it in the
oven after the bread comes out; be careful the oven is not too hot; if
it is, the corn will be spoiled. If not dry enough, put it in the sun
for a few days, stirring it frequently. When perfectly dry, tie it up
in bags and keep it in a dry place. When you cook it, wash it well: put
it down with a little water, butter, pepper and salt. It will require
much longer to cook than it does in summer.


HOMINY.

Wash it well, and soak it over night in the water you intend to boil it
in; put it on early in the morning with a few beans and a piece of salt
pork. Let it boil slowly for three hours or more, if not soft.


TO FRY HOMINY.

After your hominy is boiled and cold, mash and season with pepper and
salt; have some lard hot in a pan, into which put your hominy. Cover
it for five minutes, then stir it well, and cover again, and let it fry
a light brown. Fried hominy is very good for breakfast.


TO FRY EGG PLANT.

Pare and let them lie ten or fifteen minutes in salt and water, to take
away the bitter taste; wipe them perfectly dry; have ready cracker
rolled fine, and seasoned with pepper and salt; dip each piece in the
yolk of an egg beaten, then in the rolled cracker, and fry in hot lard.


TO STEW EGG PLANT.

Cut in half with the skin on, then soak in vinegar to extract the
bitter taste, say half an hour, then boil till quite tender; scrape out
the pulp and fill them with bread crumbs, butter, cayenne pepper and
salt; lay them open in your bake pan with a little water in the bottom,
put them in the oven and baste them often so that they will not be dry;
rub a little flour and butter together for the gravy.


ANOTHER WAY.

Prepare as above, and mix with pepper, salt, butter, and bread crumbs;
fry in sweet oil.


TO STEW TOMATOES.

Take off the skins by pouring boiling water over them; then stew them
with butter, pepper and salt; put in a little soda to correct the
acidity; pour in some cream, and stew for a few minutes longer. Some
persons prefer them without cream, and then it is not necessary to use
the soda.


ANOTHER WAY.

Wash and boil your tomatoes whole; then pass them through a hair sieve;
season with butter, pepper and salt; let them stew some twenty minutes,
and serve. Or dress them with sugar and a little wine.


TO BROIL TOMATOES.

Wash some large ripe tomatoes: wipe them dry; put them on a gridiron
over hot coals to broil; when they are hot through, they are done; send
them hot to table: to be eaten with butter, pepper and salt.


TO BAKE TOMATOES.

Have some large ripe tomatoes; wash and peel them; cut them up in
a dish--have ready bread, butter, pepper and salt; put a layer of
tomatoes, then the bread crumbs, butter, pepper and salt, and so on,
till your dish is full; bake, and send them to table in the dish in
which they were baked.


ANOTHER WAY.

Take some large tomatoes; peel them, cut the top off, and take out some
of the seeds; have ready some mushrooms chopped fine to fill them;
season with butter, pepper and salt; then put them in a pan, and bake
them; serve up hot.


ANOTHER WAY.

Peel your tomatoes; slice them and put down to stew; season with some
onions cut fine, bread crumbs, butter, pepper and salt; they will be
sufficiently done in twenty minutes. Some persons prefer a little flour
rolled in butter.


TO BOIL CORN.

Take off carefully all the silk and all the husks. Put the corn in
boiling water: if young and tender, it will boil in half an hour. Some
persons serve it up in a napkin on the dish, but if it is sufficiently
cooked, and can be served hot, it is better not to be steamed in a
napkin.


TOMATOES AND OCHRAS.

Take some tomatoes; skin and cut them up with equal quantities of
ochras; season with pepper, salt and butter; stew them till tender;
which will be nearly an hour. Ochras may be stewed alone, seasoned with
butter, pepper and salt: add very little water when you put them down.


EGGS AND TOMATOES.

Skin some tomatoes; slice and fry them with butter, pepper and salt;
cut up two onions, and put in with four eggs; stir all well together,
and send hot to table.


TO DRY OCHRAS FOR WINTER.

Get the young ochras; slice and string them; hang them up to dry; when
dry, put them away for soup in winter.


CUCUMBERS.

Gather them fresh. Pare, slice and lay them in salt and water; just
before dinner, pour off the water; season with pepper, salt, vinegar
and onions.


SQUASHES.

Squashes should be young and tender; try them with a fork; if they are
old, do not use them. Peel them and take out the seed; cut them in
pieces and boil till tender; when done, pass them through a cullender.
Stew with butter, pepper, salt and a little cream; send them hot to
table.


TO BOIL BEETS.

The early turnip beet is best in summer: wash them, but do not cut the
tops too close, as they are much sweeter with some of the tops boiled
on them. They will boil in three quarters of an hour; when done, take
them up, put them in cold water for a moment, so that the skin will
easily peel off. Slice them, and season with pepper, salt and butter.
Old, or winter beets, will take much longer. They will take from two to
three hours to boil. It is better to put them to soak over night, if
they are very solid: cut them in slices, and pour vinegar over them.


TO COOK ONIONS.

The small white onions are preferred. Peel them, and put them down in
a little water and salt; when nearly done, pour off the water, and add
milk and a little flour mixed with butter.


TO KEEP VEGETABLES FOR WINTER.

Salsify, parsnips, beets, and carrots should be gathered in the early
part of November. Those you want to use during the winter should be put
in boxes, and covered with sand. Celery should be put in a box with the
roots down, covered with sand. Some gardeners keep it in the ground all
winter, and dig it as they wish it, for use.


TO STEW MUSHROOMS.

Wash and peel the mushrooms; put them down in a stew pan with a little
water, pepper, salt and butter; let them stew slowly for ten or fifteen
minutes; then take them up. They are very good broiled.


HOT OR COLD SLAW.

The hard white cabbage is the best for slaw. Wash it well, and cut it
fine; have some butter boiling hot; put in the slaw and keep stirring
till it is shrivelled: then beat up some vinegar and the yolk of an
egg: season with pepper and salt; pour this in the pan over the slaw,
and stir in till quite hot: send to table either hot or cold, as
preferred.


COLD SLAW.

Cut fine some hard cabbage; dress with hard-boiled eggs, oil, vinegar,
mustard, pepper and salt.


TO BOIL CABBAGE.

Wash your cabbage well; cut it in two, and boil till tender in salt and
water. Some persons prefer it boiled with a piece of pork or bacon.
If it is boiled with bacon, the pot should be well skimmed before the
cabbage goes in.


BROCOLI.

Pick and wash it well; tie it up in bunches and boil it; when done,
drain it and serve it up with drawn butter. Put a little salt in the
water when nearly boiled.


SEA KALE.

Sea kale is cooked in the same way as brocoli.


BUTTER.

In winter the pans should be scalded before the milk is strained into
them; in summer the pans and strainer should be rinsed with cold water.
Do not cover the milk until it is perfectly cold; a stone crock is the
best for keeping the cream in, and it should be stirred two or three
times a day; if the cream is not stirred, the butter will have a bad
taste; do not let your milk stand too long, or this will make the
butter taste very unpleasant. Be particular to put cold water in your
churn the night before you wish to use it; pour it out in the morning,
and rinse it again; before the butter comes, or while it is gathering,
take off the lid of the churn; have your butter-bowl scalded and
cooled; work the milk out well, but do not put in any water; add salt
to your taste. Everything connected with milk or butter should be kept
very carefully clean.


TO KEEP BUTTER.

Butter, to keep, should be well worked; pack it in stone jars, and tie
it up tight, and set it in a cool place.


TO KEEP EGGS.

Get eggs as fresh as possible; put a layer of salt in a jar; then put
in some eggs, the small end down, then another layer of salt, then the
eggs; be careful not to let the eggs touch each other; set them in a
dry cool place, and they will keep all winter.


TO MAKE COFFEE.

Coffee should be roasted with great care, to a dark brown colour,
stirring it all the time it is on the fire, with a long-handled iron
spoon; when it is done, put it in a stone jar, and cover it up. Freshly
roasted coffee is much the best; grind it into a bowl, beat it up
with part of the white of an egg, and cold water; put it into the tin
coffee-pot, and pour on it boiling water, out of a tea-kettle, stirring
it all the while; set it on the fire, and let it boil fifteen minutes;
stir it frequently from the sides of the pot; when it is done, set it
a moment on the hearth, and it will settle; do not pour into it either
cold or warm water, or coffee, to settle it: this spoils the coffee.
Pour it into your silver or china coffee pot, and send to table.


TO MAKE TEA.

Black tea should be boiled fifteen or twenty minutes. Green tea should
not boil: but have boiling water poured on about five minutes before
it comes to table.


TO MAKE CHOCOLATE.

Have a quart of good milk boiling; grate a piece of chocolate three
inches square; mix it with a little cold milk; then stir it gradually
into the milk on the fire. If preferred thinner, use less chocolate. It
should boil at least half an hour.


YEAST.

Pare six good-sized potatoes; put them on to boil with three pints of
water and a handful of hops; pour the water through a sieve on a pint
of flour; stir it until perfectly smooth; mash your potatoes through
a cullender into the yeast; stir all well together, and let it stand
till nearly cold; then stir into it a pint bowl half full of dry yeast,
dissolved in water; put the water on the dry yeast as soon as you mix
your flour and potatoes, and when it has sufficiently cooled, your
yeast will be ready to go in. Set it in a warm place to rise. When it
is light enough, keep it in a cool place; cover it close. Yeast should
be made the day before you bake; then it is good and fresh.


TO MAKE DRY YEAST.

Make as directed above. When perfectly light, stir in corn meal till
it is quite dry; spread it on dishes to dry. Be careful not to let it
be in the sun, as this would sour it. When dry, put it in a bag, in a
dry, cool place. In summer time, when the flies are numerous, spread a
thin piece of gauze over to keep them off when it is drying.


BREAD.

Sift the flour; put it in an earthen vessel; the quantity of flour you
take will depend upon the number of loaves you want. Four loaves of
bread will require two quarts of water; pour the water, which may be as
warm as milk just from the cow, upon the flour, enough to make a thick
batter; put in two tablespoonsful of salt, and a pint of home-made
yeast; do not beat it after the yeast goes in. Set it in a warm place
to rise; when it is light, work it very well with flour. The more you
knead it, the better. If the flour is running, the bread will require
to be made stiffer than when it is superfine flour. Let it rise again,
covering it, and set it in a warm place. When it is broken on top, make
it into loaves, with as little flour as possible. Put each loaf into a
basket: cover it over, and set it to rise again. When quite light, bake
it in a brick oven, from three quarters to one hour.


TO BAKE IN A BRICK OVEN.

A brick oven will require one hour to heat. The wood should be split
fine; make a little fire at first, then add more wood; when the oven
is white at the top, it is sufficiently hot. Spread the coals over the
bottom of the oven, and let them remain a quarter of an hour.

Rusk or biscuit, if they are very light, will bake in from ten to
fifteen minutes. Bread requires one hour.


PHILADELPHIA BUNNS.

One pound of flour, and a half pound of sugar, one pint of milk, with
one teaspoonful of soda, a few currants, and half a pound of butter, a
tea-cup full of yeast. Mix all well, and let it rise; when well risen,
put in six eggs, beaten separately: pour it in the pans, and let it
rise again; then bake.


BREAD ROLLS.

When your bread is very light, take a piece of dough, into which rub a
small piece of butter; make them into rolls a quarter of an inch thick:
let them rise, and bake.


DIET BREAD.

Rub into a pound of flour, one tablespoonful of butter, and a
teaspoonful of salt: work it very well, or beat it; roll very thin:
stick with a fork, and bake.


MUSH ROLLS.

Have a pint of corn mush; when a little warm, add a little salt and
flour, enough to make a dough; add a tea-cup full of yeast; let it
rise, and when quite light, make into rolls; let them rise again, and
bake. You can put a little butter with them, if you prefer: but they
are very palatable without.


RISEN MUFFINS.

Warm a quart of milk, into which put a quarter pound of butter, enough
flour to make a batter, two eggs, well beaten, and a cup of yeast, a
little salt; when quite light, bake in rings. Do not beat them after
the yeast is in: they will be light enough in three hours.


SODA CAKES, VERY SUPERIOR.

Sift into three pints of flour, three teaspoonsful of cream of tartar;
rub one quarter of a pound of butter in the flour; dissolve one
teaspoonful of soda in as much milk as will make a dough, thick enough
to roll out; then take a large spoonful, sift flour on the board, roll
out and bake: do not touch them with the hands.


PHILADELPHIA MILK BISCUIT.

Rub half a pound of butter in three pounds of flour, a teaspoonful of
salt; warm the milk and pour on enough to make a thick batter; beat it
well, then add a cup of good yeast. Do not beat it after the yeast goes
in; let it rise; when quite light mix in flour, enough to make it out,
but as little as possible: roll it out and cut into cakes with a small
tumbler: let them rise again, and bake as soon as light.


TWIST ROLLS.

Twist rolls are made in the same way, only make in small twists or
rings, and bake.


LIGHT BISCUIT.

Have a quart of milk a little warm, into which put two spoonsful of
butter; pour this on flour, enough to make a dough; add a tea-cup full
of yeast, and a little salt; let it rise three hours, when roll into
cakes: put them in pans: let them rise again, and bake.


TEA BISCUIT.

Warm a pint of good milk, into which put a piece of butter, the size of
an egg; pour this on some flour, with a little salt and a tea-cup full
of yeast. When quite light, knead it well; roll out and bake in pans.
When done, pull them open and butter them.


GERMAN CAKES.

Cut up into a pound of flour, lard the size of an egg, and a little
salt; milk sufficient to make a dough; roll out very thin, and bake.
These cakes can be fried in lard, in round cakes, and are then called
snow-balls.


MARYLAND BISCUIT.

Cut up a quarter of a pound of lard and butter, into two pounds of
flour; add a little salt and water enough to make a stiff dough; beat
very light with an axe, till it will break off short: stick with a
fork, and bake in a quick oven. To be made up in small cakes.


BUCKWHEAT CAKES.

In a quart of buckwheat meal, put a cup of Indian or wheat flour,
whichever is preferred. Make this into a batter, with water, a little
warm, a cup of yeast and a little salt. Set it to rise, and when quite
light, pour it on the griddle. It is better to set them to rise in a
pitcher, as stirring the batter spoils them.


FLANNEL CAKES.

Make a batter of a pint of milk, sufficiently warm to melt in it a
piece of butter the size of an egg, two eggs, a little salt and flour;
put in a cup of yeast, and set it to rise three hours: bake on the
griddle. If you wish them quick, make them of soda and cream of tartar,
one third soda, and two thirds cream of tartar, or yeast powder.


SALLY LUNN.

Take a pint of milk and water mixed; warm it, and melt a small piece
of butter in it. Put in flour enough to make a stiff batter. Two eggs
and a cup of good yeast, a little salt, but no sugar. Set it in a warm
place to rise. Send to table whole. This quantity will take near an
hour to bake: do not beat it after the yeast goes in.


POTATO BREAD OR ROLLS.

Take some mealy potatoes, mash them fine in some flour, a small piece
of butter, a little salt and some yeast; when light, roll out in cakes:
put them in pans, and set them away to rise, and when light, bake.


MUSH MUFFINS.

Take a pint of corn mush, and when milk warm, put in a lump of butter,
a little milk, two eggs, and flour enough to make a batter; add a
little salt and one cup full of yeast. Set to rise for three hours:
bake in rings.


RICE MUFFINS.

Take a cup full of boiled rice, and a piece of butter, the size of an
egg; pour upon this a quart of boiling milk; add a little salt and two
eggs well beaten; when cool, a tea-cup full of yeast and flour, enough
to make a stiff batter: when light, bake in rings.


QUICK MUFFINS.

One and a half pints of milk to a quart of flour, an even tablespoonful
of butter, two eggs; sift with the flour two teaspoonsful of cream of
tartar, and dissolve with a little milk and a teaspoon three quarters
full of soda: bake immediately.


QUICK WAFFLES.

Quick waffles are made with sour cream. To one quart of sour cream add
flour enough to make a batter, two eggs well beaten, a small piece of
butter, and one teaspoonful of soda; just before baking, a little salt;
bake immediately: a little boiled rice will be a great improvement.


REMARKS ON MAKING INDIAN BREAD.

It is better in making Indian bread to pour the liquid, either water or
milk, boiling hot on the Indian meal. Indian takes more salt than wheat.


TO MAKE MUSH.

Have a pot of boiling water. Stir in gradually corn meal to make it
thick. Salt it to your taste: let it boil one hour. When it is cold,
slice it and fry it a light brown: send to table hot.


CORN BATTER CAKES.

Pour boiling milk on meal, enough to make a batter; add a little salt
and two eggs. The eggs will prevent them breaking when they are turned:
send hot to table. If this batter is made thick and baked in a pan, it
is called pone.


JOURNEY CAKE.

Mix well some corn meal with water, and a little salt. Have ready the
middle board of a flour barrel-head; wet the board, upon which put the
dough with a large spoon; smooth it over; bake before the fire; when
baked brown, turn the other side. Send hot to table.


LIGHTENED PONE.

Pour either milk or water boiling hot on a pint of corn meal; add salt,
and, when it is cool, some yeast and two eggs; when it is light, it
will open at top: bake in pans an inch thick.


INDIAN BREAKFAST CAKES.

Upon one quart of corn meal, pour one quart of boiling milk, with a
small piece of butter, a spoonful of salt, a spoonful of cream of
tartar, and a half one of soda sifted with the meal; when well mixed
drop them into a pan, and bake in an oven: these cakes must be rough on
top.


POTATO CAKES.

Boil ten mealy potatoes, put to them a piece of butter the size of an
egg, some salt and flour, enough to roll them out; bake them in cakes,
on the griddle: send hot to table.


TO MAKE PUFF PASTE.

Take one pound and a half of flour; sift half of it into a tin pan. The
remainder keep for rolling out the paste; take a pound of butter which
has been washed and well worked the night before, and kept in a cold
place. Cut up half of it with two knives into the flour, then mix it
with a tumbler of ice water. Then roll it out very thin, and spread on
it in small thin pieces a quarter of a pound of butter, and sift flour
over it. Cut it in strips, about four inches wide, and six long; lay
one upon another till they are all on; then roll again, and put the
remaining quarter of butter on as before; roll and cut it in strips,
and those strips in squares, and lay one upon another. When you make
the pie do not take one of the strips, but cut it down, so as to have
as many layers as possible in each pie. Always use the knives: never
touch the paste with the hand.


ANOTHER VERY SUPERIOR PUFF PASTE.

One pound and a quarter of flour, and one of butter. The butter should
be divided into four parts, and the salt well washed out of it in three
different waters, the night before, and set in a cold place to become
hard, the harder the better. Weigh a pound and a quarter of flour;
sift half a pound of the flour into a tin pan, (such a pan as should
be always kept for making pastry,) keep the rest of the flour in the
sieve. Cut up in the pan with the half pound of flour, a quarter of
a pound of butter with two knives. (The hands should never touch the
pastry.) Then pour slowly into the pan half a pint of ice water; mixing
it with the knives. Sift some of the flour on your board, and roll it
out very thin, with a floured rolling pin; sufficient flour must be
used to prevent it sticking to the board; put over the paste in small
pieces as regularly as possible, one quarter of butter; then sift flour
over and cut it in strips about three inches wide; then cut across as
many times, placing one piece upon another till it makes quite a high
mound. Flour it and roll it out again as thin as possible. Then put on
in very small pieces the third quarter of butter, and proceed as above,
with the last quarter; roll out very thin, cutting it as before. The
flour is now all rolled in except half of a pound, reserved for rolling
out the paste when making up. It should be made in a cold place, and
near an open window. When you make up your pies cut a piece from top
to bottom of the pile, and roll out thin. The fire should be under
pastry to make it puff up. There is nothing better for baking pastry
than a ten plate stove.


VERY SUPERIOR MINCE PIES.

Take a fresh tongue and some of the neck, four pounds in all; two
pounds of suet, four pounds of raisins, two of currants, two of citron,
six pounds of sugar, one quart of brandy, one of Madeira wine, and half
a peck of apples. Cinnamon, nutmeg, cloves, and very little salt.


CURRANT PIES.

Pick and scald your currants; let them stand a few minutes, then
pour off the water. Some prefer them stewed. Sugar to your taste.
Gooseberries are prepared in the same way.


RHUBARB PIE.

Take off the skin; cut in small pieces; sugar them and put them in the
paste, and bake. Some prefer them stewed.


BLACKBERRY PIE.

Wash your blackberries; put them in the paste, with sugar to your
taste: bake, and send hot to table. These pies are not good, if they
stand long after being baked.


PEACH PIES.

Pare your peaches; cut them in slices; put them in your paste with
sugar and a little water, and bake slowly.


FLORENDINES.

Boil a quart of milk; stir into it four tablespoonsful of rice flour;
let it boil ten minutes, then add a tea-cup full of powdered loaf
sugar, grated nutmeg, a gill of cream, and five eggs beaten very light.
Make a puff paste, and bake.


CREAM PUDDING.

To one cup of cream, add two tablespoonsful of rice flour, and two
eggs; a few currants, sugar, and rose water, to your taste: bake in
paste.


INDIAN PUDDING.

Pour one quart of boiling milk over a half pint of corn meal; add two
tablespoonsful of butter, and four of molasses; beat four eggs very
light; and, when perfectly cool, add them, with a glass of brandy, and
mace and nutmeg: bake, and send to table hot with wine sauce.


RICE PUDDING.

Take half a pint of rice; wash it well; put it on to boil with very
little water, and let it boil dry; then stir in a piece of butter the
size of a goose egg; a grated nutmeg, a tea-cup full of loaf sugar, a
quart of milk, and two eggs well beaten: pour it into a pudding dish,
and bake.


COCOANUT PUDDING.

Grate one cocoanut; pour the milk on some sugar, then boil it, and
throw in the cocoanut; let it come to a boil again. When cold, add four
eggs well beaten: bake in puff paste.


BREAD PUDDING.

Take the inside of a stale loaf of baker’s bread; pour over it one
quart of boiling milk; when perfectly cold, add five eggs well beaten,
one cup full of sugar, a small piece of butter, a little brandy,
mace, and nutmeg: bake in buttered pans. A few raisins would be an
improvement.


POOR MAN’S PUDDING.

Have a pan well buttered; on which put a layer of bread crumbs; then a
layer of apples, pared and sliced, and some sugar and cinnamon; then
bread and butter; then apples, sugar and cinnamon, till your dish is
full. The apples should be juicy: bake, and eat, with wine sauce.


SAGO PUDDING.

Wash a tea-cup full of sago well, in two waters; then pour over it one
quart of boiling milk; a small piece of butter. Set it on the stove to
simmer, slowly, for a few moments; then take it off. Beat four eggs
very light; add sugar and rose water, to your taste: bake in a crust,
or in a buttered dish.


TAPIOCA PUDDING.

Wash well the tapioca; one cup to a quart of milk; put it on the stove;
let it boil till soft; stir in while hot a little butter; let it get
cold; beat three eggs very light: season to your taste, with sugar and
lemon peel: bake in a paste.


ARROW ROOT PUDDING.

Boil one quart of milk; dissolve one tablespoonful of arrowroot; and
when the milk boils, stir it in as you would starch. Let it cool, and
then mix a half pound of butter, and the same of sugar; add six eggs
beaten very light; the rind of a lemon grated, and some grated nutmeg;
put a paste in your dish, and bake: this quantity will make four
puddings.


ORANGE PUDDING.

Orange pudding is made like lemon pudding: using the oranges instead of
the lemons.


JERSEY RICE PUDDING.

Wash well half a tea-cup full of rice; put it in a bake pan with two
quarts of milk; sugar and cinnamon to your taste: bake in a slow oven
till it is as thick as custard.


SPONGE CAKE PUDDING.

Make a sponge cake batter. Boil it in a pyramid form. Make a sauce
of the white of egg and loaf sugar beaten up together. Pour over the
pyramid.


MUNSEY PUDDING.

Take half a loaf of bread crumbled fine; a cup full of suet chopped
fine; some pippin apples cut in thin slices. Have a tin pan well
buttered; put the bread around it; then put in alternately the apples,
bread and suet, with some sugar and nutmeg; to be baked, and eaten with
wine sauce.


PEACH PUDDING.

One quart of dried peaches. Wash them well in four waters; then pour
three pints of boiling milk on one quart of bread crumbs, made fine;
five large tablespoonsful of flour, three spoonsful of cinnamon, one
wine-glass full of brandy, half a pound of suet, two tablespoonsful of
brown sugar, eight or nine eggs beaten separately: boil three hours,
and eat with wine sauce.


PLUM PUDDING.

Take the crumbs of a five cent loaf of bread; one quart of rich milk
boiled and poured over the bread while hot, one quarter of a pound of
suet cut fine, two pounds of raisins stoned, half a pound of currants
washed and dried, one quarter of citron cut in thin slices, six eggs
beaten very light, one tablespoonful of flour. Mix these ingredients,
and boil, or bake slowly. Make a rich sauce, half wine and half brandy.


SWEET POTATO PUDDING.

Boil one pound of sweet potatoes till half done; then skin and grate
them; add half of a pound of butter, the same of powdered sugar, beaten
to a cream; add six eggs well beaten, a grated nutmeg, and lemon
peel with a glass of brandy; bake in a paste, and when the pudding
is done, sprinkle the top with sugar, and cover with bits of citron.
Irish potato pudding is made in the same way. A little cream is an
improvement to the Irish potato pudding.


PUMPKIN PUDDING.

Stew a fine sweet pumpkin till soft and dry; rub it through a sieve;
add half a pound of butter beaten to a cream, with half a pound of
sugar, half a pint of new milk, and a wine-glass full of brandy, some
cinnamon, and nutmeg, six eggs beaten very light: put in a paste, and
bake.


LEMON PUDDING.

One pound of butter; the same of sugar beaten to a cream; ten eggs
beaten to a froth, one wine-glass full of brandy and rose water mixed;
the rind of one lemon and the juice; add one tablespoonful of grated
cracker, or Indian meal: bake in a paste.


LEMON PUDDING ANOTHER WAY.

One cup full of sugar, one egg, the rind and juice of one lemon. This
will make one pudding: or mix with a little rice flour, and make two
with two eggs.


A FANCY DISH.

Get some small-sized oranges; take out all the pulp very carefully,
by cutting a round piece out of the top; scrape out the pulp with a
spoon. Make a jelly with the juice of the oranges; wash and wipe dry
the skins of the oranges. Have some blanc-mange of Irish moss: fill
half of the oranges with the blanc-mange, and the rest with the jelly;
let it get perfectly cold, then cut them in halves or quarters, just as
you fancy; pile them in a dish, and ornament with orange or any kind of
long leaves.


MERANG AUX POMME IN PASTE.

Have a good under crust; cover with stewed apples seasoned with lemon
peel; make an icing as for cake; spread thick over the apples: put it
in the oven for a few moments.


MERANG AUX POMME WITH CREAM.

Have some good cooking apples; pare, core, and stew them slowly till
they are tender; then take them out, and fill the centre with any kind
of marmalade. Arrange them in any fanciful manner you may prefer. Have
some apples stewed and mashed fine; fill all the uneven spaces; cover
this with icing, and decorate with blanched almonds, or macaroon. Set
it in a moderate oven for a few minutes: to be eaten with cream, when
perfectly cold.


SPONGE CAKE CUSTARD.

Grate some stale sponge cake; upon which put some thin slices. Whisk
three eggs very light; pour on them one pint of boiling milk: season
with lemon peel and sugar to the taste. Mix all well together: bake
twenty minutes in a slow oven. Cover the top with sponge cake, and pile
the icing up high in the centre.


SWISS CUSTARD.

Take a quart of thick cream. Mix very smoothly eight teaspoonsful of
the finest flour, with some of the quart of cream: season to your taste
with lemon peel and sugar. Then put the remainder of the cream on the
fire, and when it simmers slowly, put in the cream and flour, stirring
it very gently till it is thick; then pour it out: when perfectly cool,
add some lemon juice. Place in a dish some macaroons, upon which pour
some of the custard. And so proceed, till all of the custard is in.
Ornament the top with any kind of preserves you prefer.


STRAWBERRY WHIPS.

You can make a basket of macaroons any shape you like, by dipping the
edges of the macaroons in barley sugar, and putting them over a mould.
Whip some cream with strawberry juice, fill your basket very high, and
ornament with strawberries and rose leaves.


A GOOD DESSERT.

Take half a pound of loaf sugar; rub on it the rind of a lemon; add
half a pint of boiling water; let it stand till quite cold; beat the
whites of three eggs very light, and one yolk. Mix all together with
a little lemon juice. Put this in a pitcher and set it in a pan of
boiling water, stirring it till it is thick: when quite cold, put it in
cups. If you find it difficult to thicken, add two teaspoonsful of rice
flour, with the boiling water.


APPLE DUMPLINGS.

Boil some potatoes; mash them with salt and a small piece of butter;
add flour, enough to make a paste; pare and core your apples; have
small dumpling-cloths, on each of which place a tablespoonful of dough,
and roll it out; then tie up an apple in each one; scald and flour your
cloth. They should be put in when the water boils, and will take from
half to three quarters of an hour to boil, if the apples are good.


PEACH DUMPLINGS.

Make a paste of one pound of flour, and a quarter of suet; cut the suet
up fine: put in water enough to make a paste; pare your peaches, and
put each one in a cloth; tie up and boil: have a small cloth for each
dumpling.


FRUIT DUMPLINGS.

Pour some boiling water on flour; beat it very light; roll it on a
cloth; put in your fruit; tie it up, and boil.


INDIAN MEAL FRITTERS.

Make a batter of a pint of milk, some Indian meal, and two eggs; have
ready some hot lard, and fry them.


APPLE FRITTERS.

Make a batter of one pint of milk, and three eggs, and flour; chop four
pippin apples up fine; stir them into the batter; drop in a spoonful at
a time.


PANCAKES.

Make a batter of eggs, and milk, and flour; pour a little in the pan,
sufficient to cover the bottom: when a light brown, turn on the other
side.


A QUICK PUDDING.

Mix one table-spoonful of arrow-root with a pint of milk; beat up two
eggs very light; while the milk is boiling, add the arrow root, and
stir all the time: when it comes to a boil, take it off; let it cool;
then add the eggs, some lemon peel, and a little juice: bake in a paste.


BOILED MILK FRITTERS.

Have a quart of new milk boiling hot; stir into it flour enough to make
a stiff dough: then take it off, and let it get perfectly cold; beat
seven eggs very light, and stir them in: drop them in hot lard, and fry
a light brown.


A BAKED FLOUR PUDDING.

To one quart of milk, add eight tablespoonsful of flour. Stir till the
flour is perfectly well mixed; then add six eggs, beaten separately,
very light: butter your pan, and bake in a quick oven; or bake in cups;
these are then called puffs.


A FARINA PUDDING.

Boil a quart of milk; stir into it four tablespoonsful of farina; let
it boil fifteen minutes: when cold, add a cup of cream, a nutmeg, a
cup full of powdered sugar, and four eggs; bake, and eat hot with wine
sauce.


CORN STARCH PUDDING.

Put three table-spoonsful of corn starch into a quart of boiling milk;
let it boil ten minutes: then add four eggs, sugar and nutmeg to the
taste. Bake and serve with wine sauce.


MACARONI PUDDING.

Boil a quart of milk, and when quite cold, beat up four eggs very
light, and add to the milk, with sugar to the taste. Boil three ounces
of macaroni, and when the pan is buttered, put in the macaroni, and
pour the custard around; when it begins to bake stir it well; season
with lemon: send hot to table.


VERMICELLI PUDDING.

Vermicelli pudding is made in the same way, only add a quarter of a
pound of vermicelli to a quart of milk, and five eggs.


RICE PUDDING.

Wash well three ounces of rice; put it in sufficient water to cover it:
when it has boiled a few minutes, pour off the water, and add a pint of
milk: stir it; and when done, take it up; put in it a piece of butter
the size of an egg, some sugar and nutmeg; beat very light four eggs,
and when cold, add to the rice, and if thick, some milk; a few raisins
will improve it very much: when nearly done, have some white of egg and
sugar beaten up very light; arrange on the top, and set it for a few
moments in the oven.


ALMOND PUDDING.

To one quart of cream, add half a pound of almonds, blanched and
pounded in a mortar, with rose water; sweeten to your taste; beat to a
stiff froth the whites of six eggs, with three table-spoonsful of rice
flour: bake in a paste.


A BOILED RICE PUDDING.

Take four ounces of rice; wash it and put it in a bag, with some
raisins; let the rice have plenty room to boil in the bag; turn it
while boiling. It will take an hour and a half. To be eaten with wine
sauce.


RICE FLOUR FRITTERS.

Rice flour fritters are made the same as wheat flour fritters: six
eggs, a quart of milk and flour enough to make a batter.


RICE MILK.

Take any quantity of rice you wish; wash it well; put it down to boil;
when half done, pour off the water: then add milk; season with vanilla
and sugar.


COLD CUSTARD.

Take three quarts of new milk; have a piece of rennet about an inch
square, which put into two table-spoonsful of water; let it soak over
night; in the morning, pour this in the milk; keep it in a warm place
till it turns; then set it on the ice to become cold: eat with cream
and sugar.


TRIFLE.

Place some slices of sponge cake in a dish; put on them preserves
of any kind; pour over this some boiled custard, then ornament the
top with the whites of eggs beaten up with loaf sugar, or whips, if
preferred.


WHIPS.

To one pint of cream, two whites of eggs, one wine-glass full of wine,
and sugar to your taste; churn the cream, and take off the top as it
rises; put in lemonade or other glasses, and ornament with macaroons.


CARRAGEEN, OR IRISH MOSS.

Take one ounce of moss; wash it very well, and let it soak for a few
minutes: put on to boil four quarts of milk; when boiling, put in the
moss; let it boil for four or five minutes, then strain it into moulds;
season with sugar, rose water, or any thing you prefer; if vanilla is
preferred, boil part of a bean in the milk.


FLOATING ISLAND.

Beat to a stiff froth the whites of six eggs; sweeten with loaf sugar;
add currant jelly or strawberry syrup to colour it; sweeten some
cream, upon which put the float. You may season the cream with white
wine, or the extract of vanilla, if preferred; it is then called
syllabub. Ornament with ripe strawberries.


GOOSEBERRY FOOL.

Take a quart of gooseberries; put them in a pan with two pounds of loaf
sugar, and a little water; when quite soft, pass them through a sieve;
when cold, add boiled custard till it is thick. Put it in the dish you
intend to send to table, with whipped cream on top.


APPLE FLOAT.

Stew and mash very well some good cooking apples; sweeten the apples;
make a float of the whites of eggs and sugar, mixed well together, and
cool on the ice. To be eaten with cream.


ICED APPLES.

Have some good cooking apples; stew and mash them; sweeten to your
taste; beat the whites of four eggs to a stiff froth with sugar; cover
the apples, (which must be in the dish you intend to send them to table
in;) set them in a moderate oven to brown for a few moments; take them
out, and keep in a cold place till they are required.


FREEZING CREAM.

Put the freezer containing the cream into the bucket with the ice and
salt; put the ice closely around, so as to touch every part of it; as
soon as the ice is formed, scrape it from the sides to the centre. The
freezer must be kept moving constantly during the process.


ICE CREAM.

Take four quarts of good cream; sweeten with loaf sugar very sweet, as
the sugar loses its strength by freezing; boil a vanilla bean in a pint
of milk; then pour it in the cream and freeze it.


LEMON CREAM.

The lemon must be rolled in sugar to extract the oil; use the sugar for
sweetening the cream. Then freeze it.


RASPBERRY CREAM.

Mash the berries; press them through a sieve; sweeten the juice, and
mix it with the cream. Strawberry ice cream is made in the same way.


COCOANUT CREAM.

Pare and grate it; boil it with half a pint of cream; then add it to
the cream you wish to freeze. Strain the boiled cream before you put it
in the freezer.


ALMOND CREAM.

Blanch the almonds by pouring boiling water on them till the skins
will peel off easily; then pound them fine and put them in the cream;
sweeten with loaf sugar and freeze.


CHOCOLATE CREAM.

Scrape two ounces of chocolate; put it on to boil in a pint of milk;
boil it till the chocolate dissolves. Sweeten it and add it to the
cream and freeze.


PEACH ICE.

Get soft ripe peaches; mash them through a sieve; then sweeten and
freeze. Apples may be stewed and mashed and frozen also.


FRENCH PUFFS.

Mix together four ounces of butter, and two ounces of sugar, three
eggs beaten separately, and five ounces of sifted flour; cut a sheet
of paper into four pieces; spread them with batter; drop the batter
with a tea spoon in the form of balls on the paper; immerse the paper
into boiling lard; and as they cook drop them off, and fry them a light
brown; drain them on a sieve covered with paper, to absorb the grease;
dust fine sugar over them; and eat them with sugar, butter, and wine,
beaten together.


JELLY PUFFS.

Make puff paste; roll it out half an inch thick; cut it out with a
large tumbler; double them over; lay them in rows on sheet irons; egg
them over, and sift sugar on them; then bake, and, before serving,
place on them some currant or plum jelly.


ICED CUSTARD WITH FRUIT.

Line the sides and bottom of a round mould with macaroons, fastened
together with hot sugar; when cool, place it on a dish. Then make a
custard with the yolk of ten eggs, and one quart of milk, half a pound
of sugar, and a vanilla bean. Freeze the custard; fill the macaroon
mould with it; forming it in a pyramid; and ornament with strawberries,
cherries, or any fruit in season.


APPLES AND RICE.

Pare and core a dozen apples; place them in a pan with a little butter,
loaf sugar, and lemon peel; add a little water, and bake them slowly,
without allowing them to become brown. Boil some rice with milk, sugar,
a little butter, and a nutmeg; when perfectly done, mash it with a
spoon, and put into a round mould to cool; then turn it out, and
arrange the apples neatly upon it; eat it with wine sauce.


SPONGE CAKE IN THE FORM OF A HAM.

Make a sponge cake, and bake in an oval tin pan; when cold, shape it
with a sharp knife in the form of a ham; hollow it out on the under
part; and fill with whipped cream. Pin a paper ruffle on the hock; and
cover all over with broken calf’s foot jelly.


APPLE CHARLOTTE.

Have a tin pan well buttered, and spread around the sides and bottom
nicely stewed apples. Make a rich custard; place some savoury cakes in
the pan; with raspberry jam between each layer of cake; fill up with
the custard, and steam a few minutes.


TO CLARIFY ISINGLASS.

Cooper’s isinglass is the best. Wash it well, and put it in a pan; and
to a half pound, add a pint and a half of water, a quarter of a pound
of sugar, and the juice of three lemons; let it boil slowly about
fifteen minutes; removing the scum as it rises. When cold, the whites
of two eggs may be added, and boiled again for a few minutes; then
passed through a jelly strainer.


TO CLARIFY SUGAR.

To two pounds of loaf sugar, add one quart of water; and when the sugar
is dissolved, add the whites of two eggs well beaten; let it boil
slowly, until the scum has ceased rising, then pour through a strainer.


STRAWBERRY JELLY.

Pour one pint of boiling syrup upon two quarts of strawberries; let it
remain until cold; then press through a jelly bag. Let it boil again,
and stir in it a pint of clarified isinglass; then pour into moulds to
cool.

Pine apples, oranges, or any other fruit can be made into jelly in the
same way.


MADEIRA JELLY.

To one quart of syrup add one quart of clarified isinglass, the juice
of four lemons, and a pint of good Madeira wine. Pour it into moulds,
and place them in ice.


RASPBERRY CREAM.

Bruise in a bowl two quarts of ripe raspberries, with half a pound of
powdered sugar; rub them through a sieve. Mix with the juice, one pint
of whipped cream, and one pint of clarified isinglass. Pour it into a
mould which has been rubbed with sweet oil; set it in ice; and when
cold turn it out on a dish.


CHOCOLATE CREAM.

Make a quart of rich vanilla chocolate; add to it one quarter of a
pound of sugar, and the yolks of six eggs. Stir all together over the
fire a few minutes. Then add a half pint of whipped cream, and a pint
and a half of clarified isinglass. Mix well together, and pour into
moulds.


PEACH CHEESE.

Stone and pare a quarter of a peck of ripe peaches; put them into a
porcelain lined kettle, with one pound of loaf sugar, and a little
water; stir over the fire until all is dissolved; rub it through a
hair sieve into a bowl; add one pint of clarified isinglass; fill the
moulds, and place them in the ice; when it is firm turn it out; and
cover the top with whipped cream.


CALF’S FEET JELLY.

Take two sets of calves’ feet, and one of pigs’ feet; put them in a
kettle with two gallons of water; let it boil down one-half; strain
it and set it away till the next day; before you put it on the fire,
skim it well; add half a gallon of wine and a pint of brandy, the juice
of eight lemons, the skins of four, pared from the rind, four sticks
of cinnamon, sugar to your taste, the whites of ten eggs beaten to a
froth; mix all in the stock when cold. Let it boil twenty minutes. If
the stock is very stiff, ten will be sufficient; then strain it through
a jelly-strainer.


A HEN’S NEST.

Put some calf’s feet jelly in a deep dish, upon which make a nest with
some skins of lemons cut in strips and preserved in syrup. Take some
eggs; make a small hole, through which empty them; wash and drain, and
fill them with blanc-mange; when perfectly cold, take off the shell and
put them in the nest.


CHARLOTTE RUSSE.

Make a rich boiled custard of a quart of milk and six eggs; sweeten
with sugar and season with vanilla; while warm stir into it a quart
of calf’s feet jelly; whip a pint of cream, and mix with it; make
a Turk’s cap sponge cake; cut out the centre and fill it with the
mixture; put on the top, and ice it when perfectly cold.


CHOCOLATE CUSTARD.

Boil one and a half ounces of gelatine in two quarts of good milk; add
three ounces of the best French chocolate; vanilla and sugar to your
taste; beat very light twelve eggs, omitting the whites of four; pour
the boiling mixture very slowly on the eggs; put it in a tin saucepan,
and set it in a pot of boiling water; stir it till thick; pour it in
moulds.


BOILED CUSTARD.

Put a quart of milk on to boil with half of a vanilla bean or eight
peach leaves, when they are in season; beat the yolks of six eggs and
the whites of three; pour the milk boiling hot upon the eggs, stirring
all the time; then put it in a pitcher, and set the pitcher in a pot
of boiling water; stir it well till it is as thick as good cream; then
pour it from one pitcher to another till it is nearly cold, when put it
in cups, and ornament the tops with the whites of eggs and sugar beaten
very light, on which put a strawberry, or a rosebud, or jelly.


TRANSPARENT PUDDING.

Half a pound of butter and one pound of sugar beaten to a cream; the
yolks of sixteen eggs beaten very light; lay in the dish, either with
or without pastry, some West India preserves. Then pour over them the
mixed ingredients, and put it in the oven, which must be well heated.
Try it with a knife; when done, ice it. Rose water or wine will improve
it.


A BOILED FLOUR PUDDING.

Mix together three pints of milk and six eggs, well beaten; stir in as
much flour as will make a thick batter; have a pudding bag, which wash
and flour well; pour in the batter, tie the bag tight, but far enough
from the batter to give it room to swell; turn the bag frequently, and
do not allow it to cease boiling until done. To be eaten with wine
sauce.


APPLE PUDDING.

Pare and core half a peck of apples; stew and mash them fine; add lemon
peel, sugar, and nutmeg to the taste; beat five eggs very light, and
mix all together, and bake in a paste.


A RICH CUSTARD PUDDING.

Make a custard of one quart of milk and three eggs, and sugar to the
taste; cut some slices of bread, butter them, and lay them in the
bottom of the pan, which cover with raisins: do this till the pan is
half full, then pour over the custard, and bake slowly.


A BIRD’S NEST PUDDING.

Pare and core some good cooking apples; make a batter of one quart of
milk, a little flour, four eggs, and sugar to the taste; pour this
around the apples and bake.


GREEN CORN PUDDING.

Grate one dozen ears of corn; then make a batter of a quart of milk and
four eggs, a little flour, and sugar to the taste, and a very small
piece of butter; bake slowly one hour. To be eaten with sugar and
butter beaten up very light.


A GOOD CUSTARD.

To three pints of milk, sweetened to your taste, add two eggs, well
beaten; cut some bread in squares, very thin, and put over the top,
upon which grate nutmeg; bake very slowly, and be careful the milk does
not curdle.


CAKES.

The flour for making cakes should always be sifted before using it, and
of superfine quality, and dry. The butter must be the best, and the
salt and water well worked out of it. The eggs should always be fresh.


ICING FOR CAKES.

Whip the whites of four eggs to a stiff froth; add gradually some fine
white sugar till it will not run: season as you prefer, with vanilla or
lemon.


LIGHT GINGER-BREAD.

Beat to a cream half a pound of butter, and two of sugar; beat five
eggs very light; add them to the sugar and butter. Have ten cups full
of flour in a pan, into which put six cups full of molasses; season
with half a cup full of ginger, and one tablespoonful of cloves;
dissolve one and a half teaspoonsful of soda in sour milk, and put it
in just before baking: bake in small pans.


CRISP GINGER-BREAD.

Beat to a cream half a pound of butter, the same of sugar; add ginger
and some cayenne pepper; add two cups full of molasses, and flour
enough to roll out. Cut in small cakes, and bake.


GINGER-BREAD NUTS.

Beat to a cream half a pound of butter, and the same of sugar; add a
pint of molasses, cloves, ginger, and cinnamon to your taste; flour
enough to make a stiff dough. Roll out thin; cut in small cakes: bake
on pans in a quick oven.


SHAVINGS.

Beat the whites of four eggs to a stiff froth; add four or five
tablespoonsful of white sugar, to one of butter; flour enough to roll
out. Fry in hot lard: cut them in long strips and curl, before frying.


SOFT MOLASSES GINGER-BREAD.

Six cups full of flour, two of sugar, two of molasses, one of milk, two
of butter; beat the sugar and butter together, to which add four eggs
well beaten; then add one dessert spoonful of cloves, and three of good
ginger, and the molasses and flour, till all is mixed; dissolve one
teaspoonful of soda and three of cream of tartar,--each in half a cup
full of milk, which mix in just before you put it in the oven. This
cake will take at least an hour and a half to bake.


SPICED GINGER-BREAD.

To three pints of flour, and one pound of brown sugar, add three
tablespoonsful of ginger, and one and a half of cloves mixed. Melt half
a pound of butter in a quart of molasses; knead all up; roll in thin
cakes, and bake in a quick oven.


A VERY GOOD GINGER-BREAD.

Mix well with a pound and a half of flour, a half tea-cup full of good
ginger. Melt in a pint of molasses half a pound of butter; when the
molasses is hot, pour it over the flour, stirring it well to keep it
from becoming lumpy; let it stand till quite cold, then beat two eggs
very light, and stir in with flour, enough to make a stiff dough. Roll
out and bake.


LEMON CAKE.

Beat to a cream one cup full of butter, and two of white sugar; add
three eggs well beaten, one lemon grated and a little juice; one
teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a little milk, and three of cream of
tartar dissolved in water. Put in, after these ingredients are well
beaten, three cups full of flour: bake in tins an inch thick. Ice them.


QUEEN CAKE.

Cream, half a pound of butter, and the same of loaf sugar; beat very
light four eggs; flour, a few currants, and put them in; stir in seven
ounces of flour: mix well, and bake in small tins.


ALMOND CAKE.

Blanch a quarter of a pound of almonds, and rub them fine in a mortar
with a little rose water; beat five eggs separately till very light;
beat the sugar with the yolks of eggs; almonds with the whites of eggs,
and a quarter of a pound of flour: bake an hour and a half in small
tins.


MACAROONS.

Take half a pound of almonds, a few of them bitter; blanch them and
pound in a mortar, with a little rose water; beat the whites of three
eggs to a stiff froth, and add half a pound of white sugar, rolled very
fine. Stir all together; drop on buttered paper, and bake in a slow
oven, or on paper with grated rusk or bread; this will keep them from
sticking to the paper. Some persons add a spoonful of rice flour.


GOOD JUMBLES.

Beat to cream one pound of sugar, and the same of butter. Beat six eggs
separately, the yolks with the sugar and butter; add flour enough to
roll out: season to your taste. Cut them in rings, and bake: sift sugar
over them when they are hot.


COMMON JUMBLES.

Beat to a cream half a pound of butter, and the same of sugar; add four
eggs, a little brandy and nutmeg; flour enough to roll out: bake in
pans: cut them in round rings.


CRULLERS.

One cup full of butter, two cups full of sugar, one cup full of
sour cream, four eggs, half a nutmeg, and a little cinnamon, half a
teaspoonful of soda; flour enough to make a dough. Roll out, and fry in
hot lard.


DOUGH NUTS.

Melt in a quart of boiling hot milk, a quarter of a pound of butter,
into which beat flour enough to make a stiff dough, and one pound of
brown sugar. When nearly cold, put in four eggs well beaten, and a
tea-cup full of yeast. Let them rise, and when quite light, drop them
with a spoon into boiling lard. Spices to your taste, and a little
brandy.


MERANGUES.

Have a pound of fine white sugar, to which add the whites of twelve
eggs beaten very stiff, and two tablespoonsful of rice flour. When
well beaten, lay the mixture on thick white paper well buttered, or
bread grated on it, to prevent the cakes sticking. Make the cakes in
the shape of a half egg. When they are a light brown, and firm to the
touch, take them out. Scoop out the middle, into which put preserves.
Put them again in the oven to dry; when done, fasten two together with
a little white of egg. Send to table on a fancy dish. For dessert,
whipped cream is very excellent, in merangues.


COMPOSITION CAKE.

One pound of flour, one pound of sugar, the same of butter, seven eggs,
half a pint of cream, and a gill of brandy, one tea-spoonful of soda
and three of cream of tartar. Dissolve each separately and put in last.
This cake will take an hour and three quarters to bake.


LOAF CAKE.

Two pounds of flour, one of sugar, half a pound of butter, one pint
of yeast, eight eggs, one quart of milk; cream the sugar and butter
together: add the raisins and spices after the first rising. This cake
will take an hour and three quarters to bake.


SEED CAKE.

Three pints of sifted flour, one pound of brown sugar, one
tablespoonful of caraway seed, mixed together. Then melt half a pound
of butter, and pour it into as much cold milk as will make them soft
enough to roll out. Three teaspoonsful of cream of tartar. Put in the
flour before it is sifted. Dissolve one teaspoonful of soda in the
milk: roll out; cut with a tumbler: bake in a quick oven.


JELLY CAKE.

Jelly cake is made of either cup or sponge cake, as preferred. Bake
in round tin pans on buttered paper; the pans should be as large as a
dinner plate, and the cakes a quarter of an inch in thickness, when
baked. Spread jelly upon each cake; place one upon another, till you
have four or five, and then ice it.


SPONGE CAKE.

Beat ten eggs separately, very light; mix the whites and yolks
together; add a pound of loaf sugar; then put in half a pound of flour.
Do not beat it after the flour goes in, as this will make it tough:
season to your taste, with lemon or vanilla.


ANOTHER SPONGE CAKE.

One pint of flour, and one of sugar, half a tea-cup full of water; beat
six eggs very light; put in the water before the whites of the eggs,
and stir as little as possible after all the ingredients are in.


LADY FINGERS.

Beat to a stiff froth the whites of four eggs, and the yolks of four,
with a pound of sugar. Mix with this two or three spoonsful of flour:
season with rose water or lemon: bake on buttered paper.


ALBONNIE CAKE.

Put three teaspoonsful of cream of tartar into three pints of flour,
and sift it; beat half a pound of butter to a cream, with two large
cups full of sugar; add five eggs, well beaten, a teaspoonful of soda,
dissolved in a small quantity of milk, and some caraway seed. Roll very
thin: bake on tins.


CUP CAKE.

Beat to a cream half a tea-cup full of butter, and one and a half
of sugar; add three eggs beaten very light, two cups full of flour,
one teaspoonful of soda, and three teaspoonsful of cream of tartar.
Dissolve each separately in a little milk; mix them just before putting
them in the pan: bake an hour and a half.


KISSES.

Beat till very light the whites of four eggs; add one teaspoonful of
flour, either wheat or rice: season with rose water or lemon: bake on
buttered tins or paper.


RICE SPONGE CAKE.

Rice flour sponge cake, is made like flour sponge cake, only add a
little more of the rice than you would of the wheat flour: bake in
small tins. Ice them.


WAFERS.

Beat three eggs to a stiff froth; two cups full of flour, a small piece
of butter, and milk enough to make a batter; add four tablespoonsful of
sugar. Roll out thin as possible, and bake: roll them up while hot.


WHITE CAKE.

One pound and a quarter of butter, one and a half pounds of sugar, the
whites of twenty eggs, two teaspoonsful of cream of tartar, and a third
as much soda; dissolve each in a tablespoonful of cream; put in the
cream of tartar the last; one and a half pounds of flour; season to
your taste: an hour and a half will bake it.


CAROLINA CAKE.

Beat to a cream one cup full of butter, and two of sugar, three cups
full of flour, the whites of eight eggs, half a cup full of sweet milk,
one teaspoonful of cream of tartar, and the third of that quantity of
soda; dissolve each separately in the milk; add them the last; season
to your taste; bake an hour and a half.


BUNNS.

Beat to a cream half a pound of butter, and the same of sugar, four
eggs, half a pound of currants, a glass of brandy, a pint of milk,
flour enough to make a stiff batter; stir in a cup full of yeast. When
light, bake in small pans, or in a large one, and cut them out in
squares.


SASSAFRAS CAKE.

Beat to a cream half a pound of butter, and the same of sugar; whisk
till very light six eggs; add them to the butter and sugar, with a
glass of brandy, the peel and juice of a lemon; add flour enough to
make a dough: roll out, and bake on tins.


WARWICK CAKE.

Beat to a cream two tea-cups full of sugar, and one of butter; add half
a pound of currants floured, one glass of rose water, and six eggs
beaten separately; dissolve one teaspoonful of soda, and three of cream
of tartar in a little cream; and add, just before putting the cake in
the pan, flour enough to make a stiff batter.


POUND CAKE.

Beat to a cream one pound of butter, with one pound of sugar; separate
ten eggs, and beat them very light; have a pound of flour sifted; add
the eggs and flour alternately; beat till the cake looks light just
before going in the pan; put in a glass of brandy, rose water or lemon
peel, or anything you prefer. This cake will take an hour and three
quarters to bake.


PLUM OR FRUIT CAKE.

Fruit cake is made as the above; with the addition of a pound of
currants, a pound of raisins, and half a pound of citron; flour the
currants, raisins, and citron before putting them in. Raisins should
always be seeded.


A VERY CHEAP CAKE.

One tin cup full of flour, with two teaspoonsful of cream of tartar
sifted with the flour; a piece of butter the size of an egg, half a cup
full of sugar rubbed in the butter, and half of a teaspoonful of soda;
dissolve in a small cup full of milk; bake in a pound cake form.


RUSKS.

Take a pint of milk, a quarter of a pound of butter; warm the butter
in the milk with half a tea-cup full of sugar; stir in enough flour to
make a very soft dough; beat three eggs very light, and add; lastly,
put in a tea-cup full of yeast; do not beat it or any cake after the
yeast goes in; set it in a warm place to rise; when light add more
flour by stirring it in, but do not beat it; let it rise again; flour
your board, and pour out your dough; cut in cakes, and put in pans;
handle as little as possible, and do not put any more flour to them;
set them to rise again, and as soon as light, bake.


TO MAKE COCOA-NUT CAKE.

To two whites of egg, take one cocoa-nut; after it has been peeled and
grated, sugar to the taste; make them high in middle, and bake a few
minutes.


COCOA-NUT AND ALMOND CAKE.

Blanch half a pound of almonds, and pound them in a mortar, with a
little rose water, to prevent them oiling; add an equal quantity of
grated cocoa-nut, three whites of eggs beaten to a froth, and sugar to
the taste; bake ten minutes.


LADY CAKE.

Beat to a stiff froth the whites of ten eggs, add one pound of loaf
sugar, blanch half a pound of almonds, and pound them very well with
some rose water; beat to a cream a quarter of a pound of butter, then
add the sugar; stir in alternately with half a pound of flour, the eggs
and the almonds; bake one hour and a half.


SMALL ALMOND CAKE.

Blanch and pound, with rose water, a quarter of a pound of almonds;
beat very stiff the whites of four eggs; add three tablespoonsful of
rice-flour, and sugar to the taste; bake in fancy shapes on buttered
paper, in a slow oven, ten minutes.


DROP CAKE.

Beat to a cream half a pound of butter, and a quarter of a pound of
loaf sugar; three eggs and the third of a cup of cream, half a pound of
flour, rose water to the taste; drop them in buttered pans, and bake
fifteen minutes. If preferred, they can be seasoned with chocolate.


FEDERAL CAKE.

Two pounds of flour, one pound of sugar, three quarters of butter, four
eggs, the juice of one lemon, three teaspoonsful of cream of tartar,
sifted with the flour, one of soda; dissolve in milk enough to make a
dough; cut the cakes in the shape of a diamond.


HARD GINGERBREAD.

One and a half pounds of flour, half a pound of butter, half a pound of
sugar, a pint of molasses, a tea-cup full of ginger, a tablespoonful of
ground orange peel, and cloves; roll them very thin, and bake.


BUTTER DROPS.

One quarter of a pound of butter, one pound of flour, two spoonsful of
rose water, three eggs, well beaten, a little nutmeg; dissolve a small
lump of pearlash in a little milk, and stir in just before baking; drop
them on tins, and bake.


OHIO CAKES.

One and three-quarters of a pound of flour, three-quarters of a
pound of sugar, four eggs, five tablespoonsful of thick cream, and a
teaspoonful of soda; spice to your taste. Roll them about a quarter of
an inch thick, and bake.


SUGAR CAKES.

Three pounds of flour, and half a pound of sugar, thirteen ounces of
butter, and a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in half a pint of water;
rub the butter in the flour; mix the sugar and water, then knead all
well together; roll thin, and bake.


ANOTHER COCOA-NUT CAKE.

One pound of cocoa-nut, one pound of flour, three quarters of a pound
of sugar, half a pound of butter, six eggs, well beaten; mix all
together, and bake.


NEW YORK COOKIES.

Two pounds flour, one of sugar, one quarter of a pound of butter, a
large cup full of milk, a teaspoonful of soda, two of cream of tartar,
two tablespoonsful of caraway seeds; roll them, and bake on tins.


DIAMOND CAKES.

Beat to a cream half a pound of butter, and the same of sugar; add four
eggs, well beaten, half a pound of flour, and the same of currants,
washed and dried, and well floured, to keep them from sinking, a small
teaspoonful of soda, and two of cream of tartar dissolved separately in
milk; bake them in small pans, diamond shape.


A SPANISH CAKE.

Beat to a cream half a pound of butter; with the same quantity of
sugar, four eggs, well beaten, a quarter of a pound of currants, a
glass of wine and brandy mixed, two tablespoonsful of rose water, and
half a pound of prepared flour, (which can be bought at any grocery
store in the city;) bake in small tin pans, any shape preferred. Ice
them.


A. P. S.

Beat to a cream half a pound of butter, with same of sugar, a few
caraway seed, three eggs, rose water, and nutmeg, and flour enough to
make a dough; roll out thin, and bake.


SPANISH BUNNS.

Three quarters of a pound of flour, a pint of good milk or cream, three
eggs, two tablespoonsful of rose water, half a nutmeg, half a pound of
butter, and the same of sugar; warm the butter in the milk; when milk
warm, stir in the flour and eggs; then beat in the sugar, a little at a
time, and some currants; put in the yeast, and set it to rise in square
tin pans; when very light, bake for fifteen or twenty minutes.


SCOTCH CAKES.

Beat to a cream half a pound of butter, and three quarters of a pound
of sugar, a tablespoonful of caraway seed, one tablespoonful of rose
water or essence of lemon, a pound of flour, and five eggs, beaten very
light; roll half an inch thick, stick them with a fork, and bake.


A GOOD SMALL CAKE.

Beat to a cream three quarters of a pound of butter, and the same of
sugar; whisk three eggs very light; season with rose water; add flour
enough to roll out; cut them half an inch thick, and bake.


CREAM CAKE.

One and a half cups full of butter, two of sugar, four eggs, one cup
full of sour cream, into which dissolve one teaspoonful of soda, four
cups full of flour; season as you like; beat very light, and bake.


LEMON DROP CAKES.

Grate the rinds of six lemons; add six heaping tablespoonsful of
the best white sugar and two of flour; work all well together; beat
very light the whites of two eggs; drop the mixture from a spoon on
buttered paper. When cold, take them off very carefully with a knife.


ORNAMENTAL ICING FOR CAKES.

Put the icing on any way you prefer with a syringe, which must be
kept for the purpose. It is better to put it on plain first, and then
ornament it.


POTATO PUFFS.

Take a pint bowl of white potatoes, mashed as fine as possible; then
add two eggs and one tablespoonful of flour; drop them from a spoon
into hot lard, and fry: when done, sprinkle sugar over them.


SAVOY CAKES.

Separate twelve eggs, and beat them very light; add a pound of the best
loaf sugar; stir in three quarters of a pound of flour, essence of
lemon, or rose water to the taste; do not beat it after the flour goes
in, as this will make it tough: bake in small tin pans in a quick oven.


COCOA-NUT POUND CAKE.

Beat to a cream a quarter of a pound of butter and half a pound of the
best white sugar; add four tablespoonsful of cream, one tablespoonful
of the essence of lemon, one of flour, and three eggs; beat till very
light: then grate the white meat of a cocoa-nut; stir it lightly, and
bake in tin pans. Some persons omit the flour.


ALMOND POUND CAKE.

Blanch the almonds by throwing them into boiling water: take them out;
drain and pound them in a mortar with a little rose water, and proceed
as for cocoa-nut pound cake. Ice them, if preferred.


EVERY DAY CAKE.

Beat to a cream half a pound of butter, and the same of sugar, some
grated nutmeg and rose water, two eggs well beaten; stir in a pound of
flour: roll out, and bake.


COMMON RUSK.

One cup full of butter, the same of sugar, one pint of milk, flour
enough to make a batter; beat it well, and then put in a cup full of
yeast; (but never beat any cake after the yeast goes in;) when very
light, add more flour; make into cakes, and set them to rise; as soon
as they are light, bake them.


A VERY CHEAP AND GOOD CAKE.

One cup full of lard, two of molasses, two of sour milk, one egg, three
tablespoonsful of cinnamon, half a nutmeg, essence of lemon, and flour
enough to make a thick batter; beat a great deal, and bake in a tin
pan, one hour and a half or two hours.


HOME-MADE POUND CAKE.

One pound of patent flour, one of pulverized sugar, one cup full of
butter, one of milk, and four eggs; bake in a quick oven: if it gets
too brown, put paper over the top.


A VERY GOOD HOME-MADE GINGER-BREAD.

One pint of molasses, one tea-cup full of sugar, three quarters of a
pound of butter and lard mixed. Spices,--one tablespoonful of good
ginger, three of cinnamon, a whole nutmeg, a teaspoonful of cloves.
Roll out thin, and bake in a quick oven.


CINNAMON CAKE.

Take one pint of risen dough; work into it one cup full of butter, and
two of sugar, one tablespoonful of cinnamon; set it in a dripping pan,
and pour over it a little melted butter and some cinnamon; set it to
rise, and when light, add more cinnamon, and butter, and bake. Cut them
in square cakes.


PRESERVES.

A porcelain kettle is the best for preserves. Have a ladle with a long
handle, and pierced with holes. The sugar should be the best loaf
sugar. All soft fruit should be done gently, and not allowed to remain
longer than half an hour after it begins to cook, till it is laid on
dishes. This makes the fruit more firm.


TO PRESERVE CLING-STONE PEACHES.

Get the finest cling-stone peaches; take out the stone without
disfiguring them; lay them after they are pared in half of their
weight of sugar, allowing a pound of sugar to a pound of peaches; let
them remain two hours: then put both sugar and peaches in the kettle
together; let them boil till clear, skimming them frequently. Have
some of the kernels cracked, and preserve them with the peaches.


TO PRESERVE PEACHES IN BRANDY.

The heath cling-stone are the best for this purpose. Half a pound of
sugar to a pound of peaches. Throw into boiling pearl-ash water for a
moment: then take them out and rub the skin off with a coarse towel,
and throw them into cold water; make a syrup with as little water as
possible; put in the peaches to boil, until they begin to look clear;
then take up the peaches, and let the syrup boil ten minutes longer,
mixing equal quantities of the syrup and the best white brandy. Put the
peaches in jars: pour over the syrup, and seal them.


PEACH MARMALADE.

Take free-stone peaches; pare and slice them, allowing half a pound of
sugar to one of the peaches. Sprinkle the sugar over them and let them
stand two hours: then put them down to cook. Stir and mash them; let
them cook gently, till they are a transparent pulp; then take it off,
put into jars, and seal them.


QUINCES.

Take fine large quinces; pare and core them; cut them round half an
inch thick; then put them in the preserving kettle with the skins and
cores, with water enough to cover them; let them boil till they look
clear: take them up; strain the juice; put it back again into the
kettle with the sugar, allowing three quarters of a pound to a pound
of quinces: let the syrup boil slowly; skim it, and put it in the
quinces for twenty minutes.


QUINCE JELLY.

Put down the quinces, after mashing and quartering them, in sufficient
water to cover them; let them boil slowly more than half a day: then
strain the juice, and add a pound of sugar to a pint of the juice. Let
it boil till it jellies.


QUINCE MARMALADE.

Boil your quinces till soft: when cool, pass them through a cullender;
add half a pound of sugar to a pint of the pulp; let it boil till it
will jelly.


PEARS.

Leave the stems on, and stick a clove in the blossom end, after paring
them; make a syrup of a pint of water to half a pound of sugar; skim
it, and put in the pears: let them boil till clear.


TO PRESERVE GREEN TOMATOES.

Gather those that look clear, not very large; put them down to boil
with plenty of water. Throw this water off; then add more water and
some green ginger; let this boil till the water tastes of the ginger
very strong: allow three quarters of a pound of sugar to a quart of
juice; make a syrup and put in the tomatoes; let them boil till clear.
The syrup, when boiled down, will make a nice jelly.


TO PRESERVE CITRON MELON.

Pare the melon, and cut it in any shape you fancy; put it down to boil
in a strong ginger water; after it has boiled ten minutes take it up;
make a syrup, allowing a pound of sugar to a quart of the water; add
slices of lemon; cut them; put in your citron: when clear, it is done.


SPICED PEACHES.

To nine pounds of peaches, take three pounds of sugar, and one pint of
vinegar; make a syrup; then put in the fruit. Soft free-stone peaches
are the best; let them boil ten minutes.


PLUMS.

Plums are prepared in the same way as peaches, also cantelopes before
they are ripe; add cloves, mace and allspice, to the taste: make the
syrup; put in the plums, and let boil ten minutes; or pour the boiling
vinegar and spices over the plums.


BLACKBERRY FLUMMERY.

Put the blackberries down to stew, with sugar to the taste; thicken
with a little flour; keep stirring till it is done, which will be in
ten minutes. This is sometimes called blackberry mush.


CURRANT JELLY.

Wash the currants; then spread them on a dish in the sun to dry; then
put them in a stone crock, and set the crock in boiling water till the
currants are soft; then strain them through a flannel bag or a hair
sieve; press all the juice out; allow a pound of the best loaf sugar to
a pint of the juice; boil twenty minutes, not longer. Another way is to
pour the boiling juice on the sugar: this makes much prettier jelly,
but not so rich.


APPLE JELLY.

Cut up some fine pippin apples; do not pare them; let them boil till
quite tender: then strain the juice and put it down with sugar,
allowing three quarters of a pound to a pint of juice; put in while
boiling, some lemon peel: when the jelly is done, which will be as soon
as it is thick, take out the lemon peel. Put the jelly in half-pint
tumblers.


GREEN GRAPE JELLY.

Put the grapes on to boil with a little water; mash them, and when the
juice is well out, strain it; add a pint of juice to a pound of sugar;
boil until it jellies.


MORELLA CHERRIES OR CARNATION.

Allow one pound of sugar to a pound of cherries; take out the stones
with a quill; boil the juice and the sugar; skim it well, and then put
in the fruit: when clear, they are done.


RASPBERRY JAM.

Allow a pound of sugar to a pound of fruit; stir it well, and when it
is a thick jelly, it is done.


TO PRESERVE STRAWBERRIES.

The medium size are the best and the firmest; allow a pound of sugar to
a quart of the fruit; sprinkle them with sugar for a couple of hours;
then put all into the kettle together; skim it well, and let them boil
twenty minutes; be very careful not to mash them.


MAGNUM BONUM PLUMS.

Stick them with a large needle; make a syrup of a pound of the fruit to
three quarters of sugar; then put in the fruit; let them boil slowly
till they clear.


STRAWBERRY JAM.

Strawberry jam is made in the same manner as raspberry jam.


PINE APPLES.

Grate them; allow a pound of sugar to a pint of the fruit; after it has
been grated, half an hour will cook it sufficiently.


APRICOTS.

Scald and wipe them dry; a pound of fruit to a pound of sugar; water
sufficient to make a syrup; boil and take off the skum; put in the
apricots: boil slowly till the fruit is clear.


GREEN GAGE PLUMS.

Take a pound of sugar to a pint of the fruit; scald the plums and wipe
them; pierce them with a needle; put very little water to the sugar;
when the syrup boils, put in the plums. Have a slow fire, and let them
boil till they are clear; take out the plums, and spread them on dishes
to cool; put the syrup in a tureen, and set all away till perfectly
cold. Then put some of the plums in half pint tumblers, nearly filling
them full of the syrup, which will be very rich; pour on the top of
each tumbler a dessert spoonful of good brandy. Cut a round piece of
white paper the size of the top of the tumbler; soak it in brandy, and
lay it on top; then cover it tight by pasting paper over. Preserves
properly done and put up in this way will be as good at the end of
three years as the first. Glass tumblers are excellent for putting up
jelly and preserves. Prune plums, egg plums, and the common blue plums
may all be done in the same way.


WATER MELON RINDS.

The rinds are cut in various fancy forms; make a strong salt and water;
put them in with cabbage leaves as for greening; keep them near the
fire, turning them very often, till they become yellow; have a kettle
of alum water ready; wash the rinds, and put them in the kettle with
cabbage leaves over and under them and between every layer; put the
kettle on the fire; do not let them come to a boil, but keep them
scalding over two hours; when they are green, put them in cold water
for three days; change the water several times. Some persons make two
syrups; but one will be sufficient, by making a syrup of a pound and a
quarter of sugar to one of melon; drop in some ginger; boil twenty-five
minutes.


PINE APPLE PRESERVES.

Pack the pine apple, after it is peeled and cut into slices, in a jar
with a layer of sugar on every layer of the fruit; set the jar for
fifteen minutes in a kettle of boiling water; cover it tight, and keep
it in a dry place.


TO PRESERVE CRAB APPLES.

Make a syrup of a pound of sugar for a pound of fruit; put in the
apples after skimming the syrup; let them boil till they are clear.
Some persons make a second syrup, and keep the first for cordial.


TO DRY PEACHES LIKE FIGS.

Pare and cut the peaches in slices; make a syrup of half a pound of
sugar to one of fruit; put the peaches in and let them scald; then take
them out, put them on a flat dish, and set the syrup away; next day
repeat the process; then put them in the oven, after the bread comes
out, on a flat dish; do this till they are dry; pack them in jars,
sprinkling sugar over each layer. The syrup will make cordial.


TO PRESERVE LIMES.

Get the limes green; take out all the inside very carefully with a
pen-knife, then lay them for twenty-four hours in salt and water; take
them out, wash and scald them till all of the salt is out; make a syrup
with three quarters of a pound of sugar to a pound of limes; skim it,
and put in the fruit; let them boil till clear. It is better to boil
the limes in water for twenty minutes before they go in the syrup.




Pickles.

The vinegar for pickling should be the best kind of cider vinegar.


MANGOES.

Have the melons of a good size, solid, but not large; put them in a
crock, and pour over them salt and water, boiling hot; let them remain
for three days; take them out of the pickle, cut a hole in the side,
scrape out the inside; make a dressing of the following articles; some
cucumbers cut fine, some cabbage, onions, horse-radish, race ginger,
mustard seed, mace, and cloves; mix all well together and fill the
mangoes; sew up the mangoes, put the top on, lay them in a jar, and
pour over them boiling vinegar. They will be fit for use in three
months.


TO PICKLE ONIONS.

The small white onions are the best; pour boiling salt and water over
them, and let them stand till cold; repeat this several times; then
put them in a jar and pour boiling vinegar over them; cover tight, and
put them away for three weeks, when they are fit to use.


TO PICKLE CUCUMBERS.

Gather the small cucumbers; put in brine for a day and night; then pour
off the water, put them in jars, and pour boiling vinegar over them,
with whole ears of pepper and allspice if you like.

Gherkins, radish pods, and beans may be pickled according to the above
receipt.


TO PICKLE NASTURTIONS.

Nasturtions should be young: pour boiling salt and water over them; let
them stand till cold; pour it off and repeat it; let it stand two days,
then pour off the water; add cold vinegar with a little mace.


TO PICKLE TOMATOES.

Have ripe tomatoes; the small ones are the best; put them in a jar,
with salt over each layer; next day take them out, and wipe them off;
wash the jar; wipe it perfectly dry; put them in again in the same
manner; let them stand another day; then drain and wipe them; put them
in a clean jar with mustard seed, cloves, and whole grains of pepper;
and if preferred some onions sliced; pour cold vinegar over them, and
put them away.


TO PICKLE PEPPERS.

Get some good green peppers; cut a hole at the top, and take out the
seed; lay them in salt and water for two days; then wash them; fill
them with cabbage, horse-radish, mustard seed, and onions, all chopped
fine with pepper and cloves. Boil the vinegar and pour over them.


TO PICKLE BUTTER NUTS.

Gather the nuts in the beginning of July; put them in strong salt and
water for a week; take them out, wash and drain them; lay them in a
stone jar; boil some good vinegar with pepper grains, mustard seed,
mace, and cloves; pour this boiling hot over the nuts, and let them
stand a week; then take them and put on fresh vinegar with the spices
which were in the first vinegar; in a month look at them; if the
vinegar has lost its strength, boil fresh and pour over: this will be
fit to use in six months.


TO PICKLE MUSHROOMS.

Gather the small mushrooms; peel and mash them; put them in a jar; add
a little mace and white mustard; cold vinegar sufficient to cover them.


TO PICKLE GREEN TOMATOES.

Wash them and cut them in slices, with an equal number of white onions;
put in a jar with a layer of tomatoes, then a layer of onions and
salt; let them remain twenty-four hours; take them out; have some good
vinegar and pepper, white mustard seed, and cloves; mix some mustard,
flour, and turmeric, with the vinegar; and when boiling hot, put in the
tomatoes and onions; let them boil ten minutes; then take them up, and
put them away; in two weeks they will be fit for use; at the end of
that time boil the vinegar again, and pour over them.


PICCALILLE.

Piccalille is made in the same manner, only the vinegar must be cold
when it is poured on: omit the cloves, as they will make them dark, and
use white vinegar.


CAULIFLOWER.

Cut the cauliflower in small pieces, but long, so as to show the
flower; lay them twenty-four hours in salt and water; then take out and
wash and drain them for two hours; add to the vinegar, mustard seed,
horse-radish, ginger, allspice, and mace; boil for ten minutes, and
pour over the cauliflower.


TO PICKLE RED CABBAGE.

Cut up the cabbage with a slaw cutter; sprinkle it with salt in
alternate layers; let it stand twenty-four hours; then take it out and
drain it; put it in a jar, and pour boiling vinegar, with horse-radish,
black pepper, and cloves; cover it; when nearly cold, tie up the jar.


TOMATO CATSUP.

Wash the tomatoes; cut them in slices; put them into a stone jar, with
alternate layers of tomatoes and salt, till the jar is nearly full. Set
them in the sun every day for a week. Bring them in at night, or if
it is cloudy at the end of that time, put them in a bell metal kettle,
which must be very clean; let them get well heated; take them up, and
strain them through a sieve; let some of the pulp pass through, but not
the seeds or the skins; boil it for two hours, with whole grains of
black pepper and cloves. Otherwise, you may add mustard seed, cayenne
pepper, mace, nutmeg, cinnamon, allspice, and ginger. When cold,
bottle: cork tight, and rosin the tops.


MUSHROOM CATSUP.

Take full grown mushrooms; put them in a stone jar with layers of salt.
Break up the mushrooms, and cover the jar close. Let them remain ten
days. Stir several times a day. Then strain off the liquor and boil it,
and season with the following ingredients, whole pepper, mustard seed,
cloves and ginger. Boil thirty minutes; when quite cold, bottle it; put
into each bottle a gill of vinegar. They should be corked tightly.


WALNUT CATSUP.

Put them in salt and water for eight days. Take them out and mash them
well; to fifteen walnuts allow one quart of vinegar; let it stand for
eight or ten days, stirring it very often. Then strain it; season
with mace, cloves and pepper; boil twenty minutes, and when cold,
bottle. This receipt will answer for either English or the common black
walnuts.


ELDER-BERRY WINE.

Gather and pick the berries. To every quart of the berries add a
quart of water; after they have been mashed in a clean tub, let them
lie three days, stirring it very often. Then strain it; sweeten to
your taste; put the juice in a kettle, and boil it an hour and twenty
minutes, with a little ginger and cloves; then put it in a cask, and
when cold, if you have four gallons, stir in a tea-cup full of yeast:
after it has fermented, add a little brandy.


WILD-CHERRY BRANDY.

To two gallons of brandy, add three quarts of wild cherries; mash a
pint of them, and break the stone. In two weeks they will be fit for
use.


BLACK-BERRY CORDIAL.

Take three pints of the juice of the black-berry, three pounds of the
best loaf sugar, one pint of good brandy, one ounce of cinnamon and
cloves, each: boil half an hour, and skim it well. This is very good
for children.


ROSE BRANDY.

Fill a jar with rose leaves; pour over some good French brandy; let it
stand twenty-four hours; take out the leaves, and add fresh ones. Do
this till the brandy is sufficiently strong with the roses. The jar
must be kept covered: when done, bottle it.


ORGEAT.

Blanch two pounds of almonds; pound them in a marble mortar, adding a
little rose water to keep them from oiling. Then boil one quart of milk
with a small piece of cinnamon, and when cold, put in the almonds: let
it boil for ten minutes, then strain, and when cold, bottle it.


TO KEEP LEMON JUICE.

To one pint of lemon juice, add a pound of sugar. Strain the juice
before you put in the sugar, then let it stand till the sugar is
dissolved; stir it often. Then bottle it; add a gill of French brandy
to each bottle; cork it up tight: cover with rosin. To be kept in a
cool place.


COLOGNE.

To a quart of alcohol, add two drachms of essence of bergamot, and the
same of essence of lemon; one drachm of oil of rosemary and lavender;
put all into a bottle, shake well together, and cork up tight.


CURRANT SHRUB.

To one quart of currant juice, take two pounds of loaf sugar; put the
sugar in the juice, and let it stand all night; then put in half a pint
of spirits, and the juice of three lemons. Bottle, and set it away for
use.


RASPBERRY VINEGAR.

To a pint of English raspberries, take a pint of white wine vinegar;
pour the vinegar on the raspberries, and let it stand all night, then
strain it through a bag; add another pint of raspberries, and let it
stand a day; then strain it; to each pint of the liquor, add a pound of
sugar; put it into a jar, and set the jar in a pan of boiling water for
half an hour. When it is cold, bottle it.


BLACK-BERRY CORDIAL, ANOTHER.

Take two quarts of black-berry juice, one and a half pounds of best
loaf sugar, a half ounce of nutmeg, one ounce cinnamon, a quarter of an
ounce of mace, and the same of cloves and allspice pounded fine; boil
all together for twenty minutes; when cold, add one pint of the best
French brandy. The berries should be fresh, and if kept more than a
year, add a little more brandy.


CHERRY SHRUB.

Morella cherries are the best. Pick, and mash them; put them in a jar,
and set the jar in a pot of boiling water, for two hours, then strain
through a flannel bag. Sweeten with the best loaf sugar; bottle it, and
put a little brandy in each bottle. Sealed air tight. Keep in a cool
place.


TO MAKE CHERRY BRANDY.

Have some good morella cherries. Get a small cask, one holding about
five quarts; fill it nearly with cherries; add two quarts of water; the
water should be hot; let it stand full three hours, then add one quart
of brandy; let it stand four days; add two quarts more of water, and
one of brandy; let it stand two more days, then drain it off: wash
out the cask well. Put your juice on the fire with sugar, (say half a
pound of sugar to two quarts of the juice) let it boil fifteen minutes;
skim it; take it off, and let it get perfectly cold, then put it in the
cask, and set it away. If it is too strong of the brandy, add water.


SPRUCE BEER.

Boil some sassafras root, cut fine, and half as much hops, in five
gallons of water; add, while hot, two quarts of molasses, one
tablespoonful of spruce, and the same of powdered ginger, and a little
allspice; when perfectly cold, put it into a cask; add a gill of good
yeast; mix it well. After it has fermented, bottle it.


MEAD.

To prepare mead, take two pounds and a half of honey; add three quarts
and a pint of warm water. Mix it well, and when it is dissolved in the
water, pour it into the cask. After it has fermented and is clear,
bottle in stone bottles, and cork tight.




Soup.


CALF’S HEAD SOUP.

Take a calf’s head; wash and soak it for one hour. Then put it down
early in the morning with four quarts of water to boil. When you can
separate the meat from the bones easily, take it up. Be careful to
take out all the bones, and chop the meat very fine. Then put on your
soup to boil again, with two onions, a bunch of parsley and thyme,
seasoned with pepper and salt, with a little flour made very smooth in
water, allspice, cloves, and mace. Have ready a small piece of butter
boiling hot, into which put white sugar and half a tumbler full of
claret wine; put this in a pitcher; add as much of this as you wish;
when you first put on the soup (the quantity will depend upon the
colour you wish the soup,) boil three eggs hard; take the yolks and one
of the whites, mash them up fine with a little flour; fry them a light
brown. Keep the pan moving all the time. Before you put on the head
take out the brains; boil them for a few minutes. Then chop them up,
and put them in with the eggs and half a tumbler full of Madeira wine,
just before you dish the soup. A little mushroom catsup will improve
this soup very much. Beef soup made in this way is very good.


CALF’S HEAD SOUP ANOTHER WAY.

After cleaning it well, put it down to boil with one gallon of water.
When it is half done, take up the meat; cut it up in small pieces,
carefully removing all the bones. Put the meat in the soup with a quart
of beef stock: season with black and cayenne pepper and salt. Fry two
onions; cut in thin slices, in butter, and stir in a little flour to
thicken the gravy; put this in the soup. About ten minutes before
serving it up, put in some chives and parsley chopped fine, with egg
balls made as in the above receipt, with two spoonsful of mushroom
catsup and one of soy, and a pint of white wine. Squeeze a lemon in the
tureen, and pour the soup upon it. This is very good.


CALF’S HEAD SOUP ANOTHER WAY.

Take a large calf’s head, wash it very clean, and let it boil an hour
and a half. Then take it up, removing all the meat from the bones; skim
the soup well; add two quarts of veal stock, and put in the meat after
cutting it in small square pieces; add three large onions, half an
ounce of cloves, and nutmeg and mace; chop very fine all kinds of sweet
herbs. Strain off the liquor. Put a quarter of a pound of butter in a
pan on the fire, and when it is hot, stir in some flour and a little
sugar. Put this in the soup, stirring it well: season it to your taste:
add eggs, balls fried, and a pint of wine. Serve it up hot.


TURTLE SOUP.

In most of the markets the turtle can be bought cleaned and ready for
cooking. If not, place it on its back to make it extend itself. Then
cut off its head and fins; let it bleed freely; when quite dead, cut
the belly part clean off, take out the gall and the sand bag. Draw and
wash the entrails well. Scald the black meat, so that the skin will
come off, which must be done very carefully. Cut the meat in joints
like a chicken, then put it down with five quarts of water. Let it
boil till soft, (which will depend upon the turtle; if it is old, it
will take a long time.) Make forcemeat balls of one pound and a half
of veal, chopped fine, with parsley, thyme, pepper, salt, and two eggs
and flour to thicken; fry them in butter and lard; put half a pound of
butter in the pan, and when hot, stir in enough flour to thicken it.
Put these all in the soup, and season with pepper, cayenne and black,
with salt to your taste; let it simmer, till the flour is well cooked:
put in just as you dish it up, one quart of Madeira wine. This is very
superior.


EGG SOUP.

Boil a small piece of beef or the scrag end of the neck of veal: season
it with pepper and salt, and let it boil very gently till the meat is
well cooked. Then strain it. Beat the yolks of two eggs well, with some
chopped parsley, and pour the soup in the tureen on the eggs. Keep
stirring it all the time. A little rice will improve this soup very
much: put the soup in the boiler again, after it is strained, and cook
till done.


CLAM SOUP.

Take two quarts of clams. After they are opened, cut off the beards
and put them down to cook, with equal quantities of the water and the
liquor. Take four crackers pounded fine and rolled in butter; stir in
very gently: season with pepper, salt, chopped parsley, a little mace,
and add a pint of sweet cream, just before you take it up.


OYSTER SOUP.

Oyster soup is made as clam soup, only omitting parsley and
substituting a little mace.


SOUP FOR THE SICK.

In a pint of boiling water put half a wine-glass full of wine; beat up
the yolk of one egg; when the water and wine boils, pour it out into a
bowl; then on the egg; continue to pour it from one bowl to another,
two or three times; then add a small piece of butter, a little sugar
and nutmeg.


TERRAPINS.

Take the terrapins one at a time, and immerse them in boiling water for
half a minute; take them out and remove the skin; put them back into
hot water, and watch them carefully that they do not boil too much;
(some will be done in half an hour, others will take much longer. They
are sufficiently done when the feet are soft to the touch.) Take off
the shell and remove the sand bag and the gall, (which will be found
in the liver; the sand bag is full of water;) then put them down to
stew with one pound of best butter to three good-sized terrapins:
season with red and a little black pepper; (no salt;) when they are
perfectly heated through, put in the following dressing, and when it
boils furnish the seasoning with a little salt, &c., if required.
Dressing,--Take three yolks of hard-boiled eggs, to one large terrapin;
mash them up fine, and add the best Madeira, a little at a time, until
you make a thin paste; stir this into the terrapins, and add more wine,
if necessary. There should be just dressing enough to float near to the
top of your terrapin in the saucepan.


ROMAN PUNCH.

One gallon of water, one quart of cream, the juice of a dozen lemons,
one pint of the best brandy, and a pint of rum; sugar to the taste; to
be frozen before the cream goes in. The cream stirred in and frozen
again.


APPLE TODDY.

One bushel of apples baked on white paper, and strained next day
through a sieve, three gallons of water, one gallon of brandy, three
quarts of Jamaica spirits; sweeten to your taste.


TO MAKE A VEAL POT-PIE.

Half boil some veal; then cut it in small pieces; season it with
cayenne pepper, salt, nutmeg, parsley and a little butter: make a
good paste; line the sides of a deep dish; put in the meat, and add
some cream; have a small cup in the middle of the pie; cut across the
centre, and turn back the sides to let the steam escape: bake slowly.


GUINEA FOWL.

They are very good cooked as pheasants or stewed like chickens.


SUCCOTASH.

Boil some string beans in as little water as they can be cooked in,
with salt; when nearly done, have some corn cut from the ears put in,
and season with pepper, salt, butter and a little cream; twenty minutes
will be long enough for the corn to cook; but the beans will require
an hour and a half. In winter, succotash can be made with dried corn
and beans; let them both soak all night in the water you boil them in,
after washing them well.


POTTED SHAD.

Take fine large shad, and when they are thoroughly cleaned and washed,
_split_ them in two and cut them in square pieces. Place a layer of
fish in a stone crock; (a glazed one will not answer;) sprinkle over it
salt, cloves, whole pepper and mace; thus continue till your crock is
filled; pour over it the best pure cider vinegar; cover the mouth of
the crock with a bladder, which should be tied down sufficiently tight,
to prevent the steam from escaping; place it in a moderately warm oven,
and let it bake for several hours. It is a good plan to send it to a
bake-house, and let it be put in a brick oven, after the bread is taken
out. If properly done, the bones will all be dissolved, and it will be
almost equal to salmon.


TO MAKE STOCK FOR SOUPS AND GRAVY.

To one shin of beef and one of veal, add eight quarts of water, and
salt to the taste; skim it well, and let it boil till it is quite
thick: take out all the meat, and pour off the stock; set it away till
next day: you can add some of this to your soup, and it will improve
it very much. Geese, ducks, and chickens are very good stewed in stock
made after the above receipt, and then browned in an oven.


TO STEW SWEET-BREADS.

Parboil them; then cut in small pieces; season with pepper, salt, and
nutmeg; put them down to stew in some veal gravy, and just before you
take them up, add some mushroom catsup and a glass of wine.


TO ROAST SWEET-BREADS.

Half boil them; then take them up; lard them with ham, and roast before
the fire: season with cayenne pepper, salt and mushroom catsup.


TO HASH MUTTON.

Cut in small pieces; have two onions fried brown; put it down in a
little good gravy; just before you dish it, season with pepper, salt, a
little currant jelly and wine, or a spoonful of walnut pickle.


SUGAR DROPS.

Beat to a cream a quarter of a pound of butter and half a pound of
sugar, rose water to the taste, half a pound of flour; stir all well
together, and drop them on buttered paper, and bake: ornament with
sugar plums.


CURRANT CAKE.

One pound of butter, one and a half of sugar, two pounds of flour, nine
eggs, two pounds of currants, and a little soda dissolved in milk.


ANOTHER SPONGE CAKE.

Flour, one pound; sugar, one pound and a half, ten eggs, and a large
tea-cup full of water. The water must be poured over the sugar and put
on the fire to dissolve, and come nearly to the boil; meanwhile, beat
the eggs separately very light; then mix them together, and add the
dissolved sugar, beating it in the egg very hard; lastly, stir in the
flour very _slowly_.


PIGNOLATTIS.

One pound of sugar, three quarters of a pound of flour, five eggs, five
ounces of almonds or ground-nuts, blanched and pounded. Cut into cakes
and bake.


COCOA-NUT CAKE, No. 4.

Half a pound of butter, one of sugar, six eggs, and one large cocoa-nut
grated.


COTTAGE PUDDING.

Half a pound of butter warmed, four eggs well beaten, four tea-cups
full of fine white sugar, two quarts of flour, four teaspoonsful of
cream of tartar, two of soda, four tea-cups full of milk; stir all well
together; flavour with grated lemon peel, and bake in a moderate oven.


APPLES IN JELLY.

Have some moderate-sized cooking apples; pare and core without cutting
them open. Let them boil slowly till they are tender, with some slices
of lemon; when they are done, take them up, and add sugar enough to
the liquor to make a syrup; put the apples in, and let them boil till
clear; put in half an ounce of isinglass dissolved; lay a slice of
lemon on each apple, and pour the jelly around them.


SYLLABUB.

Take the juice and peel of one large lemon, two glasses of wine, and
one of brandy; sugar to the taste; to this add a pint of whipped cream;
arrange it in glasses.


A DISH OF SNOW.

Grate the white part of the cocoa-nut, and pile it up in the middle;
this is nice to eat with preserves or fruit, and is a delicate relish
for tea.


CHEESE CAKE.

To two bowls of cottage cheese, add ten eggs, and half a pint of cream,
mace, cinnamon, sugar, and nutmeg, to the taste; add a little brandy;
bake in puff paste.


ALMOND CHEESE CAKE.

Blanch a pound of sweet almonds, and a few bitter; pound them in a
mortar, with a little rose-water; add ten eggs, beaten very light, and
sugar to the taste; a glass of brandy, and some lemon peel; bake in
puff paste. You may take equal quantities of almonds and cocoa-nut.


TO PRESERVE LEMON PEEL.

Take out all the inside, and lay them in salt and water for two days;
then wash them well; put them in fresh water; let them boil till
tender; then take them up; throw off the water; and make a syrup with
half their weight of sugar; put in the peel for twenty minutes; then
take them up; and when the syrup is thick, pour over the peel; put them
in jars, and cover tightly. This may be used as citron.


TO COOK CHEESE AND EGGS.

To half a pound of grated cheese, add the yolks of six eggs, and half a
pound of butter; stir all together; add some cayenne pepper, and bake.


TO PICKLE CUCUMBERS.

Scald the cucumbers in brine; let them stand till cold; repeat this
three times; then put them in jars, pouring on vinegar, with a small
quantity of whisky in each jar; let them stand for three months; they
will be hard and green.


TO MAKE MOLASSES CANDY.

Grease the saucepan with butter; then put in the molasses, with a
little brown sugar; let it boil for half an hour, stirring it all the
while; when it is brittle, it is done. If you like, add the kernels of
any kind of nuts you prefer: just before taking up, pour into buttered
tin pans, and set away to cool.


TO MAKE CANDY WITH THE KERNELS OF NUTS.

Make a thick syrup; then throw in the kernels of any kind of nuts you
prefer; have buttered tin pans, and pour it out.


JELLY.

Three quarts of water, four of gelatine, three pounds of sugar, the
whites of five eggs, one pint of wine, and six tablespoonsful of
brandy, and six lemons, peel and juice. The gelatine must be soaked in
one quart of water for half an hour; stir all the ingredients, except
the brandy, well together, before it is put on the fire; first beating
the white very light. Let it boil ten minutes without disturbing it;
then strain it through a jelly strainer.


CARRAGEEN, OR IRISH MOSS JELLY FOR THE SICK.

One ounce of moss, one quart of water, three tablespoonsful of sugar,
half a pint of wine; boil ten minutes, and strain.


OINTMENT FOR MORTIFICATION.

Make a salve of raw carrots; grate and stew them in lard; when done,
strain it. Another salve can be made of the leaves and bark of black
alder, stewed in lard. Raw cranberries, cut in half and mashed, are an
excellent application.


ELDER-BERRY JAM.

Put two quarts of elder-berries in a kettle, with some water, say a
pint; stir and mash them well; when the juice is all extracted, strain
it, and add two pounds of the best loaf sugar; let this simmer twenty
minutes. This is good for colds, and sore throat, and is a great
purifier of the blood.


BLACK CURRANT JELLY.

Mash your currants well, and strain them through a sieve; to one pint
of juice, put one pound of loaf sugar; boil twenty minutes. Quince
jelly is also very good for the throat. The seeds should always be
kept, as they are very good for sore mouth or throat.


TO PRESERVE ORANGE PEEL.

Take out all the inside; then let them soak in salt and water
twenty-four hours; take them out; wash them well, and let them boil for
ten minutes; throw off the water; make a rich syrup; after boiling the
peel till they are tender, put them in the syrup; let them boil for ten
minutes; and when the syrup is thick, pour it over the peel.


SCOTCH CAKE.

Beat to a cream one pound of sugar, and three quarters of a pound of
butter; beat separately nine eggs; put them into the cake; add the
juice and grated rind of a lemon, and a wine-glass full of brandy;
then add one pound of sifted flour; and just before it is put in the
pans, a pound of seeded raisins.


HARD GINGER BREAD.

One quart of molasses, one pound of brown sugar, three quarters of a
pound of butter, cloves, and ginger, to the taste; with very little
cayenne pepper; flour enough to roll it out. The cake must be very
thin, and bake in a slow oven.


GINGER JUMBLES.

One cup full of butter, two cups full of sugar, and one cup full of
molasses, one of cream, and a teaspoonful of soda; dissolve in a small
quantity of thick milk a tablespoonful of ginger, two eggs, a glass of
wine, and flour sufficient to roll out thin.


SPICE NUTS.

Two pounds of butter, and the same of flour, one quarter of a pound of
ginger, an ounce of cake seed, the same of cloves, and cinnamon, one
quart of molasses, three quarters of a pound of sugar, and nutmeg; roll
out thin, and bake.


QUAKER CAKE.

Three cups full of sugar, one cup full of butter, six eggs, five cups
full of flour, one teaspoonful of soda; season with lemons or almonds
to the taste.


A. P. S.

Cut fine half a pound of butter, in three quarters of flour, half a
pound of sugar, a glass of wine and brandy, rose water, and spice to
your taste; then mix in two ounces of flour, reserving two ounces to
mould them in.


DOVER CAKE.

Take one pound of sugar, half a pound of butter, six eggs, one
teaspoonful of soda, one cup full of sour milk, one pound of flour;
season to the taste.




Articles of Diet for the Sick.

Here we may observe that neatness in serving up, as well as care and
cleanliness in the preparation, makes food for the sick room more
likely to be attractive to the fastidious appetite of the invalid.


BARLEY WATER.

Wash well a tea-cup full of pearl barley; put it in a sauce pan, with
two quarts of water, and a small cup full of raisins; boil it to a
quart; then strain, and add sugar, nutmeg, and lemon juice, to your
taste.


OATMEAL GRUEL.

Mix smoothly a dessert spoonful of meal, with two of cold water; pour
on a pint of boiling water, and let it boil for fifteen minutes,
stirring all the time; sugar or salt may be added as preferred. Wine is
sometimes used.


CORN MEAL GRUEL.

Wash several times in cold water, three tablespoonsful of corn meal;
pouring off the water as it settles; then pour on a quart of water,
and boil, stirring all the time; add a little salt; strain and sweeten,
adding butter, wine, and nutmeg.


ARROW ROOT.

Mix a dessert spoonful of arrow root smoothly, in a little cold water;
pour on it a pint of boiling water; let it boil five minutes; then
sweeten to your taste, and add nutmeg and wine. If richer food is
required, this can be made in the same way, with milk instead of water.


WINE WHEY.

To half a pint of boiling milk, add one glass full of sherry wine, and
a little sugar; let it boil until the curd has separated, and strain
through a fine sieve.


RICE GRUEL.

Stir into a pint of boiling water, a tablespoonful of rice flour,
which has been mixed with a little water; let it boil fifteen minutes,
stirring all the time; then season with sugar and nutmeg, or a little
cream.


TAMARIND WATER.

Upon a gill of good tamarinds, pour a pint of boiling water; cover it,
and let it stand until cold, with a lump of ice: it is very grateful to
a feverish person. Both currant and quince jelly make pleasant drinks,
prepared in the same way.


CREAM OF TARTAR PUNCH.

Pour on a teaspoonful of cream of tartar, a tumbler full of boiling
water; sweeten to your taste, with loaf sugar, and drink as hot as
possible, upon getting into bed; a teaspoonful of nitre in it is
excellent for a fever, or a cold.


LEMONADE.

Squeeze and strain the juice of six lemons into three pints of ice
water; sweeten to your taste: by adding a gill of good French brandy,
it will be lemon punch. Some persons prefer it made with boiling water,
and then cooled with ice.


VEGETABLE SOUP.

Slice one potato, one turnip, one onion, one carrot, and a little
celery; boil in a quart of water one hour; toast some bread nicely; cut
in small pieces, and lay in a bowl: add salt to the soup, and pour over
the toast.


TOAST WATER.

Let the water be boiled and cooled; then toast bread of a deep brown,
and pour over it the water; let it stand half an hour. A small piece of
dried lemon or orange peel gives it a pleasant taste.


SAGO.

Sago should be well washed; put a tablespoonful in a pint of milk, and
boil it until it is quite soft; sweeten to the taste, and add wine or
lemon juice. Tapioca is made in the same way, but does not require so
much washing.


CARRAGEEN MOSS.

Pour upon one ounce of carrageen (after it has been well washed) one
quart of warm water; cover it, and let it stand on top of a stove
all night: it will form a tasteless jelly, which when sweetened and
seasoned with lemon, is palatable and strengthening.


CRACKER JELLY.

Take a quarter of a pound of crackers; pour on them two quarts of
water; boil down to one quart; strain it: add one pound of sugar, one
pint of Madeira wine, and a little nutmeg.


BEEF TEA.

Take a tender, juicy piece of beef; cut into small pieces; put into
a bottle with a little salt, and a tablespoonful of water: place the
bottle in a pan of hot water, and let it boil three quarters of an hour.


BEEF TEA.

Cut up into small pieces a pound of juicy beef; cover it with a quart
of water, and let it stand for two hours: then boil it until it is
reduced to a pint; let it cool: skim off all the grease; then boil
again; drink it while warm.


BALM TEA.

Pour upon a tea-cup full of the leaves of dried balm, a pint of boiling
water; let it stand fifteen minutes, when it is ready for use.


CHICKEN TEA.

Wash in cold water the leg and wing of a young chicken; put it in a
stew pan, with a pint of water and a little salt; cover it, and let it
boil twenty minutes; then skim and strain it.


MILK TOAST.

Cut a thin slice from a loaf of stale baker’s bread; toast it a light
brown. Boil half a pint of milk, and a small piece of butter ten
minutes; then sprinkle in a little salt, and pour over the toast. Cream
toast is made in the same way.


TO KEEP FLOWERS FOR A LONG TIME.

To one quart of water, add one teaspoonful of carbonate of soda: do not
change the water.


TO KEEP FURS FROM MOTHS.

Get the gum camphor; as soon as you can do without the furs, beat them,
and put small pieces of camphor rolled in paper, in, and around them;
sew them up tightly in linen, and keep in a cool place. Black pepper
will not prevent the moths getting in, nor will it kill them.


TO WASH FLANNELS.

Wash them in clean suds as hot as you can bear the hands in; then in
water of the same temperature, with a little soap in, but not so much
as the first; rinse in hot water, and hang up immediately.


TO WASH WINDOWS.

Never put soap on the windows, but wash them off with a shammy, and
then dry them with the same; if the shammy cannot be obtained, paper
will answer, but it is not so good.


TO WASH BOTTLES BELONGING TO THE CASTOR.

Wash them well with water, with a little soap and soda in it, also some
clean coarse sand or rice to get the marks out.


TO WASH CALICOES.

Wash out the grease spots before putting the dress in, as the spots
cannot be seen after it is wet; wash them well through two suds; then
rinse them, throwing a little salt in the water to set the colours;
starch and hang them in the shade, as the sun will fade them. If the
calico is black, make the starch water as blue as possible. Wash, and
hang up quickly.


TO GATHER GARDEN HERBS.

Herbs should be gathered on a dry day, just before they blossom. Wash
them and hang them in a dry place; as soon as they are dry, put them
in a paper bag. Sage, sweet marjoram, summer savoury, and thyme should
be pounded fine, and kept in bottles corked tight. When parsley is dry,
cut it fine, and keep in bottles.


FOR A COUGH.

Make a strong tea of hoarhound; then strain it, and add half a pound of
the best loaf sugar, to a pint of the tea: let it simmer till thick;
then bottle it, and take a little two or three times a day.


FOR A SORE THROAT OR MOUTH.

Make a sage tea by boiling some sage leaves; when strong, add honey and
some alum or borax. Gargle the throat with this often through the day.


FOR THE STING OF A BEE OR WASP.

Rub the part with hot tallow, or with hartshorn, or wet clay.


FOR POISON.

Mix in a tumbler full of warm water one teaspoonful of the flour of
mustard; drink while warm: it will make the patient throw off the
poison. This is good for the cramp.


FOR BURNS.

When the skin is not off, apply scraped raw potatoes. When the skin is
off, apply sweet oil and cotton, or linseed oil and lime water made
into a paste. Elder ointment is very good: make the ointment of the
green bark of the elder; stew in lard.

Linseed oil and lime water mixed in a paste, is also an excellent cure.


TO PICK DUCKS AND GEESE.

Dip them in boiling water; then wrap them for a few moments in flannel,
and pick them, holding them by the feet, with the head down; be careful
to dry the feathers as soon as possible. A very good way to cure
feathers is to put them several times in a brick oven after the bread
comes out: then let them lie on the ground for several days, bringing
them in at night. This will take away all the disagreeable smell which
is so unpleasant in feathers when they are not properly dried.


TO TAKE INK STAINS OUT OF LINEN.

Rub the stain with lemon juice and salt, or a little hot tallow; when
the lemon juice and salt are used, it must go in the sun for several
hours; then rinse it: new milk boiling hot will take out most kinds of
fruit stains; dip in them when dry, and repeat it often.


TO CLEAN CARPETS.

Shake them well; then spread them on a clean floor, and rub them with a
soft brush dipped in camphine, or with a piece of cloth: when they are
dry, if the grease is not out, repeat the operation.


TO TAKE GREASE SPOTS OUT OF SILK OR WOOLLEN.

Rub the spots with a sponge dipped in camphine; rub, or if the article
soiled be silk, spread magnesia on the wrong side; let it remain for a
day or two; then brush it off, and the spot will have disappeared.


TO CLEAN KNIVES AND FORKS.

The iron filings from the blacksmith shop are excellent to clean knives
and forks with. Rotten stone or fine brick dust is also very good. Do
not put the handles in hot water, as this injures them; wipe them dry,
and keep them rolled in brown paper.


TO CLEAN BRASS AND COPPER UTENSILS.

All brass and copper utensils should be well cleaned before using them,
with hot vinegar and salt, then washed in hot water; keep the vessel
warm till ready for use; when done with it, clean it well, and keep in
a dry place.


TO CLEAN BRITANNIA.

Rub them well with sweet oil and whitening; when dry, rub them off with
buckskin. If they are well washed in hot soap suds, and rinsed in clean
hot water every day, and let dry quickly near the fire or in the sun,
they will seldom require rubbing.


TO CLEAN STOVES.

Mix some British lustre with alum water; put it on with a brush, and
with a dry brush rub it off.


TO PRESERVE CORN FOR WINTER USE.

Take off all the outside husks; fasten the inside ones down tight, and
pack in barrels or boxes with salt in alternate layers; keep in a cool
place, or the corn will heat and spoil.


TO PRESERVE GRAPES.

Gather the bunches on a dry day; be careful that the grapes are all
sound; pack them in sawdust or cotton: put them in a box; fasten it up,
and keep in a dry place.




INDEX.


  A.

  Albonnie Cake, 105

  Almond Cake, 102, 115

  Almond Cream, 91

  Almond Pudding, 81

  Apple Charlotte, 94

  Apple Dumplings, 85

  Apple Dumpling Sauce, 29

  Apple Float, 90

  Apple Fritters, 86

  Apples, Iced, 90

  Apple Jelly, 120

  Apples in Jelly, 141

  Apple Pudding, 98

  Apple Sauce, 29

  Apples and Rice, 93

  Apple Toddy, 137

  Apricots, 121

  Arrow Root (for the sick,) 147

  Arrow Root Pudding, 80

  Asparagus, 58

  A. P. S., 112, 145


  B.

  Balm Tea, 150

  Barley Water, 144

  Bass, Sea, 19

  Batter Cakes, Corn, 74

  Bean Soup, 16

  Beans, Lima, 58

  Beans, String, 58

  Beef, To roast, 30

  Beef, To stew, 31

  Beef, To boil Corned, 33

  Beef, To cure, 41

  Beef Soup, 11, 12

  Beef Steak Pie, 32

  Beef Steaks, 31

  Beef a La Mode, 23

  Beef Brisket, (baked,) 32

  Beef’s Heart, 33

  Beef Tea, 149

  Beef Tongues, To cure, 42

  Beer, Spruce, 132

  Beets, To boil, 63

  Biscuit, Light, 71

  Biscuit, Maryland, 71

  Biscuit, Philadelphia Milk, 70

  Biscuit, Tea, 71

  Blackberry Flummery, 119

  Blackberry Pie, 77

  Brandy, Cherry, 131

  Brandy, Wild Cherry, 129

  Brandy, Rose, 129

  Bread, 68

  Bread in a Brick Oven, To bake, 68

  Bread, Diet, 69

  Bread, Indian, 74

  Bread, Potato, 72

  Bread Pudding, 79

  Bread Rolls, 69

  Breakfast Cakes, Indian, 75

  Brocoli, 65

  Broth, Chicken, 137

  Broth, Mutton, 21

  Buckwheat Cakes, 72

  Burns, For, 152

  Butter, 65

  Butter Drops, 111

  Butter, Melted, 26

  Butter, To keep, 66

  Butternuts, To pickle, 126

  Bunns, 107

  Bunns, Philadelphia, 69

  Bunns, Spanish, 112


  C.

  Cabbage, To boil, 64

  Cabbage, To pickle, 127

  Cakes, 99

  Cake, A very cheap, 108, 115

  Cake, A good small, 113

  Cake, Albonnie, 105

  Cake, Almond, 112, 115

  Cake, Almond (Small,) 110

  Cakes, Buckwheat, 72

  Cake, Carolina, 107

  Cake, Cheese, 141

  Cake, Cinnamon, 116

  Cake, Cocoanut, 109, 111, 140

  Cake, Cocoanut Pound, 114

  Cake, Cocoanut and Almond, 109

  Cake, Composition, 104

  Cake, Corn Batter, 74

  Cake, Cream, 113

  Cake, Cup, 106

  Cake, Currant, 140

  Cake, Diamond, 112

  Cake, Dover, 146

  Cake, Drop, 110

  Cake, Every day, 115

  Cake, Federal, 110

  Cake, Flannel, 72

  Cake, German, 71

  Cake, Home made Pound, 115

  Cake, Icing for, 99, 114

  Cake, Indian Breakfast, 75

  Cake, Jelly, 105

  Cake, Journey, 74

  Cake, Lady, 109

  Cake, Lemon, 101

  Cake, Lemon Drop, 113

  Cake, Loaf, 104

  Cake, Ohio, 111

  Cake, Plum or Fruit, 108

  Cake, Potato, 75

  Cake, Pound, 108, 115

  Cake, Quaker, 145

  Cake, Queen, 102

  Cake, Sassafras, 107

  Cake, Savoy, 114

  Cake, Scotch, 113, 144

  Cake, Seed, 104

  Cake, Soda, 70

  Cake, Spanish, 112

  Cake, Sponge, 105, 140

  Cake, Sugar, 111

  Cake, White, 107

  Cake, Warwick, 108

  Calf’s Feet Jelly, 96

  Calf’s Feet, To stew, 35

  Calf’s Head or Mock Turtle, 34

  Calf’s Head Soup, 14, 132, 133, 134

  Calicoes, To wash, 151

  Candy, Molasses, 142

  Candy with Kernels of Nuts, 143

  Caper and Nasturtion Sauce, 26

  Carrageen or Irish Moss Jelly, 143, 149

  Carrots, 55

  Castor Bottles, To wash, 151

  Catfish Soup, 15

  Catsup, Mushroom, 128

  Catsup, Tomato, 127

  Catsup, Walnut, 128

  Cauliflower, 54, 127

  Celery Sauce, 27

  Celery Vinegar, 28

  Charlotte Russe, 96

  Cheese Cake, 141

  Cheese and Eggs, To cook, 142

  Cherries, (Morella,) or Carnation, 120

  Cherry Shrub, 131

  Cherry Brandy, 131

  Chicken, To fry, 45

  Chicken, To roast, 45

  Chicken, To stew, 46

  Chicken, To broil, 46

  Chicken, To bake, 46

  Chicken, To boil, 47

  Chicken Broth, 13

  Chicken Pie, 46

  Chicken Tea, 150

  Chicken with Curry, To cook, 47

  Chicken in Batter, To cook, 47

  Chicken Salad, 51

  Chicken Soup, 13

  Chine, To boil and freeze, 43

  Chocolate, To make, 67

  Chocolate Cream, 92, 95

  Chocolate Custard, 97

  Chops, Mutton, 37

  Citron Melon, To preserve, 119

  Clam Soup, 17, 135

  Clams, To fry, 22

  Clams, To stew, 22

  Cocoanut Cream, 91

  Cocoanut Pound Cake, 114

  Cocoanut Pudding, 79

  Cod, To boil fresh, 18

  Cod, To dress salt, 20

  Coffee, To make, 66

  Cologne, 130

  Composition Cake, 104

  Cookies, New York, 111

  Cordial, Blackberry, 129, 131

  Corn, To boil, 62

  Corn, To fricassee, 59

  Corn, for Winter, To keep, 59

  Corn Batter Cakes, 74

  Cornmeal Gruel, 146

  Cottage Cheese, 25

  Cottage Pudding, 140

  Cough, For a, 152

  Crab Apples, To preserve, 123

  Crabs, To boil, 22

  Crabs, To stew, 22

  Cracker Jelly, 149

  Cranberry Sauce, 30

  Cream, To freeze, 90

  Cream, Almond, 91

  Cream, Chocolate, 92

  Cream, Cocoanut, 91

  Cream, Ice, 91

  Cream, Lemon, 91

  Cream, Raspberry, 91, 95

  Cream Sauce, 28

  Croquettes, To make, 49

  Croquettes of sweet Breads, 53

  Crullers, 103

  Cucumbers, 63

  Cucumbers, To pickle, 125, 142

  Cup-Cake, 106

  Currant Cake, 140

  Currant Jelly, 119, 144

  Currant Pies, 77

  Currant Shrub, 130

  Custard, A good, 99

  Custard, Boiled, 97

  Custard, Cold, 89

  Custard, Chocolate, 97

  Custard Pudding, 98

  Custard, Swiss, 84

  Custard with Fruit, Iced, 93

  Custard, Sponge Cake, 83


  D.

  Dessert, 84

  Diet for the Sick, 146

  Doughnuts, 103

  Dried Fruit, To stew, 30

  Ducks, To stew, 47

  Ducks, Wild, 48

  Dumplings, Apple, 85

  Dumplings, Fruit, 85

  Dumplings, Peach, 85


  E.

  Eggs, To boil, 53

  Eggs, To fry, 53

  Eggs, To poach, 53

  Eggs and Tomatoes, 62

  Eggs, To keep, 66

  Eggs, Scrambled, 53

  Egg Plant, To fry, 60

  Egg Plant, To stew, 60

  Egg Sauce, 26

  Egg Soup, 135

  Egg Toast, 52

  Elderberry Jam, 144

  Elderberry Wine, 129


  F.

  Fish, 17

  Flannel Cakes, 72

  Flannels, To wash, 151

  Floating Island, 89

  Florendines, 78

  Flowers, To keep, 150

  Fondus, 39

  Freezing Cream, 90

  Fritters, Apple, 86

  Fritters, Boiled Milk, 86

  Fritters, Indian Meal, 85

  Fritters, Rice Flour, 88

  Furs from Moths, To keep, 150


  G.

  German Cakes, 71

  Gingerbread, A very good, 101, 116

  Gingerbread, Crisp, 100

  Gingerbread, Hard, 110, 145

  Gingerbread, Light, 99

  Gingerbread Nuts, 100

  Gingerbread, Soft Molasses, 100

  Gingerbread, Spiced, 101

  Ginger Jumbles, 145

  Goose, To roast, 44

  Gooseberry Fool, 90

  Grape Jelly, Green, 120

  Gravy, 29

  Greens, To boil, 57

  Gruel, Cornmeal, 146

  Gruel, Oatmeal, 146

  Gruel, Rice, 147

  Guinea Fowl, 137


  H.

  Haddock, 19

  Halibut, To boil, 18

  Halibut, To fry, 18

  Ham, To boil, 42

  Ham, To boil Stuffed, 42

  Ham, To bake, 42

  Hams and Shoulders, To cure, 42

  Hen’s Nest, 96

  Herbs, To gather, 151

  Herring, To pickle, 19

  Hog’s Head Cheese, 44

  Hominy, 59

  Hominy, To fry, 59


  I.

  Ice Cream, 91

  Icing for Cakes, 99, 114

  Indian Bread, 74

  Indian Breakfast Cakes, 75

  Indian Meal Fritters, 85

  Indian Pudding, 78

  Irish Moss, 89

  Isinglass, To clarify, 94

  Italian Macaroni, 51


  J.

  Jam, Elderberry, 144

  Jam, Raspberry, 120

  Jam, Strawberry, 121

  Jelly, 143

  Jelly, Apple, 120

  Jelly Cake, 105

  Jelly, Calf’s Feet, 96

  Jelly, Cracker, 149

  Jelly, Currant, 119, 144

  Jelly, Green Grape, 120

  Jelly, (Irish Moss) or Carrageen, 143

  Jelly, Madeira, 95

  Jelly Puffs, 92

  Jelly, Quince, 118

  Jelly, Raspberry, 120

  Jelly, Strawberry, 94

  Journey Cake, 74

  Jumbles, Common, 103

  Jumbles, Good, 102

  Jumbles, Ginger, 145


  K.

  Kidneys, 39

  Kisses, 106


  L.

  Lady Fingers, 105

  Lamb with Peas, To stew, 36

  Lemonade, 148

  Lemon Cake, 101

  Lemon Cream, 91

  Lemon Juice, To keep, 130

  Lemon Peel, To preserve, 142

  Lemon Pudding, 82

  Lima Beans, 58

  Limes, To preserve, 123

  Liver, 39

  Loaf Cake, 104

  Lobsters, To boil, 22

  Lobster Sauce, 27

  Lobsters, Stewed, 22


  M.

  Macaroni, 50

  Macaroni with Cream, 51

  Macaroni, Italian, 51

  Macaroni Pudding, 87

  Macaroons, 102

  Mackerel, To boil, 21

  Mangoes, To pickle, 124

  Marmalade, Peach, 117

  Marmalade, Quince, 118

  Mead, 132

  Melted Butter, 26

  Merang aux Pomme, in Paste, 83

  Merang aux Pomme, with Cream, 83

  Merangues, 103

  Mince Pies, 77

  Mint Sauce, 27

  Mock Turtle Soup, 14

  Mock Turtle or Calf’s Head, 34

  Muffins, Mush, 73

  Muffins, Quick, 73

  Muffins, Rice, 73

  Muffins, Risen, 70

  Mullagatawny Soup, 15

  Munsey Pudding, 80

  Mush, To make, 74

  Mush Rolls, 69

  Mushrooms, To pickle, 126

  Mushrooms, To stew, 64

  Mushroom Sauce, 27

  Mutton, To hash, 139

  Mutton, To roast a Loin of, 36

  Mutton, To roast a Leg of, 36

  Mutton, To boil a Breast of, 37

  Mutton, To boil a Leg of, 38

  Mutton, To salt a Leg of, 37

  Mutton, To stew, 38

  Mutton with Mushrooms, To stew, 38

  Mutton like Venison, To dress, 37

  Mutton like Venison, To stew, 39

  Mutton Broth, 12

  Mutton Chops, 37

  Mutton Chops like Venison, 38

  Mutton Steaks, 37


  N.

  Nasturtions, To pickle, 125

  Noodles for Soup, 49


  O.

  Ochras for Winter, To dry, 62

  Ochra Soup, 15

  Ointment for Mortification, 143

  Omelet, 54

  Omelet Souffle, 54

  Omelette with Cheese, 52

  Omelette with Oysters, 52

  Onions, To cook, 63

  Onion Sauce, 27

  Onions, To pickle, 124

  Orange Pudding, 80

  Oranges, A fancy dish of, 82

  Orange Peel, To preserve, 144

  Orgeat, 130

  Ox Tail Soup, 14

  Oysters, Broiled, 22

  Oyster Fritters, 24

  Oysters, Pickled, 23

  Oyster Pie, 23

  Oyster Plant or Salsify, 55

  Oysters, Roasted, 23

  Oyster Sauce, 26

  Oysters, Scalloped, 24

  Oyster Soup, 13, 136

  Oysters, Stewed, 23


  P.

  Pancakes, 86

  Parsnips, 55

  Partridges, 49

  Peaches, To preserve, 116

  Peaches in Brandy, To preserve, 117

  Peach Cheese, 95

  Peach Dumplings, 85

  Peach Ice, 92

  Peach Marmalade, 117

  Peaches, Spiced, 119

  Peaches like Figs, To dry, 123

  Peas, 58

  Pea Soup, 16

  Pears, 118

  Perch, To fry, 21

  Pepper Sauce, 28

  Pepper-pot, 49

  Peppers, To pickle, 125

  Pheasants, To roast, 48

  Piccalille, 127

  Pickles, 124

  Pie, Blackberry, 77

  Pie, Currant, 77

  Pies, Mince, 77

  Pies, Peach, 78

  Pies, Rhubarb, 77

  Pig, To roast, 40

  Pig’s Feet, To fry, 40

  Pig’s Feet, To souse, 41

  Pig’s Head, 40

  Pigeons, 49

  Pignolattis, 140

  Pine Apples, 121

  Pine Apple Preserves, 123

  Plums, 119

  Plums, Green Gage, 121

  Plums, Magnum Bonum, 121

  Poison, For, 152

  Polenta, To make, 50

  Pone, Lightened, 74

  Pork, To roast, 40

  Potatoes, To boil, 55

  Potatoes, To fry, 56

  Potatoes, To stew, 56

  Potatoes, Mashed, 56

  Potatoes, To roast, 57

  Potato Cakes, 75

  Potato Rolls, 72

  Potato Puffs, 114

  Preserves, 116

  Preserves, Pine Apple, 123

  Pudding, Almond, 88

  Pudding, Apple, 98

  Pudding, Arrow Root, 80

  Pudding, Bird’s Nest, 98

  Pudding, Bread, 79

  Pudding, Cocoanut, 79

  Pudding, Corn Starch, 87

  Pudding, Cottage, 140

  Pudding, Cream, 78

  Pudding, Custard, 98

  Pudding, Farina, 87

  Pudding, Flour (baked,) 86

  Pudding, Flour (boiled,) 98

  Pudding, Green Corn, 99

  Pudding, Indian, 78

  Pudding, Lemon, 82

  Pudding, Macaroni, 87

  Pudding, Munsey, 80

  Pudding, Orange, 80

  Pudding, Peach, 81

  Pudding, Plum, 81

  Pudding, Poor Man’s, 79

  Pudding, Pumpkin, 82

  Pudding, Quick, 86

  Pudding, Rice, 78, 87

  Pudding, Rice (Jersey,) 80

  Pudding, Rice (boiled,) 88

  Pudding, Sago, 79

  Pudding, Sponge Cake, 80

  Pudding, Sweet Potato, 81

  Pudding, Tapioca, 79

  Pudding, Transparent, 97

  Pudding, Vermicelli, 87

  Puff Paste, 75, 76

  Puffs, French, 92

  Puffs, Jelly, 92

  Puffs, Potato, 114

  Punch, Cream of Tartar, 148

  Punch, Roman, 137


  Q.

  Queen Cake, 102

  Quinces, 117

  Quince Jelly, 118

  Quince Marmalade, 118


  R.

  Rabbits, To fry, 48

  Rabbits, To stew, 48

  Raspberry Cream, 91, 95

  Raspberry Jam, 120

  Raspberry Vinegar, 130

  Rennet, To prepare, 25

  Rice Flour Fritters, 88

  Rice Gruel, 147

  Rice Milk, 88

  Rice Pudding, 78, 80, 87, 88

  Rice Sponge Cake, 106

  Rock Fish, To boil, 21

  Rock Fish, To fry, 21

  Rolls, Bread, 69

  Rolls, Mush, 69

  Rolls, Potato, 72

  Rolls, Twist, 70

  Rologee, 39

  Rose Brandy, 129

  Rusks, 109

  Rusks, (Common,) 115


  S.

  Sago, 148

  Salad, To dress, 54

  Salad, Chicken, 51

  Sally Lunn, 72

  Salmon, To boil, 20

  Salmon, To pickle, 20

  Salsify or Oyster Plant, 55

  Sauce, Venison, 29

  Sauce, Wine, 28

  Sausage Meat, To make, 43

  Scrapple, To make, 41

  Sea Bass, 19

  Sea Kale, 65

  Seed Cake, 104

  Shad, To bake, 17

  Shad, To broil, 18

  Shad, Potted, 138

  Shavings, 100

  Sheep’s Head, To boil, 19

  Slaw, Cold, 64

  Slaw, Hot or Cold, 64

  Smearcase, or Cottage Cheese, 25

  Smelts, To fry, 21

  Snipe or Woodcock, To roast, 48

  Snow, A dish of, 141

  Soda Cakes, 70

  Soup, Clam, 135

  Soup, Egg, 135

  Soup, Oyster, 136

  Soup, Turtle, 134

  Soup, Veal, 12

  Soup, Vegetable, 148

  Soup for the Sick, 136

  Spanish Olio, 50

  Spice Nuts, 145

  Spinach, 57

  Sponge Cake, 105, 140

  Sponge Cake in form of a Ham, 93

  Sponge Cake, Custard, 83

  Sponge Cake, Rice, 106

  Spruce Beer, 132

  Squashes, 63

  Sting of a Bee, or Wasp, 152

  Stock for Soups and Gravy, 138

  Strawberries, To preserve, 121

  Strawberry Jam, 121

  Strawberry Jelly, 94

  Strawberry Whips, 84

  Sturgeon, To boil, 19

  Succotash, 138

  Sugar, To clarify, 94

  Sugar Drops, 139

  Sweet Breads, 35

  Sweet Breads, To stew, 139

  Sweet Breads, To roast, 139

  Sweet Breads and Oyster Pie, 35

  Sweet Potatoes, To fry, 57

  Sweet Potatoes, To boil, 57

  Syllabub, 141


  T.

  Tamarind Water, 147

  Tea, To make, 66

  Tea, Balm, 150

  Terrapins, 24, 136

  Throat, For a Sore, 152

  Toast Water, 148

  Toast, Milk, 150

  Toddy, Apple, 137

  Tomatoes, To stew, 60, 61

  Tomatoes, To broil, 61

  Tomatoes, To bake, 61, 62

  Tomatoes and Ochras, 62

  Tomatoes, To pickle, 125

  Tomatoes, To pickle green, 126

  Tomatoes, To preserve green, 118

  Trifle, 89

  Tripe, To fry, 25

  Trout, 19

  Turbot, 18

  Turkey, To roast, 44

  Turkey, To boil, 45

  Turnips, 55

  Turtle Soup, 134


  V.

  Veal, 33

  Veal, To stew, 34

  Veal, To roast a Loin of, 33

  Veal, To bake a Fillet of, 34

  Veal Cutlets, 34

  Veal Gravy, 29

  Veal Potpie, 137

  Veal Soup, 12

  Vegetables for Winter, To keep, 64

  Venison Sauce, 29

  Vinegar, Celery, 28

  Vinegar, Raspberry, 130


  W.

  Wafers, 106

  Waffles, Quick, 73

  Water Melon Rinds, 122

  Whips, 89

  White Cake, 107

  Wild Cherry Brandy, 129

  Windows, To wash, 151

  Wine, Elderberry, 129

  Wine Sauce, 28

  Wine Whey, 147

  Woodcock, or Snipe, To roast, 48


  Y.

  Yeast, 67




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber’s note:

Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation are as in the original.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 52815 ***
