*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 63056 ***

                   _Home Canning of Meat and Poultry_


                        County Extension Office
                          Post Office Box 1286
                         Conway, Arkansas 72032

                                        HOME AND GARDEN BULLETIN No. 106
                                 UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE




                                Contents


                                                                    Page
  Getting ready                                                        4
      Meats                                                            4
      Equipment                                                        4
  Canning methods                                                      8
      Packing                                                          9
      Closing jars                                                    10
      Sealing cans                                                    10
      Processing                                                      11
      Yield of canned meat from fresh                                 11
  After-canning jobs                                                  12
      Cooling                                                         12
      Checking seals                                                  12
      Labeling                                                        12
      Storing                                                         13
  Spoilage                                                            13
  Directions for meat                                                 18
      Cut-up meat                                                     18
      Ground meat                                                     19
      Sausage                                                         19
      Corned beef                                                     19
      Meat-vegetable stew                                             20
      Heart and tongue                                                20
      Soup stock                                                      20
  Directions for poultry                                              21
      Cut-up poultry                                                  21
      Giblets                                                         22
  Questions and answers                                               23
  Index                                                               24


                  This is a _Consumer Service_ of USDA

  Washington, D.C.
                                                    Issued February 1966
                                           Slightly revised October 1972


 For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
                                 Office
                 Washington, D.C. 20402—Price 15 cents
                         Stock Number 0100-2612




                    Home Canning of Meat and Poultry


                              Prepared by
                 CONSUMER AND FOOD ECONOMICS INSTITUTE
                     Agricultural Research Service

Fresh, wholesome meats and fresh, wholesome poultry are suitable for
home canning. Frozen meats also may be canned at home.

Popular meats for home canning are—


—Beef, veal, mutton, lamb, pork.

—Chicken, duck, goose, guinea, squab, turkey.

—Rabbit.

—Game birds.

—Small-game animals.

—Large-game animals.


Meat and poultry canned at home must be processed in a pressure canner.
Either glass jars or tin cans may be used for home canning.

To insure the safety and wholesomeness of the meats you can at home—


—Start with good-quality fresh or frozen meat.

—Keep all meat, work surfaces, and equipment clean.

—Make sure the pressure canner is in good working condition.

—Pack and close containers carefully.

—Process meat for recommended time.

—Test seals after cooling containers.

—Label containers.

—Store canned meat in cool, dry place.


Acknowledgment is made to the research laboratories of the National
Canners Association for consultation and advice on processing.


Follow all canning directions carefully. Processing times and
temperatures were developed specifically for use with a pressure canner.

Meat may contain bacteria that cause botulism, a severe form of food
poisoning. These bacteria are destroyed when cans or jars of food are
processed at a temperature of 240° F. for the times specified.

There is a risk of botulism from home-canned meats if the processing
temperature is lower than 240° F. or if processing time is shorter than
recommended.

It is not safe to process canned meat in a boiling-water bath, an oven,
a steamer without pressure, or an open kettle. None of these methods
will heat the meat enough to kill dangerous bacteria in a reasonable
time.

There also is a risk of botulism if shortcuts are taken in canning
meats, if untested directions are used, or if processing times (pp. 18
to 23) are changed.




                             Getting Ready


                                 Meats

Use only good-quality meat or poultry—home-produced or purchased from a
farm or store.

Chill home-produced meat immediately after slaughter to prevent spoiling
and to permit tenderizing. Meat is easier to handle when it is cold. For
thorough chilling, keep meat at a temperature below 40° F. until time to
prepare it for canning; can it within a few days after slaughter.

If refrigeration is not available and if the maximum daily temperature
is above 40° F., process the meat as soon as body heat is gone.

If meat must be held for longer than a few days, freeze it. Store frozen
meat at temperatures of 0° F. or lower until canning time. Then cut or
saw frozen meat into pieces of desired size.

If frozen meat is thawed before canning, thaw it in a refrigerator at a
temperature of 40° F. or lower until most of the ice crystals have
disappeared.

Keep all meat clean and sanitary. Rinse poultry thoroughly in cold
water, then drain.

Keep all meat as cool as possible during preparation for canning. Handle
it rapidly; process it as soon as containers are packed.


                               Equipment

To control the bacteria that cause spoilage, keep everything that
touches meat as clean as possible.

Scrub metal, enamelware, and porcelain pans in hot soapy water. Rinse
pans well in boiling water before putting meat in them. Wash knives and
kitchen tools to be used in canning; rinse well with boiling water.

Cutting boards, wood utensils, and wooden work surfaces need special
treatment to keep spoilage bacteria under control. Scrape surfaces if
necessary; scrub with hot soapy water and rinse well with boiling water.
Then disinfect clean surfaces.

For disinfecting, use a liquid chlorine disinfectant (household laundry
bleach) or other disinfectant. Dilute according to directions on the
container. Cover wooden surfaces with the disinfectant solution and
leave 15 minutes. Wash solution off with boiling water.


                            Pressure canner

To insure the safety of canned meats and poultry, jars or cans must be
processed at a sufficiently high temperature for a long enough time to
kill all bacteria that cause spoilage or food poisoning.

The only practical way to get this high temperature is to use a pressure
canner. When steam is held under 10 pounds of pressure at sea level, the
temperature in the canner quickly reaches 240° F.—the necessary safe
temperature for canning meat.

A pressure canner should be equipped with a rack to hold jars or cans.

A pressure saucepan with accurate controls may be safely used for
processing meats in pint jars or No. 2 cans. If you use a pressure
saucepan, add 20 minutes to the processing times specified.

Before using the canner, wash the kettle well. Do not put cover with
dial gage in water. Wipe the cover carefully with a hot soapy cloth;
repeat with a clean damp cloth. Dry. Keep the petcock and safety valve
clear. Before each use of the canner, inspect these openings. To clean,
draw a string or narrow strip of cloth through the petcock.

_Pressure adjustments._—If you live above sea level, you may need to
adjust steam pressure in your canner to get a temperature of 240° F. The
rule: For each 2,000 feet above sea level, increase the pressure by 1
pound.

Caution: Do not increase processing time when you increase steam
pressure.

If a weighted gage is used at a high altitude, have it corrected for
altitude by the manufacturer of the canner.

_Gage adjustments._—When a weighted gage is adjusted for altitude, it
needs no further regulation.

A dial gage should be checked before the canning season. If you use the
canner frequently, have the gage checked several times a year. Ask your
extension home economist, your dealer, or the manufacturer about
checking the accuracy of a dial gage.

If the dial gage is not accurate, tie a warning tag to the canner. On
the tag, write the margin of error, the date the canner was tested, and
the gage setting to use for the correct pressure (see below).

All directions in this bulletin require processing at 10 pounds of steam
pressure. The following adjustments give the correct pressure:

If the gage reads high—

  1 pound high—process at 11 pounds.
  2 pounds high—process at 12 pounds.
  3 pounds high—process at 13 pounds.
  4 pounds high—process at 14 pounds.

If the gage reads low—

  1 pound low—process at 9 pounds.
  2 pounds low—process at 8 pounds.
  3 pounds low—process at 7 pounds.
  4 pounds low—process at 6 pounds.

It is not safe to use a canner if the dial gage registers as much as 5
pounds high or low. Replace a faulty gage with an accurate one.


                               Glass jars

Jars may be widemouth or regular type. Pints and quarts are satisfactory
sizes for canning meats and poultry.

There are two types of jar closures:


—Flat metal lid with sealing compound and a metal screw band. This
  closure seals as jar cools.

—Porcelain-lined zinc cap with a shoulder rubber ring. This cap must be
  tightened to complete the seal immediately after meat is canned.


Be sure all jars and closures are perfect. Discard jars with cracks or
chips; discard lids and bands with dents or rust. Defects prevent
air-tight seals.

    [Illustration: {jar and lid}]

  Metal screw band
    Metal lid with sealing compound
    Seals here
  Porcelain lined screw cap
    Rubber
    Seals here

Before canning, jars must be thoroughly clean. It is not necessary to
sterilize them before they are filled, however. Processing at the
recommended steam pressure sterilizes both the containers and their
contents.

Wash jars and lids in hot soapy water; rinse well. Some metal lids with
sealing compound may need boiling or holding in boiling water for a few
minutes before use. Do not reuse metal lids with sealing compounds.
Follow the manufacturer’s directions.

If you use rubber rings, get new ones of the right size to fit jars.
Don’t test by stretching. Wash rings in hot soapy water. Rinse well.


                                Tin cans

Use plain tin cans in good condition for canning meats.

C-enamel, R-enamel, and sanitary-enamel cans are not suitable for meat.
Fat in meat or poultry may cause enamel to peel off the inside of the
can. Meat in such cans appears unappetizing, but it is not harmful.

Make sure that cans, lids, and gaskets are perfect. Discard cans that
are badly bent, dented, or rusty; discard lids with damaged gaskets.

Protect lids from dirt and moisture by storing them in original packing.

Directions are given for canning meat in No. 2 and No. 2½ tin cans. A
No. 2 can holds 2½ cups; a No. 2½ can holds 3½ cups.

Wash cans in clean hot water just before use. Drain upside down.

Do not wash lids of cans, because washing may damage the gaskets. If
lids have become soiled, rinse with clean water or wipe with a damp
cloth when you are ready to put them on cans.


                                 Sealer

If you use cans, you need a sealer in good working order. Before
processing meat or poultry, adjust sealer according to manufacturer’s
directions.

The finished seam between lid and can should be smooth and even.

Test by sealing a can containing a small amount of water. Submerge the
sealed can in boiling water for a few seconds. If air bubbles rise from
around the can, the seam is not tight. Readjust the sealer.


                              Thermometer

It is a good idea to use a thermometer both when meat is packed hot and
when the canning directions call for removing (exhausting) air from jars
or cans. With a thermometer, you are able to make sure meat is heated to
170° F.—the minimum temperature needed to exhaust air properly.

Place thermometer in center of jar or can that is being heated. The
thermometer bulb should be about half-way to the bottom of the
container.

If a thermometer is not available, follow the times given in the
directions.

    [Illustration:                                               76627—B
    For hot pack, pour boiling liquid over packed poultry or meat before
    closing jar and processing in a pressure canner.]




                            Canning Methods


Prepare and process meat and poultry according to general directions
given. Directions specify the types of packs and types of containers
suitable for each meat product listed. Instructions must be followed
carefully to assure a product safe from spoilage.

Detailed directions for canning meats are given on pages 18 to 20.
Picture sequences are shown on pages 14 and 15.

Detailed directions for canning poultry are given on pages 21 to 23.
Pictures illustrating main steps are on pages 16 and 17.


                           How To Make Broth

To make meat or poultry broth, place bony pieces in saucepan and cover
with cold water. Simmer until meat is tender. Pour broth into another
pan; skim off fat. Add boiling broth to containers packed with precooked
meat or poultry; fill to level specified in directions.


                                Packing

Pack meat loosely in containers. Jars may lose liquid during processing
if they are packed too tightly or too full.

Work with one glass jar or tin can at a time. Keep precooked meat hot
while packing. Use boiling liquid—broth, meat juice, or water—if
directions call for added liquid.

Two methods are used for packing meat:

• _Hot pack._ Meat is precooked before it is packed in jars or cans.
      Boiling broth or boiling water is poured over meat before
      containers are processed in a pressure canner. (See p. 8 for
      directions on how to make broth.) The temperature of food packed
      hot should be at least 170° F. at the time jars are closed or cans
      are sealed.

• _Raw pack._ Meat is packed uncooked. Raw-packed meat usually is heated
      to 170° F. to exhaust—or remove—air from jars or cans before
      processing in a pressure canner.

Directions for canning in glass jars require exhausting air from
raw-packed meat products, except meat-vegetable stew and raw pack
poultry, with bone. These two products may be processed without
exhausting if they are raw packed in glass jars according to directions
on pages 20 and 22.

Directions for using tin cans include exhausting air from all raw-packed
meat. It always is necessary to exhaust air from raw-packed meat in tin
cans before processing because air has no way to escape after cans are
sealed.


                             Exhausting air

To exhaust—or remove—air, set open jars or cans packed with raw meat on
a rack in a large pan of boiling water. Water level should be about 2
inches below tops of jars or cans. Cover the pan. Cook meat in
containers at slow boil until temperature at center of jars or cans
registers 170° F. If a thermometer is not available, follow times given
to cook meat until medium done.

When raw-packed meat is heated to 170° F., air is driven out of the food
so that a vacuum will be formed in jars or cans after processing and
cooling. Exhausting air also helps to prevent changes in the flavor of
canned meat.


                                  Salt

Salt may be added to canned meat for flavor. It does not act as a
preservative in canned meat, so it is not needed to make the product
safe.

If you decide to use salt, add it after meat is packed in the jar or
can. Amounts for various sized containers are given in the canning
directions.


                                  Fat

Remove as much fat as possible from meat before canning. Cut off all
large lumps; trim marbled meat without slashing the lean unnecessarily.

Do not use excessively fat meat or poultry for canning.

After packing containers, wipe the tops free of fat. Any fat that gets
on the rim of jars or cans may prevent an airtight seal.


                              Closing Jars

If jar has a flat metal lid: Wipe rim of packed jar to remove fat and
meat particles that might prevent a proper seal. Put lid on jar with
sealing compound next to glass. Screw the metal hand down tight by hand.
When band is screwed tight, this lid has enough “give” to let air escape
during processing. Do not tighten band further after taking jar from
canner.

If jar has a porcelain-lined zinc lid: Fit wet rubber ring down on
shoulder of empty jar. Don’t stretch ring unnecessarily. Pack jar with
meat. Wipe rubber ring and jar rim clean. Then screw cap down firmly and
turn it back ¼ inch before processing. As soon as you take jar from
canner, screw cap down tight to complete seal.


                              Sealing Cans

Use a can sealer in good working condition. Follow the manufacturer’s
directions carefully.

Wipe rim clean; place lid on can. Seal at once.

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1327
    A can sealer is needed if tin cans are used.]


                               Processing

Use a pressure canner for processing meat. A pressure saucepan may be
used for pint jars or No. 2 cans (see p. 5).

Follow the manufacturer’s directions carefully. Here are a few
suggestions about using a pressure canner:

• Put 2 or 3 inches of water in the canner; heat to boiling. Use enough
      water to prevent the canner from boiling dry.

• Set packed jars or cans on rack in the canner. Allow space for steam
      to flow around each container. If there are two layers of cans or
      jars, stagger the top layer. Use a rack between layers of jars.

• Fasten canner cover securely so that all steam escapes through the
      petcock or weighted-gage opening.

• Let steam pour steadily from vent for 10 minutes to drive all air from
      the canner. Then close petcock or put on weighted gage.

• Let pressure rise to 10 pounds (240° F.). The moment this pressure is
      reached, start to count processing time. Regulate heat under the
      canner to maintain even pressure. Do not lower pressure by opening
      petcock. Keep drafts from blowing on canner. Fluctuating pressure
      during processing causes liquid to be drawn out of glass jars.

• Watch processing time carefully. When time is up, remove canner from
      heat immediately.

• If meat is packed in jars, let canner stand until pressure drops to
      zero. Do not pour cold water over canner. When pressure is reduced
      suddenly, jars lose liquid. After pressure registers zero, wait a
      minute or two. Then slowly open petcock or take off weighted gage.
      Unfasten cover and tilt the far side up so steam escapes away from
      you. Take jars from the canner.

• If meat is packed in cans, remove canner from heat as soon as
      processing time is up. Open petcock or take off weighted gage at
      once to release steam. Then unfasten cover, tilting far side up so
      steam escapes away from your face. Remove cans.


                    Yield of Canned Meat From Fresh

The number of jars or cans you get from a given amount of raw meat
varies with the size of the pieces and the way the meat is packed.

For a 1-quart jar, allow approximately the following amounts of fresh,
untrimmed meat with bone or ready-to-cook chicken:

  Beef:                                  _Pounds_
      Round                              3 to 3½.
      Rump                               5 to 5½.
  Pork loin                              5 to 5½.
  Chicken:
      Canned with bone                   3½ to 4¼.
      Canned without bone                5½ to 6¼.




                           After-Canning Jobs


                                Cooling


                               Glass jars

As soon as you take jars out of the canner, complete seals if necessary.

Cool jars top side up. Put them on a rack or folded cloth to cool. Keep
them away from drafts. Don’t cover.

When jars are cool, take off screw bands. Do not force bands that stick:
loosen by covering them with a hot damp cloth. Wash hands and store them
in a dry place.


                                Tin cans

As soon as you take cans out of the canner, put them in cold water.
Change water frequently for fast cooling. Remove cans from water while
they are still warm so they will dry in the air. If you stack cans,
stagger them to allow air circulation.


                             Checking Seals

Check containers for leaks when jars or cans are thoroughly cool.

Occasionally, a can packed too full bulges at the ends. Set it aside and
use within a few days. This will prevent later confusion with cans that
bulge from spoilage during storage.

On the day after canning, examine each jar carefully. Turn it partially
over. If jar has a flat metal lid, test seal by tapping center of lid
with a spoon. A clear ring means a good seal. A dull note, however, does
not always mean a poor seal. Another test is to press on the center of
the lid; jar is sealed if lid is down and does not move.

Examine seams and seals carefully on all cans. Can ends should be almost
flat, with a slight inward curve. Buckled or broken seams may be caused
by cooling cans too fast or by not filling cans with enough meat.

Do not store leaky jars and cans. Either use the food at once or can it
again in another container. Begin the second canning by heating meat
through. Then pack and process it in a pressure canner for the full time
recommended.

Do not open and refill jars that have lost liquid during processing.
Loss of liquid does not cause canned meat to spoil. Opening would
contaminate the sterile contents, and meat would have to be processed
again to insure safety.


                                Labeling

Wipe containers after they are cool. Label each jar and can to show
contents and date of canning. If you canned more than one lot on one
day, add a lot number.


                                Storing

Select a cool, dry place for storing canned meat and poultry. Protect
meat from heat, from freezing, and from dampness.

Heat causes canned foods to lose quality. Do not store canned meats in
direct sunlight, near hot pipes, or near heat.

Freezing does not cause canned meat to spoil, but it may damage the seal
so that spoilage begins. In an unheated storage area, cover jars and
cans with a clean, old blanket or wrap them in newspapers.

Dampness may corrode cans or metal jar lids and cause leakage.




                                Spoilage


Immediately destroy any canned meat that has spoiled. Burn it or dispose
of it where it cannot be eaten by humans or animals.

Do not taste canned meat that you suspect of being spoiled.

Take these positive steps to insure the safety of canned meat—


—Keep meat and equipment clean.

—Follow recommended methods, including processing times and
  temperatures.

—Cool and store properly.


To avoid any risk of botulism—a serious food poisoning—it is essential
that the pressure canner be in perfect order and that every canning
recommendation be followed exactly. Unless you are absolutely sure of
your gage and canning methods, boil home-canned meat 20 minutes in a
covered pan before tasting or using.

Boiling is the best way to find out if canned meat is safe. Heat brings
out the characteristic odor of spoiled meat. If meat develops such an
odor, destroy it without tasting.

If boiled meat is not to be used at once, or if it is to be used in
salads or sandwiches, refrigerate it immediately.

Be alert to signs of spoilage when you take meat containers from
storage. Bulging jar lids or rings, gas bubbles, leaks, bulging can
ends—these may mean the seal has broken and the food has spoiled. Test
each can by pressing the ends; ends should not bulge or snap back.

Check the contents as you open the container. Spurting liquid, off-odor,
and color changes in meats are danger signals.

Sulfur in meat often causes metal lids or cans to darken. This
discoloration does not affect the safety of the meat.


                        How To Can MEAT—raw pack

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1311
    1. Cut meat carefully from bone. Trim away most of fat without
    unduly slashing the lean part of meat.]

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1312
    2. Cut meat in jar-length pieces, so grain of meat runs length of
    jar. Fill jars to 1 inch of top with one or more pieces of meat.]

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1313
    3. Set open, filled jars on rack in pan of boiling water. Keep water
    level 2 inches below jar tops. Insert thermometer in center of a jar
    (above), cover pan, and heat meat slowly to 170° F. Without
    thermometer, cover pan; heat slowly for 75 minutes.]

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1314
    4. Remove jars from pan. Add salt if desired. Wipe jar rim clean.
    Place lid so that sealing compound is next to glass (above). Screw
    the metal band down tight by hand. When band is screwed tight, this
    lid has enough “give” to let air escape during processing.]

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1315
    5. Have 2 or 3 inches of boiling water in pressure canner—enough to
    keep it from boiling dry during processing. Put jars in canner
    (above), fasten cover. Let steam pour from open petcock or
    weighted-gage opening 10 minutes. Shut petcock or put on gage.]

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1316
    6. When pressure reaches 10 pounds, note time. Adjust heat under
    canner to keep pressure steady. Process pint jars packed with large
    pieces of meat 75 minutes; process quart jars 90 minutes. When
    processing time is up, slide canner away from heat.]

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1317
    7. Let pressure fall to zero (30 minutes). Wait a minute or two,
    then slowly open petcock. Unfasten cover, tilting far side up to
    keep steam away from your face.]

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1318
    8. Set jars on rock to cool overnight. Keep them away from drafts,
    but do not cover. When jars are thoroughly cool, remove metal bands
    and wipe jars clean. Label and store.]

Directions for canning cut-up meat by hot-pack and raw-pack methods
begin on page 18.


                      How To Can CHICKEN—hot pack

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1310
    1. Rinse and drain (p. 4), then use a sharp knife to disjoint bird.
    Pull on leg or wing as you cut through the joint.]

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1320
    2. Cut from end of breastbone to backbone along ends of ribs.
    Separate breast and back. Break backbone; cut back in half.]

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1321
    3. Cut breast straight down between wishbone and point of breast.
    Leave meat on wishbone.]

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1322
    4. Remove breast meat from center bone by carving down the bone on
    one side of breast. Repeat on other side of breastbone.]

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1323
    5. Cut legs into drumsticks and thighs. Saw drumsticks off short, if
    desired. Sort into meaty and bony pieces; set aside giblets to can
    separately.

    6. Pour enough hot water or broth (p. 8) over raw meaty pieces in
    pan to cover meat. Put on lid; precook meat to medium done (when cut
    at center, pieces show almost no pink color).]

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1324
    7. Pack hot chicken loosely into jars. Place thighs and drumsticks
    with skin next to glass; breasts in center of jar; smaller pieces
    fitted in. Leave 1 inch at the top of jar. Add salt, if desired.
    Cover chicken with boiling broth. Again leave 1 inch of space at top
    of jar.]

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1325
    8. Wipe jar rim clean. Place lid with sealing compound next to
    glass. Screw metal band tight. Have 2 or 3 inches of boiling water
    in pressure canner to prevent it from boiling dry during processing.
    Place jars in canner (left) and fasten lid securely. Let steam pour
    from open petcock or weighted-gage opening for 10 minutes. Then shut
    petcock or put on weighted gage.]

    [Illustration:                                               PN-1326
    9. When pressure is 10 pounds, note time. Adjust heat to keep
    pressure steady. Process pint jars of chicken with bone 65 minutes;
    quarts, 75 minutes. Slide canner off heat when time is up. Let
    pressure fall to zero (about 30 minutes). Wait a minute or two. Open
    petcock slowly. Unfasten cover, tilting far side up to keep steam
    away from your face. Cool jars overnight. Wipe clean; label (left).
    Before storing canned chicken, remove screw bands.]

Directions for canning poultry by hot-pack and raw-pack methods begin on
page 21.




                          Directions for Meat


Directions for canning cut-up meat may be used for beef, veal, pork,
lamb, and mutton. Meat from large-game animals may be canned by the same
directions.

Use tender meat—loin and cuts suitable for roasts, steaks, and chops—for
canning as large pieces. Use less tender cuts that contain more
connective tissue and small pieces for canning as stew meat or ground
meat. Use bony pieces for soup.


                              Cut-Up Meat

Follow directions for cutting up meat (p. 14).

Cut tender meat into jar- or can-length strips. Strips should slide into
jars or cans easily, with the grain of the meat running the length of
the container. Strips may be any convenient thickness, from 1 or 2
inches to jar or can width.

Cut less tender meat into chunks or small pieces suitable for stew meat.

Small, tender pieces may be packed by themselves, with meat strips, or
with stew meat.


                                Hot pack

Put meat in large shallow pan; add just enough water to keep from
sticking. Cover pan. Precook meat slowly until medium done. Stir
occasionally, so meat heats evenly.

_Glass jars._—Pack hot meat loosely. Leave 1 inch of space at top of
jars. Add salt if desired: ½ teaspoon to pints or 1 teaspoon to quarts.

Cover meat with boiling meat juice, adding boiling water if needed.
Leave 1 inch of space at top of jars. Adjust lids. Process in a pressure
canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        75 minutes
  Quart jars       90 minutes

_Tin cans._—Pack hot meat loosely. Leave ½ inch of space above meat. Add
salt if desired: ½ teaspoon to No. 2 cans or ¾ teaspoon to No. 2½ cans.
Fill cans to top with boiling meat juice, adding boiling water if
needed. Seal. Process in a pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240°
F.)—

  No. 2 cans       65 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      90 minutes


                                Raw pack

Cut up meat (p. 14). Pack containers loosely with raw, lean meat.

_Glass jars._—Leave 1 inch of space above meat. To exhaust air, cook raw
meat in jars at slow boil to 170° F., or until medium done (about 75
minutes). (See p. 9.) Add salt if desired: ½ teaspoon per pint or 1
teaspoon per quart. Adjust lids. Process in a pressure canner at 10
pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        75 minutes
  Quart jars       90 minutes

_Tin cans._—Pack tin cans to top. To exhaust air, cook raw meat in cans
at slow boil to 170° F., or until medium done (about 50 minutes). (See
p. 9.) Press meat down ½ inch below rim, and add boiling water to fill
to top, if needed. Add salt if desired: ½ teaspoon to No. 2 cans or ¾
teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Seal cans. Process in a pressure canner at 10
pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       65 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      90 minutes


                              Ground Meat

For grinding, start with fresh, clean, cold meat. Use small pieces of
meat from less tender cuts.

Never mix leftover scraps with fresh meat. Don’t use lumps of fat.

If desired, add 1 level teaspoon of salt per pound of ground meat. Mix
well.


                                Hot pack

Shape ground meat into fairly thin patties that can be packed into jars
or cans without breaking.

Precook patties in slow oven (325° F.) until medium done. (When cut at
center, patties show almost no red color.) Skim fat off drippings; do
not use fat in canning.

_Glass jars._—Pack patties, leaving 1 inch of space above meat. Cover
with boiling meat juice to 1 inch of top of jars. Adjust jar lids.
Process in a pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        75 minutes
  Quart jars       90 minutes

_Tin cans._—Pack patties to ½ inch of top of cans. Cover with boiling
meat juice to fill cans to top; seal.

Process in a pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       65 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      90 minutes


                                Raw pack

Raw pack is suitable for tin cans. Ground meat canned in bulk is
difficult to get out of jars.

_Tin cans._—Pack raw ground meat solidly to the top of the can. To
exhaust air, cook meat at slow boil to 170° F., or until medium done
(about 75 minutes). (See p. 9.) Press meat down into cans ½ inch below
rim. Seal. Process in a pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       100 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      135 minutes


                                Sausage


                                Hot pack

Use any tested sausage recipe.

Use seasonings sparingly because sausage changes flavor in canning and
storage. Measure spices, onion, and garlic carefully. Omit sage—it makes
canned sausage bitter.

Shape sausage meat into patties. Precook, pack, and process as directed
for hot-packed ground meat.


                              Corned Beef


                                Hot pack

Use any tested recipe to make corned beef.

Wash corned beef. Drain. Cut in pieces or strips that fit in containers.

Cover meat with cold water and bring to a boil. If broth is very salty,
drain meat; boil again in fresh water. Pack while hot.

_Glass jars._—Leave 1 inch of space above meat. Cover meat with boiling
broth or boiling water. Leave 1 inch of space at top of jars. Adjust
lids. Process in a pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        75 minutes
  Quart jars       90 minutes

_Tin cans._—Leave ½ inch of space above meat. Fill cans to top with
boiling broth or boiling water. Seal. Process in a pressure canner at 10
pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       65 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      90 minutes


                          Meat-Vegetable Stew


                                Raw pack

  Beef, lamb, or veal, cut in 1½-inch cubes.     2 quarts
  Potatoes, pared or scraped, cut in ½-inch      2 quarts
  cubes
  Carrots, pared or scraped, cut in ½-inch       2 quarts
  cubes
  Celery, ¼-inch pieces                          3 cups
  Onions, small whole, peeled                    7 cups

Combine ingredients. Yield is 7 quarts or 16 pints.

_Glass jars._—Fill jars to top with raw meat-vegetable mixture. Add salt
if desired: ½ teaspoon per pint or 1 teaspoon per quart. Adjust lids.
Process in a pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        60 minutes
  Quart jars       75 minutes

_Tin cans._—Fill cans to top with raw meat-vegetable mixture. Do not add
liquid. Add salt if desired: ½ teaspoon to No. 2 cans or 1 teaspoon to
No. 2½ cans. To exhaust air, cook stew at slow boil to 170° F., or until
medium done (about 50 minutes). (See p. 9.) Seal cans. Process in a
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       40 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      45 minutes


                            Heart and Tongue


                                Hot pack

Heart and tongue usually are served as fresh meat. To can, prepare as
described below; then follow hot pack directions (p. 18).

_Heart._—Remove thick connective tissue before cutting into pieces.

_Tongue._—Drop tongue into boiling water and simmer about 45 minutes, or
until skin can be removed. Then cut into pieces.


                               Soup Stock


                                Hot pack

For canning, make meat stock fairly concentrated. Cover bony pieces of
meat (or chicken) with lightly salted water. Simmer until tender.

Skim off fat. Remove all bones. Leave meat and sediment in stock.

_Glass jars._—Pour boiling soup stock into jars, leaving 1 inch of space
at top. Adjust lids. Process in a pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure
(240° F.)—

  Pint jars        20 minutes
  Quart jars       25 minutes

_Tin cans._—Fill cans to top with boiling soup stock. Seal. Process in a
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       20 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      25 minutes




                         Directions for Poultry


Directions for poultry may be used to can chicken, duck, goose, guinea,
squab, and turkey. These directions also apply to game birds.

Domestic rabbits and small-game animals should be canned like poultry.

Poultry, rabbits, and small-game animals may be canned with or without
bone.

To make soup stock from poultry for canning, follow directions for meat.


                             Cut-Up Poultry

Follow directions for cutting up poultry (p. 16). Sort into meaty and
bony pieces. Use bony pieces for broth (p. 8) or soup (p. 20). Set aside
giblets to can separately.


                          Hot pack, with bone

Bone breast. Saw drumsticks off short. Leave bone in other meaty pieces.
Trim off large lumps of fat.

Place raw meaty pieces in pan and cover with hot broth or water. Put on
lid. Heat, stirring occasionally until medium done. To test, cut piece
at center; if pink color is almost gone, meat is medium done.

Pack poultry loosely. Place thighs and drumsticks with skin next to
glass or tin. Fit breasts into center and small pieces where needed.

_Glass jars._—Pack jars, leaving 1 inch of space above poultry. Add salt
if desired: ½ teaspoon per pint or 1 teaspoon per quart. Cover poultry
with boiling broth, leaving 1 inch of space at top of jar. Adjust jar
lids. Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        65 minutes
  Quart jars       75 minutes

_Tin cans._—Pack cans, leaving ½ inch of space above poultry. Add salt
if desired: ½ teaspoon to No. 2 cans or ¾ teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill
cans to top with boiling broth. Seal. Process in a pressure canner at 10
pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       55 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      75 minutes


                         Hot pack, without bone

Cut up poultry (p. 16). Remove bone—but not skin—from meaty pieces
either before or after precooking.

_Glass jars._—Pack jars loosely with hot poultry, leaving 1 inch of
space above poultry at top of jars. Add salt if desired: ½ teaspoon per
pint or 1 teaspoon per quart. Pour in boiling broth; leave 1 inch of
space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in a pressure canner at 10
pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        75 minutes
  Quart jars       90 minutes

_Tin cans._—Pack loosely, leaving ½ inch above poultry. Add salt if
desired: ½ teaspoon to No. 2 cans or ¾ teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill
cans to top with boiling broth. Seal. Process in a pressure canner at 10
pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       65 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      90 minutes


                          Raw pack, with bone

Cut up poultry (see p. 16).

Bone breast. Saw drumsticks off short. Leave bone in other meaty pieces.
Trim off large lumps of fat.

Pack raw poultry loosely. Place thighs and drumsticks with skin next to
glass or tin. Fit breasts into center and small pieces where needed.

_Glass jars (air exhausted)._—Pack jars to 1 inch of top. To exhaust
air, cook raw poultry in jars at slow boil to 170° F., or until medium
done (about 75 minutes). (See p. 9.) Add salt if desired: ½ teaspoon per
pint or 1 teaspoon per quart. Adjust lids. Process in a pressure canner
at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        65 minutes
  Quart jars       75 minutes

_Glass jars (air not exhausted)._—Fill jars loosely with raw pieces of
poultry to 1 inch of top. Do not exhaust. Add salt if desired: ½
teaspoon per pint or 1 teaspoon per quart. Adjust lids. Process in a
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Quart jars       80 minutes

_Tin cans._—Pack cans to top. To exhaust air, cook raw poultry in cans
at slow boil to 170° F., or until medium done (about 50 minutes). (See
p. 9.) Add salt if desired: ½ teaspoon to No. 2 cans or ¾ teaspoon to
No. 2½ cans. Seal cans. Process in a pressure canner at 10 pounds
pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       55 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      75 minutes


                         Raw pack, without bone

Cut up poultry (p. 16). Remove bone—but not skin—from meaty pieces
before packing containers.

_Glass jars._—Pack raw poultry in jars to 1 inch of top. To exhaust air,
cook poultry in jars at slow boil to 170° F., or until medium done
(about 75 minutes). (See p. 9.) Add salt if desired: ½ teaspoon per pint
or 1 teaspoon per quart. Adjust lids. Process in a pressure canner at 10
pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        75 minutes
  Quart jars       90 minutes

_Tin cans._—Pack raw poultry to top of cans. To exhaust air, cook
poultry in cans at slow boil to 170° F., or until medium done (about 50
minutes). (See p. 9.) Add salt if desired: ½ teaspoon to No. 2 cans or ¾
teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Seal cans. Process in a pressure canner at 10
pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       65 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      90 minutes


                                Giblets

Use pint jars or No. 2 cans.

Wash and drain giblets.

Pack gizzards and hearts together. Precook and pack livers separately to
avoid blending of flavors.


                                Hot pack

Put giblets in pan; cover with hot broth or hot water. Cover pan and
precook giblets until medium done. Stir occasionally. Pack hot.

_Glass jars._—Leave 1 inch of space above giblets. Add boiling broth or
boiling water, leaving 1 inch of space below jar tops. Adjust lids.
Process in a pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F)—

  Pint jars        75 minutes

_Tin cans._—Leave one-half inch of space above giblets. Fill cans to top
with boiling broth or boiling water. Seal. Process in a pressure canner
at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       65 minutes




                         Questions and Answers


Q. Why must a pressure canner be used for canning meat and poultry?

A. To insure a safe product. It takes a combination of high temperature
      and sufficient processing time to make sure of killing bacteria
      that cause dangerous spoilage in canned meat and poultry. The only
      practical way to get the necessary high temperature is to use a
      pressure canner.

Q. How should meat and poultry for canning be handled?

A. Keep meat and poultry clean and sanitary. Chill at once and keep cold
      until canning time. (See p. 4.)

Q. Why is liquid sometimes lost from glass jars during processing?

A. Loss of liquid may be due to packing jars too full, fluctuating
      pressure in a pressure canner, or lowering pressure too suddenly.

Q. Should liquid lost during processing be replaced?

A. Loss of liquid does not cause meat to spoil, although the meat above
      the liquid may darken. Never open a jar and refill with
      liquid—this would let in bacteria and meat would have to be
      processed again.

Q. Is it safe to can meat and poultry without salt?

A. Yes. Salt is used for flavor only and is not necessary for safe
      processing.

Q. Is it safe to leave food in tin cans after opening?

A. Yes. Food in tin cans needs only to be covered and refrigerated.

Q. Is it all right to use preservatives in home canning?

A. No. Some canning powders or other chemical preservatives may be
      harmful.

Q. Should processing times be changed for different types of ranges?

A. No. Processing times and temperatures given in this bulletin are for
      canning in a pressure canner and may be used for any type of
      range.

Q. Is it possible to can frozen meat or poultry?

A. Yes, frozen meat or poultry may be canned. (For directions, see p.
      4.)




                                 Index


                                   A
  Page
  Altitude, high, canning at                                           5


                                   B
  Beef                                                                18
  Beef-vegetable stew                                                 20
  Botulism                                                         4, 13
  Broth                                                                8


                                   C
  Canning methods                                                      8
  Chilling meat                                                        4
  Corned beef                                                         19


                                   D
  Discoloration                                                       13


                                   E
  Equipment                                                            4


                                   F
  Fat                                                                  9
  Frozen meat, canning                                                 4


                                   G
  Gage                                                                 5
  Giblets                                                             22
  Glass Jars:
      Cooling                                                         12
      Closures                                                     6, 10
      Exhausting                                                       9
      Packing                                                          9
      Processing                                                      11
      Use                                                              6


                                   H
  Heart                                                               20


                                   L
  Labeling                                                            12
  Lamb                                                                18
  Lamb-vegetable stew                                                 20
  Large game                                                          18
  Liquid:
      Loss                                                         9, 23
      Use                                                              9


                                   M
  Meat, cut-up:
      Hot pack                                                        18
      Raw pack                                                        18
  Meat, ground:
      Hot pack                                                        19
      Raw pack                                                        19
  Meat-vegetable stew                                                 20
  Mutton                                                              18


                                   P
  Packing:
      Hot pack                                                         9
      Raw pack                                                         9
  Pork                                                                18
  Poultry, cut-up:
      Hot pack, with bone                                             21
      Hot pack, without bone                                          21
      Raw pack, with bone                                             22
      Raw pack, without bone                                          22
  Pressure canner:
      Care                                                             5
      Use                                                          5, 11
  Pressure saucepan                                                    5


                                   R
  Rabbit                                                              21
  Rubber rings                                                         7


                                   S
  Salt                                                             9, 23
  Sausage                                                             19
  Sealer, tin-can                                                  7, 10
  Seals, testing                                                       7
  Small game                                                          21
  Soup stock                                                          20
  Spoilage                                                      4, 5, 13
  Stew                                                                20
  Storing                                                             13


                                   T
  Thermometer                                                          7
  Tin cans:
      Cooling                                                         12
      Exhausting                                                       9
      Packing                                                          9
      Processing                                                      11
      Sealing                                                         10
      Types                                                            7
      Use                                                              7
  Tongue                                                              20


                                   V
  Veal                                                                18
  Veal-vegetable stew                                                 20


                                   Y
  Yields of canned meat from fresh                                    11




               Publications About Preserving Food at Home


Publications of the Agricultural Research Service listed below may help
you if you want to preserve food at home. Single copies may be obtained
free by sending a post card to the Office of Communication, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C., 20250. Please order by
title and number of publication. Include your ZIP Code.

                                                           _Order No._

  Home Canning of Fruits and Vegetables                    G 8
  Home Freezing of Fruits and Vegetables                   G 10
  Freezing Combination Main Dishes                         G 40
  How To Make Jellies, Jams, and Preserves at Home         G 56
  Home Freezing of Poultry                                 G 70
  Making Pickles and Relishes at Home                      G 92
  Freezing Meat and Fish in the Home                       G 93


                         U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1973—O-509-159




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's Home Canning of Meat and Poultry, by Anonymous

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 63056 ***
