*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 65020 ***

                          Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation have been standardised but other spelling and
punctuation remains unchanged. Variable spelling of the names of herbs
have been corrected in the case of Stæchus which was sometimes spelled
Stæchas and Zedoary sometimes spelled Zeadory.

The introductory text to Part II appears to have been erroneously
headed Chapter I. It has no subtitle and is not listed in the Contents.
To avoid the confusion of duplicated Chapter numbers, this heading has
been removed.

Italics are represented thus _italic_.




                                  THE

                               COMPLETE

                              DISTILLER:

                              CONTAINING,

 I. The Method of performing the various Processes of Distillation,
 with Descriptions of the several Instruments: The whole Doctrine
 of Fermentation: The manner of drawing Spirits from Malt, Raisins,
 Molosses, Sugar, _&c._ and of rectifying them: With Instructions for
 imitating to the greatest Perfection both the Colour and Flavour of
 _French_ Brandies.

 II. The manner of distilling all Kinds of Simple Waters from Plants,
 Flowers, _&c._

 III. The Method of making all the compound Waters and rich Cordials so
 largely imported from _France_ and _Italy_; as likewise all those now
 made in _Great Britain_.

                          To which are added,

 Accurate Descriptions of the several Drugs, Plants, Flowers, Fruits,
 &c. used by Distillers, and Instructions for chusing the best of each
 Kind.

    The Whole delivered in the plainest manner, for the Use both of
                 _Distillers_ and _Private Families_.

                      By _A. COOPER_, DISTILLER.

                               _LONDON_:

            Printed for P. VAILLANT in the _Strand_; and R.
                   GRIFFITHS in _Pater-Noster-Row_.

                              M.DCC.LVII.




                                  THE

                               PREFACE.


_It is now some Years since I first formed a Design of compiling a
complete System of Distillation; and accordingly read most of the
Treatises on that Subject, and extracted from each what I thought
necessary for my Purpose, proposing to supply the Defects from my own
Experience. It is, however, more than probable, that this Design had
never been executed, had not a_ French _Treatise of Distillation[1]
fell into my Hands; but finding in that Book many useful Observations,
and a great Number of Recipes for making various Sorts of compound
Waters and Cordials, I determined to finish the Work I had begun, being
now enabled to render it much more useful than it was possible for
me otherwise to have done. What I have translated from this Author,
will, I dare say, be kindly received by our Distillers, as the manner
of making many of the foreign Compound Waters,_ &c. _has never before
been published in the_ English _Language. And I flatter myself, if the
several Hints interspersed through this Treatise are carefully adverted
to, Distillation may be carried to a much greater Degree of Perfection
than it is at present; and the celebrated Compound Waters and Cordials
of the_ French _and_ Italians,_ imported at so great an Expence, and
such Detriment to the Trade of this Nation, may be made in_ England,
_equal to those manufactured abroad._

[Footnote 1: This Treatise is intitled _Traité Raisonné de la
Distillation; ou La Distillation réduite en Principes: Avec un Traité
des Odeurs_. _Par M._ DE’JEAN, _Distillateur_. Printed at _Paris_,
in the Year, M.DCC.LIII.]

_My principal Intention being to render this Treatise useful to all,
I have endeavoured to deliver every thing in the plainest and most
intelligible Manner. Beauty of Stile is not, indeed, to be expected in
a Work of this Nature; and therefore if Perspicuity be not wanting, I
presume the Reader will forgive me, if he meets with some Passages that
might have been delivered in a more elegant Manner. I have also, for
the same Reason, avoided, as much as possible, Terms of Art, and given
all the Recipes in Words at length._

_Distillation, tho’ long practised, has not been carried to the Degree
of Perfection that might reasonably have been expected. Nor will
this appear surprising, if it be considered, that the Generality of
Distillers proceed in the same beaten Tract, without hardly suspecting
their Art capable of Improvements; or giving themselves any Trouble to
enquire into the Rationale of the several Processes they daily perform.
They imagine, that the Theory of Distillation is very abstruse, and
above the Reach of common Capacities; or, at least, that it requires a
long and very assiduous Study to comprehend it; and, therefore, content
themselves with repeating the Processes, without the least Variation.
This Opinion, however ridiculous it may appear to those not acquainted
with the present Practice of Distillers, has, I am satisfied, been
the principal Cause why Distillation has not been carried to the
Height it would otherwise have been. I have therefore endeavoured
in the following Treatise to destroy this idle Opinion, and shew
the Distiller how he may proceed on rational Principles, and direct
his Enquiries in such a manner as cannot fail of leading him to such
Discoveries in his Profession, as will be attended with Advantage both
to himself and his Country._

_But it is not to those only who make Distillation their Profession,
that I have laboured to render this Treatise useful; I have also
endeavoured to extend its Utility to those who distil Simple and
Compound Waters for their own Use, or to distribute to their indigent
Neighbours. And for this Reason I have adapted most of the Recipes to
small Quantities, and briefly enumerated the Virtues and Uses of each
Composition._

_The short Descriptions of the most capital Ingredients, and the
Directions for chusing the best of each Kind, I flatter myself
will not be considered as improper: Because the Goodness of every
Composition, must, in a great Measure, depend on the Goodness of the
Ingredients._

_As Typographical Errors are almost impossible to be avoided, the
Reader will, I hope, pardon any he may chance to meet with in the
ensuing Treatise; and the rather as, I dare say, there are none but
what he may himself very easily correct._




                                  THE

                               CONTENTS.


                                PART I.

                   _Of the Distillation of Spirits._

  CHAP. I. _Of Brewing in order to the Production
  of inflammable Spirits._                                        PAGE 2

  II. _Of Fermentation._                                               7

  III. _Of Distillation in general._                                  26

  IV. _Of particular Distillation._                                   27

  V. _Of Alembics, and their different Constructions._               29

  VI. _Of the Accidents that too often  happen in performing
       the Processes of Distillation._                                33

  VII. _Of the Methods of preventing Accidents._                      37

  VIII. _Of the Remedies for Accidents, when they happen._            41

  IX. _Of the Necessity of often cooling the Alembic, as
       another means of preventing Accidents._                        46

  X. _Of the Necessity of putting Water into the Alembic for
      several Distillations._                                         49

  XI. _Of the particular Advantages attending every Kind
       of Distillation._                                              51

  XII. _Of Bodies proper for Distillation._                           59

  XIII. _Of what is procured by Distillation._                        62

  XIV. _Of the proper Season for Distillation._                       67

  XV. _Of the Filtration of Liquors._                                 68

  XVI. _Of the Distillation of Malt Spirits._                         70

  XVII. _Of the Distillation of Molosses Spirits._                     75

  XVIII. _Of the Nature of Brandies, and the Method of
          distilling them in_ France.                                 76

  XIX. _Of the Distillation of Rum._                                  80

  XX. _Of Sugar Spirits._                                             83

  XXI. _Of Raisin Spirits._                                      _ibid._

  XXII. _Of Arracs._                                                  86

  XXIII. _Of Rectification._                                          89

  XXIV. _Of the Flavouring of Spirits._                               97

  XXV. _Of the Methods of colouring Spirits._                        101


                               PART II.

              _Containing the Method of distilling Simple
                               Waters._

  CHAP. I. _Of Waters drawn by the cold Still._                      109

  II. _Of distilling Simple Waters by the Alembic._                  114

  III. _Of increasing the Virtues of Simple Waters by means
        of Cohobation._                                              121

  IV. _Of the Method of procuring a Simple Water from Vegetables,
       by previously fermenting the Vegetable before Distillation._  123

  V. _Of the Simple Waters commonly in Use._                         125

  VI. _Of Orange-flower Water._                                      127

  VII. _Of Rose Water._                                              131

  VIII. _Of Cinnamon Water._                                         134

  IX. _Of Fennel Water._                                             135

  X. _Of Pepper-mint Water._                                         136

  XI. _Of Spear-mint Water._                                         137

  XII. _Of Baum Water._                                          _ibid._

  XIII. _Of Penny-royal Water._                                      138

  XIV. _Of_ Jamaica _Pepper Water_.                                  139

  XV. _Of Castor Water._                                             140

  XVI. _Of Orange Peel Water._                                       142

  XVII. _Of the Water of Dill-seed._                                 142


                               PART III.

               _Of making Compound Waters and Cordials._

  CHAP. I. _Of strong Cinnamon Water._                               147

  II. _Of Clove Water._                                              150

  III. _Of Lemon Water._                                             152

  IV. _Of Hungary Water._                                            153

  V. _Of Lavender Water._                                            154

  VI. _Of Citron Water._                                             156

  VII. _Of Aniseed Water._                                           157

  VIII. _Of Caraway Water._                                          159

  IX. _Of Cardamom-seed Water._                                      160

  X. _Of Aqua Mirabilis._                                            162

  XI. _Of Mint Water._                                               164

  XII. _Of Pepper-mint Water._                                       165

  XIII. _Of Angelica Water._                                         166

  XIV. _Of Orange Water._                                            168

  XV. _Of Plague Water._                                             169

  XVI. _Of Dr._ Stephens_’s Water_.                                  172

  XVII. _Of Surfeit Water._                                          173

  XVIII. _Of Wormwood Water._                                        175

  XIX. _Of Antiscorbutic Water._                                     177

  XX. _Of Compound Horse-radish Water._                              178

  XXI. _Of Treacle Water._                                           180

  XXII. _Of Compound Camomile-flower Water._                         182

  XXIII. _Of Imperial Water._                                        183

  XXIV. _Of Compound Piony Water._                                   184

  XXV. _Of Nutmeg Water._                                            186

  XXVI. _Of Compound Bryony Water._                                  188

  XXVII. _Of Compound Baum Water; or_ Eau de Carmes.                 190

  XXVIII. _Of Ladies Water._                                         192

  XXIX. _Of Cephalic Water._                                         193

  XXX. _Of Heavenly Water; or Aqua Cœlestis._                        194

  XXXI. _Of Spirituous Penniroyal Water._                            195

  XXXII. _Of Compound Parsley Water._                                196

  XXXIII. _Of Carminative Water._                                    197

  XXXIV. _Of Gout Water._                                            198

  XXXV. _Of Anhalt Water._                                           199

  XXXVI. _Of Vulnerary Water; or_ Eau d’Arquebusade.                 200

  XXXVII. _Of Cedrat Water._                                         201

  XXXVIII. _Of Bergamot Water._                                      203

  XXXIX. _Of Orange cordial Water; or_ Eau de Bigarade.              204

  XL. _Of Jasmine Water._                                            206

  XLI. _Of the Cordial Water of_ Montpelier.                         207

  XLII. _Of Father_ Andrew_’s Water_.                                207

  XLIII. _Of the Water of Father_ Barnabas.                          208

  XLIV. _Of the Water of the four Fruits._                           209

  XLV. _Of the Water of the four Spices._                            210

  XLVI. _Of the Water of the four Seeds._                            211

  XLVII. _Of the divine Water._                                      212

  XLVIII. _Of_ Roman _Water_.                                        213

  XLIX. _Of_ Barbadoes _Water_.                                      214

  L. _Of Ros Solis._                                                 215

  LI. _Of Usquebaugh._                                               218

  LII. _Of Ratafia._                                                 221

  LIII. _Of Gold Cordial._                                           245

  LIV. _Of Cardamum, or All-fours._                                  247

  LV. _Of Geneva._                                                   248

  LVI. _Of Cherry Brandy._                                           252

  LVII. _Of Honey Water._                                            253

  LVIII. _Of Unequalled Water; or_ Eau sans Pareille.                255

  LIX. _Of the Water of Bouquet._                                    256

  LX. _Of Cyprus Water._                                             257

  LXI. _Of Vestal Water._                                            259

  LXII. _Of Beauty Water._                                           260

  LXIII. _Of Royal Water._                                           261

  LXIV. _Of the Essence of Ambergrise, Musk, and Civet._             262

  LXV. _Of Faints._                                                  263


[Illustration: Various forms of alembic]




                                   A

                            Complete System

                                  OF

                             DISTILLATION.


Distillation is the Art of separating, or drawing off the spirituous,
aqueous, and oleaginous Parts of a mixt Body from the grosser, and more
terrestrial Parts, by means of Fire, and condensing them again by Cold.

We shall therefore divide this Treatise into three Parts; in the
first, we shall explain the Method of distilling Spirits from various
Substances; in the second, the manner of drawing simple Waters; and in
the third, the best Methods of making cordial or compound Waters.




                                PART I.

                   _Of the Distillation of Spirits._


By the Distillation of Spirits is to be understood the Art by which
all inflammable Spirits, Brandies, Rums, Arracks, and the like,
are procured from vegetable Substances, by the means of a previous
Fermentation, and a subsequent Treatment of the fermented Liquor by the
Alembic, or hot Still, with its proper Worm and Refrigeratory.

But as it is impossible to extract vinous Spirits from any vegetable
Subject without Fermentation, and previous to this Brewing is often
necessary, it will be requisite first to consider these Operations.




                               CHAP. I.

   _Of Brewing, in order to the Production of inflammable Spirits._


By Brewing, we mean the extracting a Tincture from some vegetable
Substance, or dissolving it in hot Water, by which means it becomes
proper for a vinous Fermentation.

A Solution, or fermentable Tincture of this kind, may be procured, with
proper Management, from any vegetable Substance, but the more readily
and totally it dissolves in the Fluid, the better it is fitted for
Fermentation, and the larger its Produce of Spirits. All inspissated
vegetable Juices therefore, as Sugar, Honey, Treacle, Manna, _&c._ are
very proper for this Use, as they totally dissolve in Water, forming a
clear and uniform Solution; but Malt, for its Cheapness, is generally
preferred in _England_, though it but imperfectly dissolves in hot
Water. The worst sort is commonly chosen for this Purpose; and the
Tincture, without the Addition of Hops, or Trouble of boiling it, is
directly cooled and fermented.

But in order to brew with Malt to the greatest Advantage, the three
following Particulars should be carefully attended to: 1. the Subject
should be well prepared; that is, it should be justly malted, and well
ground: For if it be too little malted, it will prove hard and flinty;
and consequently, only a small Part of it dissolve in the Water: And,
on the other hand, if too much malted, a great Part of the finer
Particles, or fermentable Matter, will be lost in the Operation. With
regard to grinding, the Malt should be reduced to a kind of coarse
Meal; for Experience has shewn, that by this means, the whole Substance
of the Malt may, through the whole Process, continue mixed with the
Tincture, and be distilled with it; whereby a larger Quantity of Spirit
will be obtained, and also great Part of the Trouble, Time and Expence
in Brewing saved. This Secret depends upon thoroughly mixing, or
briskly agitating the Meal, first in cold Water, and then in hot; and
repeating this Agitation after the Fermentation is finished: When the
thick turbid Wash must be immediately committed to the Still. And thus
the two Operations of Brewing and Fermenting may very commodiously be
reduced to one, to the no small Profit and Advantage of the Distiller.

The second Particular to be attended to, is, that the Water be good,
and properly applied. Rain Water is the best adapted to Brewing; for
it not only extracts the Tincture of the Malt better than any other;
but also abounds in fermentable Parts, whereby the Operation is
quickened, and the Yield of the Spirit increased. The next to that of
Rain, is the Water of Rivers and Lakes, particularly such as wash any
large Tract of a fertile Country, or receive the Sullage of populous
Towns. But whatever Water is used, it must stand in a hot State upon
the prepared Malt, especially if a clear Tincture be desired; but the
greatest Care must be taken to prevent the Malt from running into Lumps
or Clods; and, indeed, the best Way to prevent this, is to put a small
Quantity of cold Water to the Malt first, and mix them well together,
after which the remaining Quantity of Water may be added in a State of
boiling, without the least Danger of coagulating the Malt, or what the
Distillers call, making a Pudding.

It has been found by Experience, that a certain Degree of Heat is
necessary to extract the whole Virtue of the Malt: This Degree may,
by the above Method, be determined to the greatest Exactness, as the
Heat of boiling Water may at once be lessened to any assigned Degree of
Warmth, by a proper Addition of cold Water; due Regard being had to the
Season of the Year, and the Temperature of the Air. This Improvement,
with that mentioned above, of reducing the two Operations of Brewing
and Fermentation to one, will be attended with considerable Advantage.

With regard to the proper Quantity of Water, it must be observed, that
if too little be used, a viscid clammy Mixture will be produced,
little disposed to ferment, nor capable of extracting all the soluble
Parts of the Malt. On the other hand, too much Water renders the
Tincture thin and aqueous, and by that means increases the Trouble and
Expence in all Parts of the Operation. A due Medium, therefore, should
be chosen; and Experience has shewn, that a Wash about the Goodness
of that designed by the _London_ Brewers for Ten Shilling Beer, will
best answer the Distiller’s Purpose. When a proper Quantity of Water
is mixed with the Malt, the whole Mass must be well agitated, that
all the soluble Parts of the Malt may often come in contact with the
aqueous Fluid, which being well saturated after standing a proper time,
must be drawn off, fresh Water poured on, and the Agitations repeated,
till at last the whole Virtue, or saccharine Sweetness of the Malt is
extracted, and only a fixed husky Matter remains, incapable of being
dissolved by either hot or cold Water.

The third requisite Particular is, that some certain Additions be
used, or Alterations made according to the Season of the Year, or the
Intention of the Operator. The Season of the Year is very necessary to
be considered. In the Summer, the Water applied to the Malt must be
colder than in the Winter; and in hot sultry Weather, the Tincture
must be suddenly cooled, otherwise it will turn eager; and, in order to
check the too great Tendency it has to Fermentation, when the Air is
hot, it will be necessary to add a proper Quantity of unmalted Meal,
which being much less disposed to Fermentation than Malt, will greatly
moderate its Impetuosity, and render the Operation suitable to the
Production of Spirits, which, by a too violent Fermentation, would, in
a great Measure, be dissipated and lost.




                               CHAP. II.

                          _Of Fermentation._


The tincture, or, as the Distillers call it, the Wash, being prepared,
as in the foregoing Chapter, it is next to be fermented; for, without
this Operation, no vinous Spirit can be produced.

By Fermentation is meant that intestine Motion performed by the
instrumental Efficacy of Water, whereby the Salt, Oil and Earth of a
fermentable Subject, are separated, attenuated, transposed, and again
collected, and recomposed in a particular Manner.

The Doctrine of Fermentation, is of the greatest Use, and should be
well understood by every Distiller, as it is the very Basis of the
Art; and, perhaps, if more attended to, a much purer Spirit, as well
as a greater Quantity of it, might be procured from the same Materials
than at present. We shall therefore lay down a concise Theory of
Fermentation, before we proceed to deliver the Practice.

Every fermentable Subject is composed of Salt, Oil, and a subtile
Earth; but these Particles are so small, that, when asunder, they are
imperceptable to the Senses; and, therefore, when mixed with an aqueous
Fluid, they leave it transparent; neither have fermentable Bodies any
Taste, except that of Sweetness.

These Particles are each composed of Salt, Oil and Earth, intimately
mixed in an actual Cohesion, Connexion, and Union; and, therefore, when
any one of those Principles too much abounds in any Subject, so that an
intimate Union is prevented, the whole Efficacy of the Fermentation is
either stopped or impaired, or at least limited to one certain Species.

This equal Connexion of Salt, Oil and Earth into a single compound
Particle, forms a Corpuscle soluble in Water; or, to speak more
philosophically, this compound Corpuscle is, by means of its saline
Particles, connected with the aqueous Corpuscles, and moved up and down
with them. But where these Corpuscles are not thus connected with the
Water, a Number of them join together, and form either a gross, or a
loose, chaffy, and spungy Matter.

When these compound Particles are diluted with a small Quantity of an
aqueous Fluid, they feel slippery, clammy, and unctuous to the Touch,
and affect the Taste with a kind of ropy Sweetness. And when a proper
Quantity of the Fluid is added, a Commotion is presently excited, and
afterwards a subtile Separation.

This Commotion and Separation first begins in the whole Substance; for
before the Addition of Water, the Subject may remain in dry, solid, and
large Pieces, as in Malt, Sugar, _&c._ which being reduced to Powder,
each Grain thereof is an Aggregate of many smaller compound Corpuscles;
these being put into Water, dissolve, and separately float therein,
till at length, they become so small as to be invisible, and only
thicken the Consistence of the Liquor.

These Corpuscles being thus separated from one another, there next
ensues a Separation of their component Particles; that is, the Salt,
the Oil, and the Earth, are divided by the Interposition of the aqueous
Particles.

The first Commotion is no more than a bare Solution; for the saline
Particles being easily dissolvable in Water, they are immediately laid
hold of by the aqueous Particles, and carried about with them. But the
succeeding Separation, or fermentative Motion, is a very different
thing; for by this the saline Particles are divided from those of Oil
and Earth, partly by the Impulse of the others in their Motion, and
partly by the Force of the aqueous Particles, which are now continually
meeting and dashing against them.

This Motion is performed by the Water, as a Fluid, or Aggregate of an
infinite Number of Particles, in actual and perpetual Motion; their
Smallness being proportionable to that of the fermenting Corpuscles,
and their Motion, or constant Susceptibility of Motion, by Warmth, and
the Motion of the Air, disposing them to move other subtile moveable
Corpuscles also. The certain Agreement of Figure, or Size between the
aqueous Particles, and those of the Salt in the fermentable Subject,
tends greatly to increase this Commotion; for, by this means, they are
readily and very closely connected together; and therefore move almost
like one and the same compound Corpuscle; whilst the Water is not at
all disposed to cohere immediately with either the Oil or Earth. And
thus an unequal Concussion is excited in the compound Corpuscles of the
fermentable Subject; which Concussion at length strikes out the saline
Particle, loosens the others, and finally produces a Separation of the
original Connexion of the Subject.

An aqueous Fluid, therefore, is the true, and indeed the only,
Instrument for procuring a fermentable Motion in these compound
Corpuscles of the Subject: For were an oily Fluid poured upon any
fermentable Subject, no vinous Fermentation would ensue; as the Oil
could neither give a sufficient Impulse on the compound Corpuscles,
which are grosser than its own constituent Particles, nor divide the
oily or saline Particles of the Subject from their Connexion with the
others, which detain, and, as it were, envelope, or defend them from
its Action.

The compound Corpuscles of the fermentable Subject being affected by
the perpetual Motion of the Particles of the aqueous Fluid, a proper
Degree of Motion is necessary, or that the Particles move with a
proper Degree of Velocity, which principally depends on external Heat.
A considerable Degree of Cold, indeed, will not absolutely prevent
Fermentation, though it will greatly retard it; and a boiling Heat
will prevent it still more. A tepid, or middle Degree of Heat between
Freezing or Boiling, is therefore the most proper for promoting and
quickening the Operation.

The Admission of Air, also, though not of absolute Necessity, yet
greatly promotes and quickens the Action, as being a capital Instrument
in putting in a proper Degree of Motion the oily Particles of the
Subject. But whilst the Air thus contributes to hasten the Effect, it
causes at the same time by its Activity some remarkable Alterations in
the oily Particles; for it not only moves, but absolutely dissolves
and displaces them from their original Connexions; and thus carries
them off with itself from the whole Mass. And, therefore, though the
Consideration of the Air does not so properly belong to Fermentation in
the general, yet it does in particular; as having an accidental Power
to alter every Species of this Operation: Consequently its Agency ought
to be well understood, either to procure Alterations at pleasure in the
fermenting Mass, or to prevent and correct impending Dangers.

The oily Particles thus separated and dissolved by the Air, are
also elastic, though they probably derive that Property from their
Intercourse with the Air itself, and their being rendered extremely
minute.

When, therefore, an aqueous Fluid is added to a fermentable Subject
exposed to a temperate Heat, a fermentative Struggle immediately
arises, the saline Part of the compound Particles being dissolved
by the continual intestine Motion of the Water, and carried up and
down with it in all Directions, amidst an infinite Number of other
Particles, as well fermentable, as aqueous ones; whence, by this
Collision and Attrition, the saline Particles are dissolved, and
separated from their Connexion with the oily and earthy. And as the
oily Particles are the most subtle and elastic, they would, by this
means, be thrown up to the Surface of the Liquor, and carried off by
the Air, were they not closely connected with the earthy ones, whose
Gravity prevents their Evaporation, and, by coming in contact with
others of the same kind, form Aggregations, and sink down, with the
oily Particles, to the Bottom. But before these can form a Bulk too
large to be supported by the Water, many of the oily Particles are,
by their frequent Collisions with the aqueous Fluid, separated from
the earthy ones; and, by Degrees, more strongly connected again with
the saline ones; whilst, on the other hand, the same saline Particles
imbibe some of the earthy ones, which being left single, upon their
Separation from the oily Particles, floated about separately in the
Fluid.

And hence proceed the several different Consequences of Fermentation;
_viz._ 1. From the Separation of the saline Particles of the
fermentable Subject proceeds the tart, saline, or acid Taste of the
Liquor; which is more sensible at first, before the Liquor is duly
composed and settled, or the due Arrangement and Connection of the
saline Particles with those of the oily and earthy Kinds, completed:
After which the Liquor proves milder, softer, or less pungent. 2. From
the oily Particles being set at liberty, proceeds the strong Smell
of the Liquor, and the Head or shining Skin upon the Surface. 3. The
earthy Particles collecting together in Clusters, cause the Fluid to
appear turbid, and afterwards a visible earthy, or clay-like Matter
to be precipitated: And some of the earthy Parts, in their Motion,
arriving at the Head, or oily Skin on the Surface, cause it to thicken;
and afterwards taking it down along with it, thus constitute the Lees
which abound in Oil. 4. From this new Struggle or Collision, which
is productive both of Solution, and a new Connection in the saline
and earthy Corpuscles, proceeds the Ebullition in Fermentation. And,
lastly, by the same repeated Coalition of the oily with the aqueous and
saline Particles, the inflammable Spirit is produced.

Having thus laid down a concise Theory of Fermentation, we shall now
proceed to the Practice.

The Wash being brought to a tepid, or lukewarm State in the Backs, a
proper Quantity of a good-conditioned Ferment is added; but if the
Ferment be solid, it should be previously broke into small Pieces, and
gently thinned either with the Hand, Whisp, _&c._ in a little of the
tepid Liquor. A complete and uniform Solution, however, should not be
attempted, because that would greatly weaken the Power of the Ferment,
or destroy its future Efficacy. The whole intended Quantity, therefore,
being thus loosely mixed with a moderate Parcel of the Liquor, and kept
in a tepid State, either by setting it near the Fire, or otherwise,
and free from the too rude Commerce of the external Air; more of the
insensibly warm Liquor ought to be added, at proper Intervals, till, at
length, the whole Quantity is properly set to working together. And,
thus, by dividing the Business into Parts, it may much more speedily
and effectually be performed, than by attempting it all at once.

The whole Quantity of Liquor being thus set to work, secured in a
proper Degree of Warmth, and defended from a too free Intercourse of
the external Air, Nature itself, as it were, finishes the Process, and
renders the Liquor fit for the Still.

By Ferments, we mean any Substance, which, being added to any rightly
disposed fermentable Liquor, will cause it to ferment much sooner and
faster than it would of itself; and, consequently, render the Operation
shorter; in contradiction to those abusively called so, which only
correct some Fault in the Liquor, or give it some Flavour. Hence we
see, that the principal Use of Ferments is to save Time, and make
Dispatch in Business; whilst they only occasionally, and, as it were,
by Accident, give a Flavour, and increase the Quantity of Spirit. And,
accordingly, any fermentable Liquor, may, without the Addition of any
Ferment, by a proper Management of Heat alone, be brought to ferment,
and even more perfectly, though much slower, than with their Assistance.

These Ferments are, in general, the Flowers and Fæces of all
fermentable Liquors, generated and thrown to the Surface, or deposited
at the Bottom, either during the Act of Fermentation, or after the
Operation is finished.

Two of these are procurable in large Quantities, and at a small
Expence; we mean, Beer-Yeast and Wine-Lees; a prudent and artificial
Management, or Use of which, might render the Business of Distillation
much more facile, certain and advantageous.

It has been esteemed very difficult, and a great Discouragement, in
the Business of Distillation, to procure a sufficient Stock of these
Materials, and preserve them at all times ready for use. The whole
Secret consists in dexterously freeing the Matter from its superfluous
Moisture; because in its fluid State, it is subject to a farther
Fermentation, which is productive of Corruption; in which State it
becomes intolerably fœtid and cadaverous.

The Method of exposing it to the Air till it has required a proper
Consistence, is subject to great Inconveniencies; and so peculiar and
careful a Management necessary, that it rarely succeeds.

The best Way, therefore, is to press it very slowly and gradually, in
a thick, close, and strong Canvas Bag, after the manner of Wine Lees,
by the Tail-press, till it becomes a kind of Cake; which, though soft,
will easily snap, or break dry and brittle between the Fingers. Being
reduced to that Consistence, and closely packed up in a tight Cask,
it will remain a long Time uncorrupted, preserve its Fragrancy, and
consequently, fit to be used for fermenting the finest Liquor.

The same Method is also practicable, and to the same Advantage, in the
Flowers or Yeast of Wine; which may be thus commodiously imported from
abroad: Or, if these cannot be procured, others of equal Efficacy may
be procured from fresh Wine Lees, by barely mixing and stirring them
into a proper warm Liquor; whence the lighter, or more volatile and
active Parts of the Lees, will be thrown to the Surface, and may easily
be taken off, and preserved, by the above-mentioned Method, in any
desired Quantity. And hence, by a very easy Process, an inexhaustible
Supply of the most useful Ferments may be readily and successively
procured, so as to prevent for the future all Occasion of Complaint for
want of them, in the Distiller’s Business.

Experience has demonstrated, that all Ferments abound much more in
essential Oil, than the Liquor which produced them; and consequently
they retain, in a very high Degree, the Smell and Flavour of the
Subject. It is therefore requisite, before the Ferment is applied, to
consider what Flavour is intended to be introduced, or what Species of
Ferment is most proper for the Liquor.

The Alteration thus caused by Ferments is so considerable, as to render
any neutral fermentable Liquor, of the same Flavour with that which
yielded the Ferment. This Observation is of much greater Moment than
will presently be conceived; for a new Scene is hereby opened, both in
the Business of Distillation, and others depending upon Fermentation.
It must, however, be observed, that its Benefit does not extend to
Malt, treated in the common Method; nor to any other Subject but
what affords a Spirit tolerably pure and tasteless: For, otherwise,
instead of producing a simple, pure, and uniform Flavour, it causes
a compound, mixed, and unnatural one. How far the fine Stiller may
profit by it, well deserves his Attention; and whether our native Cyder
Spirit, Crab Spirit, _&c._ which have very little Flavour of their own,
may not, by this Artifice, be brought nearly, if not intirely, into the
State of some foreign Brandies, so highly esteemed, is recommended to
Experience.

It is common with Distillers, in order to increase the Quantity of
Spirit, give it a particular Flavour, or improve its Vinosity, to add
several things to the Liquor, during the Time it is in a State of
Fermentation; and these Additions may properly be reduced to Salts,
Acids, Aromatics, and Oils.

All rich vegetable Juices, as Treacle, Honey, _&c._ which either want
a natural Acid, have been deprived of it, or contain it in too small
a Quantity, will be greatly improved by adding, at the Beginning of
the Operation, a small Quantity of the vegetable or fine mineral
Acids; as Oil of Sulphur, Glauber’s Spirit of Salt, Juice of Lemons,
or an aqueous Solution of Tartar. These Additions will either give, or
greatly improve the vinous Acidity of the Subject, but not increase the
Quantity of the Spirit, that Intention being performed by Aromatics
and Oils.

All pungent Aromatics have a surprising Quality of increasing the
Quantity of the Spirit, as well as in altering, or improving the
Flavour; but their Use requires that the Fermentation should be
performed in close Vessels. And if a large Quantity be intended to be
added, Care must be taken not to do it all at once, lest the Oiliness
of the Ingredients should check the Operation. But if the Flavour be
the principal Intention, they should not be added till the Operation
is nearly finished. After the same Manner a very considerable Quantity
of any essential vegetable Oil may be converted into a surprisingly
large Quantity of inflammable Spirit; but great Caution is here also
necessary not to drop it too fast, or add too large a Quantity at a
time, which would damp the Fermentation; it being the surest Method
of checking, or totally stopping this Operation, at any Point of Time
required. The best Method, therefore, of adding the Oil, so as to
avoid all Inconveniencies, is to rub the Oil in a Mortar with Sugar,
which the Chemists call making an _Olæosaccharum_, by which Means the
Tenacity of the Oil will be destroyed, and the whole readily mix with
the Liquor, and immediately ferment with it. The Distiller would do
well to consider these Observations attentively, as he may thence form
an advantageous Method of increasing the Quantity of Spirits, and at
the same Time greatly improve their Quality and Flavour.

But in order to put these Observations in practice, particular Regard
must be had to the containing Vessel in which the Fermentation is
performed, the Exclusion of the Air, and the Degree of the external
Heat or Cold.

With regard to the containing Vessel; its Purity, and the Provision
for rendering it occasionally close, are chiefly to be considered. In
cleansing it, no Soap, or other unctuous Body should be used, for fear
of checking the Fermentation; and, for the same Reason, all strong
alkaline Lixiviums should be avoided. Lime-water, or a turbid Solution
of quick Lime may be employed for this Purpose, without producing
any ill Effect; it will also be of great Service in destroying a
prevailing acetous Salt, which is apt to generate in the Vessels when
the warm Air has free Access to them; and tends to pervert the Order
of Fermentation, and, instead of a Wine or Wash, produce a Vinegar.
Special Care must also be had, that no Remains of Yeast, or cadaverous
Remains of former fermented Matters, hang about the Vessels, which
would infect whatever should be afterwards put into them; and cannot,
without the utmost Difficulty, be perfectly cured and sweetened.

The occasional Closeness of the Vessels may in the large way, be
provided for by Covers properly adapted; and, in the small way, by
Valves, placed in light Casks. These Valves will occasionally give
the necessary Vent to preserve the Vessel, during the Height of the
Fermentation; the Vessel otherwise remaining perfectly close, and
impervious to the Air.

It is a Mistake of a very prejudicial Nature, in the Business of
Fermentation, to suppose, that there is an absolute Necessity for a
free Admission of the external Air. The express contrary is the Truth,
and very great Advantages will be found by practising according to
this Supposition. A constant Influx of the external Air, if it does
not carry off some Part of the Spirit already generated, yet certainly
catches up and dissipates the fine, subtile, or oleaginous and saline
Particles, whereof the Spirit is made, and thus considerably lessens
the Quantity. By a close Fermentation this Inconveniency is avoided;
all Air, except that included in the Vessel, being excluded. The whole
Secret consists in leaving a moderate Space for the Air at the Top
of the Vessel, unpossessed by the Liquor. When the Liquor is once
fairly at work to bung it down close, and thus suffer it to finish
the Fermentation, without opening or giving it any more Vent than
that afforded it by a proper Valve placed in the Cask; which, however
is not of absolute Necessity, when the empty Space, or rather that
possessed by the Air, is about one tenth of the Gage; the artificial
Air, generated in the Operation being then seldom sufficient to open a
strong Valve, or at most not to endanger the Cask.

This Method may be practised to good Advantage by those whose Business
is not very large; but it requires too much Time to be used by the
large Dealers, who are in a manner forced to admit the free Air, and
thus sustain a considerable Loss in their Quantity of Spirit, that
the Fermentation may be finished in the small Time allowed for that
Purpose. It may, however, be said, that the silent, slow, and almost
imperceptible vinous Fermentation, is universally the most perfect and
advantageous.

During the whole Course of this Operation, the Vessel should be kept
from all external Cold, or considerable Heat, in an equal, uniform, and
moderate Temperature. In the Winter, a Stove-Room, such as is common
in _Germany_, would be very convenient for this Purpose; the Vessel
being placed at a proper Distance from the Stove: But at other Seasons
no particular Apparatus is necessary with us in _England_, if the Place
allotted for the Business be but well defended from the Summer’s Heat,
and the ill Effects of cold bleak northern Winds.

The Operation is known to be perfected when the hissing, or small
bubbling Noise can be no longer heard, upon applying the Ear to the
Vessel; and also by the Liquor itself appearing clear to Eye, and
having a pungent Sharpness on the Tongue. And that it may fully obtain
these Properties, and be well fitted to yield a pure and perfectly
vinous Spirit by Distillation, it should be suffered to stand at rest
in a somewhat cooler Place, if practicable, than that in which it was
fermented; till it has thoroughly deposited and cleansed itself of
the gross Lee, and become perfectly transparent, vinous and fragrant;
in which State it should be committed to the Still, and the Spirit
obtained will not only exceed that obtained in the common Way in
Quantity, but also in Fragrance, Pungency, and Vinosity.




                              CHAP. III.

                     _Of Distillation in general._


Having in the two preceding Chapters laid down the best Methods of
Brewing and Fermentation, we shall now proceed to the Method of
Distillation.

And in order to lead our Readers methodically through the Path which
lies before them, we shall begin with explaining the Principles of
Distillation; or, the Method of extracting the spirituous Parts of
Bodies.

To extract the Spirits is to cause such an Action by Heat, as to cause
them to ascend in Vapour from the Bodies which detain them.

If this Heat be natural to Bodies, so that the Separation be made
without any adventitious Means, it is called Fermentation, which we
have already explained.

If it be produced by Fire, or other heating Power, in which the Alembic
is placed, it is called Digestion, or Distillation: Digestion, if the
Heat only prepares the Materials for the Distillation of their Spirits;
and Distillation, where the Action is of sufficient Efficacy to cause
them to ascend in Vapour, and distil.

This Heat is that which puts the insensible Parts of a Body, whatever
it be, into Motion, divides them, and causes a Passage for the Spirits
inclosed herein, by disengaging them from the Phlegm and the earthy
Particles by which they are inclosed.

Distillation considered in this Light, is not unworthy the Attention
and Countenance of the Learned. This Art is of infinite Extent;
whatever the whole Earth produces, Flowers, Fruits, Seeds, Spices,
aromatic and vulnerary Plants, odoriferous Drugs, _&c._ are its
Objects, and come under its Cognizance; but we generally confine it to
Liquids of Taste and Smell; and to the simple and spirituous Waters of
aromatic and vulnerary Plants. With regard to its Utility, we shall
omit saying any thing here, as we shall give sufficient Proofs of it in
the Sequel.




                               CHAP. IV.

                     _Of particular Distillation._


Distillation is generally divided into three Kinds; the first is called
Distillation _per ascensum_, which is when the Fire, or other Heat,
applied to the Alembic, containing the Materials, causes the Spirits to
ascend. This is the most common, and indeed almost the only kind used
by Distillers.

The second is called Distillation _per descensum_; which is, when the
Fire being placed upon the Vessel precipitates, or causes the Spirit to
descend. This Kind is hardly ever used by Distillers, but to obtain the
Essence or Oil of Cloves.

The third is termed Distillation _per latus_, or oblique Distillation;
but this being used only by the Chemists we shall say nothing farther
of it here.

With regard to the different Methods of Distillation, occasioned by the
different Vessels, or Materials made use of to excite Heat, improperly
called Distillation; they are of various Kinds, and shall be explained
as they occur in the Work.

There are various Kinds of Distillation, some of which arise from the
different Constructions of Alembics; such are the Distillation by the
common Alembic, with a Refrigeratory, the Glass Alembic, the serpentine
Alembic, and the Retort: Others are produced from the Heat surrounding
the Alembic; such as the Distillation in _Balneum Mariæ_, the Vapor,
the Sand, the Dung, and the Lime Baths.

These different Methods of Distilling, we shall explain in enumerating
the Operations in which they are most proper; and proceed to treat of
the different Forms of Alembics and their Constructions.




                               CHAP. V.

       _Of_ ALEMBICS, _and their different Constructions._


The Alembic is a Vessel usually of Copper tined, which serves for, and
is essential to all Operations in the Distillery.

There are several Sorts of Alembics, all different, either with regard
to Matter or Form. As, the common Alembic with a Refrigeratory, the
earthen and the glass Alembic, the _Balneum Mariæ_, and the Vapour-Bath
Alembic.

Every one of these being of a different Construction, are also used in
different Operations.

The common Alembic consists principally of two Parts, the lower Part
called the Body, and the upper termed the Head.

The Body consists of two Pieces, the lower called the Cucurbit, and the
upper the Crown. The Cucurbit or lower Part of the Body, is a kind of
Receptacle proportioned to the Size of the Alembic, in which the Bodies
to be distilled are placed.

The Crown, or upper Part of the Body, is also another Part of the
Alembic; and is that Part of the Body to which the Head is immediately
luted. But an Idea of these several Alembics will be much better
attained from the following Figures, which represent them much stronger
to the Imagination than is possible to be done by Words.

_Fig. 1._ Is a common Alembic, as it appears before it is placed in a
Furnace, where _a_ is the Bottom, _b_ the Crown, _c_ the Head.

_Fig. 2._ Is the Body without the Head; _a_ the Rim or Top of the Crown
where the Head is luted.

_Fig. 3._ The Head; _a_ the Rim where it is to be luted to the Body;
_b_ the Nose, or End which is luted into the Worm.

_Fig. 4._ The Worm, as it appears when out of the Tub in which it is
fixed when in use; _a_ the End into which the Still Head is inserted,
_b_ that which conveys the Liquor into the Receiver.

_Fig. 5._ Two Stills at work in one Refrigeratory; _a_, _b_ the two
Still Heads, _c_, _d_ the Bodies inclosed in the Brick-Work; _e_, _e_
the two Fire-Places; _f_, _f_ the two Ash-Holes; _g_ a Common Receiver;
_h_ a Spout Receiver, called by Chemists a Separating-Glass, used in
the Distillation of Herbs, in order to extract their essential Oil; _i_
a Crane for drawing the Water out of the Refrigeratory.

_Fig. 6._ A small Still with a Refrigeratory; _a_ the Body, _b_ the
Head, _c_ the Refrigeratory filled with Water, _d_ the Receiver, luted
to the Bec of the Alembic.

_Fig. 7._ A Glass Alembic to be used as a _Balneum Mariæ_; _a_ the
Body, _b_ the Head, _c_ the Bec, which is to be luted to the Receiver,
_d_ a Trivet on which it is standing in the Water.

_Fig. 8._ A proper Receiver for the Glass Alembic, called by Chemists a
Bolt-Head, or Matrass.

_Fig. 9._ The Glass Alembic placed in a Copper Vessel; _a_ the Copper
Vessel filled with Water, _b_ the Body of the Glass Alembic, _c_ the
Head, _d_ the Receiver luted at _c_ to the Bec of the Alembic.

_Fig. 10._ A cold Still for distilling simple Waters; _a_ the Head, _b_
the Bec, or Nose, _c_ the Receiver, _d_ the Plate on which Herbs are
laid.

_Fig. 11._ A Vessel for Digestion, called by Chemists a Pelican or
circulatory Vessel; _a_ the Body, _b_ the Head, _c_, _c_ two Tubes,
luted at _d_, _d_, by which the Liquor returns from the Head into the
Body; _e_ a Furnace on which it is placed, _f_ the Fire-place, _g_ the
Ash-hole.

_Fig. 12._ Another Receiver, used when it is necessary to lute it to
the End of the Worm, in order to prevent the most volatile Parts from
being evaporated, and lost.




                               CHAP. VI.

 _Of the_ ACCIDENTS _that too often happen in performing the Processes
                           of_ DISTILLATION.


Among the Accidents which frequently happen in Distilling, the least of
all is for the Operation to miscarry and the Ingredients to be lost.

And this being a Subject of the greatest Importance we shall treat it
with all possible Accuracy.

All Accidents are occasioned by Fire, their primary Cause; by want of
Attention they get too much Head, and Fear often suffers them to become
irremediable.

The first Accident which may happen by the Fire, is when a Distiller,
by too great a Heat, causes the Ingredients to be burnt at the Bottom
of the Still; by this Means his Liquor is spoiled by an empereumatic
Taste, and the Tin is melted off from the Alembic. An Empereuma
resembles the Smell of burnt Tobacco, and is produced in Liquors by too
great a Degree of Heat. To illustrate this, distil any Fruit, Flowers,
or any Aromatic whatever; but especially something whose Smell is very
volatile, draw off only the best, unlute the Alembic, and what remains
in the Still, will be found to have a very disagreeable Smell; whence
it follows, that if a little more had been drawn off, it would have
spoiled what was before obtained.

If the Fire be too violent, the extraordinary Ebullition of the
Contents causes them to ascend into the Head; and, if a Glass Alembic,
they fall ignited into the Recipient; the Heat breaks it, the Spirits
are dissipated, and often take Fire from the Heat of the Furnace.

If the Fire be too strong, the Bottom of the Still becomes red hot, the
Materials inflamed, and consequently the Fire reaches the Recipient.

When an earthen Alembic is used, the closest Attention is requisite to
keep the Fire from burning the Materials at the Bottom. The Head, which
is always of Glass, bursts, and the Spirits are spilt, and often catch
fire. And the Remedy becomes the more difficult, as Earth retains the
Fire much longer than a common Alembic.

If the Alembic be not firmly fixed, it is soon put out of Order, falls
down and unlutes itself; thus the Liquor is spilt, and the Vapour sets
the Spirits on fire.

If all the Joints be not carefully luted, the Spirits at their first
Effort issue through the least Aperture, run into the Fire, which is
propagated into the Alembic by the Vapour.

In Distillations where the Phlegm ascends first, its Humidity
penetrates the Lute, and loosens it, so that when the spirituous
Vapours ascend, they are exposed to the same Accident.

Lastly, when the Recipient is unluted, especially if near full, without
the greatest Circumspection the Spirits will be spilt, and so catch
Fire.

Hitherto I have only given a simple Account of what daily happens to
Distillers; but the Consequences of these Accidents are infinitely more
terrible than the Accidents themselves; for an Artist to lose his Time,
his Labour and Goods, is no small Matter; but it follows from what we
have premised, that both his Life and Fortune are in danger from these
Conflagrations. Instances of the former are too common, as well as
those of the latter, relating to the Danger to which the Operator is
exposed. They are evident, and we have seen very lately three Instances
sufficient to intimidate the most sanguine. The Spirits catch, the
Alembic and Recipient fly, and the inflamed Vapour becomes present
Death to all who breathe it.

The Rectifiers, who perform the most dangerous Operations of
Distillery, are particularly exposed to these terrible Accidents;
the Fineness of the Spirit at the same time that it renders it more
inflammable, also causes the Fire to spread with the greater Rapidity.
And when their Store-houses are once on Fire, they are seldom or never
saved.

Possibly I may be censured for my Conciseness on this Head; indeed
the Importance of it requires the most particular Discussion; but
intending to speak of the Methods proper to prevent these Accidents,
I shall close this Chapter, with recommending the Subject of it to
the serious Reflection of all concerned in Distillation. And it being
hitherto omitted, though of all others it requires the Attention
of the Distiller, I shall further observe, that these Operations
should never be left to Servants. What can be expected from ignorant
Persons? Fear will seize them, when the greatest Presence of Mind is
requisite.————Let us now proceed to the Methods of preventing, or at
least lessening their Effects.




                              CHAP. VII.

               _Of the Methods of preventing Accidents._


To have informed the Reader of the Accidents which happen in
Distilling, would have been of little Consequence, without shewing, at
the same Time, the Methods of preventing them. In order therefore to
fortify him against the Terror, which the foregoing Chapter may have
excited, we will here point out the Remedies for all the Cases before
specified.

To prevent Accidents, two Things especially must be known, and adverted
to.

1. The Knowledge of the Fire, which depends on the Fuel, whether Wood
or Coal.

2. The Manner of luting so as to prevent the Vapours from escaping
through it, and by that Means of setting the whole on fire.

The hardest Wood generally makes the quickest Fire, such as Beech, Oak,
Holm, Elm, _&c._ The white Woods, as the Ash, the Poplar, the Willow,
and the Birch, make a milder Fire. This holds good also of the Coal
made of these two kinds of Wood; and, consequently, the Nature of the
Wood or Coals must determine the Fire, and the Action of this must be
proportioned to the Effect intended to be produced by it. That is,
the Capacity of the Alembic, the Matters to be distilled, and their
Quantity. The same may also be said of Pit Coal, which is generally
used in _England_.

It is evident, that the larger the Alembic, the more Fire is necessary.
What has not been digested, also, requires more Fire than that which
has been prepared by that Operation. Spices require a stronger Fire
than Flowers; a Distillation of Simple Waters more than that of
spirituous Liquors.

The surest Way of ascertaining the necessary Degree of Fire, is to
regulate it by the Materials, as they are more or less disposed to
yield them Spirits, _&c._ and this is done as follows. The Operator
must not leave the Alembic, but attentively listen to what passes
within, when the Fire begins to heat it. When the Ebulition becomes
too vehement, the Fire must be lessened, either by taking out some of
the Fuel, or covering it with Ashes or Sand.

It requires a long Experience in the several Cases, before a Distiller
can acquire a competent Knowledge in this important Point. Nor is it
possible to determine the Degree of Fire from the Quantity of Fuel;
Judgment, assisted by Experience, must supply this Defect.

Every thing being determined with regard to the Degree of Fire, we
shall now proceed to explain the Method of luting Alembics.

By the Term luting an Alembic, we mean, the closing the Joints through
which the Spirits might transpire.

Lute is a Composition of common Ashes, well sifted, and soaked in
Water; Clay, and a kind of Paste made of Meal or Starch are also used
for this Purpose; which, as I before observed, is to close all the
Joints, _&c._ in order to confine the Spirits from transpiring.

Good Luting is one of the surest Methods of preventing Accidents. An
Alembic, where all Transpiration is prevented, having nothing to fear
but the too great Fierceness of the Fire; and that may be regulated by
the Rules already laid down.

The refrigerating Alembic is mostly used. The Body and the Head are
joined to each other; but notwithstanding the greatest Care be taken in
luting the Juncture, there will still be some imperceptable Interstice
for Transpiration; and the least being of the greatest Consequence, a
Piece of strong Paper, should be pasted over the Joint, and the Alembic
never left, till the Spirits begin to flow into the Receiver, in order
to apply fresh Paper, if the former should contract any Moisture. The
Master himself should carefully attend to this, and whatever Precaution
may have been previously used, the Eye must be constantly upon it.

The Alembic, when vinous Spirits are distilled, should be luted with
Clay, carefully spread round the Junctures, in order to prevent all
Transpiration; because the Consequences here are terrible; for when
the Fire catches a large Quantity, it is often irremediable. Besides,
as this Earth cracks in drying, it must be often moistened, and fresh
applied, on the first Appearance of any Occasion for it.

The Retort is also luted with Clay; but as glass Retorts are also used,
they are often coated with the same Clay, to prevent their melting by
the Intenseness of the Fire.

Lastly, the earthen and glass Alembics are luted with Paper and
Paste as above.——Having thus explained the great Consequence of
Circumspection with regard to Luting, and the Degree of Fire, we shall
now proceed to a third Method of preventing them, and close this
Chapter with a short Observation on portable Furnaces; which is, That
Alembics being never thoroughly secure on this kind of Furnaces, a Hook
should be fastened to the Refrigerant for fixing it to the Wall.




                              CHAP. VIII.

          _Of the Remedies for Accidents, when they happen._


Notwithstanding the best of Rules, and the strictest Observation, it
is impossible entirely to prevent Accidents, and therefore it is of no
less Importance to point out the Remedies on those Occasions.

The most essential, are Courage and Presence of Mind; Fear only
increasing the Misfortune.

1. If the Fire be too violent it must be covered, but not so as totally
to prevent its Action, as by that Means the Process of the Distillation
would be interrupted, and render it more difficult and less perfect.

2. When the Ingredients burn, which you will soon discover by the
Smell, the Fire must be immediately put out, in order to prevent the
whole Charge of the Still being entirely spoiled, which would otherwise
inevitably be the Consequence.

3. If the Spirits should catch fire, the first care is to unlute
immediately the Receiver, and stop both the End of the Beak and Mouth
of the Receiver with wet Clothes.

The Fire must then be put out, and if the Flame issued through the
Luting, the Joints must be closed with a wet Cloth, which, together
with Water, should never be wanting in a Distil-house.

4. If the Alembic be of Earth, and the Contents burn at the Bottom, the
Fire must immediately be put out, the Alembic removed, and Water thrown
upon it, till the Danger is over; and, for farther Security, covered
with a wet Cloth.

5. If after all your Care in closing the Junctures to prevent
Transpiration, you perceive any thing amiss, while the Spirits are
ascending, apply Clay, or any other Composition, in order to stop the
Aperture, and have always a wet Cloth ready to stifle the Flame, if the
Spirits should take fire.

6. If the Heat detaches the Lute, or it becomes moist, immediately
apply another, having always ready what is necessary for performing it.
Should the Transpiration be so violent, that you cannot immediately
apply a fresh Lute, clap a wet Cloth round the Joint, and keep it
on firm and tight, till the Spirits have taken their Course. But if
notwithstanding all your Efforts the Transpiration should increase, so
that you fear a Conflagration, remove the Receiver as soon as possible
from the Fire, and afterwards your Alembic, if portable; but if
otherwise, put out the Fire immediately.

7. The Charge being worked off, be cautious in luting the Receiver,
that nothing be spilt on the Furnace, and carry it to some Distance
from it, that the Spirits exhaling may not take fire.

8. Lastly observe, that wherever a Remedy is required, there must be
no Candle used; for the spirituous Vapours easily take fire, and
propagate the Flame to the Vessels from whence they issue.

All that has been hitherto said concerns only the Management of the
Alembic; but what remains is still more interesting, and relates to
those who work it, that they may not, by conquering the Accident,
destroy themselves.

On discovering any of the above Accidents, when the Flame has not yet
reached the Spirits, let the Remedies already mentioned be applied,
either with regard to the Lute, or the Violence of the Fire.

But if the Flame has reached the Alembic, the following Precautions are
to be used.

The Operator must not approach the Alembic without a wet Cloth over his
Mouth and Nostrils, it being immediate Death to inhale the inflamed
Vapour.

In hastening to stop any Accident, be careful to approach the Side
opposite to that whither the Air impels the Flame; for, without this
Precaution you would be involved in it, and could not, without the
utmost Difficulty, extricate yourself from it.

If notwithstanding this Precaution, the Eddy of the Air should force
the Flame to your Side, quit the Place immediately, and do not return
till its Direction be changed, always taking care to have a wet linen
Cloth before your Nose and Mouth, and keep yourself on the Side
opposite to the Direction of the Flame: And also to have another such
Cloth, in order to smother the Flame, and close the Crevise through
which the Spirits issue.

Should it be your Misfortune to be covered with inflamed Spirits,
wrap yourself in a wet Sheet, which should be always ready for that
Purpose. Self-Preservation is of too great Importance that any of these
Precautions should be omitted in such Variety of Dangers.

If the Fire has acquired such a Head that it cannot be stopt, the
Receiver must be broke, and the Alembic, if portable, thrown down; but
no Person must be suffered to go near them, especially those who are
Strangers to the Business.

In a desperate Case, like that of a large Quantity of rectified Spirit
taking Fire, if Time permit, the Communication of the Beak of the
Alembic with the Recipient, which is usually a Cask, must be cut off,
by closely stopping the Bung; and be sure no Candle come near the
Receiver, leaving the rest, as the Danger would be too great to expose
ones self to the Flames of a large Charge, and the Distiller’s Safety
should be principally considered.

I thought it my Duty to give my Reader these Informations, and hope
that in the Practice of Distillation, he will find them of great
Advantage.




                               CHAP. IX.

  _On the Necessity of often cooling the Alembic, as another Means of
                        preventing Accidents._


The Refrigerant is so essential a Part of the Alembic, that for want of
it several other Expedients are made use of to perform its Office, for
cooling those whose Capacity, Brittleness, or lastly the Construction,
will not admit of their having any.

The Refrigerant is usually in proportion to the Capacity of the
Alembic, for which the following may serve as a Rule, that the Capacity
of the Refrigerant should be to that of the Alembic, as 14 to 8.

The Necessity of cooling the Head of the Alembic is self-evident to
all who have the least Knowledge of Distillation, as it condenses the
Spirits, cools them, and causes them to flow into the Receiver, which,
if of Glass, would otherwise be broken by the Heat; and consequently
serves to prevent Conflagrations.

The Alembics of the _Balneum Mariæ_, and the Vapour Bath, ought also to
have Refrigerants, like the common Alembic, unless they are of Glass.

Those of Earth and Glass are cooled, as we have already observed, with
a wet Cloth, which is also used to cool the Head of other kinds of
Alembics. But it is not difficult to contrive one which may be placed
in a Refrigerant; such as the following.

To a common small Still apply and lute a Worm, or long tin or pewter
Tube, forming several Circumvolutions, of the same Circumference with
the Body, in order to give it some Elevation, place this Worm in a
Refrigerant, proportioned to the Alembic. If the Capacity of this
Alembic should make it bear too much on the Neck of the Matrass, it may
be supported by a Trevit of the same Circumference as the Body itself:
The Extremity of the Worm may have a Beak projecting beyond the Side of
the Refrigerant, for conveying the Spirits into the Receiver.

This Apparatus will be attended with little Expence, will save the
Distiller the Trouble of being perpetually cooling the Head of the
Alembic, and is such a Safe-guard against Accidents, that if the Worm
be well luted, nothing need be apprehended but from the Violence of the
Fire.

This Method of Practice, therefore, is productive of three valuable
Particulars: The first is, that by cooling the Spirits it preserves
the Receiver, and obviates the Accidents arising from their Heat.
The second is, that the Spirits being kept in a moderate Heat, the
Transpiration is less, and consequently the Spirits procured by
the Operation have more Taste, Smell and Fragrancy than they would
otherwise have had.

Experience demonstrates, that when the Spirits flow hot into the
Receiver, however attentive the Distiller may be to lute the Junctures
of the Alembic, there will be a very sensible Evaporation, which even
in simple Waters greatly depreciates the Goodness of the Liquor.

Lastly, the third is, that the Cooling of Alembics is what principally
contributes to the Perfection of the Operation; because the Coolness
of the Head precipitates the Phlegm, and in the Case of too great a
Degree of Fire, and where the Ebullition is too vehement, if after
taking away Part of the Fire, or covering it, the Ebullition should
continue, the Head may be cooled with a wet Cloth, till the Ebullition
is reduced.

As there is a Necessity of cooling the Alembic, so what we have said
cannot be too carefully observed. In fine, the Contrast of Cold and
Heat, equally concurring, but by Methods directly opposite, to the same
Process, and the Perfection of the Distillation, is a Phœnomenon, which
deserves the Attention of all who study the Operations of Nature.




                               CHAP. X.

   _Of the Necessity of putting Water into the Alembic, for several
                            Distillations._


Two principal Advantages attend putting Water into the Alembic. The
first is, to prevent the Loss the Distiller would incur without that
Precaution, and so prevent any Alteration in the Liquor procured
by Distillation. This we shall illustrate by an Example. Suppose a
Distiller should attempt to rectify Spirits of Wine, without putting
Water in the Alembic. It is evident, that the Fire will consume Part
of it, which is entirely loss, because the same Quantity of Spirit
cannot be procured from it, which might, had there been any thing to
moderate the Action of the Fire, which now preyed upon it.

_Secondly_, If Liquors are impregnated with strong Ingredients,
especially Seeds, and the Quantity be sufficient to absorb all the
Phlegm, a great Quantity of Spirit must be left in the Still, or the
Ingredients will burn, and the Spirits contract an empyreumatic Taste,
which is the more detrimental to the Spirit, as it is increased by Age.

_Thirdly_, If no Water be put into the Alembic with the Ingredients,
the Spirit will be rendered finer by them, and the Fire, if ever so
little too strong, will cause the Ingredients to burn, and the Spirits
to contract an Empyreuma; a Misfortune easily prevented by this
Precaution.

Thus it is a Safe-guard against Accidents: But besides, Water being
mixed with the Ingredients, they are at once prevented from burning,
and the Spirit not weakened; for no sooner are the Ingredients put in
Motion by the Fire, than the Spirits immediately ascend, and the Liquor
loses nothing of its Quality, provided the Receiver be removed as soon
as the Phlegm begins to ascend.

The Water therefore prevents the Waste of the Spirits, and thus the
Distiller loses nothing of his Goods; whereas, without Water, the
Spirits by impregnating the Materials, their Quantity must be less.
With regard to the Phlegm, there is no Difficulty in finding when
it begins to ascend, the first Drop being cloudy, and when it has
continued dropping for some time, it is perceived by a milky Cast at
the Bottom of the Receiver.

_Lastly_, The Distiller is no Loser with regard to the Quality of his
Liquor, which is not at all weakened thereby. Thus it is attended
with the two capital Advantages, the Profit of the Distiller, and the
Perfection of the Liquor. Let us now proceed to the different Manners
of Distillation.




                               CHAP. XI.

 _Of the particular Advantages attending every kind of Distillation._


In the third Chapter we mentioned the several kinds of Distillation, we
shall here enlarge on the particular Advantages of each, and in what
Circumstances each is to be used.

In order for Distillation, the Alembic must be charged with Materials,
and placed on a Fire, or Substances capable of producing the same
Effect.


    _The Method of Distilling with the common refrigerant Alembic._

This Method of Distilling is the most generally used, being one of the
most speedy and profitable, as it requires fewer Preparatives, and less
Time.

To distil with the common Alembic, the Body of it must be thoroughly
cleansed, that no Taste or Smell of any preceding Materials may remain.
The Materials are then to be put into the Alembic; but care must be
taken that the Alembic be not above half full, in order that the
Materials may have sufficient Room to move, without choaking the Neck
of the Alembic. The same Care must be taken with regard to the Head, it
must be thoroughly cleansed and dried; for it often happens that some
small Quantity of Water is left in the Rim, which renders the first
Spirits foul, and, by endeavouring to separate it from the other, some,
and that the most volatile Part of the Spirit, will be lost.

After this the two Parts of the Alembic are to be carefully luted with
strong brown Paper, well pasted on, and the Nose of the Alembic luted
to the Worm; after which the Fire should be immediately made under the
Still, lest too long an Infusion should prejudice the Liquor.

This Alembic being worked on an open Fire, the Operation is quicker
than any other; but the Degree of Fire requires a very close Attention;
as a different Management is necessary to different Materials. The
Water of the Refrigeratory must be changed from time to time, and if
the Case requires it, the whole Head, but especially the Bec, must be
kept cold.


    _Of Distillation in Sand, and in what Cases it should be used._

This Species of Distillation is performed in two different Manners.
First, by covering the Fire with Sand or Ashes, and placing the Alembic
upon it. This Method is very necessary in Digestion, and for the
perfect Rectification of Spirits. Sand is absolutely necessary for
moderating the Action of the Fire, when there is Reason to fear the
Matter contained in the Bottom of the Alembic will burn.

The second Method of Sand Distillation, is to take the finest River
Sand, and after thoroughly washing it, put into the Alembic a Quantity
sufficient to cover it three Fingers deep; after which the Still is to
be charged with the Ingredients to be distilled. This serves instead
of Water in certain Cases, where the Use of it would prejudice the
Ingredients; as in the fine spirituous Waters impregnated with the
aromatic Parts of Flowers; the Sand preventing the Ingredients from
burning. It is also necessary in distilling rectified Spirits from
Seeds.

This Operation being finished, the Alembic must be thoroughly cleansed
from the Sand, that the Taste or Smell contained therein, be not
communicated to any other Charge of different Ingredients.


        _Of Distilling in_ Balneum Mariæ, _and its Advantages_.

This Method of Distillation is of great Use in several Cases. Its
Operation is more perfect, and is subject to few, if any of those
Accidents attending Distillations on an open Fire.

In distilling sweet-scented Waters from Flowers, aromatic Plants,
and others of that kind, where neither Water, nor Spirit ought to
be mixed with them, there is an absolute Necessity for using the
_Balneum Mariæ_; as by every other Distillation, on an open Fire, the
Ingredients would infallibly burn.

If Sand should be made use of, the Fire would melt the Tin from the
Alembic, and the Contents be in the utmost Danger of being burnt.

In distilling in _Balneum Mariæ_, a glass Alembic is generally used.
This Alembic is to be placed in a Copper Vessel filled with Water. This
Vessel ought at least to be of half the Height of the Alembic: at the
Bottom of the Copper Vessel must be a Trivet on which the Alembic is to
be placed, that it may not touch the Bottom of the Copper, because when
the Water begins to boil, it disperses itself towards the Sides, and
leaving the Bottom dry, the Ingredients would be in danger of burning.

The Use of the _Balneum Mariæ_ is excellent for those Ingredients
which require little Spirit; but if a Copper Alembic be used, be
sure to place Sand at the Bottom, that the distilled Liquor may not
contract any ill Taste or Smell. This Method is also adviseable in the
Rectification of Spirits, on Account of the Danger attending this
Operation when performed on a naked Fire.

Were this Method of Distillation as expeditious as that performed on
a naked Fire, no other ought to be used, because it is subject to no
Accidents, and at the same Time the Spirit, &c. distilled is much more
fragrant and grateful.


    _In what Cases glass, or earthen Alembics are to be used; their
                    Advantages and Disadvantages._

In the Chapter relating to Accidents, we have mentioned the earthen
Alembic; we must now add, that it ought never to be used, except the
Matter to be distilled have a strong and bad Smell, and then seldom
above once, unless it be for Ingredients of the same or similar
Qualities.

This Alembic being very difficult to be managed, we can only recommend
it in the Case above-mentioned.

As a naked Fire is generally applied to this Alembic, it requires a
Furnace where the Fire may be gradually increased, on account of the
Accidents to which it is liable.

The glass Alembic is more easily managed, as it is generally placed
in a _Balneum Mariæ_. Its principal Use is for distilling Waters from
Flowers, and making Quintessences; and were it not for the Length of
the Operation, it would be preferable to any other Method.

This Alembic hardly admitting of a Refrigerant, a wet linen Cloth must
be placed on the Head, and often changed.

The Receiver of this Alembic must not be very large, because of the
Fragility of the Bec; but if it were ever so little bent into a Curve,
the Largeness of the Receiver would be of no Prejudice; because then
its whole Weight would be supported by its Stand.


      _Advantages of Distillation performed by the Vapour Bath._

This Method differs very little from the _Balneum Mariæ_, and is used
nearly in the same Circumstances; but has greatly the Advantage of the
_Balneum Mariæ_ in the Quickness of the Operation. And _Lemery_, in the
first Part of his Course of Chemistry, affirms its Operation to be more
perfect.

However that be, its Use is equal to that of the _Balneum Mariæ_; but
in distilling sweet-scented Waters, or Flowers, Sand must be placed at
the Bottom, that the Liquor may not contract a Taste from the Copper.


_Cases where Dung, Husks of Grapes, and Lime, are to be used._

These Substances are rarely used except in Digestions; and therefore of
no great Use to Distillers, they using only hot Ashes, or a Fire well
covered for that Purpose.

If Dung be used it must be of the hottest kind, _viz._ that of the
Horse or Sheep, and the Quantity proportioned to the Heat intended. The
Lime must be quick; and if the Heat required be moderate, Lime which
has lain some time in the Air must be used. The same is to be observed
with regard to the Husks of Grapes. But in whatever manner these are
used, the Digestions must be performed in a close covered Vessel.




                              CHAP. XII.

                 _Of Bodies proper for Distillation._


This Chapter alone might make a Volume, were we to make a particular
Enumeration of all its Parts; but, as we have already observed, we
shall confine ourselves to the Distillation of simple and compound
Waters, _&c._

If we acquit ourselves to the Satisfaction of the Public, we shall
enjoy the Pleasure of having treated of one Part entirely new; and,
indeed, the only one that has been overlooked.

The Bodies proper for Distillation, are Flowers, Fruits, Seeds, Spices
and aromatic Plants.

By Distillation and Digestion, we extract the Colour and Smell of
Flowers in simple Waters and Essences.

We extract from Fruits, at least from some, Colour, Taste, _&c._

From aromatic Plants, the Distiller draws Spirits, Essences, simple and
compound Waters.

From Spices are procured Essences, or in the Language of the Chemists,
Oils, and Perfumes, and also pure Spirits.

From Seeds or Berries are drawn simple Waters, pure Spirits; and from
some, as those of Anise, Fennel, and Juniper, Oil.

The Colour of Flowers is extracted by Infusion, and likewise by
Digestion in Brandy or Spirit of Wine: The Smell is extracted by
Distillation; the simple Water with Brandy or Spirit of Wine.

What is extracted of the Colour of Flowers, by Infusion in Water by a
gentle Heat, or by Digestion in Brandy or Spirits of Wine, is called,
in the Distiller’s Phrase, Tincture of Flowers.

The Colour of Fruits is extracted in the same manner, either by
Infusion or Digestion: Their Taste is also procured by the same
Processes. But let it be observed, that the Time of these Operations
must be limited; for otherwise the Fruit, after Fermentation, would
render it acid. The Taste is also extracted by Distillation in Spirit
of Wine.

From aromatic Plants are extracted by the Alembic pure Spirits,
Odours, and simple Waters. But these require different Methods
of Distillation. The first by Water or Brandy only, the second by
rectified Spirit, which will give them the greatest Excellency they are
capable of.

The Plants themselves with their Flowers may also be distilled, which
is still better.

From Spices are drawn Spirits, and oily or spirituous Quintessences.
The Spirits are drawn by Brandy, or Spirit of Wine, with very little
Water: The Oils are distilled _per Descensum_; and the spirituous
Quintessences by pounding the Spices, and after infusing them in Spirit
of Wine, decanting it gently by inclination.

From Seeds are extracted simple Waters, Spirits and Oils. Very few of
the first and last, Spirits being what is generally extracted from
Seeds and Berries.

Some Distillers, through a Notion of Frugality, distil Seeds with
Water; but their Liquors are not to be compared with those which are
distilled with Spirits. When Oils are drawn from Seeds, the Operation
is performed either by the _Balneum Mariæ_, or the Vapour Bath.

We only deliver in this Place, the first Elements of each of these
Operations, which will be farther illustrated in the Sequel, when we
treat more particularly of these Subjects.




                              CHAP. XIII.

                _Of what is procured by Distillation._


By Distillation are procured Spirit, Essence, simple Waters and Phlegm.

_Spirits_ are very difficult to be defined. I consider them as the most
subtil and volatile Parts of a Body.

All Bodies without Exception have Spirits more or less.

These Parts are an ignited Substance, and consequently by their own
Nature disposed to a violent Motion.

These volatile Particles are more or less disposed to separate
themselves, as the Bodies are more or less porous, or abound with a
greater or lesser Quantity of Oil.

By the Term _Essence_, we understand the oleaginous Parts of a Body. An
essential Oil is found in all Bodies, being one of their constituent
Principles. I have observed in all my Distillations, Spirit of Wine
excepted, a soft unctuous Substance floating on the Phlegm; and this
Substance is Oil, which we call Essence; and this is what we endeavour
to extract.

_Simple Waters_ are those distilled from Plants, Flowers, _&c._ without
the Help of Water, Brandy, or Spirit of Wine. These Waters are commonly
odoriferous, containing the Odour of the Body from whence it is
extracted, and even exceeds in Smell the Body itself.

_Phlegm_ is the aqueous Particles of Bodies; but whether an active or
passive Principle, we shall leave to the Decision of Chemists.

It is of the last Importance to a Distiller to be well acquainted with
its Nature; many mistaking for Phlegm several white and clouded Drops,
which first fall into the Receiver, when the Still begins to work.
These, however, are often the most spirituous Particles of the Matter
in the Alembic, and consequently ought to be preserved. What has given
occasion to this Mistake, is some Humidity remaining in the Head, _&c._
of the Alembic. And had it been thoroughly wiped, the first Drops would
have been equally bright with any during the whole Operation.

The following Remark deserves Attention. In Bodies that have been
digested the Spirits ascend first; whereas in Charges not digested, the
Phlegm ascends before the Spirits. The Reason of this is very plain and
natural.

In Substances previously digested, the Action of the Fire no sooner
causes the Matter in the Alembic to boil, than the Spirits, being the
most volatile Parts, detach themselves, and ascend into the Head of the
Alembic. But when the Matter to be distilled has not undergone a proper
Digestion, the Spirits being intangled in the Phlegm, are less disposed
to ascend, till the Phlegm itself separates, and gives them room to fly
upward. The Phlegm being aqueous rises first: This is more particularly
observable in Spices. I am, however, inclined to believe, that were the
Operation performed in an Alembic, whose Head was at a great Distance
from the Surface of the Charge, they would not ascend high enough to
come over the Helm, but fall back again by their own Gravity, and by
that means leave the Spirits at Liberty to ascend. But in the common
Refrigatory Alembic this always happens.

If this Observation be not readily admitted, I appeal to Experience,
which I desire may be the Test of every thing I shall advance.

Another Observation, which has verified the above Assertion by
innumerable Instances, is, that in an extraordinary Run of Business,
when I had not time sufficient to digest the Substances, I used to
bruise them in a Mortar; but notwithstanding the Trituration, the
Phlegm first came over, and afterwards the Spirits. But I desire to be
understood, that I speak here only of the volatile Parts of the Plants
not drawn with vinous Spirits, but contained in a simple Water.

Another Remark I must add, and which I hope will be acceptable to
the Curious, as it has not yet been made public, though doubtless
the Observation has often occurred to others; it is this: That in
mixed Charges, consisting of Flowers, Fruits, and aromatic Plants,
put into the Alembic without a previous Digestion, the Spirits of the
Flowers ascend first; and notwithstanding the Mixture, they contracted
nothing of the Smell or Taste of the Fruits and Plants. Next after
the Spirits of the Flowers, those of the Fruits ascend, not in the
least impregnated with the Smell or Taste of either of the Flowers or
Plants. And in the last Place the Spirits of the Plants distil no less
neat than the former. Should this appear strange to any one, Experience
will convince him of the Truth.

Another Observation I have made on aromatic Herbs, is, that whether
they are, or are not digested; whether the Spirits or Phlegm ascend
first; the Spirits contain very little of the Taste and Smell of the
Plants from whence they were extracted; and I have always been obliged
to put to these Spirits a greater or lesser Quantity of the Phlegm, in
order to give the Spirits I had drawn the Taste of an aromatic Odour of
the Plants; the Phlegm containing the greatest Quantity of both.

This Observation I insert as of great Use to those who practice
Distillation.

As the Term Digestion often occurs in this Essay, I cannot avoid
pointing out its Advantages, and even shew the Necessity of using it in
several Circumstances.

Substances are said to be in Digestion, when they are infused in a
Menstruum, over a very slow Fire. This Preparation is often necessary
in Distillation; for it tends to open the Bodies, and thereby free the
Spirits from their Confinements, whereby they are the better enabled
to ascend.

Cold Digestions are the best; those made by Fire, or in hot Materials,
diminish the Quality of the Goods, as some Part, as the most volatile,
will be lost.

In order to procure Essences, the Bodies must be prepared by Digestion.
It is even of absolute Necessity for extracting the Spirits and
Essences of Spices.




                              CHAP. XIV.

                _Of the proper Season for Distilling._


Flowers of all Kinds must be distilled in their proper Seasons. To
begin with the Violet. Its Colour and Smell can only be extracted when
it is in its greatest Vigour, which is not at its first Appearance, nor
when it begins to decay. _April_ is the Month in which it is in its
greatest Perfection; the Season being never so forward in _March_, as
to give the Violet its whole Fragrancy.

The same must be observed of all other Flowers. And let them be
gathered at the hottest Time of the Day; the Odour and Fragrancy of
Flowers being then in their greatest Perfection.

The same Observation holds good, with regard to Fruits; to which
must be added, that they are the finest, and of the most beautiful
Colour, especially those from whence Tinctures are drawn; they must
be free from all Defects, as the Goods would by that Means be greatly
detrimented.

Berries and Aromatics may be distilled at any Season, all that is
necessary being a good Choice. But in this Distillers are sometimes
mistaken, as may easily happen without a very accurate Knowledge. We
shall therefore, in the Sequel, lay down more particular Directions for
making a proper Choice of Materials.




                               CHAP. XV.

                    _Of the Filtration of Liquors._


Filtration consists in passing Liquors thro’ some porous Substance, in
order to free them from those Particles which obscure their Brightness.

Nothing is finer than a Liquor newly distilled; but the Syrup and
colouring Particles render it thick and opaque; in order, therefore,
to restore their Brightness they are filtrated, which is done by
passing them through Sand, Paper, Cloth, _&c._

All the Attention of the Distiller cannot in ordinary Operations always
prevent some aqueous Particles from rising with the Spirits, either in
the Beginning of the Process, in those Compositions where they ascend
first, or at the Conclusion when they rise last. As this is almost
unavoidable, so it is also sometimes necessary.

In distilling Flowers, or aromatic Plants, fresh gathered, the Phlegm
rises first; and this Part cannot be taken out of the Receiver without
depriving the Spirits of a considerable Part of their Fragrancy.

In distilling Spices, their Odour being more entangled, will remain in
the Alembic till Part of the Phlegm is drawn off. But when, instead of
these Substances, their Quintessences are used, the Necessity ceases.
But the Phlegm commonly causing a Cloudiness in the Liquor, it may
be rendered tolerably fine, by pouring it gently off by Inclination,
without the Trouble of Filtration the aqueous Particles, by their
Gravity, falling to the Bottom. But to render it entirely bright and
fine, put some Cotton in a Funnel, and pour the Liquor thro’ it, by
which means the aqueous Particles will be retained in the Cotton. You
must however remember to cover the Top of the Funnel, to prevent the
most volatile Parts of the Spirits from evaporating.




                              CHAP. XVI.

                _Of the Distillation of Malt Spirits._


The Wash, or Liquor being prepared by Brewing and Fermentation, as
directed in the first and second Chapters of this Treatise, the Still
is to be charged with it, and worked off with a pretty brisk Fire. But
it should be observed, that the only Apparatus used in this Process, is
the Alembic with a Refrigeratory, as represented in _Fig. 1._

The Wash being of a mucilaginous Nature, a particular Management is
necessary to prevent its burning, and cause it to work kindly in the
Still: If it should happen to be burnt in the Operation, the Spirit
will have a most disagreeable Flavour, which can hardly ever be
removed; and therefore to prevent this ill Effect, the Wash should be
made dilute or thin, the Fire well regulated, and the whole kept in
a continual Agitation during the whole Process. The most judicious
Distillers always take care to have their Wash sufficiently diluted,
and constantly find their Spirit the purer for it. With regard to
the Fire, it may be easily kept regular by a constant Attendance,
and observing never to stir it hastily, or throw on fresh Fuel; and
the stirring of the Liquor in the Still is to be effected by Means
of a Paddle, or Bar kept in the Liquor till it just begins to boil,
which is the Time for luting on the Head; and after which there is
no great Danger, but from the improper Management of the Fire: This
is the common Way; but it is no easy Matter to hit the exact Time,
and the doing it either too late, or too soon, is attended with great
Inconvenience, so that several have discovered other Methods; some
put more solid Bodies into the the Still with the Wash; others place
some proper Matter at the Bottom and Sides of the Still, which are the
Places where the Fire acts with the greatest Force.

The Use of the Paddle would, however, answer better than either of
these Methods, could it be continued during the whole Time the Still
is working; and this may be done by the following Method: Let a short
Tube of Iron or Copper be soldered in the Center of the Still-head, and
let a cross Bar be placed below in the same Head, with a Hole in the
Middle, corresponding to that at the Top; through both these let an
iron Pipe be carried down in the Still, and let an iron Rod be passed
through this with wooden Sweeps at its End; this Rod may be continually
worked by a Winch at the Still-head, and the Sweeps will continually
keep the Bottom and Sides scraped clean, the Interstices of the Tube
being all the time well crammed with Tow to prevent any Evaporation of
the Spirit.

The same Effect may, in a great Measure, be produced by a less
laborious Method, namely, by placing a Parcel of cylindrical Sticks
lengthways, so as to cover the whole Bottom of the Still, or by
throwing in a loose Parcel of Faggot Sticks at a Venture; for the
Action of the Fire below moving the Liquor, at the same time gives
Motion to the Sticks, making them act continually like a Parcel of
Stirrers upon the Bottom and Sides of the Still, which might, if
necessary, be furnished with Buttons and Loops, to prevent them from
starting. Some also use a Parcel of fine Hay laid upon the loose
Sticks, and secured down by two cross Poles, laid from Side to Side,
and in the same Manner fastened down with Loops. Care is to be taken in
this Case not to press the Hay against the Sides of the Still; for that
would scorch nearly as soon as the Wash itself; but the Sticks never
will: These are simple but effectual Contrivances, and in point of
Elegance, they may be improved at Pleasure.

There is another Inconvenience attending the distilling of Malt Spirit,
which is, when all the Bottoms, or gross mealy Fœculence is put into
the Still along with the Liquor, the thinner Part of the Wash going off
in Form of Spirit; the mealy Mass grows by Degrees more and more stiff,
so as to scorch towards the latter Part of the Operation. The best
Method of remedying this is to have a Pipe with a Stop-cock, leading
from the upper Part of the Worm-tub into the Still; so that upon a
half, or a quarter Turn, it may continually supply a little Stream of
hot Water, in the same Proportion as the Spirit runs off, by which
Means the Danger of scorching is avoided, and the Operation, at the
same time, not in the least retarded.

In _Holland_, the Malt Distillers work all their Wash thick, with
the whole Body of Meal among it; yet they are so careful in keeping
their Stills clean, and so regular and nice in the Management of their
Fires, that though they use no Artifice at all on this Head, only to
charge the Still while it is hot and moist, they very rarely have the
Misfortune to scorch, except now and then in the Depth of Winter.
When such an Accident has once happened in a Still, they are extremely
careful to scrape, scrub and scour off the Remains of the burnt Matter,
otherwise they find the same Accident very liable to happen again
in the same Place. But beyond all the other Methods in Use on this
Occasion, would be the working the Stills not by a dry Heat, but in
a _Balneum Mariæ_, which might possibly be so contrived by the Bason
being large, and capable of working a great many stills at once, as to
be extremely worth the Proprietor’s while in all respects.

Another Requisite to be observed is, that the Water in the Worm-tub be
kept cool; this may be affected, by placing in the middle of the Tub a
wooden Pipe or Gutter, about three Inches square within, reaching from
the Top almost to the Bottom; by this Contrivance cold Water may, as
often as necessary, be conveyed to the Bottom of the Worm-tub, and the
hot Water at the Top forced either over the Sides of the Tub, or, which
is better, through a leaden Pipe of moderate Size, called a Waste-pipe,
soldered into the Top of the Tub, and extended to the Gutter formed to
carry away the Water.




                              CHAP. XVII.

              _Of the Distillation of Molosses Spirits._


The Spirit distilled from Molosses or Treacle, is very clean or pure.
It is made from common Treacle dissolved in Water, and fermented in the
same Manner as the Wash for the common Malt Spirit.

But if some particular Art is not used in Distilling this Spirit, it
will not prove so vinous as Malt Spirit, but more flat and less pungent
and acid, though otherwise much cleaner tasted, as its essential Oil
is of a less offensive Flavour. Therefore, if good fresh Wine-lees,
abounding in Tartar, be added and duly fermented with the Molosses, the
Spirit will acquire a much greater Vinosity and Briskness, and approach
much nearer to the Nature of foreign Spirits.

Where the Molosses Spirit is brought to the common Proof Strength, if
it be found not to have a sufficient Vinosity, it will be very proper
to add some good dulcified Spirit of Nitre; and if the Spirit be clean
worked, it may, by this Addition only, be made to pass on ordinary
Judges for _French_ Brandy.

Great Quantities of this Spirit are used in adulterating foreign
Brandy, Rum and Arrac. Much of it is also used alone in making
Cherry-Brandy, and other Drams by Infusion; in all which many, and
perhaps with Justice, prefer it to foreign Brandies.

Molosses, like other Spirits, is entirely colourless when first
extracted; but Distillers always give it, as nearly as possible, the
Colour of foreign Spirits; the Methods of performing which we shall
explain in a subsequent Chapter.




                             CHAP. XVIII.

 _Of the Nature of Brandies, and Method of Distilling them in_ France.


The general Method of distilling Brandies in _France_ need not be
formally described, as it differs in nothing from that commonly
practised here in working from Wash or Molosses; nor are they in the
least more cleanly, or exact in the Operation.

They only observe more particularly to throw a little of the natural
Lee into the Still, along with the Wine, as finding this gives their
Spirit the Flavour, for which it is generally admired abroad.

But though Brandy is extracted from Wine, Experience tells us, that
there is a great Difference in Grapes from which the Wine is made.
Every Soil, every Climate, every kind of Grapes varies with regard to
the Quantity and Quality of Spirits extracted from them. There are some
Grapes which are only fit for eating; others for drying; as those of
_Damascus_, _Corinth_, _Provence_, and _Avignon_; but not fit to make
Wine.

Some Wines very proper for Distillation, others much less so. The
Wines of _Languedoc_ and _Provence_ afford a great deal of Brandy by
Distillation, when the Operation is made in their full Strength: The
_Orleans_ Wines, and those of _Blois_ afford yet more; but the best
are those of the Territories of _Cogniac_ and of _Andaye_, which are
however in the Number of those the least drank in _France_. Whereas
those of _Burgundy_ and of _Champaign_, though of a very fine Flavour,
are improper, because they yield but very little in Distillation.

It must also be farther observed, that all the Wines for Distillation,
as those of _Spain_, the _Canaries_, of _Alicant_, of _Cyprus_, of St.
_Perés_, of _Toquet_, of _Grave_, of _Hungary_, and others of the same
kind, yield very little Brandy by Distillation; and consequently would
cost the Distiller considerably more than he could sell it for. What is
drawn from them is indeed very good, always retaining the saccharine
Quality, and rich Flavour of the Wine from whence it is drawn; but as
it grows old, this Flavour often grows aromatic, and is not agreeable
to all Palates.

Hence we see, that Brandies always differ, according as they are
extracted from different Species of Grapes. Nor would there be so
great a Similarity as there is between the different kinds of _French_
Brandies, were the strongest Wines used for this Purpose: But this
is rarely the Case, the weakest and lowest-flavoured Wines only are
distilled for their Spirit, or such as prove absolutely unfit for any
other Use.

A large Quantity of Brandies is distilled in _France_ during the
Time of the Vintage; for all those poor Grapes that prove unfit for
Wine, are usually first gathered, pressed, their Juice fermented,
and directly distilled. This rids their Hands of their poor Wines at
once, and leaves their Casks empty for the Reception of better. It is
a general Rule with them not to distil any Wine, that will fetch any
Price as Wine; for, in this State, the Profits upon them are vastly
greater than when reduced to Brandies. This large Stock of small Wines,
with which they are almost over-run in _France_, sufficiently accounts
for their making such vast Quantities of Brandy in _France_, more than
other Countries, which lie in warmer Climates, and are much better
adapted to the Production of Grapes.

Nor is this the only Fund of their Brandies; for all the Wine that
turns eager, is also condemned to the Still; and, in short, all that
they can neither export, nor consume at home, which amounts to a large
Quantity; since much of the Wine, laid in for their Family Provision,
is so poor, as not to keep during the Time in spending.

Hence many of our _English_ Spirits, with proper Management, are
convertible into Brandies, that shall hardly be distinguished from the
foreign in many Respects, provided this Operation be neatly performed.
And, in particular, how far a Cyder Spirit, and a Crab Spirit, may,
even from the first Extraction, be made to resemble the fine and thin
Brandies of _France_, we would recommend to those Distillers, whose
Skill and Curiosity prompts them to Undertakings condemned by those who
only work mechanically, and scorn to deviate from the beaten Tract,
tho’ they have the fairest Prospect of acquiring Profit to themselves,
and a lasting Emolument to their Country.




                              CHAP. XIX.

                     _Of the Distillation of Rum._


Rum differs from what we simply call Sugar Spirit, as it contains
more of the natural Flavour, or essential Oil of the Sugar Cane; a
great deal of raw Juice, and even Parts of the Cane itself being often
fermented in the Liquor, or Solution, of which the Rum is prepared.

Hence we see from whence Rum derives its Flavour; namely, from the Cane
itself. Some, indeed, are of Opinion, that the unctuous or oily Flavour
of the Rum proceeds from the large Quantity of Fat used in boiling
the Sugar. This Fat, indeed, if coarse, will give a stinking Flavour
to the Spirit in our Distillations of the Sugar Liquor, or Wash, from
our refining Sugar-houses; but this is nothing like the Flavour of the
Rum; which, as we have already observed, is the Effect of the natural
Flavour of the Cane.

Great Quantities of Rum are made at _Jamaica_, _Barbadoes_, _Antigua_,
and other Sugar Islands: The Method of making it is this:

When a sufficient Stock of the Materials is got together, they add
Water to them, and ferment them in the common Method, though the
Fermentation is always carried on very slowly at first; because at
the Beginning of the Season for making Rum in the Islands, they want
Yeast, or some other Ferment to make it work; but after this, they,
by Degrees, procure a sufficient Quantity of the Ferment, which
rises up as a Head to the Liquor in the Operation; and thus they are
able afterwards to ferment, and make their Rum with a great deal of
Expedition, and in very large Quantities.

When the Wash is fully fermented, or to a due Degree of Acidity, the
Distillation is carried on in the common Way, and the Spirit is made
up Proof; though sometimes it is reduced to a much greater Degree of
Strength, nearly approaching to that of Alcohol, or Spirit of Wine; and
it is then called double distilled Rum.

It would be easy to rectify the Spirit, and bring it to a much greater
Degree of Purity than we usually find it to be of; for it brings over
in the Distillation a large Quantity of the Oil; and this is often so
disagreeable, that the Rum must be suffered to lie by a long time to
mellow before it can be used; whereas, if well rectified, its Flavour
would be much less, and consequently much more agreeable to the Palate.

The best State to keep Rum, both for Exportation, and other Uses, is
doubtless that of Alcohol, or rectified Spirits. In this manner, it
would be contained in half the Bulk it usually is, and might be let
down to the common proof Strength with Water when necessary: For the
common Use of making Punch, it would likewise serve much better in the
State of Alcohol; as the Taste would be cleaner, and the Strength might
always be regulated to a much greater Degree of Exactness than in the
ordinary Way.

If the Business of rectifying Rum was more nicely managed, it seems a
very practicable Scheme to throw out so much of the Oil, as to reduce
it to the fine light State of a clear Spirit, but lightly impregnated
with the Oil; in this State it would nearly resemble Arrac, as is
easily proved by mixing a very small Quantity of it with a tasteless
Spirit; for it then bears a very near Resemblance to Arrac in Flavour.




                               CHAP. XX.

                          _Of Sugar-Spirit._


We mean by a Sugar-Spirit, that extracted from the Washings, Scumings,
Dross, and Waste of a Sugar-baker’s Refining-house.

These recrementitious, or drossy Parts of the Sugar are to be diluted
with Water, fermented in the same manner as Molosses or Wash, and then
distilled in the common Method. And if the Operation be carefully
performed, and the Spirit well rectified, it may be mixed with foreign
Brandies, and even Arrac in a large Proportion, to great Advantage; for
this Spirit will be found superior to that extracted from Treacle, and
consequently more proper for these Uses.




                              CHAP. XXI.

                         _Of Raisin-Spirits._


BY Raisin-Spirits, we understand, that extracted from Raisins, after a
proper Fermentation.

In order to extract this Spirit, the Raisins must be infused in a
proper Quantity of Water, and fermented in the manner described in the
Chapter on Fermentation. When the Fermentation is completed, the whole
is to be thrown into the Still, and the Spirit extracted by a strong
Fire.

The Reason why we here direct a strong Fire, is, because by that
Means a greater Quantity of the essential Oil will come over the Helm
with the Spirit, which will render it much fitter for the Distiller’s
Purpose; for this Spirit is generally used to mix with common Malt
Goods; and it is surprizing how far it will go in this Respect, ten
Gallons of it being often sufficient to give a determining Flavour, and
agreeable Vinosity to a whole Piece of Malt Spirits.

It is therefore well worth the Distiller’s while to endeavour at
improving the common Method of extracting Spirits from Raisins; and
perhaps the following Hint may merit Attention.

When the Fermentation is completed, and the Still charged with
fermented Liquor, as above directed, let the whole be drawn off
with as brisk a Fire as possible; but instead of the Cask or Can,
generally used by our _English_ Distillers for a Receiver, let a large
Glass, called by Chemists, a Separating-Glass, be placed under the
Nose of the Worm, and a common Receiver applied to the Spout of the
Separating-Glass; by this means the essential Oil will swim upon the
Top of the Spirit, or rather low Wine, in the Separating-Glass, and may
be easily preserved at the End of the Operation.

The Use of this limpid essential Oil is well known to Distillers; for
in this resides the whole Flavour, and consequently may be used to
the greatest Advantage in giving that distinguishing Taste, and true
Vinosity, to the common Malt-Spirits.

After the Oil is separated from the low Wine, the Liquor may be
rectified in _Balneum Mariæ_ into a pure and almost tasteless Spirit,
and therefore well adapted to make the finest compound Cordials, or to
imitate or mix with the finest _French_ Brandies, Arracs, &c.

In the same Manner a Spirit may be obtained from Cyder. But as its
particular Flavour is not so desirable as that obtained from Raisins,
it should be distilled in a more gentle Manner, and carefully rectified
in the Manner we shall shew in the Chapter on Rectification; by which
Means a very pure and almost insipid Spirit will be obtained, which
may be used to very great Advantage in imitating the best Brandies of
_France_, or in making the finest compound Waters or Cordials.




                              CHAP. XXII.

                             _Of Arracs._


What is properly meant by the Term Arracs, are Spirits extracted from
the fermented Juice of certain Trees common in the _East-Indies_,
particularly those of the Cocoa, or Palm-tree. The whole Process of
making Arrac, is performed in the following Manner.

In order to procure the vegetable Juice for this Operation, the Person
provides himself with a sufficient Number of small earthen Pots, with
Bellies and Necks, resembling our common glass Bottles; a Number of
these he fastens to his Girdle, or to a Belt across his Shoulders, and
climbs up the tall Trunk of the Cocoa tree: Having reached the Boughs
of the Tree, he cuts off with a Knife certain small Buds, or Buttons,
applying immediately to the Wound one of his Bottles, and fastens it
with a String to the Bough. In this Manner he proceeds till he has
fixed his whole Number of Bottles, which serve as Receivers to the
Juice distilling from the Wounds. This Operation is generally performed
in the Evening, a greater Quantity of Juice flowing from the Tree in
the Night than in the Day. The Bottles are next Morning taken off,
and the Liquor emptied with a proper Vessel, where it spontaneously
ferments. As soon as the Fermentation is completed, the Liquor is
thrown into the Still, and drawn down to a low Wine; but so very poor
and dilute, that they are obliged to rectify it in another Still,
to that weak kind of Proof Spirit, we generally see it; for though
it appears Bubble-Proof, it rarely contains more than a sixth, and
sometimes only an eighth of Alcohol, all the rest being no more than
an acidulated Water, which might be supplied from any common Spring.
Why Arrac appears Bubble-Proof, when in reality so far below what we
mean by Proof, is not so great a Mystery, as at first Sight it appears
to be; for this kind of Proof is entirely owing to a certain Tenacity
of the Parts of the Liquor, or to the particular Property of the Oil
incorporated in the Spirit; as we shall abundantly shew in a subsequent
Chapter.

From this Account of Arrac, it should seem no very difficult Matter to
imitate it here. And, perhaps, the whole Difficulty lies in procuring
a pure and insipid Spirit; for it is ridiculous to attempt it with our
common Malt-Spirit. With regard to the Flavour of the Arrac, it may be
effectually imitated by some essential Oils easily procurable.

Hence we see of what prodigious Advantage a pure and insipid Spirit
would be of to Distillers, and consequently the great Encouragement
there is to attempt the Discovery. Perhaps a Spirit of this kind may be
extracted from Sugar properly refined. The Hint is worth prosecuting;
and the Writer of this Essay, from repeated Experiments, is abundantly
convinced that the Thing is practicable. Had he entirely succeeded,
he would readily have communicated the Whole for the Benefit of his
Country; but is now obliged to defer, to some future Opportunity, the
Result of his Enquiries. In the mean Time, he would recommend the
Prosecution of this Hint to those Distillers, who endeavour to improve
their Art, and advance it nearer to Perfection.

Since Arrac is a Spirit extracted from the Juice of the Cocoa tree, it
might perhaps be worth enquiring how nearly it might be imitated by
fermenting and distilling the Juices of the Birch and Sycamore-trees.
We should by this Means obtain an _English_ Arrac; and, perhaps, a
Spirit equal in Flavour to that imported from _Batavia_.

When the Cask, in which the Arrac is imported happens to be decayed;
or the Liquor touches any Nails, or other Iron, it dissolves Part of
it, and at the same time extracts the resinous Parts of the Oak, by
which means the whole Liquor in the Cask acquires an inky Colour. In
order to whiten and clarify Arrac, which has contracted this Colour, a
large Quantity of new or skimmed Milk must be put into the Cask, and
the whole beat together, as Vintners do to whiten their brown Wines; by
this means the inky Colour will be absorbed by the Milk, and fall with
it to the Bottom, so that the greatest Part of the Arrac may be drawn
off fine; and the Remainder procured in the same Condition by being
filtrated through a conical Flannel Bag.




                             CHAP. XXIII.

                          _Of Rectification._


There are several Methods of performing this Operation; though some,
and indeed those in general practiced by our Distillers, hardly deserve
the Name; because, instead of rectifying, that is freeing the Spirit
from its essential Oil and Phlegm, they alter the natural Flavour of
the Spirit that comes over in the Operation.

The principal Business of Rectification is to separate the Spirit
from the essential Oil of the Ingredient, which is very apt to adhere
strongly to the Spirit. And in order to this, Care should be taken in
the first Distillation; that is, the Spirit, especially that from Malt,
should be drawn by a gentle Fire, by which means great Part of the
essential Oil will be kept from mixing with the Spirit; for Experience
has abundantly proved, that it is much easier to keep asunder, than to
separate them when once mixed.

But as it is almost impossible to draw low Wines without the Spirit
being in some Measure impregnated with the essential Oil, it is
absolutely necessary to be acquainted with some Methods of separating
the Spirit from the Oil, and also of freeing it from its Phlegm. The
best Methods of doing this to Perfection, are Re-distillation and
Percolation.

In order to rectify low Wines, they should be put into a tall Body or
Alembic, and gently distilled in _Balneum Mariæ_; by this means a
large Proportion, both of the Oil and Phlegm will remain in the Body.
But if the Spirit should be found, after this Operation, to contain
some of the essential Oil, it must be let down with fair Water, and
re-distilled in the same gentle Manner. And thus it may be brought
to any Degree of Purity; especially if in the working the Spirit be
suffered to fall into a proper Quantity of clear Water, and the Spirit
afterwards rectified to the Height proposed. The same Method should be
used in freeing Proof Spirit, or even Alcohol, from this Oil; namely,
by letting it down with clean Water to the Strength of low Wines,
and re-distilling it in _Balneum Mariæ_. But it must be remembered,
that it is much more difficult to cleanse Alcohol, or Proof-Spirit
than low Wines, because the Oil is more intimately mixed with the two
former than with the latter. This Oil may however be separated from
Proof-Spirit, &c. by the Method already proposed, especially if it be
previously filtrated through Paper, thick Flannel, Sand, Stone, _&c._

But this Method, though it effectually answers the Intention, is
generally rejected by our Distillers, because of the Slowness of the
Operation; and others substituted in its stead, though instead of
freeing the Spirit from the Oil, they only abolish the natural Flavour
of the Spirit, and make a more intimate Mixture between the Particles
of the Spirit, and those of the essential Oil.

It is impossible to enumerate all the Methods practised by Distillers,
as almost every one pretends to have a secret Nostrum for this Purpose.
The principal Methods in use for rectifying Malt-Spirits, are however
reducible to three, namely, by fixed alcaline Salts, by acid Spirits
mixed with alcaline Salts, and by saline Bodies, and flavouring
Additions.

The Method of rectifying by alcaline Salts is thus performed. To every
Piece of Proof Spirit, add fourteen Pounds of dry Salt of Tartar,
fixed Nitre, or calcined Tartar; lute on the Head, and distil, by a
gentle Heat, but be very careful to leave out the Faints. By this
Method a large Proportion of the fœtid Oil will be left in the Still;
and what comes over with the Spirit will be greatly attenuated. But
this Operation is generally performed in a very different manner; for,
instead of distilling the Spirit in a gentle and equable manner, the
Still is worked in its full Force; by which means the Oil, which should
have remained in the Still, is driven over, and intimately mixed with
the Spirit; and, consequently, the whole Operation frustrated, and the
Spirit rendered much harder to cleanse than it was before.

But even when the Operation is performed according to the Rules of
Art, it is far from being perfect; for it is well known, that Part
of the fixed Salts become volatile in the Operation, pass over the
Helm, and intimately mixes with the essential Oil still contained in
the Spirits: by this means the Oil becomes more perfectly united with
the Spirits, and consequently much harder to be separated by repeated
Distillations. Nor is this all, for the Still being worked in its full
Force, the bitter Oil of the Malt, formed into a kind of liquid Soap in
the Still, by means of the alcaline Salt, is brought over the Helm with
the Faints, and suffered to mix with the Spirit, whereby it is rendered
almost as nauseous and ill-tasted as before the Operation. Besides, if
this Operation were performed in its utmost Perfection, it would never
answer the Intention; for the alcaline Salt destroys the Vinosity of
the Spirit; and consequently deprives it of one of its most valuable
Properties. Our Distillers are well acquainted with this Defect in the
Operation, and endeavour to supply it by an Addition of Acids. This is
what we call the second Method by Alcalies and Acids.

The Operation of rectifying by the Method of fixed Alcalies and Acids
is the same as that above described; the Spirit is drawn over from
fixed Alcalies as before; but in order to mortify the Alcali in the
Spirit, and restore its Vinosity, a proper Quantity of some acid
Spirit is added. Various kinds of Acids are used on this Occasion; but
principally those of the mineral Kind, because of their Cheapness;
as Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of Nitre, Oil of Sulphur, and the like. We
would, however, caution a young Distiller from being too busy with
these corrosive Acids, the sulphurous Spirit of Vitriol, dulcified
Spirit of Nitre, or Mr. _Boyle_’s acid Spirit of Wine well rectified,
will much better answer his Purpose.

The third Method of Rectification is that by saline Bodies, and
flavouring Ingredients. There is no Difference in the Operation between
this and the two foregoing Methods; fixed alcaline Salts, common Salt
decrepitated or dried, calcined Vitriol, Sandiver, Allum, _&c._ is put
into the Still with the low Wines, and the Spirit drawn over as before.
When the Quantity is drawn off, the flavouring Ingredients are added
to give the Spirit the Flavour intended. But as the Spirit is not by
this means rendered sufficiently pure, the disagreeable Flavour of the
Spirit generally overpowers that of the Ingredients, whereby the whole
Intention is either destroyed, or a compound Flavour produced, very
different from that intended.

Some Distillers, instead of alcaline Salts, use quick Lime in
rectifying their Malt Spirit; this Ingredient cleanses and dephlegmates
the Spirit considerably; but like that rectified from alcaline Salts,
it requires an alcaline Disposition, and also an nidorous Flavour.
Acids, therefore, are as necessary to be mixed with those Spirits
rectified with quick Lime, as with those rectified with an alcaline
Salt. If Chalk, calcined and well purified animal Bones, _&c._ were
used instead of quick Lime, the Spirit would have a much less alcaline
or nidorous Flavour; and, consequently, the flavouring Ingredients
might be added to it with more Success than can be expected from a
Spirit rectified from alcaline Salts.

But, perhaps, if neutral Salts were used instead of the alcaline ones,
the Spirit might be rendered pure, without contracting an alcaline
Flavour; soluble Tartar might be used for this Purpose, though the
Spirit acquires from hence a little saponaceous Flavour. Dr. _Cox_ has
mentioned another Method for this Purpose, namely, to deprive the
volatile Salts of their Oil, by rendering them neutral with Spirit of
Salt, and afterwards subliming them with Salt of Tartar: The Acid may
be varied if the Spirit of Salt should not be found so well adapted
to the Purpose as could be wished: But fine dry Sugar seems the best
adapted to the Purpose of rectifying these Spirits; as it readily
unites with the essential Oil, detains and fixes it, without imparting
any urinous, alcaline, or other nauseous Flavour to the Spirits
rectified upon it.

Thus have I considered the principal Methods used by our Distillers
in rectifying their Spirits; and shall conclude this Chapter with
remarking, that there is no other Way of rectifying to Perfection
besides what we first laid down, namely, by gentle Distillation.
But then it must be remembered, that the whole Process must be of a
Piece: We mean, that the first Distillation from the Wash must be
performed in a gentle manner; for otherwise the essential Oil will be
so intimately blended with the Spirit, as not to be easily separated
by Re-distillation. Another good Property attending this Method is
its Universality; all kinds of Spirits, from whatever Ingredients
extracted, require Rectification; and this is adapted to all kinds.




                              CHAP. XXIV.

                    _Of the Flavouring of Spirits._


We have observed in the preceding Chapter, that the common Method of
rectifying Spirits from alcaline Salts, destroys their Vinosity, and
in its stead introduces an urinous or lixivious Taste. But as it is
absolutely necessary to restore, or at least to substitute in its room
some Degree of Vinosity, several Methods have been proposed, and a
Multitude of Experiments performed, in order to discover this great
_Desideratum_: But none has succeeded equal to the Spirit of Nitre; and
accordingly this Spirit, either strong or dulcified, has been used by
most Distillers to give an agreeable Vinosity to their Spirits.

Several Difficulties however occur in the Method of using it; the
principal of which is, its being apt to quit the Liquor in a short
Time, and consequently depriving the Liquor of that Vinosity it was
intended to give. In order to remove this Difficulty, and prevent
the Vinosity from quitting the Goods, the dulcified Spirit of Nitre,
which is much better than the strong Spirit, should be prepared by a
previous Digestion continued for some Time with Alcohol; the longer
the Digestion is continued the more intimately will they be blended,
and the Compound rendered the milder and softer.

After a proper Digestion, the dulcified Spirit should be mixed with the
Brandy, by which Means the Vinosity will be intimately blended with the
Goods, and disposed not to fly off for a very considerable Time.

No general Rule can be given for the Quantity of this mineral Acid
requisite to be employed, because different Proportions of it are
necessary in different Spirits. It should, however, be carefully
adverted to, that though a small Quantity of it will undoubtedly give
an agreeable Vinosity resembling that naturally found in the fine
subtile Spirits drawn from Wines, yet an over large Dose of it will
not only cause a disagreeable Flavour, but also render the whole
Design abortive, by discovering the Imposition. Those, therefore, who
endeavour to cover a foul Taste in Goods by large Doses of dulcified
Spirit of Nitre, will find themselves deceived.

But the best, and indeed the only Method of imitating _French_ Brandies
to Perfection, is by an essential Oil of Wine; this being the very
thing that gives the _French_ Brandies their Flavour. It must,
however, be remembered, that in order to use even this Ingredient to
Advantage, a pure, tasteless Spirit must be first procured; for it is
ridiculous to expect that this essential Oil should be able to give the
agreeable Flavour of _French_ Brandies, to our fulsome Malt Spirit,
already loaded with its own nauseous Oil, or strongly impregnated with
a lixivious Taste from the alcaline Salts used in Rectification. How a
pure insipid Spirit may be obtained has been already considered in some
of the preceding Chapters; it only therefore remains to shew the Method
of procuring this essential Oil of Wine, which is this:

Take some Cakes of dry Wine Lees, such as are used by our Hatters,
dissolve them in six or eight times their Weight of Water, distil the
Liquor with a slow Fire, and separate the Oil by the Separating Glass;
reserving for the nicest Uses that only which comes over first, the
succeeding Oil being coarser and more resinous.

Having procured this fine Oil of Wine, it may be mixed into a
Quintessence with pure Alcohol; by which Means it may be preserved a
long time fully possessed of all its Flavour and Virtues; but without
such Management, it will soon grow resinous and rancid.

When a fine essential Oil of Wine is thus procured, and also a pure and
insipid Spirit, _French_ Brandies may be imitated to Perfection with
regard to the Flavour. It must, however, be remembered, and carefully
adverted to, that the essential Oil be drawn from the same sort of
Lees, as the Brandy to be imitated was procured from; we mean, in
order to imitate _Coniac_ Brandy, it will be necessary to distil the
essential Oil from _Coniac_ Lees; and the same for any other kind of
Brandy. For as different Brandies have different Flavours; and as these
Flavours are owing entirely to the essential Oil of the Grape, it would
be preposterous to endeavour to imitate the Flavour of _Coniac_ Brandy,
with an essential Oil procured from the Lees of _Bourdeaux_ Wine.

When the Flavour of the Brandy is well imitated by a proper Dose of the
essential Oil, and the Whole reduced into one simple and homogeneous
Fluid, other Difficulties are still behind: The Flavour, though the
essential Part, is not however the only one; the Colour, the Proof and
the Softness must be also regarded, before a Spirit, that perfectly
resembles Brandy, can be procured. With regard to the Proof, it may
be easily hit, by using a Spirit rectified above Proof; which, after
being intimately mixed with the essential Oil of Wine, may be let down
to a proper Standard by fair Water. And the Softness may in a great
Measure be obtained by distilling and rectifying the Spirit with a
gentle Fire; and what is wanting of this Criterion in the Liquor, when
first made, will be supplied by Time; for it must be remembered, that
it is Time alone that gives this Property to _French_ Brandies; they
being at first, like our Spirits, acrid, foul, and fiery. But with
regard to the Colour a particular Method is necessary to imitate it to
Perfection: And how this may be done shall be considered in the next
Chapter.




                              CHAP. XXV.

                _Of the Methods of colouring Spirits._


The Art of colouring Spirits owes its Rise to Observations on foreign
Brandies. A Piece of _French_ Brandy that has acquired by Age a great
Degree of Softness and Ripeness is observed, at the same time, to
have acquired a yellowish brown Colour; and hence our Distillers have
endeavoured to imitate this Colour in such Spirits as are intended to
pass for _French_ Brandy. And in order to do this a great Variety of
Experiments has been made on various Substances, in order to discover
a direct and sure Method of imitating this Colour to Perfection. But,
in order to do this, it is necessary to know from whence the _French_
Brandies themselves acquire their Colour; for till we have made this
Discovery, it will be in vain to attempt an Imitation; because, if
we should be able to imitate exactly the Colour, which is indeed
no difficult Task, the Spirit will not stand the Test of different
Experiments, unless the Colour in both be produced from the same
Ingredient.

This being undeniably the Case, let us try if we cannot discover this
mighty Secret; the Ingredient from whence the _French_ Brandy acquires
its Colour.

We have already observed, that this Colour is only found in such
Brandies as have acquired a mellow Ripeness by Age; it is therefore not
given it by the Distiller, but has gained it by lying long in the Cask.
Consequently, the Ingredient from whence this Colour is extracted, is
no other than the Wood of the Cask, and the Brandy in reality is become
a dilute Tincture of Oak.

The common Experiment used to prove the Genuineness of _French_ Brandy
proves, that this Opinion is well founded. The Experiment is this:
They pour into a Glass of Brandy a few Drops of a Solution of calcined
Vitriol of Iron in a diluted Spirit of Sulphur, or any other mineral
Acid, and the Whole turns of a blue Colour; in the same Manner, as we
make Ink of a Tincture of Galls and Vitriol.

Since, therefore, the Colour of _French_ Brandies is acquired from
the Oak of the Cask, it is no Difficulty to imitate it to Perfection.
A small Quantity of the Extract of Oak, or the Shavings of that Wood
properly digested, will furnish us with a Tincture capable of giving
the Spirit any Degree of Colour required. But it must be remembered,
that as the Tincture is extracted from the Cask by Brandy, that is
Alcohol and Water, it is necessary to use both in extracting the
Tincture; for each of these Menstruums dissolves different Parts of the
Wood. Let, therefore, a sufficient Quantity of Oak Shavings be digested
in strong Spirit of Wine; and also at the same Time other Oak Shavings
be digested in Water: And when the Liquors have acquired a strong
Tincture from the Oak, let both be poured off from the Shavings, into
different Vessels, and both placed over a gentle Fire till reduced to
the Consistence of Treacle. In this Condition, let the two Extracts
be intimately mixed together; which may be done effectually by adding
a small Quantity of Loaf Sugar, in fine Powder, and well rubbing the
Whole together. By this Means a liquid essential Extract of Oak will be
procured, and always ready to be used as Occasion shall require.

There are other Methods in Use for colouring Brandies; but the best,
besides the Extract of Oak above-mentioned, are common Treacle and
burnt Sugar.

The Treacle gives the Spirits a fine Colour, nearly resembling that
of _French_ Brandy; but as its Colour is but dilute, a large Quantity
must be used; this is not however attended with any bad Consequences;
for notwithstanding the Spirit is really weakened by this Addition, yet
the bubble Proof, the general Criterion of Spirits, is greatly mended
by the Tenacity imparted to the Liquor by the Treacle. The Spirit also
acquires from this Mixture a sweetish or luscious Taste, and a Fulness
in the Mouth; both which Properties render it very agreeable to the
Palates of the common People, who are, in fact, the principle Consumers
of these Spirits.

A much smaller Quantity of burnt Sugar than of Treacle will be
sufficient for colouring the same Quantity of Spirits; the Taste
is also very different; for, instead of the Sweetness imparted by
the Treacle, the Spirit acquires from the burnt Sugar an agreeable
Bitterness, and by that Means recommends itself to nicer Palates, which
are offended with a luscious Spirit. The burnt Sugar is prepared by
dissolving a proper Quantity of Sugar in a little Water, and scorching
it over the Fire till it acquires a black Colour.

Either of the above Ingredients, Treacle or burnt Sugar, will nearly
imitate the genuine Colour of old _French_ Brandy; but neither of them
will succeed, when put to the Test of the vitriolic Solution.

Thus have I traced the Subject of Distillation from its Origin; shewn
the Methods commonly made use of by Distillers, and pointed out
various Improvements, that might be introduced into this Art with
great Advantage; and shall conclude this Part with recommending the
several Hints to those Distillers who are desirous of improving their
Art, and proceeding on a rational Foundation, it being from such
only that Improvements are to be expected; for where the Operations
are constantly carried on in the same beaten Tract, it is in vain to
expect Improvements, unless Chance should be kind enough to throw that
in their Way, which a rational Theory would have easily led them to
discover.




                                   A
                            Complete System
                                  OF
                             DISTILLATION.


                               PART II.

         _Containing the Method of distilling Simple Waters._


The Instruments chiefly used in the Distillation of Simple Waters, are
of two Kinds, commonly called the _Hot Still_, or Alembic, and the
_Cold Still_; the former is represented in _Fig. 5._ and the latter in
_Fig. 10._

The Waters drawn by the cold Still from odoriferous Plants are much
more fragrant, and more fully impregnated with their Virtues than those
drawn by the hot Still, or Alembic; but the Operation is much more
slow and tedious by the former than the latter, so that very few care
to comply with it: And, therefore a Method has been invented, to avoid
the Tediousness of the one, and the Inconveniencies of the other. The
Method is this:

A Pewter Body is suspended in the Body of the Alembic, and the Head of
the Still fitted to the Pewter Body: Into this Body the Ingredients to
be distilled are put, the Alembic filled with Water, the Still Head
luted to the Pewter Body, and the Nose luted into the Worm of the
Refrigeratory or Worm.

The same Intention will be answered, by putting the Ingredients into a
Glass Alembic, and placing it in a Bath Heat, or _Balneum Mariæ_, as we
have before directed, Chap. XI.

By either of these Means, the Ingredients have greater Heat given them
than in the cold Still; and yet, by the Interposition of the Water, in
which the Vessel, containing them is placed, they are not so forcibly
acted upon by the Fire, as in the common Way of the hot Still. So that
all those Things which require a middle Way between the other; that is,
those Simples which are of a Texture between very volatile, and very
fixed, are treated very properly by this Method; but neither the very
odoriferous Simples, nor those whose Parts are very heavy and fixed,
can be treated this Way but to Disadvantage.

One of the greatest Advantages of this Contrivance is, that Waters so
drawn come over much cooler than from the hot Still; that is, they have
not so much of the Fire in them, as the Distillers term it; so that a
hot spicy Water, thus ordered, will taste as cool on the Palate when
just drawn, as it would, when drawn by the hot Still, after it had
acquired a considerable Age.




                               CHAP. I.

                 _Of Waters drawn by the cold Still._


The cold Still is much best adapted to draw off the Virtues of Simples,
which are valued for their fine Flavour when green, which is subject
to be lost in drying. For when we want to extract from Plants a Spirit
so light and volatile, as not to subsist in open Air any longer than
while the Plant continues in its Growth, it is certainly the best
Method to remove the Plant from its native Soil, into some proper
Instrument, where, as it dries, these volatile Parts can be collected
and preserved. And such an Instrument is what we call the cold Still,
where the drying of the Plant or Flower, is only forwarded by a
moderate Warmth, and all that rises is collected and preserved.

As the Method of performing the Operation by the cold Still, is the
very same, whatever Plant or Flower is used, the following Instance
of procuring a Water from Rosemary, will be abundantly sufficient to
instruct the young Practitioner in the manner of conducting the Process
in all Cases whatever.

Take Rosemary, fresh gathered, in its Perfection, with the Morning Dew
upon it, and lay it lightly and unbruised upon the Plate, or Bottom
of the Still. Cover the Plate with its conical Head, and apply a
Glass Receiver to the Nose of it. Make a small Fire of Charcoal under
the Plate, continuing it as long as any Liquor comes over into the
Receiver. When nothing more comes over, take off the Still Head, and
remove the Plant, putting fresh in its stead, and proceed as before;
continue to repeat the Operation successively, till a sufficient
Quantity of Water is procured. Let this distilled Water be kept at
Rest, in clean Bottles close stopped, for some Days in a cold Place; by
this Means it will become limpid, and powerfully impregnated with the
Taste and Smell of the Plant.

In this Water are contained the Liquor of Dew, consisting of its
own proper Parts, which are not without Difficulty separated from
the Plant, and cleave to it even in the drying. This Dew, also, by
sticking to the Outside, receives the liquid Parts of the Plant,
which being elaborated the Day before, and exhaling in the Night, are
hereby detained; so that they concrete together into one external
Liquid, which is often viscid, as appears in Manna, Honey, _&c._
This Water also contains the Fluid, which exhales from the Vessels
of the Rosemary, and which principally consists of simple Water, as
appears upon long standing in an open Vessel, when the Taste and Odour
vanishing, leave an insipid Water behind. Another Part of this Water
is that subtile, volatile Substance, which give the Plant its peculiar
Taste and Odour; for this the Senses discover in it; but what remains
after the Process is finished, scarce afford any thing thereof. The
same Water seems also to contain Seeds, or other little Bodies; which
in a certain Time usually grows into a kind of thin, whitish Weed,
suspended in the middle of the Water; and daily increasing or spreading
itself, becomes a Mucilage, which did not appear at first.

I have kept these Waters undisturbed in separate well closed Vessels,
and observed that in a Year’s Time, they began to appear thick, which
Thickness gradually increased every Year, till at length the Liquor
grew ropy and mucilaginous. Hence we see, that this Water contains the
elementary Water, and presiding Spirit of the Plant; a Spirit small
in Bulk, but rich in Virtues, and exhibiting the specific Smell and
Taste of the Subject. This Water, therefore, in exhaling, proves a
Vehicle to that Spirit, which contains in a small, subtile, extremely
volatile, and thence easily separable Substance, the particular Virtue
of the Plant, leaving the Remainder exhausted in this Respect: and
hence proceeds the medicinal Virtues of these Waters, which principally
depend upon their native Spirit. For this Spirit, in most Plants,
having a brisk Mobility, affects the Nerves, and raises the Spirits in
case of their Depression.

If the Vessel be close stopped, and set in a cool Place, the Waters
drawn by the cold still will retain their Virtues for a Year; but
if negligently kept, or any Crack should happen in the Glass, their
extremely volatile Spirit secretly flies off, and leaves the Water
vapid.

Hence we learn what it is that Plants lose by being dried in the
Summer-time; namely, the Water and Spirit we have been describing.
Hence we also know the Nature of that Fluid, which first rises from
Plants in Distillation, and what that Matter properly is in Plants,
that gives their peculiar Odour; that is, their presiding Spirit.
Lastly, we hence learn, in some measure at least, what those _Effluvia_
are, which principally in the Summer-Season, and in the open Air,
exhale from Vegetables; for it is highly probable, that these constant
Exhalations of Plants, especially in the Day-time, have a near
Agreement in their peculiar Nature, with the Liquor extracted by the
cold Still, though differing in this, that the Exhalation made from the
Parts is continually recruited by the Root; whilst by our Operation,
those Parts alone are collected, which are driven off from the Plant,
after being gathered, and no longer supplied with fresh Nourishment.




                               CHAP. II.

           _Of the Distilling Simple Waters by the Alembic._


The Plants designed for this Operation are to be gathered when their
Leaves are at full Growth, and a little before the Flowers appear, or,
at least, before the Seed comes on; because the Virtue of the Simple
expected in these Waters is often little, after the Seed or Fruit is
formed, at which Time Plants begin to languish: The Morning is best to
gather them in, because the volatile Parts are then condensed by the
Coldness of the Night, and kept in by the Tenacity of the Dew, not yet
exhaled by the Sun.

This is to be understood, when the Virtue of the distilled Water
resides principally in the Leaves of Plants; as it does in Mint,
Marjoram, Penny-royal, Rue, and many more; but the Case differs when
the aromatic Virtue is only found in the Flowers, as in Roses, Lillies
of the Valley, _&c._ in which Case we choose their flowery Parts,
whilst they smell the sweetest, and gather them before they are quite
opened, or begin to shed, the morning Dew still hanging on them.

In other Plants the Seeds are to be preferred, as in Anise, Caraway,
Cumin, _&c._ where the Herb and the Flower are indolent, and the whole
resides in the Seed alone, where it manifests itself by its remarkable
Fragrance, and aromatic Taste. We find that Seeds are more fully
possessed of this Virtue, when they arrive at perfect Maturity.

We must not omit that these desirable Properties are found only in
the Roots of certain Plants, as appears in Avens and in Orpine, whose
Roots smell like a Rose. Roots of this Kind should be gathered, for the
present Purpose, at that Time when they are richest in these Virtues;
which is generally at that Season of the Year, just before they begin
to sprout, when they are to be dug up in a Morning.

If the Virtues here required be contained in the Barks or Woods of
Vegetables, then these Parts must be chosen for the Purpose.

The Subject being chosen, let it be bruised, or cut, if there be
occasion, and with it fill two thirds of a Still, leaving a third Part
of it empty, without squeezing the Matter close; then pour as much Rain
or River Water into the Still as will fill it to the same Height; that
is, two thirds together with the Plant: Fit on the Head, luting the
Juncture, so that no Vapour may pass through; and also lute the Nose
of the Still-head to the Worm. Apply a Receiver to the Bottom of the
Worm, that no Vapour may fly off in the Distillation; but that all the
Vapour being condensed in the Worm, by cold Water in the Worm-tub, may
be collected in the Receiver.

Let the Plant remain thus in the Still to digest for twenty-four Hours,
with a small Degree of Heat. Afterwards raise the Fire, so as to make
the Water in the Still boil; which may be known by a certain hissing
Noise, proceeding from the breaking Bubbles of the boiling Matter;
as also by the Pipe of the Still-head, or the upper end of the Worm,
becoming too hot to be handled; or the smoaking of the Water in the
Worm-tub heated by the Top of the Worm; and, lastly, by the following
of one Drop immediately after another, from the Nose of the Worm, so
as to form an almost continual Stream. By all these Signs we know that
the requisite Heat is given; if it be less than a gentle Ebullition,
the Virtues of the Simple, here expected, will not be raised: On the
contrary, when the Fire is too strong, the Water hastily rises into
the Still-head, and fouls both the Worm and the distilled Liquor; and
the Plant being also raised, it blocks up the Worm; for which Reason
it is no bad Caution to fasten a-piece of fine Linen before the Pipe
of the Still-head; that, in case of this Accident, the Plant may be
kept from stopping up the Worm: But, notwithstanding this Precaution,
if the Fire be too fierce, the Plant will stop up the Pipe of the
Still-head; and, consequently, the rising Vapour finding no Passage,
will blow off the Still-head, and throw the boiling Liquor about the
Still-house, so as to do a great deal of Mischief, and even suffocate
the Operator, without a proper Caution; and the more oily, tenacious,
gummy, or resinous the Subject is, the greater the Danger, in case of
this Accident; because the Liquor is the more frothy and explosive.

Let the due Degree of Fire therefore be carefully observed, and equally
kept up, as long as the Water, distilling into the Receiver, is
white, thick, odorous, sapid, frothy and turbid; for this Water must
be carefully kept separate from that which follows it. The Receiver,
therefore, should be often changed, that the Operator may be certain
that nothing but this first Water comes over; for there afterwards
arises a Water that is transparent, thin, and without the peculiar
Taste and Flavour of the Plant, but generally somewhat tartarish and
limpid, though somewhat obscured and fouled by white dreggy Matter: And
if the Head of the Still be of Copper, and not tinned, the Acidity of
this last Water corrodes the Copper, so as to become green, nauseous,
emetic and poisonous to those who use it, especially to Children, and
Persons of weak Constitutions.

The first Water above-described, principally contains the Oil and
presiding Spirit of the Plant; for the Fire by boiling the Subject,
dissolves its Oil, and reduces it into small Particles, which are
carried upwards by the Assistance of the Water, along with those
Parts of the Plant that become volatile with their Motion. And, if
the Vessels are exactly closed, all these being united together, will
be discharged without Loss, and without much Alteration, into the
Receiver; and, consequently, furnish us with a Water richly impregnated
with the Smell, Taste, and particular Virtues of the volatile Parts of
the Plants it was extracted from.

The Water of the second Running, wants the volatile Part above
described, and has scarce any other Virtue than that of cooling.

And this is the best Method of preparing simple Waters, provided the
two sorts be not mixed together, for both of them would be spoiled by
such a Mixture.

Hence it plainly appears at what time, with the same Degree of Fire,
quite contrary Virtues may arise from a Plant; for so long as a milk
Water continues to come over from such Plants as are aromatic, so long
the Water remains warming and attenuating; but when it comes to be thin
and pellucid, it is acid and cooling.

Hence we may also learn the true Foundation for conducting of
Distillation; for if the Operation be stopped, as soon as ever the
white Water ceases to come over, the Preparation will be valuable
and perfect; but if, through a Desire of increasing that Quantity,
more be drawn off, and the latter acid Part suffered to mix with the
first Running, the whole will be spoiled, or at least rendered greatly
inferior to what it would otherwise have been.

Such is the general Method of procuring simple Waters, that shall
contain the volatile Virtues of the Plants distilled; some Rules are
however necessary to render it applicable to all Sorts of Plants;
these Rules are the following:

1. Let the aromatic, balsamic, oily, and strong-smelling Plants, which
long retain their natural Fragrance, such as Balm, Hyssop, Juniper,
Marjoram, Mint, Origanum, Penny-royal, Rosemary, Lavender, Sage, _&c._
be gently dried a little in the Shade; then digest them, in the same
manner as already mentioned, for twenty-four Hours, in a close Vessel,
with a small Degree of Heat, and afterwards distil in the manner above
delivered, and thus they will afford excellent Waters.

2. When Waters are to be drawn from Barks, Roots, Seeds, or Woods that
are very dense, ponderous, tough and resinous, let them be digested
for three, four, or more Weeks, with a greater Degree of Heat, in a
close Vessel, with a proper Quantity of Salt added, to open and prepare
them the better for Distillation. The Quantity of Sea-salt is here
added, partly to open the Subject the more, but chiefly to prevent
Putrefaction, which otherwise would certainly happen in so long a Time,
and with such a Heat as is necessary in this Case, and so destroy the
Smell, Taste, and Virtues expected from the Process.

3. Those Plants which diffuse their Odour to some Distance from them,
and thus soon lose it, should immediately be distilled after being
gathered in a proper Season, without any previous Digestion; thus
Borage, Bugloss, Jessamin, white Lilies, Lilies of the Valley, Roses,
_&c._ are hurt by Heat, Digestion, or lying in the Air.




                              CHAP. III.

 _Of increasing the Virtues of Simple Waters by means of Cohobation._


By Cohobation is meant the returning the distilled Water procured in
the manner described in the preceding Chapter, upon more of the fresh
Plant. The Operation is performed in the following manner:

Take the Plant and Liquor remaining in the Still after the Operation
described in the foregoing Chapter is performed, and press them
strongly in a Bag for that Purpose, that all the Decoction may be
obtained; and with this mix all the Water before drawn over. Return
this Mixture into the Still, and a fresh Quantity of the same Plant,
and if necessary, as much Water as will make the former Proportion to
the Plant. Close all the Junctures exactly, and digest the whole in a
gentle Degree of Heat for three Days and three Nights, that the Herb,
being so long steeped in its own Liquor, may be opened, loosened, and
disposed the easier to part with its Virtues. This Digestion is of
great Service; but if protracted too long, introduces a Change tending
to Putrefaction. Let the Water now be distilled off, in the same
manner as before; only proceeding more cautiously, and somewhat more
slowly at first; because the Liquor in the Still being now thicker,
more impregnated with the Plant, and therefore more apt to smell upon
feeling the Fire, it easily boils over; but after about half of the
expected Water is come off, the Fire may be gradually raised.

By this Method, and carefully observing to change the Receiver, as soon
as the first Water is all come over, a noble Liquor, highly impregnated
with the Virtues of the Plant, will be obtained. And as this Operation
may be repeated as often as desired, the Virtues of Plants may be thus
exalted to any Degree the Artist shall think proper; which shews the
extraordinary Power of Distillation. This Method I would particularly
recommend for making the simple Water of Balm, Elder Flowers, Roses,
and the like Simples, but sparingly furnished with an essential Oil.




                               CHAP. IV.

    _Of the Method of procuring a simple Water from Vegetables, by
       previously fermenting the Vegetable before Distillation._


By this elegant Method we obtain the Virtues of Plants very little
altered from what they naturally are, though rendered much more
penetrating and volatile. The Operation is performed in the following
manner.

Take a sufficient Quantity of any recent Plant, cut it, and bruise
it if necessary; put it into a Cask, leaving a Space empty at top of
about four Inches deep; then take as much Water as would, when added,
fill the Cask to the same Height, including the Plant, and mix therein
about an eighth Part of Honey, if it be cold Winter Weather; or a
twelfth Part, if it be warm: In the Summer the like Quantity of coarse,
unrefined Sugar might be added instead of Honey, or half an Ounce of
Yeast to each Pint of Water will have the same Effect; though most
prefer Honey for this Purpose. When the proper Quantity of Honey is
added to the Water, let it be warmed and poured into the Cask, and
set it in a warm Place to ferment for two or three Days; but the Herb
must not be suffered to fall to the Bottom, nor the Fermentation above
half finished. The Whole must then be immediately committed to the
Still, and the Fire raised by Degrees; for the Liquor, containing much
fermenting Spirit, easily rarefies with the Fire, froths, swells, and
therefore becomes very subject to boil over; we ought therefore to work
slower, especially at first.

By this Method there will come over at first, a limpid, unctuous,
penetrating, odorous, sapid Liquor, which is to be kept separate: After
this there follows a milky, opake, turbid Liquor, still containing
something of the same Taste and Odour; and at length comes one that is
thin, acid, without either Smell, or scarce any Property of the Plant.

The first Water, or rather Spirit, may be kept several Years, in a
close Vessel, without changing or growing ropy. It also excellently
retains the Taste and Odour of the Plant, though a little altered;
but if less Honey were added, less Heat employed, or the Fermentation
continued for a smaller Time, the distilled Liquor of the first
running would be white, thick, opake, unctuous, frothy, and perfectly
retain the Scent and Taste of the Plant, or much less altered than in
the former Case; though the Water will not be so sharp and penetrating.
After this is drawn off, a tartish, limpid, inodorous Liquor will come
over.

And thus may simple Waters be made fit for long keeping without
spoiling; the Proportion of inflammable Spirit generated in the
Fermentation, serving excellently to preserve them.




                               CHAP. V.

                _Of the Simple Waters commonly in Use._


Simple waters are not so much used at present as they were formerly;
and perhaps one Reason for their being neglected, is the bad Methods
used in distilling them; the Process is carried on in the same manner
with every Herb; though some should be gently dried, and others
distilled green; some should be drawn with the cold, and others with
the hot Still.

The general Rule that should be observed with regard to the hot Still
is, that all Herbs should have twice their Weight of Water added to
them in the Still; and not above a fourth, or a sixth Part of it drawn
off again; for simple Waters have their Faints, if drawn too low, as
well as those that are spirituous.

Some Plants, particularly Balm, require to have the Water drawn from
them cohobated, or poured several times on a fresh Parcel of the Herb,
in order to give it a proper Degree of Strength or Richness. Others,
on the contrary, abound too much with an essential Oil that floats on
the distilled Water; in this case all the Oil should be carefully taken
off. Lastly, those that contain a more fixed Oil, should be imperfectly
fermented, in the manner laid down in the preceding Chapter, before
they are distilled; of this Kind are Carduus, Chamomile, _&c._

The simple Waters now commonly made, are Orange-flower-water,
Rose-water, Cinnamon-water, Fennel-water, Pepper-mint-water,
Spear-mint-water, Balm-water, Penny-royal-water, _Jamaica_
Pepper-water, Castor-water, Simple-water of Orange-peel, and of Dill
seed.




                               CHAP. VI.

                       _Of Orange flower-water._


The Orange-tree grows plentifully in _Italy_, _Spain_, and _Portugal_,
and bears Flowers and Fruit all the Year; but the Fruit is gathered
chiefly in _October_ and _November_.

The Flowers grow on the younger Shoots among the Leaves: They are
white, and consist of a single cup-fashioned Leaf, cut into five
Parts, with several yellow Stamina in the middle, and of a fragrant
odoriferous Smell.

Some Degree of Attention is requisite to draw a simple and odoriferous
Water for the Orange Flowers; the Fire must be carefully regulated;
for too small a Degree will not bring over the essential Oil of the
Flowers, in which their odoriferous Flavour consists: and, on the
contrary, too strong a Fire destroys the Fragrancy of the Water, and
is very apt to scorch the Flowers, and give the Water an empyreumatic
Smell. Care should also be taken to fasten the Receiver to the End
of the Worm with a Bladder, to prevent the volatile Parts from
evaporating. The Quantity of Water, also, should be carefully attended
to, if you hope to succeed in the Operation. The following Receipts
will answer the Intention.


                  _Receipt for Orange-flower-water._

Take twelve Pounds of Orange-flowers, and twenty-four Quarts of Water,
and draw over three Pints.

                                  Or,

Take twelve Pounds of Orange Flowers, and sixteen Quarts of Water; draw
over fifteen Quarts, carefully observing what has been observed at the
beginning of the Chapter with regard to the Regulation of the Fire.


  _The Manner of making Double Orange-flower-water, and the essential
               Oil, or Quintescence of Orange Flowers._

Having shewn how to make simple Orange-flower-water, we shall now shew
how to make double Orange-flower-water, and the essential Oil, or
Quintessence of Orange Flowers.

Double Orange-flower-water is made, by distilling the Orange Flowers in
a cold Still; in the Manner laid down in the first Chapter. The Water
extracted in this manner will be very odoriferous and grateful; being
what is called Double Orange-flower-water. The same odoriferous Water
will be obtained by distilling the Flowers in _Balneum Mariæ_, without
any Water in the Still. If the cold Still be used put into it as many
Flowers as the Head will well cover; and then make a gentle Fire under
the Plate, and as soon as you perceive the Still is beginning to work,
fasten the Receiver to the Beak of the Still with a Bladder. The same
Caution must be observed if the Flowers are distilled in _Balneum
Mariæ_.

To make this Water to Perfection, the Flowers should be fresh gathered
in the Morning with the Dew upon them, if possible; and carefully
picked from the Leaves. You should likewise make Choice of the largest
Flowers, because these yield most in Distillation. The Fire must be
brisk when the Flowers are distilled in _Balneum Mariæ_; because the
Operation is longer in performing than by the common Alembic, and the
Flowers are not here in Danger of being burnt at the Bottom of the
Cucurbit. If you would have your Water of a fine Smell, let it be
cohobated on fresh Flowers.

With this double Water, the essential Oil or Quintessence will come
over, and float on the Surface of the Water. But a much larger
Quantity of it will be obtained, by cohobating the Water on fresh
Flowers in _Balneum Mariæ_. The essential Oil is at first of a green
Colour, but after some Days it will turn reddish. The essential Oil
is easily separated from the Water, by the separating Glass, in
the following manner: Stop the Spout of the separating Glass with
a Cork, and then fill it with the Orange-flower-water; when it has
stood a small time the Oil will float on the Surface. Then pull
out the Cork, and let the Water run out at the Spout into another
Receiver placed for that Purpose. As the Water runs out at the Spout
of the Separating-glass, let it be supplied at the Mouth, that the
Separating-glass may be always full of Water, till the whole is in
this manner poured into it. Then by gently inclining the Glass, pour
out all the Water in it through the Spout, and the Oil will remain in
the Separating-glass, and may be poured into another Bottle, and kept
separate from the Water. The double Orange-flower water is odoriferous;
but the essential Oil much more so.

Orange-flower-water is not at present so much used as formerly; but as
it is a very odoriferous Water, I thought the Method of making it would
be not unacceptable to the young Distiller.

The essential Oil, or Quintessence of Orange-flowers will make a very
grateful Cordial, by mixing it with a clean proof Spirit: The Method of
mixing it is this:

Take some fine Loaf Sugar, and drop on it the Quantity of Oil you
intend to dissolve in the Spirit, and rub them well together in a Glass
Mortar, which is what the Chemists call making an Oleosaccharum. Put
this Oleosaccharum into the Spirit; mix them well together, and dulcify
it with Sugar to your Taste. If the Spirit be too strong, it may be
lowered with Water; but you must observe, that if you add Water enough
to bring the Spirit considerably below Proof, it will turn milky; and
in order to render it fine, you must filtrate it thro’ thick Flannel,
or thin Paper. Twenty Drops of the essential Oil will be sufficient for
a Pint of Spirit, and the same Proportion to a larger Quantity.




                              CHAP. VII.

                           _Of Rose-water._


The Damask Rose is the Species intended to be used in this Operation;
it is of a very fragrant Smell, and flowers in _June_ and _July_. The
Water may be made either by the hot Still, the cold Still, or the
_Balneum Mariæ_. If the hot Still be used, the Leaves picked from the
Stalks must be put into the Still with a sufficient Quantity of Water
to prevent an Empyreuma, and the Water drawn off by a gentle Fire.
The Receiver must be luted with a Bladder to the Nose of the Worm, to
prevent the finest and most volatile Parts from evaporating, which they
would otherwise do, to the great Prejudice of the Water.

If the cold Still be used, the Rose Leaves either with the Dew on them,
or sprinkled with Water, must be laid on the Iron Plate, and covered
with the conical Head. A gentle Fire must then be made under the Plate,
and a Receiver luted with a Bladder to the Nose of the Still. The Water
will gradually distil into the Receiver, and be strongly impregnated
with the odoriferous Parts of the Roses.

The same Method with regard to the _Balneum Mariæ_ must be used in the
Distillation of Roses as in that of Orange-flowers, and therefore need
not be repeated here. We shall therefore only observe, that Rose-water
drawn either by the cold Still, or the _Balneum Mariæ_, is much
preferable to that drawn by the hot Still.

The Essence, or essential Oil of Roses is looked upon as one of the
most valuable Perfumes in the World; but at the same Time the most
difficult to be procured in any Quantity. A small Quantity of it is
made in _Italy_, but it has always been thought impossible to procure
it here; and, therefore, a Method of acquiring this valuable Commodity
will not, I presume, be disagreeable to the Reader.

Take a Quantity of Damask Rose Leaves, put them into a proper Vessel,
with a sufficient Quantity of Water, adding some mineral Acid, as
Spirit of Salt, Vitriol, _&c._ In this Menstruum let the Roses be
digested for fifteen Days; after which put the Whole into an Alembic,
and draw off the Water with a pretty brisk Fire. But, instead of the
common Receiver, a Separating-Glass must be placed under the Nose of
the Worm, and a Receiver added to the Tube of the Separating-Glass.
By this Means all the Oil or Essence will float on the Surface of the
Water in the Separating-Glass, and may easily be separated from it,
when the Operation is finished.




                              CHAP. VIII.

                         _Of Cinnamon-water._


Cinnamon is a thin fine Bark, rolled up in a sort of little Pipes, from
the thickness of a Goose-quill, to that of a Man’s Thumb, and sometimes
more, and about two or three Feet long. Its Colour brownish, with a
Mixture of red. It is of an extremely aromatic Smell, and of an acrid
and pungent, but very agreeable Taste. It is the interior, or second
Bark of a Tree that grows plentifully in _Ceylon_. The People who
gather it take off the two Barks together, and immediately separating
the outer one, which is rough, and has very little Fragrancy, they lay
the other to dry in the Shade in an airy Place, where it rolls itself
up into the Form wherein we see it.

The greatest Cheats in the Sale of Cinnamon, are the selling such as
has already had its essential Oil distilled from it, and dried again,
and the imposing Cassia Lignea in its Place. The first of these is
discovered by the want of Pungency in the Cinnamon; the second by
this, that the Cassia, when held a little Time in the Mouth, becomes
mucilaginous, which the true Cinnamon never does, Cinnamon is a noble
Drug, endued, with many capital Virtues; it strengthens the Viscera,
assists Concoction, dispels Flatulencies, and is a pleasant Cardiac.


           _Recipe for one Gallon of simple Cinnamon-Water._

Take a Pound of the best Cinnamon grosly powdered, digest for
twenty-four Hours, in two Gallons of Water; put the Whole into an
Alembic, and draw over one Gallon with a pretty brisk Fire.

The Oil of Cinnamon, in which the specific Virtue of the Drug consists,
is very ponderous, and therefore will not come over the Helm unless the
Fire be pretty brisk, especially with a simple Water. It will therefore
be in vain to attempt distilling simple Cinnamon-water by the _Balneum
Mariæ_.




                               CHAP. IX.

                          _Of Fennel-water._


Fennel-water is extracted from a Seed larger and more beautiful than
that produced by our common Fennel; it is called _Sweet Fennel seed_,
being of a fragrant Smell, and aromatic sweet Taste, and is cultivated
in _France_ and _Italy_. It is to be chosen new, large and fair; but
when damp or dusty to be rejected.


               _Recipe for one Gallon of Fennel-water._

Take one Pound of Sweet Fennel-seeds, and two Gallons of Water; put
them into an Alembic, and draw off one Gallon with a gentle Fire.




                               CHAP. X.

                        _Of Pepper-mint-water._


Pepper-mint is a very celebrated Stomachic, and on that account greatly
used at present, and its Simple Water often called for.


              _Recipe for a Gallon of Pepper-mint-water._

Take of the Leaves of dried Pepper-mint, one Pound and a half; Water
two Gallons and a half; put all into an Alembic, and draw off one
Gallon, with a gentle Fire.

The Water obtained from Pepper-mint by Distillation in _Balneum Mariæ_,
is more fragrant and more fully impregnated with the Virtues of the
Plant than that drawn by the Alembic. The same may be said with regard
to that extracted by the cold Still; when the cold Still is used the
Plant must be green, and if possible committed to the still with the
Morning Dew upon it.




                               CHAP. XI.

                        _Of Spear-mint-water._


Spear-mint is also like Pepper-mint a great Stomachic, and therefore
constantly used.


             _Recipe for one Gallon of Spear-mint-water._

Take of the Leaves of dried Spear-mint one Pound and a half; Water two
Gallons and a half; draw off by a gentle Fire one Gallon.

This Water, like that drawn from Pepper-mint, will be more fragrant if
distilled in _Balneum Mariæ_, or the cold Still; but if the latter be
used, the same Caution must be observed of distilling the Plant green.




                              CHAP. XII.

                           _Of Baum-water._


Baum is a plant well known in our Gardens. It flowers in _July_, and is
of a fine cordial Flavour; but so weak, that it is soon dissipated and
lost; nor is it easy to dry it so as to preserve its natural Scent.

Baum-water, therefore should be drawn when the Plant is green; and in
order to procure the Water in full Perfection, it should be cohobated,
or returned several times upon fresh Parcels of the Plant; by this
means a Water may be procured from Baum extremely rich, and of
considerable Use as a Cordial.

If the _Balneum Mariæ_ be used, the Water is much better than that
drawn by an Alembic. The Water drawn from this Plant by the cold Still
will also be very fragrant, and highly impregnated with the Virtues of
the Plant.




                              CHAP. XIII.

                        _Of Penny-royal-water._


Penny-royal, a Plant very common in _England_, is very warm, and its
Parts very subtile and penetrating: It is one of the first Plants
in Esteem in the present Practice, as well as in former Ages, as an
Attenuant and Uterine. It is good in Flatulences and Suppressions of
Urine, and by many is greatly recommended in Dropsies, Jaundices, and
other chronic Distempers. It communicates its Virtues to Water in
Infusion, and its simple Water has, perhaps, more Virtue than any
other kept in the Shops. But as it is requisite in order to obtain a
Water fully impregnated with the Virtues of Baum, to cohobate it on
fresh Parcels of the Plant; the Water drawn from green Penny-royal, on
the contrary, generally contains so large a Portion of the essential
Oil, that it is necessary to separate what floats on the Surface of the
Water, by the Separating-glass.


             _Recipe for one Gallon of Penny-royal-water._

Take of the dried Leaves of Penny-royal one Pound and a half, of Water
three Gallons; draw off one Gallon with a gentle Fire.

The Water drawn from green Penny-royal by the cold Still, is very
fragrant, and fully impregnated with the Virtues of the Plant.




                              CHAP. XIV.

                     _Of_ Jamaica-_Pepper-water_.


_Jamaica_-Pepper, or Pimento, is the Fruit of a tall Tree growing
in the mountainous Parts of _Jamaica_, where it is much cultivated,
because of the great Profit arising from the cured Fruit, sent in large
Quantities annually into _Europe_.

It is gathered, when green, and exposed to the Sun for many Days on
Cloths, and frequently shaked and turned, till thoroughly dry; great
Care is taken during the Time of drying to defend the Fruit from the
Morning and Evening Dews; when thoroughly dried it is sent over to us.

It is a very noble Aromatic, and deserves to be used more frequently
than it is at present. The simple Water drawn from it is a better
Carminative than any other simple Water at present in use.


           _Recipe for a Gallon of_ Jamaica-_Pepper-water_.

Take of _Jamaica_-Pepper half a Pound. Water two Gallons and a half;
draw off one Gallon, with a pretty brisk Fire. The Oil of this Fruit is
very ponderous, and therefore this Water is best made in an Alembic.




                               CHAP. XV.

                          _Of Castor-water._


This Drug is brought to us in the Pods or Bags that naturally contained
it, and these so much resemble the Testicles of an Animal, both in
their dry State, and when on the Body of the Creatures, that it is
no wonder People who did not examine their Situation on the Animal,
really took them for such; it is, however, a peculiar secreted Matter,
contained in Bags destined to receive it.

Castor is an indurated Substance, formed of a Matter once fluid; the
thinner Part of which has been evaporated by drying. It is a light and
friable Matter, of a moderately lax Texture, and of a deep dusky brown
Colour. It is of a somewhat acrid and bitterish Taste, and of a strong
fœtid Smell, which, to many, is very disagreeable.

The Animal that produces the Castor is by all Authors called Castor and
Fiber, and by the Vulgar, the Beaver.

The Castor of several Parts of the World differs in Goodness, and in
regard to the Care taken in the drying. The _Russian_ Castor has long
been the most esteemed, and the _New England_ kind the least.

Castor-water is of great Use in hysteric Cases, and all Diseases of the
Nerves; in Epilepsies, Palsies, and all Complaints of that kind.


            _Recipe for making one Gallon of Castor-water._

Take of _Russia_ Castor an Ounce, of Water three Gallons; draw off one
Gallon with a pretty brisk Fire.




                              CHAP. XVI.

                        _Of Orange-peel-water._


The Orange is a Fruit too well known to need a Description here. The
Water is very grateful to the Taste, and often used in Fevers, &c.


             _Recipe for one Gallon of Orange-peel-water._

Take of the outward yellow Rind of _Seville_ Oranges, four Ounces;
Water three Gallons and a half; draw off one Gallon by the Alembic,
with a pretty brisk Fire.




                              CHAP. XVII.

                     _Of the Water of Dill-seed._


Dill greatly resembles Fennel both in Root, Stalk, or Leaf, but rarely
grows so tall, or is so much branched; it bears the same kind of yellow
Umbels of Flowers, after which come Seeds rounder, broader, and
flatter than those of Fennel. The whole Plant is of a strong Scent,
less pleasant than Fennel. It grows in Gardens, and flowers and seeds
in _July_ and _August_. The Water drawn from the Seeds is heating and
carminative, good in Cholics, and all Disorders arising from Wind.


        _Recipe for making a Gallon of the Water of Dill-seed._

Take of Dill-seed one Pound, Water three Gallons; distil off by the
Alembic one Gallon, with a pretty brisk Fire.

The Waters we have enumerated in this Part are those now commonly in
use; though there are many other Herbs, from whence Waters of great
Use may be drawn; but as the Method of Distillation is the same in
all, it would be of no Use to extend these Instructions to a greater
length; we shall therefore only observe, that when unfavourable Seasons
have prevented the Herbs from attaining a proper Degree of Perfection,
it will be necessary to increase their Proportion in extracting the
several Waters ordered to be drawn by the Alembic.




                                   A
                            Complete System
                                  OF
                             DISTILLATION.


                               PART III.

               _Of making compound Waters and Cordials._


The Perfection of this grand Branch of Distillery depends upon the
Observation of the following general Rules, easy to be observed and
practised.

1. The Artist must always be careful to use a well cleansed Spirit, or
one freed from its own essential Oil, as were before observed, Part
I. Chap. xxiii. For as a compound Water is nothing more than a Spirit
impregnated with the essential Oil of the Ingredients, it is necessary
that the Spirit should have deposited its own.

2. Let the Time of previous Digestion be proportioned to the Tenacity
of the Ingredients, or the Ponderosity of their Oil. Thus Cloves and
Cinnamon require a longer Digestion before they are distilled than
Calamus Aromaticus or Orange-peel. Sometimes Cohobation (explained in
Part II. Chap. iii.) is necessary; for Instance, in making the strong
Cinnamon-water; because the essential Oil of Cinnamon is so extremely
ponderous, that it is difficult to bring it over the Helm with the
Spirit without Cohobation.

3. Let the Strength of the Fire be proportioned to the Ponderosity of
the Oil intended to be raised with the Spirit. Thus, for Instance, the
strong Cinnamon Water requires a much greater Degree of Fire than that
from lax Vegetables, as Mint, Baum, _&c._

4. Let only a due Proportion of the finest Parts of the essential Oil
be united with the Spirit; the grosser and less fragrant Parts of the
Oil not giving the Spirit so agreeable a Flavour, and at the same Time
renders it thick and unsightly. This may in a great Measure be effected
by leaving out the Faints, and making up to Proof with fine soft Water
in their stead.

These four Rules carefully observed will render this extensive Part of
Distillation far more perfect than it is at present. Nor will there
be any Occasion for the use of burnt Allum, White of Eggs, Isinglass,
_&c._ to fine down Cordial Waters; for they will presently be fine,
sweet and pleasant tasted, without any farther Trouble.




                               CHAP. I.

                      _Of strong Cinnamon Water._


We have already (Chap. viii. Part II.) described this Drug, and given
some Directions for chusing the best Sort, to which the Reader is
referred.


        _Recipe for sixteen Gallons of strong Cinnamon Water._

Take eight Pounds of fine Cinnamon bruised, seventeen Gallons of clean
rectified Spirit, and two Gallons of Water. Put them into your Still,
and digest them twenty-four Hours with a gentle Heat; after which draw
off sixteen Gallons by a pretty strong Heat.

I have ordered a much larger Quantity of Cinnamon than is common among
Distillers, because when made in the Manner above directed, it is
justly looked upon as one of the noblest Cordial Waters of the Shops;
but when made in the common Way of two Pounds to twenty Gallons of
Spirit, as some have ordered, is only an Imposition on the Buyer. Some
also, to render the Goods cheaper, use equal Quantics of Cinnamon and
Cassia Lignea; but by this means the Cordial is rendered much worse;
and, therefore, if you desire a fine Cinnamon-water the above Recipe
will answer your Intention: But if a cheaper Sort be desired you may
lessen the Quantity of Cinnamon, and add Cassia Lignea in its stead.
If you would dulcify your Cinnamon-water, take double refined Sugar,
what Quantity you please, the general Proportion is, about two Pounds
to a Gallon, and dissolve it in the Spirit after you have made it up
Proof with clean Water. One general Caution is here necessary to be
added; namely, that near the End of the Operation you carefully watch
the Spirit as it runs into the Receiver, in order to prevent the Faints
mixing with the Goods. This you may discover by often catching some of
it, as it runs from the Worm in a Glass, and observing whether it is
fine and transparent; for as soon as ever the Faints begin to rise,
the Spirit will have an azure or bluish Cast. As soon therefore as you
perceive this Alteration, change the Receiver immediately; for if you
suffer the Faints to mix with your other Goods, the Value of the whole
will be greatly lessened. With regard to the Faints, they are to be
kept by themselves, and poured into the Still when a fresh Parcel of
the same Goods is to be made.

It is also necessary to observe here, once for all, that the Distillers
call all Goods made up Proof, _double Goods_; and those which are below
Proof, _single_. This Observation will be alone sufficient to instruct
the young Distiller, how he may at any Time turn his Proof or double
Goods into single.




                               CHAP. II.

                           _Of Clove Water._


Cloves, from whence this Water takes its Name, are the Fruit of a Tree
growing in the _Molucca_ Islands. The Figure of this Fruit is oblong,
and not very thick, resembling in some measure, a Nail. The Surface of
it is rough, and the Colour a dusky brown with an admixture of reddish.
The whole Fruit is of an extremely fragrant Smell, and of an acrid,
pungent, and very aromatic Taste. Cloves are to be chosen the largest,
fairest, darkest coloured, the heaviest and most unctuous on the
Surface, when pressed between the Fingers. Cloves are carminative, and
good against all Distempers of the Head arising from cold Causes. They
strengthen the Sight, and are good against Faintings, Palpitations of
the Heart, and Crudities in the Stomach.


             _Recipe for fifteen Gallons of Clove Water._

Take of Cloves bruised four Pounds, Pimento or All-spice half a Pound,
clean Proof of Spirit sixteen Gallons; let it digest twelve Hours in
a gentle Heat, and then draw off fifteen Gallons with a pretty brisk
Fire.

                                  Or,

Take _Winter_’s Bark, four Pounds, Pimento six Ounces, Cloves one Pound
and a Quarter; clean Proof Spirits sixteen Gallons: Digest, and draw
off as before.

The _Winter_’s Bark, added in the second Recipe is the Bark of a large
Tree, growing in several Parts of _America_, and has its name from
its Discoverer Captain _Winter_. The outer Rind of it is of an uneven
Surface, and of a loose Texture, very brittle, and easily powdered.
The inner Part, in which the principal Virtue resides, is hard, and
of a dusky reddish brown Colour. It is of an extremely fragrant and
aromatic Smell, and of a sharp, pungent, and spicy Taste, much hotter
than Cinnamon in the Mouth, and leaving in it a more lasting Flavour.
It is to be chosen in Pieces not too large, having the inner or brown
Part firm and sound, and of a very pungent Taste. It is apt to be
worm-eaten; but in that Case it should be wholly rejected, as having
lost the most essential Part of its Virtue.

If you desire to have your Clove Water red, it may be coloured
either by a strong Tincture of Cochineal, Alkanet-root, or
Corn-poppy-flowers. The first gives the most elegant Colour, but it is
not often used on Account of its Dearness.

You may dulcify it to your Palate, by dissolving in it double refined
Sugar. Some for Cheapness use a coarser Kind of Sugar; but this renders
the Goods foul and unsightly. Some also, to save Expences, make what
they call Clove Water, with Cloves and Caraway-seeds; the Proportion
they generally use is half an Ounce of Cloves, and two Drams of
Carraway-seeds to a Gallon of Spirit.




                              CHAP. III.

                           _Of Lemon Water._


The Peel of the Lemon, the Part used in making this Water, is a very
grateful bitter Aromatic, and on that Account very serviceable in
repairing and strengthening the Stomach.


               _Recipe for ten Gallons of Lemon Water._

Take of dried Lemon-peel four Pounds, clean Proof Spirit ten Gallons
and a Half, and one Gallon of Water. Draw off ten Gallons by a gentle
Fire. Some dulcify Lemon-water, but by that means its Virtues as a
Stomachic, are greatly impaired.




                               CHAP. IV.

                          _Of Hungary Water._


Rosemary, the principal Ingredient in Hungary Water, has always been a
favourite Shrub in Medicine; it is full of volatile Parts, as appears
by its Taste and Smell. It is a very valuable Cephalic, and is good
in all Disorders of the Nerves; in Hysteric and Hypocondriac Cases,
in Palsies, Apoplexies, and Vertigoes. Some suppose that the Flowers
possess the Virtues of the whole Plant in a more exalted Degree than
any other Part; but the flowery Tops, Leaves, and Husks, together with
the Flowers themselves, are much fitter for all Purposes, than the
Flowers alone.


              _Recipe for ten Gallons of Hungary Water._

Take of the flowery Tops, with the Leaves and Flowers of Rosemary
fourteen Pounds, rectified Spirit eleven Gallons and a Half, Water one
Gallon, distil off ten Gallons with a moderate Fire. If you perform
this Operation in Balneum Mariæ, your Hungary Water will be much finer,
than if drawn by the common Alembic.

This is called Hungary Water, from its being first made for a
Princess of that Kingdom. Some add Lavender-flowers, and others
Florentine-orice-root; but what is most esteemed is made with Rosemary
only.




                               CHAP. V.

                         _Of Lavender Water._


There are two Sorts of Lavender Water, the Simple and Compound; the
first is much used externally on Account of its Fragrancy, and cephalic
Virtues; the latter internally in a great Number of Disorders.


          _Recipe for ten Gallons of simple Lavender Water._

Take fourteen Pounds of Lavender-flowers, ten Gallons and a Half of
rectified Spirit of Wine, and one Gallon of Water; draw off ten Gallons
with a gentle Fire; or, which is much better, in Balneum Mariæ.

Both the Hungary and Lavender Water, may be made at any Time of
the Year without Distillation, by mixing the Oil of the Plant with
highly rectified Spirit of Wine. In order to this, when the Plant
is in Perfection, you should distill a large Quantity of it in Water
with a very brisk Fire; placing under the Nose of the Worm the
Separating-glass (described Page 31. Part I. of this Treatise) by which
means you will obtain the essential Oil of the Plant, in which both
its Fragrancy and Virtues reside. Having procured the essential Oil of
the Plant, the Water may readily be made in the following Manner. Put
the rectified Spirit into the Receiver (described Page 32. Fig. xii.)
and let an Assistant shake it with a quick Motion; whilst the Spirit
is thus agitated, drop in leisurely the essential Oil, and it will mix
without any Foulness or Milkiness. The Oils of Lavender and Rosemary
are imported cheaper from abroad, than they can be made here; but these
Oils will not mix with the Spirit, without rendering it foul and milky;
and therefore if you propose making Hungary or Lavender Water in this
Manner; it will be necessary to extract the Oil yourself.


     _Recipe for making three Gallons of compound Lavender Water._

Take of Lavender Water above described two Gallons, of Hungary Water
one Gallon, Cinnamon and Nutmegs of each three Ounces, and of red
Saunders one Ounce; digest the whole three Days in a gentle Heat, and
then filter it for use. Some add Saffron, Musk, and Ambergrease of each
half a Scruple; but these are now generally omitted.

This compound Lavender Water has been long celebrated in all nervous
Cases. In all Kinds of Palsies, and Loss of Memory it is of the
greatest Service; and has been so much remarked for its Efficacy in
these Complaints, as almost universally to obtain the Name of _Palsy
Drops_.




                               CHAP. VI.

                          _Of Citron Water._


The Citron is an agreeable Fruit resembling a Lemon in Colour, Smell
and Taste. The Inside is white, fleshy and thick, containing but a
small Quantity of Pulp, in Proportion to the Bigness of the Fruit.


           _Recipe for making ten Gallons of Citron Water._

Take of dry yellow Rinds of Citron four Pounds, clean Proof Spirit ten
Gallons and a Half, Water one Gallon, digest the whole twenty-four
Hours with a gentle Heat; draw off ten Gallons, with a gentle Fire;
or, which is much better, in Balneum Mariæ, and dulcify it with fine
Sugar to your Palate.

                                  Or,

Take of dry yellow Rinds of Citrons three Pounds, of Orange-peel two
Pounds, Nutmegs bruised three Quarters of a Pound; digest, draw off,
and dulcify as before.

This is one of the most pleasant Cordials we have; and the Addition of
the Nutmegs, in the second Receipt, increases its Virtue as a Cephalic
and Stomachic.




                              CHAP. VII.

                          _Of Aniseed Water._


Aniseed is a small Seed of an oblong Shape, each way ending in an
obtuse Point; its Surface is very deeply striated, and it is of a
soft and lax Substance, very light and easily broken. Its colour is
a Kind of pale olive, or greenish grey; it has a very strong and
aromatic Smell, and a sweetish but acrid Taste, but in the whole not
disagreeable. Aniseed should be chosen large, fair, new, and clean, of
a good Smell, and acrid Taste. The Plant that produces it is cultivated
in many Parts of _France_; but the finest Seed comes from the Island
of _Malta_, where it is raised for Sale, and whence a great Part of
_Europe_ is supplied.


              _Recipe for ten Gallons of Aniseed Water._

Take of Aniseed bruised two Pounds, Proof Spirits twelve Gallons and a
Half, Water one Gallon; draw off ten Gallons with a moderate Fire.

                                  Or,

Take of the Seeds of Anise and Angelica, each two Pounds, Proof Spirits
twelve Gallons and a half; draw off as before.

Aniseed Water should never be reduced below Proof, because of the large
Quantity of Oil with which the Spirit is impregnated, and which will
render the Goods milky and foul, when brought down below Proof; but
if there be a necessity for doing this, the Goods must be filtrated
either thro’ Paper or the filtrating Bag, which will restore their
Transparency.

Aniseed Water is a good Carminative, and therefore in great Request
among the common People against the Cholic.




                              CHAP. VIII.

                          _Of Caraway Water._


Caraway-seed is of an oblong and slender Figure, pointed at both Ends,
and thickest in the Middle. It is striated on the Surface, considerably
heavy, of a deep brown Colour, and somewhat bright or glossy. It is of
a very penetrating Smell, not disagreeable, and of a hot, acrid and
bitterish Taste. Caraway-seed is to be chosen large, new and of a good
Colour, not dusty, and of an agreeable Smell. The Plant which produces
the Caraway-seed grows wild in the Meadows of _France_ and _Italy_, and
in many other Places; but is sown in Fields for the sake of the Seeds
in _Germany_, and many other Parts of _Europe_.


           _Recipe for making ten Gallons of Caraway Water._

Take of Caraway-seeds bruised three Pounds, Proof Spirit twelve
Gallons, Water two Gallons; draw off ten Gallons, or till the Faints
begin to rise; make the Goods up with clean Water, and dulcify with
common Sugar to your Taste.

                                  Or,

Take of Caraway-seed bruised two Pounds and a Half, Orange or
Lemon-peel dried one Pound, Proof Spirit twelve Gallons, Water two
Gallons; draw off and dulcify as before.

Caraway Water, like that of Aniseed, is a good Carminative; but not so
much used, tho’ much pleasanter.




                               CHAP. IX.

                       _Of Cardamom Seed Water._


The Seed from whence this Water takes its Name, is called by Botanists
_Cardamomum Minus_, or the lesser Cardamom; to distinguish it from the
_Cardamomum Majus_, or Grains of Paradise.

The lesser Cardamom is a small short Fruit, or membranaceous Capsule,
of a trigonal Form, about a third of an Inch long, and swelling out
thick about the Middle; beginning small and narrow from the Stalk, and
terminating in a small, but obtuse Point at the End. It is striated all
over very deeply with longitudinal Furrows, and consists of a thin but
very tough Membrane, of a fibrous Texture, and palebrown Colour, with
a faint Cast of red. When the Fruit is thoroughly ripe, this Membrane
opens at the three Edges all the way, and shews that it is internally
divided by three thin Membranes into three Cells, in each of which is
an Arrangement of Seeds, separately lodged in two Series. The Seeds
are of an irregular angular Figure, rough, and of a dusky brown Colour
on the Surface, with a Mixture of yellowish and reddish, and of white
Colour within. They have not much Smell, unless first bruised, when
they are much like Camphire under the Nose. They are of an acrid,
aromatic and fiery hot Taste. They should be chosen sound, close shut
on all Sides, and full of Seeds, of a good Smell, and of an acrid
aromatic Taste.


           _Recipe for ten Gallons of Cardamom Seed Water._

Take of the lesser Cardamom Seeds husked two Pounds and a Half, of
clean Proof Spirit ten Gallons and a Half, and of Water one Gallon;
draw off ten Gallons by a gentle Heat. You may either dulcify it or not
with fine Sugar at pleasure.

This Water is Carminative, assists Digestion, and good to strengthen
the Head and Stomach.




                               CHAP. X.

             _Of Aqua Mirabilis; or, the Wonderful-Water._


Most of the Ingredients in this Composition have already been
described, and an Account of the Nutmegs will be given in Chap. xxv.
But the Cubebs and Ginger remain to be mentioned.

Cubebs are small dried Fruit resembling a Pepper-corn, but often
somewhat longer; of a dark brown Colour, composed of a wrinkled
external Bark; of an aromatic, tho’ not very strong Smell, and of an
acrid and pungent Taste, tho’ less so than Pepper; but its Acrimony
continues long on the Tongue, and draws forth a large Quantity of
Saliva. We have two Kinds of Cubebs, which differ only in their Periods
of gathering, both are produced from the same Plant. The unripe Cubebs
are small, very wrinkled on the Surface, and their Nucleus, when
broken, is flacid: But the ripe ones not so. Cubebs are brought from
the Island _Java_, where they grow in great Abundance. They should be
chosen large, fresh, and sound, and the heaviest possible. They are
warm and carminative, and esteemed good in Vertigoes, Palsies, and
Disorders of the Stomach.

Ginger is a Root too well known to need a long Description; it is
sufficient to observe that it is of a pale yellowish Colour when
broken, of a fibrous Structure, and easily beat into a Sort of woolly
or long thready Matter. It is of very hot, acrid, and very pungent
Taste; but Aromatic withal, and of a very agreeable Smell. We have
it both from the _East_ and _West Indies_; but the oriental is much
superior to the occidental in its Flavour, of a firmer Substance,
and does not beat out so much into Threads. Ginger is an excellent
Carminative and Stomachic; it assists Digestion, dispells Flatus’s, and
takes off Cholic Pains almost instantaneously.

There are several Receipts for making this celebrated Cordial; but the
following are allowed to be the best.

Take of Cinnamon one Pound and a Quarter, Rind of Lemon-peels ten
Ounces, Cubebs one Ounce and a Quarter, Leaves of Baum one Pound;
bruise all these Ingredients, and pour on them eleven Gallons of clean
Proof Spirit, and one Gallon of Water; digest the whole twenty-four
Hours, and distil off ten Gallons with a pretty brisk Fire; and
dulcify it with fine Sugar.

                                  Or,

Take of the lesser Cardamoms, Cloves, Cubebs, Galangal, Mace, Nutmeg,
and Ginger, of each one Pound and three Quarters, of the yellow part of
Citron-peel and Cinnamon of each three Pounds and a Half, of the Leaves
of Balm one Pound; bruise these Ingredients, and pour on them eleven
Gallons of Spirit and one Gallon of Water; digest, and draw off, _&c._
as before.

This Cordial has been long celebrated as a noble Stomachic, and
therefore greatly called for.

Some instead of all the Ingredients enumerated in the above Receipts
use only Pimento; and this is the sort of Aqua Mirabilis which some
sell so very cheap.




                               CHAP. XI.

                           _Of Mint Water._


The Mint intended in this Recipe is the common Spear-mint, an Account
of which has already been given, Page 137.


                _Recipe for ten Gallons of Mint Water._

Take of dry Spear-mint Leaves fourteen Pounds, Proof Spirit ten Gallons
and a Half, Water two Gallons; draw off ten Gallons by a gentle Heat.
You may dulcify it with Sugar if required.

Mint Water is greatly recommended by the learned _Boerhaave_ and
_Hoffman_, against Vomitting, Nauseas, and the Cholic.




                              CHAP. XII.

                        _Of Pepper Mint Water._


The Pepper-mint has been already described Page 136, to which the
Reader is referred.


_Recipe for ten Gallons of Pepper Mint Water._

Take of dry Pepper Mint Leaves fourteen Pounds, Proof Spirit ten
Gallons and a Half, Water one Gallon; draw off ten Gallons by a gentle
Fire, You may either dulcify it or not.

Pepper Mint Water is a noble Stomachic, good against Vomiting, Nauseas,
Cholic, and other griping Pains in the Bowels, in all which Intentions
it greatly exceeds the common Spear Mint Water.




                              CHAP. XIII.

                         _Of Angelica Water._


There are two Sorts of Angelica Water, the Single and the Compound.
I shall give Receipts for making both Kinds; and with regard to
the Nature of Angelica, it is sufficient to observe, that it is an
excellent Carminative.


          _Recipe for ten Gallons of single Angelica Water._

Take of the Roots and Seed of Angelica cut and bruised, of each one
Pound and a Half, Proof Spirit eleven Gallons, Water two Gallons; draw
off ten Gallons, or till the Faints begin to rise, with a gentle Fire;
and dulcify it, if required, with lump Sugar.

This Angelica Water is a good Carminative, and therefore good against
all Kinds of flatulent Cholics, and Gripings of the Bowels.


         _Recipe for ten Gallons of Compound Angelica Water._

Take of the Roots and Seeds of Angelica, and of sweet Fennel-seeds of
each one Pound and a Half, of the dried Leaves of Baum and Sage of each
one Pound; slice the Roots and bruise the Seeds and Herbs, and add to
them of Cinnamon one Ounce, of Cloves, Cubebs, Galangals, and Mace, of
each three Quarters of an Ounce, of Nutmegs, the lesser Cardamom-seed,
Pimento, and Saffron of each half an Ounce; infuse all these in twelve
Gallons of clean Proof Spirit, and draw off ten Gallons, with a pretty
brisk Fire. It may be dulcified or not at pleasure.

This is an excellent Composition, and a powerful Carminative; and good
in all flatulent Cholics, and other griping Pains in the Bowels. It is
also good in Nauseas, and other Disorders of the Stomach.

It may not be amiss to observe here, that in distilling this and
several other Compositions, abounding with oily Seeds, the Operator
should be careful not to let the Faints mix with the other Goods, as
they would by that means be rendered nauseous and unsightly; he should
therefore be careful towards the letter End of the Operation, to catch
some of the Spirit as it runs from the Worm in a Glass; and as soon as
ever he perceives it the least cloudy, to remove the Receiver, and draw
the Faints by themselves.




                              CHAP. XIV.

                          _Of Orange Water._


This Water is made in the same Manner from the Peels of Oranges, as
Citron Water; Chap. vi. is from the Peels of Citrons.


               _Recipe for ten Gallons of Orange Water._

Take of the yellow Part of fresh Orange-peels five Pounds, clean Proof
Spirit ten Gallons and a Half, Water two Gallons; draw off ten Gallons
with a gentle Fire.

This is a good Stomachic, and may also be used for making bitter
Tinctures as that called _Stoughton_’s Drops.




                               CHAP. XV.

                          _Of Plague Water._


There are several Receipts for making Plague Water; but the following
are much the best.


               _Recipe for ten Gallons of Plague Water._

Take of the Roots of Masterwort and Butter-burr, of each one Pound
and a Quarter, _Virginia_ Snake-root and Zedoary, of each ten Ounces,
Angelica-seeds and Bay-seeds of each fourteen Ounces, and of the Leaves
of Scordium one Pound and a Half. Cut or bruise these Ingredients and
put them into the Still, with twelve Gallons of clean Proof Spirit, and
two Gallons of Water; digest the whole for twenty-four Hours, and draw
off ten Gallons.

                                  Or,

Take of the Leaves of Celandine, Rosemary, Rue, Sage, Roman Wormwood,
Dragons Agrimony, Baum, Scordium, the lesser Centory, Carduus
Benedictus, Betony, and Mint, of each twenty Handfuls; of dried
Angelica-root, Zedoary and Gentian, of each ten Ounces, and of
_Virginia_ Snake-root five Ounces; digest these twenty-four Hours, in
twelve Gallons of clean Proof Spirit, and two Gallons of Water; and
then draw off ten Gallons as before.

                                  Or,

Take of Rue, Rosemary, Baum, Carduus Benedictus, Scordium,
Marigold-flowers, Dragons, Goat’s-rue, and Mint, of each ten Handfuls;
Roots of Masterwort, Angelica, Butter-burr, and Peony, of each one
Pound and a Quarter; and of Viper-grass ten Ounces; digest in twelve
Gallons of Spirit, _&c._ as before.

                                  Or,

Take of the Roots of Masterwort, Gentian, and Snake-root, of each seven
Ounces; green Walnuts bruised eighty; Venice-treacle and Mithridate
of each three Ounces; Camphire six Drams; of the Roots of Rue and
Elecampane, of each three Ounces; Horehound six Ounces; Saffron six
Drams; Proof Spirit twelve Gallons; digest, _&c._ as before.

                                  Or,

Take Dragons, Rosemary, Wormwood, Sage, Scordium, Mugwort, Scabious,
Baum, Carduus, Angelica, Marigold-flowers, Centory, Betony, Pimpernel,
Celadine, Rue, and Agrimony, of each three Pounds; of the Roots of
Gentian, Zedoary, Liquorice, and Elecampane, of each twelve Ounces;
twelve Gallons of Spirits; digest, _&c._ as before.

                                  Or,

Take of green Walnuts, five Pounds; of Angelica-root two Pounds; of the
Leaves of Angelica, Rue, Sage, and Scordium, of each ten Handfuls; of
Nutmegs, Long Pepper, Ginger, Camphire, and Gentian-root, of each five
Ounces; of Snake-root, Contrayerva, Elecampane, Zedoary, and Viper’s
Flesh, of each thirteen Ounces; Venice Treacle and Mithridate of each
thirteen Ounces; White-wine Vinegar seven Pounds; Proof Spirits twelve
Gallons; digest, _&c._ as before.

You may either dulcify your Plague-water, or not, as you see occasion.

All the above Receipts for making Plague Water are in use; but the
first the most elegant, containing nothing but what is proper in
the Intention, and at the same time adapted to give its Virtues by
Distillation; which cannot be said of any of the rest, several of the
Ingredients adding no Virtue at all to the Water. Of this Kind are the
Celandine, Carduus, Centory, Gentian, Walnuts, _&c._

Plague Water is a noble Alexipharmic, and a high Carminative Cordial
in malignant Cases, and of great Use in Lowness of Spirits, and
Depressions.




                              CHAP. XVI.

                     _Of Dr._ Stephens’s _Water_.


This Water has its Name from its Inventor, a Physician of great
Learning and Practice.


          _Recipe for ten Gallons of Dr._ Stephens’_s Water_.

Take of Cinnamon, Ginger, Galangal, Cloves, Nutmegs, Grains of
Paradise, the Seeds of Anise, sweet Fennel, and Caraway, of each one
Ounce; of the Leaves of Thyme, Mother of Thyme, Mint, Sage, Penniroyal,
Rosemary, Flowers of red Roses, Camomile, Origanum, and Lavender, of
each eight Handfuls; of clean Proof Spirit twelve Gallons, Water two
Gallons; digest all twenty-four Hours, and then draw off ten Gallons,
or till the Faints begin to rise. Dulcify with fine Sugar to your
Palate.

This is a noble Cephalic Cordial and Carminative; and also in some
Degree an Hysteric; good in all cholic Pains in the Stomach and Bowels,
and Diseases of the Nerves.




                              CHAP. XVII.

                          _Of Surfeit Water._


There are two Kinds of Surfeit-water, one made by Distillation, and
the other by Infusion, the former is generally called white _Surfeit
Water_, and latter red _Surfeit Water_.


           _Recipe for ten Gallons of white Surfeit Water._

Take Marigold-flowers, Mint, Centory, Rosemary, Scordium, Mugwort,
Carduus, Rue, St. John’s-wort, Baum, and Dragons, of each seven
Handfuls; of the Roots of Peony, Viper-grass, Butter-burr, and
Angelica, of each one Pound and a Half; of Galangal, Calamus
Aromaticus, and of the Seeds of Angelica and Caraway, of each four
Ounces; of the Flowers of red Poppies ten Handfuls; Proof Spirit twelve
Gallons, Water two Gallons; digest for twenty-four Hours, and then draw
off ten Gallons, or till the Faints begin to rise; and dulcify with
fine Sugar.

This is a good Cordial, but would not be the worse, if the Carduus,
Mugwort, Rue and St. John’s-wort, were omitted, as little of their
Virtues can be obtained by Distillation. It is, however, a good
Alexipharmic, Carminative, and Stomachic; and therefore good in all
flatulent Pains in the Stomach and Bowels, in Nauseas and Surfeits,
from whence it had its Name.


         _Recipe for making ten Gallons of red Surfeit Water._

Take of the Flowers of red Poppies, two Bushels, eleven Gallons of
clean Proof Spirit, and digest them with a gentle Heat for three Days,
or till the Spirit has extracted all the Colour of the Flowers: Then
press out the Liquor from the Flowers, and add to the Tincture of the
Seeds of Caraway and Coriander, and Liquorice-root sliced, of each ten
Ounces; of Cardamoms and Cubebs of each four Ounces; of Raisins stoned
five Pounds; of Cinnamon five Ounces; of Nutmegs, Mace, and Ginger,
of each three Ounces; of Cloves two Drams; of Juniper-berries three
Ounces; let the whole be digested three Days, then press out the Liquor
adding to it a Gallon of Rose-water; and then strain or filter the
whole through a Flannel Bag.

This Water is much Superior to the preceding, as all the Ingredients
will give their Virtues to the Tincture, tho’ they will not rise in
Distillation. It is a noble Alexipharmic, it strengthens the Stomach,
and greatly assists Digestion; it is also an excellent Carminative and
good against the Cholic and Gripes: Its Cordial Virtues renders it
serviceable in all Tremblings of the Nerves, and Depressions of the
Spirits.




                             CHAP. XVIII.

                         _Of Wormwood Water._


There are two Sorts of Wormwood Water, distinguished by the Epithets of
_greater_ and _lesser_.


 _Recipe for making ten Gallons of the lesser Composition of Wormwood
                                Water._

Take of the Leaves of dried Wormwood five Pounds; of the lesser
Cardamom-seeds five Ounces; of Coriander seeds one Pound; of clean
Proof Spirit eleven Gallons; Water one Gallon; draw off ten Gallons, or
till the Faints begin to rise, with a gentle Fire. It may be dulcified
with Sugar, or not, at pleasure.

This is a good Stomachic and Carminative; and on that Account often
called for.


_Recipe for ten Gallons of the greater Composition of Wormwood Water._

Take of the common and Sea Wormwood, dried, of each ten Pounds; of
Sage, Mint, and Baum dried, of each twenty Handfuls; of the Roots of
Galangal, Ginger, Calamus Aromaticus, and Elecampane; of the Seed of
sweet Fennel and Coriander, of each three Ounces; of Cinnamon, Cloves,
and Nutmegs, the lesser Cardamoms and Cubebs, of each two Ounces. Cut
and bruise the Ingredients as they require; digest them twenty-four
Hours, in eleven Gallons of fine Proof Spirit, and two Gallons of
Water, and draw off ten Gallons, or till the Faints begin to rise, with
a pretty brisk Fire.

This is an excellent Composition, and good in all Diseases of the
Stomach arising either from Wind or a bad Digestion. It is greatly in
use in some Parts of _England_, but comes too dear for the common Sort
of People; on which account a Cordial Water is often sold under the
Title of _the greater Composition of Wormwood Water_; drawn from the
Leaves of Wormwood, Orange and Lemon-peel, Calamus Aromaticus, Pimento,
and the Seeds of Anise and Caraway; which being all cheap Ingredients,
the Composition may be sold at a moderate Price. A Water drawn in this
manner is a good Carminative; but far inferior to that made by the
above Recipe.




                              CHAP. XIX.

                       _Of Antiscorbutic Water._


The Scurvy being a Disease very common in _England_, this Antiscorbutic
Water will be of great use.


        _Recipe for making ten Gallons of Antiscorbutic Water._

Take of the Leaves of Water-cresses, Garden and Sea Scurvy-grass, and
Brook-lime of each twenty Handfuls; of Pine-tops, Germander, Horehound,
and the lesser Centory, of each sixteen Handfuls; of the Roots of
Briony and sharp-pointed Dock, of each six Pounds; of Mustard-seed one
Pound and a Half. Digest the whole in ten Gallons of Proof Spirit, and
two Gallons of Water, and draw off by a gentle Fire.

This is a good Water for the Purposes expressed in the Title, _viz._
against Scorbutic Disorders. It is also good in Tremblings and
Disorders of the Nerves.




                               CHAP. XX.

                   _Of compound Horse-radish Water._


There are several Methods of making this compound Water; but the three
following Recipes are the best that has hitherto appeared.


    _Recipe for making ten Gallons of compound Horse-radish Water._

Take of the Leaves of fresh Garden Scurvy-grass sixteen Pounds; of
fresh Horse-radish Root, and the yellow Part of Seville Orange-peel
of each eight Pounds; of Nutmegs two Pounds. Cut and bruise these
Ingredients, and digest them twenty-four Hours in ten Gallons of Proof
Spirit and two Gallons of Water; after which draw off ten Gallons with
a gentle Fire.

                                  Or,

Take of the fresh Roots of Horse-radish nine Pounds; of the Leaves of
Water-cresses and of Garden Scurvy-grass, of each six Pounds; of the
outward, or yellow Peel of Oranges and Lemons, of each nine Ounces; of
_Winter_’s Bark twelve Ounces; of Nutmegs three Ounces. Cut, bruise and
digest the Ingredients in ten Gallons of Proof Spirit, and two Gallons
of Water, and draw off ten Gallons as before.

                                  Or,

Take of the Leaves of Garden and Sea Scurvy-grass fresh gathered in
the Spring, of each seven Pounds; Brook-lime, Water-cresses, and
Horse-radish-root of each ten Pounds; of _Winter_’s Bark and Nutmegs of
each ten Ounces; of the outer Peel of Lemons one Pound; of Arum-root
fresh gathered two Pounds; Proof Spirit ten Gallons, Water two Gallons.
Bruise and slice the Ingredients; digest the whole, and draw off ten
Gallons as before.

Either of the above Recipes will produce an excellent Water, against
all Obstructions of the Kidnies and other Viscera. It is also of great
Service in the Jaundice, Cachexies and Dropsies; and in all Scorbutic
Cases, it is equal to any Medicine; as it opens the minute Passages,
promotes Transpiration, and cleanses the Skin, and other small Glands,
which are filled with gross Particles to the Detriment of their proper
Offices.




                              CHAP. XXI.

                          _Of Treacle Water._


This Water is made in a very different Manner, by different Persons;
but the following Recipes are the best for this Purpose.


_Recipe for making ten Gallons of Treacle Water._

Take of the fresh and green Husks of Walnuts four Pounds and a Half;
of the Roots of Butter-burr, three Pounds; of Angelica and Masterwort,
of each one Pound and a Half; of Zedoary twelve Ounces; of the Leaves
of Rue and Scordium of each eighteen Ounces; of Venice Treacle three
Pounds; digest them together four Days in twelve Gallons of Proof
Spirit, and two Gallons of Water; after which draw off ten Gallons; to
which add a Gallon and a Half of distilled Vinegar.

                                  Or,

Take of the Rind of green Walnuts five Pounds; of Rue four Pounds; of
Carduus, Marigold, and Balm, of each three Pounds; of fresh gathered
Butter-burr-roots two Pounds and a Half; of Burdock-root one Pound
and a Half; of green Scordium twelve Handfuls; of Venice Treacle and
Mithridate of each two Pounds and a Half; Proof Spirit twelve Gallons;
and Water two Gallons. Digest, and draw off ten Gallons, as before; to
which add a Gallon and a Half of distilled Vinegar.

Some instead of distilled Vinegar unadvisedly add a proportional
Quantity of Spirit of Vitriol, or other Mineral Acid, to their Treacle
Water; but this Practice is very pernicious; and intirely alters
the Nature of the Medicine. Vinegar is an Acid made by a double
Fermentation, and therefore of a different Nature from the acid
Juices of Vegetables, whether Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, Limes, Crabs,
Barberies, _&c._ as also from those of Minerals, whether Vitriol,
Sulphur, _&c._ It is indeed, like them, acid on the Tongue; but then it
liquifies the Blood, is antipestilential, suddenly cures Drunkenness,
Surfeits, the Plague, and does a thousand Things both as a Menstruum
and Medicine, which they will not. This is an admirable and sprightly
Alexipharmic and Sudorific, to which the Vinegar added, greatly
contributes, and therefore good in Fevers, the Small-pox, Measles, and
other pestilential Disorders.




                              CHAP. XXII.

                   _Compound Camomile-flower Water._


The Camomile-flowers generally used are the double Sort, consisting
wholly of Petals or Flower Leaves, without any Appearance of Stamina
or Pistil, or the other Parts of Fructification, which in the single
Flowers shew themselves in the Middle in Form of yellow Threads. But
tho’ the double Flowers are the Sort commonly used, they are not the
best, or those which ought to be chosen. The single Flowers, or those
which consist of only a single Series of Leaves, or Petals, in Form of
Rays, surrounding a Cluster of yellow Threads or Stamina, have much
more Virtue. It is indeed in these Stamina and their Apices, that great
Part of the Virtue of the Flower resides, and these are wanting in the
double Flowers.


  _Recipe for making ten Gallons of compound Camomile-flower Water._

Take of dried Camomile-flowers, five Pounds; of the outer Peel of
Oranges, ten Ounces; of the Leaves of common Wormwood, and Penny-royal,
of each twenty Handfuls; of the Seeds of Anise, Cummin, and sweet
Fennel, the Berries of Bay and Juniper, of each five Ounces. Digest
these Ingredients two Days in ten Gallons of Proof Spirit, and three
Gallons of Water, and draw off ten Gallons with a gentle Fire.

This is a very good Carminative and Stomachic; good in all Cholics
and other Disorders of the Bowels from Wind. It also provokes the
Appetite and promotes a good Digestion. Its Virtues as a Stomachic will
not be less when made from the double Flowers; but if intended as a
Carminative it should be made with the single Flowers.




                             CHAP. XXIII.

                           _Imperial Water._


This Cordial Water has its Name from the great Opinion conceived of it
by its first Inventors; and tho’ their Opinion was, perhaps, justly
founded, yet it is not at present so much in use as formerly.


          _Recipe for making ten Gallons of Imperial Water._

Take of the dried Peels of Citrons and Oranges, of Nutmegs, Cloves,
and Cinnamon, of each one Pound; of the Roots of Cypress, Florintine
Orrice, Calamus Aromaticus, of each eight Ounces; of Zedoary, Galangal
and Ginger, of each four Ounces; of the Tops of Lavender and Rosemary,
of each sixteen Handfuls; of the Leaves of Marjoram, Mint, and Thyme,
of each eight Handfuls; of the Leaves of white and damask Roses, of
each twelve Handfuls. Digest the whole two Days in ten Gallons of Proof
Spirit, and four Gallons of damask Rose Water; after which draw off ten
Gallons.

All the Ingredients in Composition coincide in one intention, and
are such as will give their Virtues by Distillation; Circumstances
that cannot be said of many other compound Waters. It is a very good
Cephalic, and of great use in all nervous Cases. It is also a very
pleasant Dram, especially if dulcified with fine Sugar, and good upon
any sudden Sickness of the Stomach.




                              CHAP. XXIV.

                      _Of Compound Piony Water._


The Piony, from whence this Compound Water takes its Name, is a Plant
divided into Male and Female; but the former is the Sort intended to be
used in this Composition. The Male and Female Plants are distinguished
both by their Roots and Leaves. The Male has a shining blackish Leaf,
from which the Female differs by being lighter coloured. The Root of
the Male kind is more bulbous, shorter, and branched than that of the
Female, whose Shoots are much longer and thinner.


       _Recipe for making ten Gallons of compound Piony Water._

Take of the Roots of Male Piony, twelve Ounces; of those wild of
Valerian, nine Ounces; and of those of white Dittany six Ounces; of
Piony-seed four Ounces and a Half; of the fresh Flowers of Lilly of the
Valley, one Pound and a Half; of those of Lavender, Arabian Stæchus,
and Rosemary, of each nine Ounces; of the Tops of Betony, Marjoram, Rue
and Sage, of each six Ounces; slice and bruise the Ingredients, and
digest them four Days in ten Gallons of Proof Spirit and two Gallons of
Water; after which draw off ten Gallons.

                                  Or,

Take of the Flowers of Lillies of the Valley fresh gathered, and Male
Piony-root, of each two Pounds; of Cinnamon and Cubebs, of each eight
Ounces; of Rosemary and Lavender Flowers, of each two Handfuls; of
damask Rose Water two Gallons. Digest these four Days in ten Gallons of
Proof Spirit, and draw off ten Gallons as before.

This is an excellent Cordial, and can be exceeded by nothing in all
Nervous Cases, both in Children and grown Persons.




                              CHAP. XXV.

                          _Of Nutmeg Water._


The Nutmeg is a Kernel of a large Fruit not unlike the Peach, and is
separated from that and its investient Coat the Mace, before it is sent
over to us; except when the whole Fruit is sent over in Preserve, by
way of Sweet-meat, or as a Curiosity. There are two Kinds of Nutmegs,
the one called by Authors the Male, and the other the Female. The
Female is the Kind in common use, and is of the Shape of an Olive: The
Male is long and cylindric, and has less of the fine aromatic Flavour
than the other, so that it is much less esteemed, and People who trade
largely in Nutmegs will seldom buy it. Besides this oblong kind of
Nutmeg we sometimes meet with others of very irregular Figures; but
these are mere _Lusus Naturæ_, being produced by the same Tree. The
long or Male Nutmeg, as we term it, is, by the _Dutch_, called the
wild Nutmeg. It is always distinguishable from the others as well
by its want of Fragrancy as by its Shape: It is very subject to be
worm-eaten, and is strictly forbid by the _Dutch_ to be packed up among
the other, because it will be the means of their being worm-eaten also
by the Insects getting from it into them, and breeding in all Parts of
the Parcel. The largest, heaviest, and most unctuous of the Nutmegs are
to be chosen, such as are of the Shape of an Olive, and of the most
fragrant Smell.


           _Recipe for making ten Gallons of Nutmeg Water._

Take of Nutmegs bruised one Pound; Proof Spirit ten Gallons; Water two
Gallons. Digest them two Days, and then draw off ten Gallons with a
brisk Fire. You may either dulcify it or not as occasion offers.

                                  Or,

Take of Nutmegs bruised one Pound; Orange-peel two Ounces; Spirit ten
Gallons; Water two Gallons. Digest, and distil as before.

This is an excellent Cephalic and Cordial Water; agreeable to the
Palate, comfortable to the Stomach, and grateful to the Nerves. It
powerfully discusses Wind and Vapours the Stomach and Bowels, and is
therefore of great Service in the Cholic, and Griping of the Bowels.




                              CHAP. XXVI.

                      _Of Compound Bryony Water._


The white Bryony-root, from whence this Water takes its Name, is one
of the largest Roots we are acquainted with. It is of an oblong Shape,
and is frequently met with of the Thickness of a Man’s Arm, sometimes
of twice or three times that Bigness. Its Texture is somewhat lax and
spungy; considerably heavy, but so soft that the thickest Pieces are
easily cut through with one Stroke of a Knife: It is very juicy, and is
externally of a brownish or yellowish white Colour, and of a pure white
within: It is of a disagreeable Smell, and an acrid and nauseous Taste.


          _Recipe for ten Gallons of Compound Bryony Water._

Take of the Roots of Bryony four Pounds; wild Valerian-root one
Pound; of Penny-royal and Rue, of each two Pounds; of the Flowers of
Fever-few, and Tops of Savin, of each four Ounces; of the Rind of fresh
Orange-peel, and Lovage-seeds, of each Half a Pound: Cut or bruise
these Ingredients and infuse them in eleven Gallons of Proof Spirit,
and two Gallons of Water, and draw off ten Gallons with a gentle Heat.

                                  Or,

Take of fresh Bryony-root four Pounds; of the Leaves of Rue and
Mugwort, of each four Pounds; of the Tops of Savin six Handfuls;
of Fever-few, Catmint and Penny-royal, of each four Handfuls; of
Orange-peel eight Ounces; of Myrrh four Ounces; of _Russia_ Castor, two
Ounces; Proof Spirit eleven Gallons, Water two Gallons. Digest, and
distil as before.

This Composition is very unpalatable, but excellently adapted to the
Intention of an Hysteric, in which Cases it is used with Success. It is
very forcing upon the Uterus, and therefore given to promote Delivery,
and forward the proper Cleansings afterwards; as also to open Menstrual
Obstructions, and in abundance of other Female Complaints. It is also
good against Convulsions in Children, and of service in all nervous
Complaints in either Sex.

It may not be amiss to observe here, that the oily Parts of the
Ingredients will often render the Water foul and milky. If therefore
the Distiller desires to have it fine and transparent, the Receiver
must be removed as soon as the Liquor at the Worm appears the least
turbid, which will be long before the Faints begin to rise. The Water,
however, is not the worse for being milky, with regard to its Medicinal
Virtue. Some, when the Liquor is milky, throw in a little burnt Allum
to fine it; but this should never be done, because it spoils the
Medicine.




                             CHAP. XXVII.

       _Of compound Baum Water, commonly called_ Eau de Carmes.


This has its Name (_Eau de Carmes_) from the Carmelite Friars who were
the Inventors of it. The great Profit accruing to these Fathers, from
the Sale of this Cordial, induced them to keep the Method of making it
a Secret; but notwithstanding all their Care the Secret has at last
been discovered, and the following is the Method by which they prepare
it.


              _Recipe for two Gallons of_ Eau de Carmes.

Take of the fresh Leaves of Baum four Pounds; of the yellow Peel, or
Rind of Lemons, two Pounds; of Nutmegs and Coriander-seeds of each one
Pound; of Cloves, Cinnamon, and Angelica-root, of each Half a Pound.
Pound the Leaves, bruise the other Ingredients, and put them with two
Gallons of fine Proof Spirit into a large Glass Alembic (the Figure
of which with its Head is represented on the Plate, Fig. 7.) stop the
Mouth, and place it in a Bath-Heat to digest two or three Days. Then
open the Mouth of the Alembic, and add a Gallon of Baum Water, and
shake the whole well together. After this place the Alembic in Balneum
Mariæ, and distil till the Ingredients are almost dry; and preserve the
Water thus obtained in Bottles well stopped.

This Water has been long famous both at _London_ and _Paris_, and
carried thence to most Parts of _Europe_. It is a very elegant
Cordial, and very extraordinary Virtues are attributed to it; for it
is esteemed very efficacious not only in Lowness of Spirits, but even
in Apoplexies; and is greatly commended in Cases of the Gout in the
Stomach.




                             CHAP. XXVIII.

                          _Of Ladies Water._


This Water has its Name from its Dearness, being much fitter for the
Closet than to be sold in a Shop; but as it is an excellent Cordial, I
could not omit giving it a Place here.


                _Recipe for one Quart of Ladies Water._

Take of Sugar-candy one Pound; of Canary Wine six Ounces, Rose Water
four Ounces; boil them into a Syrup, and mix with it of Heavenly Water
(described Chap. xxx.) one Quart; of Ambergrise and Musk of each
eighteen Grains; of Saffron fifteen Grains; yellow Saunders two Drams.
Digest the whole three Days in a Vessel close stoped, and decant the
clear for use.

This is an extraordinary Cordial where the Perfumes are not offensive.
It is too rich to be drank alone, and therefore should be mixed with
Water, or some other Liquid.




                              CHAP. XXIX.

                         _Of Cephalic Water._


This Water has its Name from its use, being one of the best Cephalic
Waters known.


              _Recipe for ten Gallons of Cephalic Water._

Take of Male Piony-root twelve Ounces; of Angelica and Valerian of each
four Ounces and a Half; of the Leaves of Rosemary, Marjoram and Baum;
of the Flowers of Lavender, Betony, Piony, Marigolds, Sage, Rosemary,
Lilies of the Valley, and of the Lime Tree, of each three Handfuls; of
Stæchus, or _French_ Lavender, four Ounces and a Half; of red Roses and
Cowslips, of each six Handfuls; of Rhodium Wood and yellow Saunders,
of each two Ounces and a Half; of Nutmegs four Ounces and a Half; of
Galangals, an Ounce and a Half; of Cardamoms and Cubebs, of each one
Ounce. Bruise these Ingredients, and digest them ten Days in eleven
Gallons of Proof Spirit, and two Gallons of Water, after which add
three Pounds of Cinnamon, and digest two Days more; and then draw off
ten Gallons with a pretty brisk Fire, and dulcify it to your Palate
with fine Sugar.

This is an excellent Cordial, of great Use in Faintings or Sinking
of the Spirits, and to remove any sudden Nauseas or Sickness at the
Stomach.




                              CHAP. XXX.

                _Of Heavenly Water; or, Aqua Cœlestis._


This Water has its Name from the great opinion its Inventors had of it;
but at present it is not so much called for as formerly.


              _Recipe for ten Gallons of Heavenly Water._

Take of Cinnamon, Mace, and Cubebs, of each three Ounces; Ginger one
Ounce and a Half; Cloves, Galangal, Nutmegs, and Cardamoms, of each
one Ounce; Zedoary one Ounce and a Half; Fennel-seeds one Ounce; of
the Seeds of Anise, wild Carrot and Basil, of each Half an Ounce;
Roots of Angelica, Valerian, Calamus Aromaticus, Leaves of Thyme,
Calamint, Penniroyal, Mint, Mother of Thyme, and Marjoram, of each an
Ounce; Flowers of red Roses, Sage, Rosemary, and Stæchus, of each six
Drams; Citron-peel an Ounce: bruise all these Ingredients and digest
them three Days in eleven Gallons of Proof Spirit, and four Gallons of
Water; after which draw off ten Gallons, with a pretty brisk Fire; and
dulcify the Goods with fine Sugar, adding Ambergrise and Musk of each
three Scruples.

The Perfumes ordered to be added with the Sugar, rendering the Medicine
offensive to some People, they may be omitted at pleasure. It is
esteemed very efficacious in all nervous Complaints, particularly
Palsies, Loss of Memory, and the like. In all Decays of Age, and
languishing Constitutions, it is exceeded by nothing in suddenly
raising the Spirits, and warming the Blood.




                              CHAP. XXXI.

                   _Of Spirituous Penniroyal Water._


The Plant from whence this Water has its Name has been already
described Chap. xiii. Part II.


       _Recipe for ten Gallons of Spirituous Penniroyal Water._

Take of the Leaves of Penniroyal dried fifteen Pounds; Proof Spirit ten
Gallons; Water two Gallons: draw off ten Gallons with a gentle Fire.

This is a good Carminative, of use in Cholics and Gripings of the
Bowels; also in Plurisies and the Jaundice: It is of known Efficacy in
promoting the Menses and other Disorders of the Female Sex.




                             CHAP. XXXII.

                     _Of Compound Parsley Water._


This Plant from whence the Water is denominated is the common Parsley
of our Gardens, an Herb too well known to need Description.


          _Recipe for ten Gallons of compound Parsley Water._

Take of Parsley-root, one Pound and a Quarter; fresh Horse-radish
Root, and Juniper-berries, of each fifteen Ounces; the Tops of St.
John’s-wort, biting Arsmart, and Elder-flowers, of each ten Ounces; the
Seeds of wild Carrot, sweet Fennel, and Parsley, of each seven Ounces
and a Half; slice and bruise the Ingredients, and digest them four Days
in eleven Gallons of Spirit, and two Gallons of Water; after which draw
off ten Gallons.

This is a very good Diuretic, frees the Kidnies from Sand and other
Matter, which often forms Gravel and Stones. It is also good in cholic
Pains arising from a Stone in the Bladder, and drains off all ill
Humours by Urine.




                             CHAP. XXXIII.

                        _Of Carminative Water._


This Water has its Name from its use, being an excellent Carminative.


            _Recipe for ten Gallons of Carminative Water._

Take of fresh Camomile-flowers, four Pounds; Dill seed two Pounds and a
Half; Leaves of Baum, Origany, and Thyme, of each one Pound; Seeds of
Anise and Fennel of each six Ounces; Cummin-seed four Ounces; Peels of
Oranges and Citrons, of each eight Ounces; Juniper and Bayberries, of
each six Ounces; Cinnamon eight Ounces; Mace four Ounces. Digest these
Ingredients, bruised in eleven Gallons of Proof Spirit, and two Gallons
of Water; after which draw off ten Gallons; and dulcify it with fine
Sugar.

This is an admirable Carminative, and therefore good in all Cholicky
Pains and Gripings of the Bowels; and to remove Sickness and Nauseas
from the Stomach.




                             CHAP. XXXIV.

                           _Of Gout Water._


This Water also has its Name from its use, being of great Service in
that Distemper.


                _Recipe for ten Gallons of Gout Water._

Take of the Flowers of Camomile, Leaves of Penniroyal, Lavender,
Marjoram, Rosemary, Sage, and Ground-pine, of each eight Ounces; Myrrh
four Ounces; Cloves and Cinnamon of each one Ounce; Roots of Piony two
Ounces; Pellitory of _Spain_, and Cypress Orrice, of each one Ounce;
the lesser Cardamoms and Cubebs, of each Half an Ounce; Nutmegs, two
Ounces: Cut and bruise these Ingredients and digest them four Days in
eleven Gallons of Proof Spirit and two Gallons of Water; then draw off
ten Gallons, and dulcify with fine Sugar.

This is a very good Water in all nervous Cases; and a continued
moderate Use of it will comfort and fortify the Fibres, so as to
prevent the Discharge of such Juices upon the Joints as cause
arthritic Pains and Swellings. It is also of excellent Use in Palsies,
Epilepsies, and Loss of Memory; particularly when these Distempers
proceed from old Age, or when the principal Springs of Life begin to
decay.




                              CHAP. XXXV.

                          _Of Anhalt Water._


This Water is supposed to have been invented by a celebrated Physician
of _Anhalt_, a Province of the Circle of Upper _Saxony_.


           _Recipe for making ten Gallons of Anhalt Water._

Take of the best Turpentine a Pound and a Half; Olibanum three Ounces;
Aloes-wood powdered one Ounce; Grains of Mastick, Cloves, July-flowers,
or Rosemary-flowers, Nutmegs and Cinnamon of each two Ounces and a
Half; Saffron one Ounce; powder the whole and digest them six Days in
eleven Gallons of Spirit of Wine; adding two Scruples of Musk tied up
in a Rag; and draw off in Balneum Mariæ till it begins to run foul.

This Water is a high aromatic Cordial, invigorates the Intestines, and
thereby promotes Digestion and dispels Flatulencies. It is also in
great Repute as a sovereign Remedy for Catarrhs and Pains arising from
Colds; as also in Palsies, Epilepsies, Apoplexies and Lethargies, the
Parts affected being well rubbed with it.




                             CHAP. XXXVI.

             _Of Vulnerary Water, or, Eau d’ Arquebusade._


This Vulnerary Water is greatly esteemed abroad; and if properly tried,
there is no doubt of its obtaining the same Reputation here.


             _Recipe for five Gallons of Vulnerary Water._

Take of the Leaves, Flowers and Roots of Comfrey, Leaves of Mugwort,
Sage, and Bugle, of each eight Handfuls; Leaves of Betony, Sanicle,
or Ox-eye Daisy, the greater Figwort, Plantain, Agrimony, Vervain,
Wormwood, and Fennel, of each four Handfuls; St. John’s-wort,
Birth-wort, Orpine, Paul’s-betony, the lessor Centory, Yarrow, Tobacco,
Mouse-ear, Mint, and Hyssop, of each two Handfuls: Cut them, bruise
them well in a Mortar, and pour on them three Gallons of white Wine and
two Gallons and a Half of Proof Spirit; digest the whole six Days with
a gentle Heat, in a Vessel close stopped: after which distil off with
gentle Fire, about five Gallons, or till it begins to run milky from
the Worm.

This Water is of excellent Service in Contusions, Tumors attending
Dislocations, Fractures and Mortifications, the Part affected being
bathed with it. Some also use it to deterge foul Ulcers, and incarn
Wounds; from whence it was called Vulnerary Water.




                             CHAP. XXXVII.

                          _Of Cedrat Water._


The Fruit called _Cedrat_ by the _French_ is a Species of the Citron,
called by Botanists _Citratum Florentinum_, _fructu Mucronato &
recurvo_, _Cortice verrucoso Odoratissimo_, Florentine Citron, with
a pointed Fruit, which is recurved, and a warted sweet smelling
Rind. This Fruit is in so great Esteem, that they have been sold at
_Florence_ for two Shillings each, and are often sent as Presents to
the Courts of Princes. It is only found in Perfection, in the Plain
between _Pisa_ and _Leghorn_; and tho’ the Trees which produce this
Fruit have been transplanted into other Parts of _Italy_, yet they are
found to lose much of that excellent Taste with which they abound in
those Parts.


                _Recipe for a Gallon of Cedrat Water._

Take the yellow Rinds of five Cedrats, a Gallon of fine Proof Spirit,
and two Quarts of Water: Digest the whole twenty-four Hours in a Vessel
close stoped; after which draw off one Gallon in Balneum Mariæ, and
dulcify with fine Loaf Sugar.

This is esteemed the finest Cordial yet known; but as it is very
difficult to procure the Fruit here, I shall give the Method of making
this celebrated Cordial, with the Essence or essential Oil of the
Cedrat, which is often imported from _Italy_.


 _Recipe for a Gallon of Cedrat Water with the Essence of the Fruit._

Take of the finest Loaf Sugar reduced to Powder a Quarter of a Pound,
put into it a Glass Mortar, with one Hundred and twenty Drops of the
Essence of Cedrat, rub them together with a Glass Pestle, put them into
a Glass Alembic with a Gallon of fine Proof Spirits and a Quart of
Water. Place the Alembic in Balneum Mariæ, and draw off one Gallon, or
till the Faints begin to rise; and dulcify with fine Sugar.

You may make this Water without Distillation, by mixing the Essence
with the Sugar, as before directed, and dissolving it in the Spirit
and Water directed as above. But the Water will be foul and milky, and
therefore you must filtrate it thro’ Paper, which will restore its
Brightness and Transparency.

But whatever Method is used, you must be very careful that the Spirit
been tirely freed from its essential Oil; and therefore if your Spirit
be not very cleanly rectified, it will be adviseable to use _French_
Brandy, lest the fine Flavour so highly esteemed in this Cordial be
destroyed by the Spirit.




                            CHAP. XXXVIII.

                         _Of Bergamot Water._


The Bergamot is a Species of the Citron, produced at first casually by
an _Italian_’s Grafting a Citron on the Stock of a Burgamot Pear Tree,
whence the Fruit produced by this Union participated both of the Citron
Tree and Pear Tree. The Inventor is said to have kept the Discovery a
long Time a Secret, and enriched himself by it.

The Bergamot is a very fine Fruit both in Taste and Smell; and its
Essence or essential Oil highly esteemed.


               _Recipe for a Gallon of Bergamot Water._

Take the outer Rind of three Bergamots, a Gallon of Proof Spirit, and
two Quarts of Water. Draw off one Gallon in Balneum Mariæ, and dulcify
with fine Sugar.

If you make your Bergamot Water from the Essence or essential Oil,
observe the same Directions as given in the preceeding Chapter for
making Cedrat Water. One Hundred and sixty Drops of the Essence will be
sufficient for a Gallon of Spirit, and so in Proportion for a greater
or smaller Quantity.




                             CHAP. XXXIX.

            _Of Orange Cordial Water; or, Eau de Bigarade._


The Orange called by the _French_ Bigarade, is called by Botanists
_Aurantium maximum_, _verrucoso Cortice_, the large worted Orange.

It is a large and beautiful Fruit, and greatly esteemed for the
Fragrancy of its Essence. It is common in diverse Parts of _Italy_,
_Spain_, and _Provence_ in _France_.


            _Recipe for making a Gallon of Orange Cordial._

Take of the outer or yellow Part of the Rinds of fourteen Bigarades;
Half an Ounce of Nutmegs; a Quarter of an Ounce of Mace, a Gallon of
fine Proof Spirit, and two Quarts of Water. Digest all these together
two Days in a close Vessel; after which draw off a Gallon with a gentle
Fire, and dulcify with fine Sugar.

This Cordial is greatly esteemed abroad, and would be the same here if
sufficiently known.

If the Orange Peels are not easily procured, one Hundred and forty
Drops of the Essence may be used in their stead, and the Water will be
nearly equal to that made from the Peels.




                               CHAP. XL.

                          _Of Jasmine Water._


There are several Species of Jasmine, but that Sort intended here is
what the Gardeners call, _Spanish_ White or _Catalonian_ Jasmine. This
is one of the most Beautiful of all the Species of Jasmine; the Flowers
much larger than any of the others, of a red Colour on the Outside,
and extremely fragrant. But if the Flowers of this Species cannot be
procured, those of the common Sort may be used, but the Quantity must
be considerably augmented.


                _Recipe for a Gallon of Jasmine Water._

Take of _Spanish_ Jasmine-flowers twelve Ounces; Essence of Florentine
Citron, or Burgamot, eight Drops; fine Proof Spirit a Gallon, Water two
Quarts. Digest two Days in a close Vessel, after which draw off one
Gallon, and dulcify with fine Loaf Sugar.

This is a most excellent Cordial, and deserves to be more known here
than it is at present.




                              CHAP. XLI.

                 _Of the Cordial Water of_ Montpelier.


This Water has its Name from the Place where it was first made, and
what is now brought from thence is still in great Reputation.


       _Recipe for a Gallon of the Cordial Water of_ Montpelier.

Take of the yellow Rinds of two Bergamots, or fifty Drops of the
Essence of that Fruit; Cloves and Mace of each Half an Ounce; Proof
Spirit a Gallon; Water one Quart: Digest two Days in a close Vessel,
draw off a Gallon, and dulcify with fine Sugar.




                              CHAP. XLII.

                     _Of Father_ Andrew’_s Water_.


This Water has its Name from its Inventor; and is greatly esteemed in
_France_.


           _Recipe for a Gallon of Father_ Andrew’_s Water_.

Take of white Lilly-flowers eight Handfuls; Orange-flowers four Ounces;
Rose Water a Quart; Proof Spirit a Gallon; Water a Quart: Draw off a
Gallon in Balneum Mariæ, and dulcify with fine Sugar.




                             CHAP. XLIII.

                  _Of the Water of Father_ Barnabas.


This Water has also its Name from its Inventor, a Jesuit of _Paris_.


        _Recipe for a Gallon of the Water of Father_ Barnabas.

Take of the Roots of Angelica four Ounces; of Cinnamon and Orris-root,
of each Half an Ounce; bruise these Ingredients in a Mortar; put them
into an Alembic, with a Gallon of Proof Spirit and two Quarts of Water;
draw off a Gallon with a pretty brisk Fire.




                              CHAP. XLIV.

                  _Of the Water of the four Fruits._


This Water has its Name from the four Fruits in its Composition, namely
the Cedrat or Florentine Citron, the Bergamot, the common Citron, and
the _Portugal_ Orange.


        _Recipe for a Gallon of the Water of the four Fruits._

Take of the Essence of Cedrat, fifty Drops; of the Essence of Bergamot
thirty-six Drops; of the Essence of Citron sixty Drops; and of the
Essence of _Portugal_ Orange sixty-four Drops; fine Proof Spirit one
Gallon; Water two Quarts; draw off with a pretty brisk Fire till the
Faints begin to rise, and dulcify with fine Sugar.

This is a very pleasant and odoriferous Cordial, and in great Esteem in
_France_.




                              CHAP. XLV.

                  _Of the Water of the four Spices._


This Water also derives its Name from the four Spices from whence it is
drawn, _viz._ Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, and Cinnamon.


        _Recipe for a Gallon of the Water of the four Spices._

Take of Cinnamon two Ounces; Nutmegs and Cloves, of each three Drams;
Mace six Drams; bruise the Spices in a Mortar, and add Proof Spirit
a Gallon, and Water two Quarts. Digest twenty-four Hours in a close
Vessel, and distil with a brisk Fire till the Faints begin to rise; and
dulcify with fine Sugar.

This is an excellent Stomachic, good in all Depressions of the Spirits
and paralytic Disorders.




                              CHAP. XLVI.

                   _Of the Water of the four Seeds._


This Water has its Name from the four Seeds from whence is it drawn,
_viz._ the Seeds of sweet Fennel, Coriander, Angelica, and Anise.


       _Recipe for ten Gallons of the Water of the four Seeds._

Take of sweet Fennel-seed seven Ounces; Coriander-seed nine Ounces; of
the Seeds of Angelica and Anise, of each three Ounces; bruise all these
in a Mortar, and put them into the Still with ten Gallons and a Half of
Proof Spirits, and two Gallons of Water; draw off with a gentle Fire
till the Faints begin to rise, and dulcify with fine Sugar.

This Water is a very good Carminative, good in Cholics, Nauseas of the
Stomach, and Gripings of the Bowels.




                             CHAP. XLVII.

                        _Of the Divine Water._


This is one of those Waters whose Names have rendered them famous. The
Basis of this Water is Orange flowers, the other Ingredients being
added to diversify the Flavour, and render it more agreeable.


                _Recipe for a Gallon of Divine Water._

Take of Orange-flowers fresh gathered two Pounds; Coriander-seed three
Ounces; Nutmegs Half an Ounce; bruise the Nutmegs and Coriander-seeds;
and put them, together with the Orange-flowers, into an Alembic with
a Gallon of Proof Spirit and two Quarts of Water; draw off the Liquor
with a gentle Fire, till the Faints begin to rise, and dulcify with
fine Sugar.

This is a very pleasant Cordial, both with regard to its Smell and
Taste; and on that Account in great Esteem abroad.




                             CHAP. XLVIII.

                           _Of Roman Water._


This Water has its Name from its being made first at _Rome_; and from
whence great Quantities are still exported to different Parts of
_Europe_.


                 _Recipe for a Gallon of Roman Water._

Take the outer or yellow Peels of six Citrons; two Drams of Mace
bruised; a Gallon of Proof Spirit, and two Quarts of Water: Draw off
with a gentle Fire till the Faints begin to rise, and dulcify with fine
Sugar.

This Water is generally of a red or purple Colour, the former of which
may be easily given by infusing in it a few Grains of Cochineal, or the
red Parts of Clove Gilly-flowers; and the latter by adding to the above
a few Violets. When the Colour is extracted, run the Liquor through the
filtrating Bag, and it will be very bright and clear.




                              CHAP. XLIX.

                        _Of_ Barbadoes _Water_.


There is a great Variety of Waters called by this Name, made by foreign
Distillers; but the following Recipes will be sufficient to shew the
Distiller the Method of making them, and how to vary the Flavour of his
Waters, so as to adapt them to the Taste of his Customers.


         _Recipe for a Gallon of rectified_ Barbadoes _Water_.

Take the outer Rind of eight large Florentine Citrons; Half an Ounce
of Cinnamon bruised, and a Gallon of rectified Spirit. Distil to a
Dryness in Balneum Mariæ. Then dissolve two Pounds of Sugar in a Quart
of Water, and mix it with the distilled Liquor, and run it thro’ the
filtrating Bag, which will render it bright and fine.


   _Recipe for making a Gallon of amber-coloured_ Barbadoes _Water_.

Take of the yellow Rinds of six Bergamots, Half an Ounce of Cinnamon,
and two Drams of Cloves. Bruise the Spices and digest the whole six
Days in a Gallon of rectified Spirit; and then add a Dram of Saffron,
and let the whole stand six Days longer in Digestion; dissolve two
Pounds of fine Sugar in a Quart of Water, add it to the Tincture, and
run it thro’ the filtrating Bag.

After the same manner may be made _Barbadoes_ Waters of different
Kinds, by adding Lemon, or Orange peels instead of those of Citron or
Bergamot; or, by varying the Spices.




                               CHAP. L.

                            _Of Ros Solis._


The Ros Solis or Sun-dew, from whence this Cordial Water has its Name,
is a small low Plant, with a fibrous Root, from whence spring small
round hollowish Leaves, on Foot stalks about an Inch long, covered
and fringed with short red Hairs, which give a red Cast to the whole
Leaf. It grows in champaign and mossy Grounds, in a pale red Moss, and
flowers in _May_.


                _Recipe for ten Gallons of Ros Solis._

Take of Ros Solis picked clean, four Pounds; Cinnamon, Cloves, and
Nutmegs, of each three Ounces and a Half; Marigold-flowers one Pound;
Caraway-seeds ten Ounces; Proof Spirit ten Gallons, and of Water three
Gallons. Distil with a pretty brisk Fire, till the Faints begin to
rise. Then take of Liquorice Root sliced Half a Pound; Raisins stoned
two Pounds; red Saunders Half a Pound; digest these three Days in two
Quarts of Water, and strain out the clear Liquor, in which dissolve
three Pounds of fine Sugar, and mix it with the Spirit drawn by
Distillation.


      _Recipe for making ten Gallons of Ros Solis by Digestion._

Take Ros Solis clean picked three Pounds; Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, and
Cinnamon, the Seeds of Caraway and Coriander of each three Ounces;
Ginger, the lesser Cardamom, Zedoary, and Calamus Aromaticus, of each
one Ounce; Cubebs and yellow Saunders of each Half and Ounce; red
Saunders three Ounces; red Rose Leaves dried three Handfuls. Proof
Spirit ten Gallons; digest the whole six Days in a Vessel close stoped,
and then strain off the clear Liquor, and dulcify it with fine Sugar.

                                  Or,

Take Ros Solis picked three Pounds; Cinnamon and Nutmegs, Caraway and
Coriander-seeds, of each three Ounces; Cloves, Mace, and Ginger, of
each one Ounce and a Quarter; Cubebs, Cardamoms, Zedoary, and Calamus
Aromaticus, of each Half an Ounce; red Roses dried three Ounces;
Liquorice Root sliced, six Ounces; Raisins stoned one Pound and a Half;
Cochineal and Saffron, of each three Drams; digest the whole eight Days
in ten Gallons of Proof Spirits; strain off, and dulcify as before.


            _Recipe for ten Gallons of_ Turin _Ros Solis_.

Take of damask Roses, Orange-flowers, Lilies of the Valley, and
Jasmine-flowers, of each two Pounds and a Half; Cinnamon five Ounces;
Cloves three Drams: Put these Ingredients into an Alembic, with four
Gallons and a Half of Water, and draw off three Gallons, with a
moderate Fire; to this Water add seven Gallons of Proof Spirit, in
which a Dram of Cochineal and two Drams of Saffron has been infused;
dulcify with fine Sugar, and run the whole through the filtrating Bag.

All these different Kinds of Ros Solis are excellent Cordials, good in
all Depressions of the Spirits, Nauseas, and paralytic Disorders.




                               CHAP. LI.

                           _Of Usquebaugh._


Usquebaugh is a very celebrated Cordial, the Basis of which is Saffron.
There are different Ways of making this famous Compound; but the
following are equal to any I have seen.


            _Recipe for ten Gallons of common Usquebaugh._

Take of Nutmegs, Cloves, and Cinnamon, of each two Ounces; of the Seeds
of Anise, Caraway and Coriander, of each four Ounces; Liquorice Root
sliced Half a Pound; bruise the Seeds and Spices, and put them together
with the Liquorice into the Still with eleven Gallons of Proof Spirits,
and two Gallons of Water; distil with a pretty brisk Fire till the
Faints begin to rise. But as soon as your Still begins to work, fasten
to the Nose of the Worm two Ounces of _English_ Saffron tied up in a
Cloth, that the Liquor may run thro’ it, and extract all its Tincture,
and in order to this you should often press the Saffron with your
Fingers. When the Operation is finished, dulcify your Goods with fine
Sugar.


         _Recipe for making ten Gallons of Royal Usquebaugh._

Take of Cinnamon, Ginger, and Coriander-seed, of each three Ounces;
Nutmegs four Ounces and a Half; Mace, Cloves and Cubebs, of each one
Ounce and a Half. Bruise these ingredients, and put them into an
Alembic with eleven Gallons of Proof Spirit, and two Gallons of Water;
and distil till the Faints begin to rise; fastening four Ounces and a
Half of _English_ Saffron tied in a Cloth to the End of the Worm, as
directed in the preceding Recipe. Take Raisins stoned four Pounds and
a Half; Dates three Pounds, Liquorice Root sliced two Pounds; digest
these twelve Hours in two Gallons of Water; strain out the clear
Liquor, add it to that obtained by Distillation, and dulcify the whole
with fine Sugar.


         _Recipe for ten Gallons of Usquebaugh by Digestion._

Take of Raisins stoned five Pounds; Figs sliced one Pound and a Half;
Cinnamon Half a Pound; Nutmegs three Ounces; Cloves and Mace, of each
one Ounce and a Half; Liquorice two Pounds; Saffron four Ounces;
bruise the Spices, slice the Liquorice, and pull the Saffron in
pieces; digest these Ingredients eight Days in ten Gallons of Proof
Spirit, in a Vessel close stoped; then filter the Liquor, and add to
it two Gallons of _Canary_ Wine, and Half an Ounce of the Tincture of
Ambergrease.


        _Recipe for making ten Gallons of_ French _Usquebaugh_.

Take of Saffron three Ounces, of the essential Oil or Essence of
Florentine Citron, Bergamot, _Portugal_ Orange, and Lemon, of each a
Hundred Drops; Angelica-seed, Vanellos and Mace, of each one Ounce and
a Half; Cloves and Coriander-seed of each three Quarters of an Ounce;
bruise the Seeds and Spices, and put all into an Alembic with eleven
Gallons of Proof Spirit, and two Gallons of Water; and draw off with a
gentle Fire till the Faints begin to rise, fastening to the Nose of the
Worm four Ounces of Saffron in a Cloth. When the Operation is finished
dulcify the Goods with fine Sugar.

These Waters are excellent Cephalic Cordials, and Alexipharmics; and
are excelled by nothing in suddenly reviving the Spirits when depressed
by Sickness, _&c._




                              CHAP. LII.

                             _Of Ratafia._


Ratafia is a Liquor in great Esteem, and most Persons are acquainted
with it; tho’ the true Method of making it is known only to a few.
There are various Kinds of Ratafia made from different Fruits. I shall
give Recipes for making those which are at present in most Esteem;
which may serve as Instances for making these Goods from any other
Kinds of Fruit.


                         1. _Of red Ratafia_.

There are three Sorts of Ratafia drawn from red Fruits, distinguished
by the Epithets _fine_, _dry_, and _common_.

The Fruits most proper to make the red Ratafia are the black Heart
Cherry, the common red Cherry, the black Cherry, the Merry or Honey
Cherry, the Strawberry, the Rasberry, the red Gooseberry, and the
Mulberry.

These Fruits should be gathered in the Height of their respective
Seasons and the largest and most beautiful of them chosen for the
purpose.

Thus with regard to the Heart Cherry, it should be large, fleshy,
and thorough but not over ripe; for then a Part of its Juice will be
evaporated on the Tree: Care must be also taken, that its Colour be not
decayed; but clear and almost transparent, and well tasted.

The black Cherry, or as it is often called, the black Arvon, must be
extremely ripe, because it is used to colour the Ratafia when that of
the other fails. The Criterion of judging when it is thoroughly ripe
is its Blackness; for, when in Perfection, it is perfectly black. It
should also be remembered that this Fruit is better and more profitable
in Proportion to its Sweetness; as the Flavour of the Ratafia will be
rendered more agreeable, and a less Quantity of Sugar necessary.

As the Gooseberry is an acid Fruit, it must be chosen as ripe as
possible. The Fruit large, and the Skin and Husk so transparent as to
see the Seeds through it. The Gooseberry should be used immediately
after its being gathered; for it is very liable to ferment, which will
inevitably spoil the Ratafia. Gooseberries are chiefly used to render
the Ratafia dry or sharp, and consequently less soft; and therefore
their Quantity should always be proportioned to that Intention.

The Merry to be good should be small, black, the Skin transparent, full
of Liquor of deep black Purple Colour. The greatest Care should be
taken, that it be fresh gathered, and not rotten. It corrects the acid
Juices of the other Fruits by its Sweetness, softens the Composition;
and is of great Service in colouring the Ratafia.

The Mulberry is of the greatest Service in colouring the Ratafia. It
should be chosen large, and fully ripe, at which time it is of a black
Purple Colour. Its Taste also greatly contributes to render the Ratafia
of a pleasant and agreeable Flavour.

The Strawberry greatly contributes to increase the rich Flavour of the
Ratafia; but it must be chosen ripe, and large; fresh gathered and not
bruised. Another Caution necessary to this Fruit is, that they are
gathered in dry warm Weather; for if gathered in rainy Weather they
will want that fine Taste, for which they are so greatly valued.

The Rasberry is also added to augment the Richness of the Liquor, to
which its elegant perfumy Taste greatly contributes; by its agreeable
Acidity it renders the Flavour more brisk and agreeable. It must be
fresh gathered, full ripe, and free from Spots and Mouldness, which
this Fruit is particularly subject to.

Having thus concisely enumerated the Qualities requisite in the several
Fruits, to render the Ratafia of a rich and elegant Flavour, we shall
proceed to give the best Methods for making Ratafia from them.


            _Recipe for making red Ratafia, fine and soft._

Take of the black Heart Cherries twenty-four Pounds; black Cherries
four Pounds; Rasberries and Strawberries, of each three Pounds: Pick
these Fruits from their Stalks, and bruise them, in which Condition let
them continue twelve Hours; press out the Juice, and, to every Pint
of it add a Quarter of a Pound of Sugar. When the Sugar is dissolved
run the whole through the filtrating Bag, and add to it three Quarts
of clean Proof Spirits. Then take of Cinnamon four Ounces; of Mace an
Ounce; and of Cloves two Drams. Bruise these Spices, put them into an
Alembic with a Gallon of clean Proof Spirits and two Quarts of Water,
and draw off a Gallon with a brisk Fire. Add as much of this spicy
Spirit to your Ratafia as will render it agreeable to your Palate;
about one fourth is the usual Proportion.

Ratafia made according to the above Recipe will be of a very rich
Flavour, and elegant Colour. It may be rendered more or less of a spicy
Flavour, by adding or diminishing the Quantity of Spirit distilled from
the Spices.

Some in making Ratafia suffer the expressed Juices of their Fruits to
ferment several Days; by this means the Vinosity of the Ratafia is
increased; but, at the same time, the elegant Flavour of the Fruits
greatly diminished. Wherefore if the Ratafia be desired stronger or
more vinous, it may be done by adding more Spirits to the expressed
Juice; by which means the Flavour of the Fruits may be preserved, as
well as the Ratafia rendered stronger.

It is also a Method with some to tie the Spices in a Linen Rag, and
suspend them in the Ratafia. But if this Method be taken it will
be necessary to augment the Quantity of Spirit first added to the
expressed Juice. There is no great Difference in the two Methods of
adding the Spices, except that by suspending them in the Ratafia, the
Liquor is generally rendered less bright and transparent.

There is also another Method practised in making Ratafia, which is
this: Take the Quantity of Fruit proposed, bruise it, and immediately
pour the Spirit on the Pulp. After standing a Day or two express the
Juice and Spirit, filtrate it, and add the Sugar and Spices as before.
But this Method requires more Spirit than the former, as it will be
impossible to press it all out of the Skins and other Parts of the
Fruit remaining after the Juice is extracted.


          2. _Of making fine and dry Ratafia from red Fruit._

Tho’ the Ratafia we have just mentioned will doubtless please the
Palates of many People; yet there are others who would prefer a
different Sort; it is therefore necessary to know how to make dry as
well as sweet Ratafia, if we are desirous of pleasing all Sorts of
Palates.

Dry Ratafia is prepared in the same manner as the preceding, but the
Ingredients are different.

An equal Quantity of Cherries and Gooseberries are necessary in making
dry or sharp Ratafia; because the Acidity of the Gooseberries gives
the requisite Flavour to this Sort of Liquor. But, at the same time,
care must be taken that the Gooseberries be fully ripe; for otherwise,
tho’ Gooseberries are more acid before they are ripe than afterwards;
yet that Acidity is not the Flavour desired; it is acerb and rough,
and will render the Flavour of the Ratafia disagreeable. The same
Observation holds good also with regard to the Cherries; they must be
fully ripe as in making the soft Ratafia.

Instead of black Cherries used in the Composition of the preceding
Ratafia, Mulberries should be used in this: The reason for this Change
is, that the Juice of the black Cherry is more sweet and glutinous than
that of the Mulberry, and therefore less fit for making dry Ratafia.
But the Mulberries must be the ripest and blackest possible, in order
to give the better Colour to the Liquor.

More Spirit and less Sugar in proportion to the Juice of the Fruit,
is also required in this Composition than in the foregoing; but with
regard to the Spices, the same Quantity is generally added to both.


            _Recipe for making red Ratafia, fine and dry._

Take of Cherries and Gooseberries, of each thirty Pounds; Mulberries
seven Pounds; Rasberries ten Pounds. Pick all these Fruits clean from
their Stalks, _&c._ bruise them, and let them stand twelve Hours; but
do not suffer them to ferment. Press out the Juice, and to every Pint
add three Ounces of Sugar; when the Sugar is dissolved run it thro’ the
filtrating Bag, and to every five Pints of Liquor add four Pints of
clean Proof Spirit; together with the same Proportion of Spirit drawn
from the Spices in the foregoing Composition.

But it may not be amiss to observe here, that different Distillers use
different Quantities of the Spirit drawn from the Spices. The best
Method therefore is to imitate the Flavour most universally approved
of, which may be easily done by adding a greater or less Proportion of
the spiced Spirit.


                        3. _Of mixed Ratafia._

By mixed Ratafia is meant the Juices of Fruits prepared, and ready to
be mixed with the Spirit when called for.


                  _Recipe for making mixed Ratafia._

Ratafia is composed of Cherries and Gooseberries; of these the best are
to be chosen, bruised, and in that Condition suffered to remain some
Days to ferment. The Juice is then to be strained off, the Quantity
of Sugar and Brandy added, and the whole put into a Cask and close
stopped. A Lee or Sediment will fall to the Bottom of the Cask, which
Sediment will be of great Use in preserving the Ratafia.

The Proportion of black Cherries must be large in this Ratafia, because
the Colour, which this is greatly valued for, chiefly comes from the
Juice of that Fruit.

The Sugar must not be put in at once, because the Acidness of the
Liquor would cause a considerable Effervescence, but by a little at a
time.

These Instructions being observed, a Ratafia of this Kind may be easily
made: And as the Spirit is not to be mixed with it, till the Ratafia
is called for, a large Quantity of it may be made at a small Expence,
when the Fruits are in Perfection, which cannot be done by the common
Methods.


                  _Recipe for making mixed Ratafia._

Take of common Cherries, thoroughly ripe, four Hundred and fifty
Pounds; Gooseberries, large and ripe, two Hundred and twenty-five
Pounds; black Cherries ripe and large, fifty Pounds. Bruise these
Fruits, and in that Condition let them continue three or four Days to
ferment. Then press out the Juice, and add one fifth Part of Spirit;
that is, if you have two Hundred and fifty Pints of Juice you must add
to it fifty Pints of Spirit. When your Spirit and Juice are mixed put
them into a Cask, and for every Pint add three Ounces of Sugar. By this
means your Ratafia will be always ready to mix with Spirit.

But as the Proportion of Spirit is but small, it will be necessary to
taste your Ratafia at least every Month, lest it should ferment, and
by that means lose both its Flavour and Colour. As soon therefore as
you perceive the least Alteration in your Ratafia, more Spirit must be
added to stop the Fermentation; and by this Method it may be kept the
whole Year.

If you have any Ratafia remaining at the End of the Year, you must mix
it with that just made, adding a large Proportion of black Cherries;
because the Colour in the old Ratafia will not be equal to that of
the new. Or you may add to your old Ratafia a proper Quantity of the
fresh Juice of black Cherries, which will restore its Colour, and, in
a great Measure its Flavour too: So that if your Ratafia has been well
preserved, it will, when mixed with fresh Juice of black Cherries, be
but little inferior to the new.


                        4. _Of white Ratafia._

As red Fruits are the Basis of that called red Ratafia, so, on the
contrary, that made from the Juices of white Fruits is denominated
white Ratafia.

There are various Kinds of Ratafia made from various Fruits; but I
shall only give Recipes for making three or four Sorts, which will be
sufficient for all the rest, as the Method is nearly the same in all.


_Recipe for making Ratafia from the Muscat, or white Frontiniac Grape._

The Berries of this Kind of Grape are large, and grow extremely
close upon the Bunches, which are very long, and have commonly two
Shoulders: The Fruit, when ripe, has a rich musky Flavour; but it is
commonly very late in Autumn, before these Grapes are in Perfection;
and the Berries being so very close upon the Bunches, detain the
Moisture in the Centre; so that they often perish: To prevent which
some curious Persons look over their Vines, soon after the Grapes are
formed, and, with a Pair of Scissars, cut out all small ones, so as
to leave the others at a moderate Distance, whereby the Sun and Air
are easily admitted, which dissipates the Moisture, and prevents their
perishing. There is another Kind of this Grape, called by some the
white Frontiniac of _Alexandria_, and by others the _Jerusalem_ Muscat,
which is a very large Grape, and, when ripe, an excellent Fruit; but
is rarely brought to Perfection in _England_. The Berries of the
_Jerusalem_ Muscat, are of an oval Shape, and very large. They grow
very loose on the Bunches, are very fleshy and firm, and, when ripe,
are of greenish white, and a delicate Flavour.

Either of these Kinds of Grapes will make very fine Ratafia; but which
ever of them are chosen, they must be picked from the Stalks, and only
the finest Berries made use of. The Stones must also be picked out; for
if they are bruised with the Berries, the fine Flavour of the Juice
will be greatly diminished.

When you have picked the Grapes from the Stalks, and taken out the
Stones, press out the Juice, and filtrate it through a Flannel Bag.
Then add the Quantity of Sugar and Spirit, and flavour it to your mind
with a Spirit distilled from Spices, in the manner explained below.

The general Proportion of Sugar and Spirit, is, to twenty Pints of the
Juice, five Pounds and a Half of Sugar, ten Pints of Spirit, and what
Quantity you please of the spicy Spirit.

To make the spicy Spirit, take of Mace one Pound, Nutmegs four Ounces,
Spirit three Gallons, and draw off the whole in Balneum Mariæ.

By the same Method you may make red Ratafia from the red Frontiniac;
except that the Grapes, when bruised, must be suffered to ferment three
or four Days, before the Juice is pressed out; because the Colour,
which resides principally in the Skins of the Grapes, will, by that
means, be extracted.

The Berries of the red Muscat, or red Frontiniac, are about the Size of
those of the white; but grow much thinner on the Bunches. This Grape,
when thoroughly ripe, has the richest and highest Flavour of any
yet known; but it must have a dry Soil and a South Aspect, otherwise
it seldom ripens well in _England_. Besides the above Grape, there
is another called by some red Muscat of _Alexandria_, and by others
red _Jerusalem_ Muscat. This is not quite so late in ripening as the
white Muscat of _Alexandria_ above described; and for that reason more
esteemed. The Berries of this Kind are not quite so large as those of
the white, but of the same Form, and equal in Goodness.


                     5. _Of Ratafia from Peaches._

The Ratafia made from the Peach is the finest and richest Flavour of
any made from stoned Fruits. It is however necessary to gather the
Peach when thoroughly ripe, but, at the same time not to suffer it to
hang too long on the Tree: For as, on the one hand, it will not acquire
its delicious Flavour and Smell till thoroughly ripe, so, on the
other, it will lose both if suffered to hang on the Tree, after it has
attained to a full Maturity. Another necessary Caution is, to gather it
in fine warm Weather, and near the Middle of the Day; because then both
the Flavour and Smell are in the greatest Perfection.

It is also requisite to make Choice of the proper Sorts of Peaches;
for there is a remarkable Difference in the Flavour of these Fruits.
Gardeners reckon above thirty Sorts of Peaches, but not more than half
that number are proper for making Ratafia. I shall therefore give
a short Description of those that are most proper, that the young
Distiller may not be disappointed in making Ratafia from Peaches.

1. The early Purple (called by the _French_ _La Pourprée hâtive_.) This
Tree hath smooth Leaves: The Flowers large, and open: The Fruit is
large, round, and of a fine red Colour: The Flesh is white, but very
red at the Stone; very full of Juice, which has a rich vinous Flavour.
This Peach is ripe about the Middle of _August_.

2. The large, or _French_ Mignon. The Leaves of this Tree are smooth,
and the Flowers large and open. The Fruit is a little oblong, generally
swelling out on one Side, and of a fine Colour. The Juice is very
sweet, and of a high Flavour; the Flesh white, but very red at the
Stone, which is small, and easily separates from the Flesh. This Peach
is ripe in the middle of _August_.

3. The Chevreuse; or, belle Chevreuse. This Tree hath smooth Leaves,
and its Flowers are small and contracted. The Fruit is of a middling
Size, a little oblong, and of an elegant Colour. The Flesh is white,
but very red at the Stone, from which it separates; full of a rich
sugary Juice, and ripens towards the latter End of _August_.

4. The red Magdalen, called by the _French_ about _Paris_, _Magdeleine
de Courson_. The Leaves of this Tree are deeply sawed, and the Flowers
large and open. The Fruit is large, round, and of a fine red Colour.
The Flesh is white, but very red at the Stone, from which it separates.
The Juice is very sugary, and of a rich Flavour. It is ripe the latter
End of _August_.

5. _Smith_’s _Newington_. This Tree hath sawed Leaves, and large open
Flowers. The Fruit is of a middling Size, and of a fine red, next the
Sun. The Flesh is very firm and white, but very red at the Stone, to
which it closely adheres. It has a rich sugary Juice, and is ripe the
latter End of _August_.

6. The Chancellor. The Leaves of this Tree are smooth, and the Flowers
small and contracted. The Fruit is shaped somewhat like the Belle
Chevreuse, but rounder. The Flesh is white and melting, and separates
from the Stone, where it is of a fine red Colour. The Skin is very
thin, and the Juice remarkably rich. It ripens about the End of
_August_.

7. The Bellegarde; or, as the _French_ call it, the _Gallande_. This
Tree hath narrow Leaves, and small contracted Flowers. The Fruit is
very large and round, and of a deep purple Colour, on the Side exposed
to the Sun. The Flesh is white, melting, and separates from the Stone,
where it is of a deep red Colour. The Juice is very rich. This Peach is
ripe about the beginning of _September_.

8. The Bourdine. The Leaves of this Tree are smooth, and the Flowers
small and contracted. The Fruit is large, round, and of a fine red
Colour next the Sun. The Flesh is white, melting, and separates from
the Stone, where it is of a fine red Colour. The Juice is vinous and
rich. It is ripe the beginning of _September_, and greatly esteemed by
the curious.

9. The Lisle; or, as the _French_ call it, _la petite Violette Hâtive_.
This Tree hath smooth Leaves, and small contracted Flowers. The Fruit
is of a middle Size, and next the Sun of a fine violet Colour. The
Flesh is of a pale yellow, melting, full of a rich vinous Juice; but
adheres to the Stone, where it is very red. This Fruit is ripe the
Beginning of _September_.

10. The old _Newington_. The Leaves of this Tree are sawed, and the
Flowers large and open. The Fruit is fair, large, and of a beautiful
red Colour next the Sun. The Flesh is white, melting, and closely
adheres to the Stone, where it is of a deep red Colour. The Juice is
very rich and vinous. It is ripe about the Middle of _September_.

11. The Rambouillet, commonly called the Rambullion. This Tree has
smooth Leaves, and large open Flowers. The Fruit is of a middling Size,
rather round than long, deeply divided by a Furrow in the Middle; of
a fine red Colour next the Sun, but of a light Yellow next the Wall.
The Flesh is melting, of a bright yellow Colour, except near the
Stone, from which it separates, where it is of a deep red. The Juice
is rich and of a vinous Flavour. This Fruit ripens about the Middle of
_September_.

12. The Pourprée; or, as the _French_ generally call it _Pourprée
tardive_, the late Purple. The Leaves of this Tree are very large, and
sawed, the Shoots strong, and the Flowers small and contracted. The
Flesh, except near the Stone, from which it separates, and where it is
red, is white, melting, and of a rich sugary Juice. It is not ripe till
near the End of _September_.

13. The Nevette. The Leaves of this Tree are sawed, and the Flowers
small and contracted. The Fruit is large, somewhat longer than round,
of a bright red Colour next the Sun, and of a pale yellow on the other.
The Flesh is melting, full of a rich Juice, and very red at the Stone,
from which it separates. It ripens about the Middle of _September_, and
is esteemed one of the best Peaches.

14. The Royal. This Tree hath smooth Leaves, and small contracted
Flowers. The Fruit is large, round, and of a deep red on the Side
exposed to the Sun, but of a pale yellow on the other. The Flesh is
white, melting, and full of a rich Juice, of a white Colour, except
near the Stone from which it separates, where it is of a deep red. This
Fruit is ripe about the Middle of _September_.

15. The monstrous Pavy of Pomponne. The Leaves of this Tree are smooth;
the Flowers large and open. The Fruit is very large and round, many
times fourteen Inches in Circumference. The Flesh is white, melting,
and closely adheres to the Stone, where it is of a deep red Colour. The
Side next the Sun is a beautiful red, and the other of a pale flesh
Colour. It ripens about the End of _October_, and when the Autumn is
warm, is an excellent Peach.

The above Description of the different Kinds of Peaches proper for
making Ratafia, will be of use to the young Artist, as the fine Flavour
of this Liquor in a great Measure depends on a proper Choice of the
Fruits used in the Composition; and if the Instructions relating to the
Perfections and Ripeness of these Fruits are observed, an excellent
Cordial may be easily made in the following manner.

Take your Peaches, bruise them, and instantly strain out their Juice
thro’ a Piece of strong Linen. In this Juice, without any Mixture of
Water, dissolve your Sugar. And when the Sugar is melted, add the
Quantity of Spirit. No Spices must be used in this Ratafia, the fine
Flavour of the Peach being far preferable to all Spices in the World.
The Quantity of either the Sugar or Spirit may be augmented or lessened
according to your own Judgment, or in Proportion to the Price of your
Ratafia.

As soon as the Spirit is added to the dulcified Juice of the Peaches,
the whole must be filtrated thro’ a Flannel Bag, put into Bottles
close stopped; for the fine Flavour of the Peach will soon be lost
unless the Bottles are very well corked. Some also cover the Cork with
Sealing-wax, which is not a bad Caution.

If you would have your Ratafia of a bright red Colour, your must let
your bruised Peaches ferment a Day or two; by which means the Colour of
the Skin, and that of the Flesh near the Stone, will be extracted, and
give your Ratafia the Colour desired.


                    4. _Of Orange-flower Ratafia._

The Orange-flower has been already described, Page 127. I shall
therefore only add, that the Orange-flowers used in making Ratafia
should be large, in their full Perfection, gathered before the Rising
of the Sun, and carefully picked from their Stalks, _&c._ Some blanch
the Orange-flowers, by putting them into a small Quantity of Water,
and boiling them a few Minutes over the Fire. But by this Method the
most volatile Parts of the Flower are evaporated, by which the Ratafia
will lose much of its delicate Flavour.

The best way therefore is to use the Orange-flowers without any
previous Boiling.


       _Recipe for making ten Gallons of Orange-flower Ratafia._

Take of Orange-flowers fresh gathered, and clean picked from their
Stalks, _&c._ five Pounds, and infuse them six Days in five Gallons of
clean Proof Spirit. Dissolve fourteen Pounds of Sugar in five Gallons
of Water; and after straining the Spirit from the Flowers, mix it with
the Syrup, and filtrate the whole thro’ a Flannel Bag.

Some instead of common Water use the Orange-flower Water; but it will
be necessary in pursuing that Method to take care that the Water be
fresh made, and very fragrant; for otherwise instead of improving, you
will greatly injure the fine Flavour of your Ratafia.

The foreign Distillers keep two Sorts of Orange-flower Ratafia,
one they call _single_ and the other _double_. The former is made
according to the above Recipe; but in making the latter they use double
the Quantity of Orange-flowers, and considerably augment the Proportion
of Sugar. It will be needless to give a Recipe for making that Sort of
Ratafia, which they call _double_, as the Process is exactly the same.


                  5. _Ratafia of_ Portugal _Orange_.

Ratafia may be made from any Sort of Orange; but that of the _Portugal_
Orange is reckoned the best.

The Oranges must be chosen fair, large, and ripe; and the outer or
yellow Peel be carefully taken off. The Juice of the Oranges must be
then pressed out, dulcified with Sugar, and mixed with the Spirit:
after which the outer Rinds are to be added, and after a proper
Infusion, the whole filtrated through a Flannel Bag.

    _Recipe for making three Gallons of_ Portugal _Orange Ratafia_.

Take of the Juice of _Portugal_ Oranges two Gallons; clean rectified
Spirit one Gallon; four Pounds of Sugar; and the outer Peel of ten
Oranges. Let the whole infuse a Fortnight, and then filter the Liquor
through a Flannel Bag.

Some instead of infusing the Peel as directed in the above Recipe, put
the Peel into the Spirit, and distil it in Balneum Mariæ; after which
they add the Spirit to the dulcified Orange-juice, and filtrate as
before.

The foregoing Recipes for making Ratafia from different Fruits, _&c._
will be sufficient to instruct the young Distiller in the Method
necessary to be pursued for making Cordials of this Kind; for it would
be tedious to give Formula’s for making all the Kinds of Ratafia kept
by different Distillers. The Method in all is nearly the same; and
the Proportion of Sugar and Spirit may be easily discovered by a few
Experiments. I shall therefore conclude this Chapter with giving a
Recipe for making what is called by our _English_ Distillers Ratafia,
tho’ a very bad Composition.


          _Recipe for making ten Gallons of common Ratafia._

Take of Nutmegs eight Ounces; bitter Almonds ten Pounds; _Lisbon_ Sugar
eight Pounds; Ambergrise ten Grains: Infuse these Ingredients three
Days in ten Gallons of clean Proof Spirit, and filter thro’ a Flannel
Bag for use.

The Nutmegs and bitter Almonds must be bruised; and the Ambergrise
rubbed with the _Lisbon_ Sugar in a Marble Mortar, before they are
infused in the Spirit.




                              CHAP. LIII.

                          _Of Gold Cordial._


This Cordial has its Name from Leaf Gold being formerly used in its
Composition; but as later Experiments have abundantly demonstrated that
Gold can add nothing to its Virtues, it is now generally omitted.


           _Recipe for making ten Gallons of Gold Cordial._

Take of the Roots of Angelica, four Pounds; Raisins stoned, two Pounds;
Coriander-seeds, Half a Pound; Caraway-seeds and Cinnamon, of each
Half a Pound; Cloves two Ounces; Figs and Liquorice-root, of each one
Pound; Proof Spirit eleven Gallons; Water two Gallons: The Angelica,
Liquorice, and Figs must be sliced, before they are added. Digest two
Days, and draw off by gentle Heat, till the Faints begin to rise,
hanging in a Piece of Linen fastened to the Mouth of the Worm an
Ounce of _English_ Saffron. Then dissolve eight Pounds of Sugar in
three Quarts of Rose Water, and add it to the distilled Liquor. Some
Distillers instead of Saffron colour their Goods with burnt Sugar, but
by this means the Cordial is greatly impaired in its Virtues.

                                  Or,

Take of the Juice of Alchermes five Ounces; Cloves two Ounces and a
Half; Musk and Ambergrise, of each Half a Dram; Loaf Sugar ten Pounds;
Proof Spirit eleven Gallons; digest the whole a Fortnight in a close
Vessel, and filter thro’ a Flannel Bag for use. Some add thirty Leaves
of Gold; but the Medicine is not at all the better for it.


Either of the above Recipes will produce an excellent Cordial; good in
Tremblings, Faintings, and Lowness of Spirits, _&c_. Also in Nauseas
and Griping Pains of the Stomach and Bowels.




                              CHAP. LIV.

                     _Of Cardamum, or All-fours._


This Water has its Name from the four Ingredients in its Composition;
and in some Countries is greatly used by the poorer Sort of People.


             _Recipe for making ten Gallons of Cardamum._

Take of Pimento, Caraway and Coriander-seeds, and Lemon-peel, of each
three Pounds; of Malt Spirits eleven Gallons; Water three Gallons. Draw
off with a gentle Fire, dulcify with ordinary Sugar, and make up the
Goods, to the Strength you desire with clean Water.

This is rarely called for unless by the poor Sort of People, who are
induced to use it from its Cheapness; tho’ it is a better Cordial than
many drawn from dearer Ingredients. It is an excellent Carminative, and
is often sold for Aqua Mirabilis.




                               CHAP. LV.

                             _Of Geneva._


There was formerly kept in the Apothecaries Shops a distilled
spirituous Water of Juniper; but the Vulgar being fond of it as a Dram,
the Distillers supplanted the Apothecaries, and sold it under the Name
of Geneva. The common Sort however is not made from Juniper-berries
as it ought to be, but from Oil of Turpentine; the Method of which we
shall give in the Sequel of this Chapter.

Juniper-berries are a roundish Fruit, of the Size of a Pea. They wither
and wrinkle in the drying, and we meet with them variously corrugated,
and usually covered with a bluish resinous Dust when fresh. They should
be chosen fresh, plump, full of Pulp, and of a strong Taste and Smell.
They are usually imported from _Germany_, tho’ we have plenty of the
Trees in _England_. It is but small with us, rarely rising to more than
three or four Feet in Height, and scarce ever exceeding five or six.
Some of the Juniper Shrubs are Males, some Females of the same Species;
the Male Shrubs produce in _April_ or _May_ a small Kind of Juli with
Apices on them very large, and full of Farina; the Females produce
none of these Juli but only the Berries, which do not ripen till the
second Year, and then do not immediately fall off, so that it is no
uncommon thing to see three Sets of Berries, or the Berries of three
different Years at once on the same Tree.

If you make use of _English_ Berries, let them be fully ripe before
they are gathered; and in order to preserve them, spread them very thin
on a boarded Floor, leaving the Windows and Doors open, and turn them
once a Day till they are dry; after which pack them up in Barrels, so
that no Air may come to them, and they will keep good all the Year.
Some, when they are dry, throw them altogether in a Heap in a Corner of
the Room, where they continue till wanted for use; but the Berries will
not keep so well by this Method as by being packed in Casks; they are
subject to contract a Mouldiness, which will give a Taste to the Goods,
greatly to their Disadvantage.

Some Distillers as soon as their Berries are gathered, put them into
Casks, and cover them with Spirits of Wine; by this Method the Berries
are indeed well preserved, without any Danger of contracting an ill
Smell, which they are very apt to do by the other Methods unless the
greatest Care be taken; but then it must be remembered, that the Spirit
will extract great Part of their essential Oil, in which their Virtues
consist, and consequently the Berries themselves will be rendered of
little Value. If, therefore, you preserve your Berries in this manner,
you should put into each Cask or Jarr, only the Quantity you use for
one Charge of your Still; and when you have occasion to use them, put
both the Spirits and Berries into your Alembic.

Thus your Berries will be finely preserved, without any Loss either of
their essential Oil, or the Spirits made use of to preserve.


              _Recipe for making ten Gallons of Geneva._

Take of Juniper-berries three Pounds, Proof Spirit ten Gallons; Water
four Gallons. Draw off by a gentle Fire till the Faints begin to rise,
and make up your Goods to the Strength required with clean Water.

The Distillers generally call those Goods which are made up Proof by
the Name of Royal Geneva; for the common Sort is much below Proof, ten
Gallons of Spirit being sufficient for fifteen Gallons of Geneva. Nay,
what is generally sold at the common Alehouses is made in the following
manner.

Take of the ordinary Malt Spirits ten Gallons; Oil of Turpentine two
Ounces, Bay Salt three Handfuls, Draw off by a gentle Fire till the
Faints begin to rise, and make up your Goods to the Strength required
with clean Water.

In this manner is the common Geneva made, and it is suprizing that
People should accustom themselves to drink it for pleasure.

There is a Sort of this Liquor called _Holland_’s Geneva, from it being
imported from _Holland_, which is greatly esteemed.

The Ingredients used by the _Dutch_ are, however, the same as those
given in the first Recipe of this Chapter, only instead of Malt Spirit
they use _French_ Brandy. In the first Part of this Treatise we have
sufficiently shewn the Nature of _French_ Brandy, and in what its
Excellence consists; and, also, that by the Help of a clean Spirit,
Cordial Waters may be made with the same Goodness as those drawn with
_French_ Brandy. If therefore the Distiller be careful in distilling
and rectifying his Malt Spirit, he may make Geneva equal to that of
the _Dutch_, provided it be kept to a proper Age; for all spirituous
Liquors contract a Softness and Mellowness by Age, impossible to be
imitated by Art.




                              CHAP. LVI.

                          _Of Cherry Brandy._


This Liquor is greatly called for in the Country; and is made different
ways. Some press out the Juice of the Cherries, and having dulcified
it with Sugar, add as much Spirit to it as the Goods will bear, or
the Price it is intended to be sold for. But the common Method is to
put the Cherries clean picked into a Cask, with a proper Quantity of
Proof Spirit, and after standing eighteen or twenty Days, the Goods
are drawn off into another Cask for Sale, and about two thirds of the
first Quantity of Spirits poured into the Cask upon the Cherries. This
is suffered to stand about a Month to extract the whole Virtue from
the Cherries, after which it is drawn off as before; and the Cherries
pressed to take out the Spirit they had absorbed. The Proportion of
Cherries and Spirit is not very nicely observed; the general Rule is
to let the Cask be about half filled with Cherries, and then filled up
with Proof Spirits. Some add to every twenty Gallons of Spirit half an
Ounce of Cinnamon, an Ounce of Cloves, and about three Pounds of Sugar,
by which the Flavour of the Goods is considerably increased. But in
order to save Expences, not only the Spices and Sugar are generally
omitted, but also great Part of the Cherries, and the Deficience
supplied by the Juice of Elder-berries. Your own Reason therefore, and
the Price you can sell your Goods for, must direct you in the Choice of
your Ingredients.

By the same Method you may make Rasberry Brandy; and if the Colour of
the Goods be not deep enough, it may be improved by an Addition of
Cherry Brandy.




                              CHAP. LVII.

                           _Of Honey Water._


This Water has its Name from the Honey in its Composition; tho’
that Ingredient is but of very little Service to the Water, if made
according to the usual Method.


             _Recipe for making a Gallon of Honey Water._

Take of the best Honey and Coriander-seeds, of each one Pound; Cloves,
one Ounce and a Half; Nutmegs and Gum Benjamin, of each an Ounce;
Vanilloes Number four. The yellow Rind of three large Lemons: Bruise
the Cloves, Nutmegs, Coriander-seed, and Benjamin; cut the Vanilloes
in pieces, and put all into a Glass Alembic, with one Gallon of clean
rectified Spirit, and after digesting forty eight Hours, draw off the
Spirit in Balneum Mariæ. To a Gallon of the above Spirit, add of damask
Rose Water and Orange-flower Water, of each a Pound and a Half; Musk
and Ambergrise of each five Grains. Grind the Musk and Ambergrise with
some of the Water in a Glass Mortar, and afterwards put all together
into a digesting Vessel, shaking them well together, and let them
circulate three Days and three Nights in a gentle Heat: Then let all
cool; filter and keep the Water in Bottles well stopped for use.

This Water was first made by that faithful Chemist Mr. _George Wilson_,
for King _James_ II. It is an Antiparalitic, smooths the Skin, and
gives one of the most agreeable Scents imaginable. Forty or sixty
Drops put into a Pint of clean Water, are sufficient for washing the
Hands and Face; and the same Proportion to Punch, or any Cordial Water,
gives a very agreeable Flavour.




                             CHAP. LVIII.

  _Of Unequalled Water, generally sold by the French Name_ l’Eau sans
                               Pareille.


There are two Sorts of this Water, one drawn considerably below Proof,
and rendered fine by Filtration, and the other without the Faints, the
Receiver being removed as soon as they begin to rise. The latter is
much the best, tho’ dearer than the former.


     _Recipe for making a Gallon of the common_ Eau sans Pareille.

Take the outer Peels of twelve Citrons, three Quarts of fine Proof
Spirit, and a Quart of Water. Put all into a Glass Alembic, and distil
to a Dryness in Balneum Mariæ; filtre the Water, and put it into
Bottles well stopped.

This is the common Sort, and what is generally sold here under the Name
_Eau sans Pareille_.


  _Recipe for making a Gallon of the best Sort of_ Eau sans Pareille.

Take of the Essence of Cedrat, Bergamot, Orange, and Lemon, of each
two Drams; rectified Spirit a Gallon; Water two Quarts. Put all into
a Glass Alembic, and distil in Balneum Mariæ till the Faints begin to
rise, when the Receiver must be immediately removed.

Some to save the Trouble and Expence of Distillation, mix the Essences
with the Spirit of Wine, in the manner before mentioned in the Chapter
for making Hungary Water; but this is greatly inferior to that made by
Distillation.




                              CHAP. LIX.

                      _Of the Water of Bouquet._


This Water has its Name from its Inventor, and is greatly esteemed
abroad for its Smell. It is indeed drawn from the most odoriferous
Flowers, and therefore it is no wonder that it is held in great Esteem.


           _Recipe for making a Gallon of Bouquet’s Water._

Take of the Flowers of white Lillies, and _Spanish_ Jessamin, of each
Half a Pound; Orange-flowers and those of the Jonquil and Pink of each
four Ounces; damask Roses one Pound. Let those be fresh gathered, and
immediately put into a Glass Alembic with a Gallon of clean Proof
Spirit, and two Quarts of Water. Place the Alembic in Balneum Mariæ,
draw off till the Faints begin to rise. You may use Spirit of Wine,
instead of Proof Spirit; but it will be absolutely necessary that it
be entirely inodorous; for otherwise your Water will fall short of the
desired Perfection.




                               CHAP. LX.

                          _Of Cyprus Water._


This Water is only a dilute Tincture of Ambergrise; but as it is used
by those who are fond of that Perfume, and known by the Name of Cyprus
Water, or _Eau de Chypre_, I would not omit giving the Recipe here,
intending to give a full Account of Ambergrise in a succeeding Chapter.


             _Recipe for making a Gallon of Cyprus Water._

Take of the Essence of Ambergrise Half an Ounce; put it into a Glass
Alembic with a Gallon of Spirit of Wine and two Quarts of Water. Place
the Alembic in Balneum Mariæ, and draw off till the Faints begin to
rise.




                              CHAP. LXI.

                 _Of Vestal Water, or_ Eau de Vestale.


This is a very agreeable Water, and has been long in use in several
Parts of _Europe_.


                _Recipe for a Gallon of Vestal Water._

Take of the Seeds of Daucus Creticus or Candy Carrots, two Ounces;
Spirit of Wine a Gallon; Water two Quarts. Distil in Balneum Mariæ till
the Faints begin to rise. Then add to the Spirit drawn over an Ounce
of the Essence of Lemons, and four Drops of the Essence of Ambergrise;
redistil in Balneum Mariæ, and keep the Water in Bottles well stoped
for use.




                              CHAP. LXII.

                 _Of Beauty Water, or_ Eau de Beauté.


This Water has it Name from its use in washing the Face, and giving an
agreeable Smell. It is drawn from Thyme and Marjoram, which gives it a
very elegant Odour.


             _Recipe for making a Gallon of Beauty Water._

Take of the flowery Tops of Thyme and Marjoram, of each one Pound;
Proof Spirits five Quarts; Water one Quart. Draw off in Balneum Mariæ,
till the Faints begin to rise, and keep it close stopped for use.




                             CHAP. LXIII.

                           _Of Royal Water._


This Water has its Name from being considered as the most excellent
of all scented Waters. It is compounded of the Cedrat, Nutmegs and
Mace, from whence the most elegant Smell is produced; and no Water is
at present thought equal to this. There are two Sorts of Royal Water,
one produced by a single Distillation, and the other by a double
Distillation, and thence called rectified, or double distilled Royal
Water.


                 _Recipe for a Gallon of Royal Water._

Take of Mace one Ounce; Nutmegs Half an Ounce; Essence of Cedrat, or
Bergamot two Drams: Put these into a Glass Alembic (after bruising the
Spices) with five Quarts of fine Proof Spirit, and draw off one Gallon
in Balneum Mariæ.


     _Recipe for making a Gallon of double distilled Royal Water._

Take of Mace one Ounce; Nutmegs Half an Ounce; bruise them, and put
them into an Alembic with six Quarts of fine Proof Spirit, and draw off
five Quarts with a gentle Fire. Then take the Spirit drawn off and put
it into a Glass Alembic, with two Drams of the Essence of Cedrat, or
Bergamot, and draw off a Gallon in Balneum Mariæ.

Either of these Recipes will produce an elegant Water; but the latter
greatly exceeds the former.




                              CHAP. LXIV.

     _Of the Tincture, or Essence of Ambergrise, Musk and Civet._


1. Authors have been long divided with regard to the Origin of
Ambergrise; some taking it for a vegetable Juice, which either dropped
into the Water from the Trunks or Branches of some Trees growing on
the Sea-coast, or exudated from their Roots which ran out of the Earth
into the Sea; some for an animal Production, and formed either by a
secret Process from Honey-combs, or the Dung of Birds; and others
have very circumstantially recorded that it is produced in the Whale.
These Opinions are however now looked upon as false; Ambergrise being
universally allowed to be a Mineral Production, of the Number of
Bitumens. It is a light and frothy Substance, which generally bubbles
up out of the Earth in a fluid Form, principally under Water, where it
is by Degrees hardened into the Masses we see it in.

Ambergrise in its natural, or common Form is a lax and coarse Substance
of an irregular Structure, friable, and so light as to swim upon
Water. It is of a pale gray Colour, with a faint Tinge of brown in
it; but Pieces perfectly and uniformly of this Colour are rare, what
we usually meet with is composed of whitish, yellowish, and blackish
Granules; and in Proportion as there is more or less of this whitish
Matter in these Masses, it is more or less scented and valuable. It is
found in Pieces of perfectly irregular Figures, and from the Bigness
of a Pea to those of ten, twenty, or more Pounds; nay there have been
Masses found of more than two Hundred Weight.

It should be chosen in clean and not over friable Pieces, of a pale
grey Colour, and as uniform as possible in its Structure, with small
black Specks within.

There are two Sorts of Essences made from this Perfume; one without
Addition of any other odoriferous Substance, and the other from
Ambergrise compounded with Musk and Civet.


            _Recipe for making the Essence of Ambergrise._

Take of Ambergrise and white Sugar-candy, of each three Drams; grind
them well together in a Glass Mortar, adding to them by slow Degrees,
five Ounces of rectified Spirit of Wine, digest the whole in a Martrass
(represented Fig. 8.) well stopped for four Days, and then separate the
clear Tincture or Essence, which keep in a Bottle well stopt for use.


        _Recipe for making the compound Essence of Ambergrise._

Take of Ambergrise and white Sugar-candy of each two Drams; Musk twelve
Grains; Civet two Grains; grind all these well together in a Glass
Mortar, adding by Degrees four Ounces of rectified Spirit of Wine;
digest and separate the clear Essence for use, as in the preceding
Recipe.

2. Musk is a dry, light, and friable Substance; of a dark blackish
Colour, with some Tinge of a purplish or blood Colour in it. It is
soft, and somewhat smooth and unctuous to the Touch, and of a highly
perfumed Smell. It is brought to us sewed up in a Kind of Bladders or
Cases of Skin, covered with a brownish Hair, which are the real Bags in
which the Musk is lodged while on the Animal. Musk should be chosen of
a very strong Scent, and in dry sound Bladders; and must be kept close
shut down in a Leaden Box, by which means it will retain its Smell, and
not grow too dry.


               _Recipe for making the Essence of Musk._

Take of Musk and white Sugar-candy of each one Dram; rub them well
together in a Marble Mortar, adding by Degrees during the rubbing
five Ounces of rectified Spirit of Wine: Put the whole into a Matrass,
digest three Days in a gentle Heat, and pour off the clear Essence,
which keep in a Bottle well stopt for use. Some add a few Grains
of Civet to their Essence of Musk, which considerably augments the
Fineness of the perfume.

3. Civet is produced, like Musk, in Bags growing to the lower Part of
the Belly of an Animal. It is of different Colours from a pure lively
whitish, to a black; but the nearer it approaches to the white the
better it is; of an extremely strong Smell, and a bitterish pungent
Taste.

The Essence of Civet is rarely used alone, but of great service in
making Additions to other odoriferous Waters, and therefore I shall
here give the Method of making it.


               _Recipe for making the Essence of Civet._

Take of Civet and double refined Sugar, of each two Drams; rub them
well together in a Glass Mortar, adding by Degrees five Ounces of
rectified Spirit of Wine: Put the whole into a Matrass, digest three
Days in a gentle Heat, and pour off the clear Essence for use. Tho’
the Essences in this Chapter are, properly speaking, Chemical
Preparations, and therefore foreign to the Business of the Distiller;
yet as they are often added to perfumed Waters, and easily made, I
thought the above Recipes would not be unacceptable to the Reader.




                              CHAP. LXV.

           _Of Faints, and the Uses they may be applied to._


In many of the preceding Recipes I have ordered the Receiver to be
removed as soon as the Faints begin to rise; because otherwise the
Goods would contract a disagreeable Taste and Smell. It is not however
to be understood that these Faints are to be thrown away, nor the
Working of the Still immediately stopped; for they are far from being
of no Value, notwithstanding they would be of great Disadvantage if
suffered to run among the more spirituous Parts of the Goods before
drawn off. As soon therefore as you find the clear Colour of the Goods
begins to change of a bluish or whitish Colour, remove the Receiver,
place another under the Nose of the Worm, and continue the Distillation
as long as the Liquor running from the Worm is spirituous, which may
be known by pouring a little of it on the Still Head, and applying
a lighted Candle to it; for if it is spirituous it will burn, but
otherwise not. When the Faints will no longer burn on the Still Head,
put out the Fire, and pour the Faints in a Cask for that Purpose; and
when, from repeated Distillations, you have procured a sufficient
Quantity of these Faints, let the Still be charged with them almost to
the Top. Then throw into the Still three or four Pounds of Salt, and
draw off as you would any other Charge as long as the Spirit extracted
is of a sufficient Strength; after which the Receiver is to be removed,
and the Faints saved by themselves as before.

The Spirits thus extracted from the Faints will serve in several
Compositions as well as fresh; but they are generally used in Aniseed
Water, because the predominant Taste of the Aniseeds will entirely
cover that they had before acquired from other Ingredients.




                                  THE
                                 INDEX


  A.

                                                                 _Page._

  _Accidents_ often attending Distillation,                           33
    how prevented,                                                    37
    Remedies for,                                                     41

  _Additions_, their Use,                                             20

  _Advantages_ attending the different Kinds of
    Distillation,                                                     51

  _Air_, promotes and quickens Fermentation,                          12

  _Alembics_, different Sorts of,                                     29
    described, 30
    the common, how used,                                             52
    Glass, its Use,                                                   57
    Simple Waters how distilled by,                                  114

  _All-fours_, or Cardamom————,                                      247

  _Ambergrise_, Description of,                                      261
    Essence of, 262

  _Andrew_’s (Father) Water,                                         207

  _Angelica_ Water, spirituous,                                      166
    compound,                                                        167

  _Anhalt_ Water,                                                    199

  _Aniseed_ described,                                               157
  ———— Water,                                                        158

  _Antiscorbutic_ Water,                                             177

  _Aqua Cœlestis_,                                                   194
    _Mirabilis_,                                                     162

  _Aromatics_ their Use,                                              21

  _Arracs_ how procured in the _East Indies_,                         86
    how they may be imitated,                                         88
    how clarified,                                                    89


  B.

  _Balneum Mariæ_, described,                                         55
    its Uses,                                                        108

  _Barbadoes_ Water,                                                 214

  _Barnabas_ (Father) Water of,                                      208

  _Baum_ Water,                                                      138
    Water, compound,                                                 190

  _Beauty_ Water,                                                    259

  _Bergamot_, described,                                             203
    a spirituous Water from, 204

  _Bodies_ proper for Distillation,                                   59

  _Bouquet_, Water of,                                               256

  _Brandies_ how distilled in _France_,                               76
    how to convert _English_ Spirits into _French_,                   77
    whence they acquire their Colour,                                102

  _Brewing_ defined,                                                   2
    Water proper for,                                                  4
    how performed,  5

  _Bryony_-root described,                                           188
    a compound Water from,                                       _ibid._

  _Burnt_ Sugar its use in colouring Brandy,                         105

  _Camomile_-flowers, Description of,                                182
    a compound Water from,                                       _ibid._

  _Caraway_-seed, Description of,                                    159
    Water, _ibid._

  _Cardamom_-seed, Description of,                                   160
    Water,                                                           161

  _Cardamum_, or All-fours,                                          247

  _Carminative_ Water,                                               197

  _Castor_, Description of,                                          140
    a Simple Water from,                                             141

  _Cautions_ in distilling Vegetables,                               116

  _Cedrat_, described,                                               201
    a spirituous Water from,                                         202

  _Cephalic_ Water,                                                  193

  _Cherry_ Brandy,                                                   252

  _Cinnamon_, Description of,                                        134
    Simple Water drawn from,                                         135
    Water, spirituous,                                               147

  _Citron_ Water how made,                                           257

  _Civet_, Description of,                                           264
    Essence of,                                                  _ibid._

  _Cloves_, Description of,                                          150
    Virtues of,                                                  _ibid._
    a spirituous Water from,                                     _ibid._

  _Cohobation_, what,                                                221

  _Cold_ Still described,                                             32
    its Uses,                                                        109

  _Colouring_ of Spirits, how performed,                             101

  _Cordial_ Waters, Rules for making,                                146
    Water of _Montpelier_,                                           207

  _Cubebs_, Description of                                           162

  _Cyprus_ Water                                                     257


  D.

  _Definition_ of Distillation,                                        1
    of Brewing,                                                        2
    of Fermentation,                                                   7
    of Spirits,                                                       62
    of Essence,                                                       62
    of Simple Waters,                                                 63
    of Phlegm,                                                   _ibid._
    of Filtration,                                                    68

  _Digestion_, what, and how performed,                               66

  _Dill_-seed, Description of,                                       142
    a Simple Water from,                                             143

  _Distillation_, defined,                                             1
    of Spirits,                                                        2
    Principles of explained,                                          26
    worthy the Attention of the learned,                              27
    how divided,                                                 _ibid._
    per ascensum, what,                                          _ibid._
    per descensum, what,                                              28
    per latus, what,                                             _ibid._
    Accidents attending the Processes of,                             33
    particular Advantages attending every Kind of,                    51
    how performed in the common Alembic,                              52
    how performed in Sand,                                            53
    in Balneum Mariæ,                                                 54
    in Glass Alembics,                                                56
    by the vapour Bath,                                               57
    Bodies proper for,                                                59
    what procured by,                                                 62
    the proper Season for,                                            67
    of Malt Spirits,                                                  70
    of Molosses Spirits,                                              76
    of Rum,                                                           80
    of Sugar Spirits,                                                 83
    of Raisin Spirits,                                           _ibid._
    of Simple Waters how to be conducted,                            116
    Rules for,                                                       120
    of compound Waters,                                              145

  _Divine_ Water,                                                    212

  _Double_ Goods what,                                               149

  _Drying_ of Plants why often prejudicial,                          113


  E.

  _Eau_ d’Arquebusade,                                               200
    de Bigarde,                                                      204
    de Carmes,                                                       190
    sans Pareille,                                                   255

  _Essence_, what,                                                    62


  F.

  _Faints_, their use,                                               265

  _Father Andrew_’s Water,                                           207

  _Father Barnabas_’s Water,                                         208

  _Fennel_-seed, Description of,                                     135
    Simple Water,                                                    136

  _Fermentation_ necessary to the Extraction of
      Spirits,                                                         2
    defined,                                                           7
    Theory of,                                                         8
    Practice of,                                                      15
    how performed to the greatest Advantage,                          23
    how known to be perfected,                                        25
    its Use in drawing Simple Waters,                                123

  _Ferments_, what,                                                   16
    how to procure a Stock of,                                        17
    the Alteration they cause in any neutral
     fermentable Liquor,                                              19

  _Filtration_, how performed,                                        68

  _Fire_, how to be regulated,                                       116

  _Flavouring_ of Spirits how performed,                              99

  _Fruits_, Water of the four,                                       209


  G.

  _Geneva_,                                                          248

  _Ginger_, Description of,                                          163

  _Gold_ Cordial,                                                    245

  _Goods_ double, what,                                              149
    single, what,                                                _ibid._

  _Gout_ Water,                                                      198


  H.

  _Heat_ necessary in brewing,                                         5

  _Heavenly_ Water,                                                  194

  _Honey_, its use as an Addition,                                    20
    Water,                                                           253

  _Horse-radish_ Water,                                              178

  _Hungary_ Water, how made,                                         153


  I.

  _Jamaica_-pepper, Description of,                                  129
    how cured,                                                       130
    its Uses,                                                    _ibid._
    a Simple Water from,                                         _ibid._

  _Jasmine_ Water,                                                   206

  _Imperial_ Water,                                                  133

  _Juniper_-berries, Description of,                                 248
    the best Methods of preserving,                                  249


  L.

  _Ladies_ Water,                                                    192

  _Lavender_, Virtues of,                                            154
    a spirituous Water from,                                     _ibid._

  _Lemon_-peel, a spirituous Water from,                             152


  M.

  _Malt_, why preferred in _England_,                                  3
    how to brew with it to Advantage,                            _ibid._
    what Parts of it dissolve in Water,                                4
    Spirits how distilled,                                            70

  _Mint_ Water, spirituous,                                          165

  _Molosses_, Spirits how distilled,                                  75

  _Montpelier_ Cordial Water,                                        207

  _Motion_ in Fermentation, whence,                                   10

  _Musk_ Description of,                                             263
    Essence of,                                                  _ibid._


  N.

  _Nitre_, Spirit of, its Use,                                        97

  _Nutmegs_, Description of,                                         186
    a spirituous Water from,                                         187


  O.

  _Oak_, Extract of, how made,                                       103
    its Use,            _ibid._

  _Oil_, Essential, its Use,                                          21
    of Wine, how procured,                                            99
    its Use,                                                         100
    Essential, of Orange-flowers,                                    130

  _Oleosaccharum_, what,                                              21

  _Orange_ Water, spirituous,                                        168
    Cordial Water,                                                   204
    Flowers, Description of,                                         127
  _Orange-flowers_, Simple Water of,                                 127
    double Water of,                                                 128
    Essential Oil of,                                                129
    Cordial Water from,                                              131
    Peel, a Simple Water from,                                       111


  P.

  _Parsley_ Water, compound,                                         196

  _Penny royal_, its Uses,                                           138
    a Simple Water from,                                             139
    Water, spirituous,                                               195

  _Pepper-mint_ Water,                                               136
    spirituous,                                                      165

  _Phlegm_, what,                                                     63

  _Pimento_, Description of,                                         139

  _Piony_, Description of, 184
    a compound Water from,                                           185

  _Plague_ Water,                                                    169

  _Plants_, Spirit of, what,                                         113
    what they lose in drying,                                    _ibid._

  _Practice_ of Fermentation,                                         15

  _Principles_ of Distillation explained,                             27


  R.

  _Raisin_ Spirits how extracted,                                     83
    great Use of,                                                     85

  _Ratafia_, common,                                                 221
    red,                                                             224
    fine and dry,                                                    226
    mixed,                                                           228
    white from Grapes,                                               230
    from Peaches,                                                    234
    from Orange-flowers,                                             241
    from the _Portugal_ Orange,                                      243
    _English_,                                                       244

  _Rectification_, what,                                              89
    how performed to the greatest Advantage,                          90
    by alcaline Salts,                                                92
    by Alcalies and Acids,                                            94
    by saline Bodies,                                            _ibid._
    by quick Lime,                                                    95
    by neutral Salts,                                            _ibid._

  _Roman_ Water,                                                     213

  _Rose_, Description of,                                            131
    a Water drawn from,                                              132
    Essence of,                                                      133

  _Rosemary_, a Simple Water of,                                     110
    Virtues of,                                                      153
    a spirituous Water from,                                     _ibid._

  _Ros solis_, Description of,                                       215
    compound Water,                                              _ibid._

  _Royal_ Water,                                                     260

  _Rules_ for conducting Simple Distillation,                        120
    for making Cordial Waters,                                       146

  _Rum_, how distilled,                                               80
    whence it derives its Flavour,                               _ibid._
    how it may be made to resemble Arrac,                             82


  S.

  _Sand_, its use in Distillation,                                    53

  _Salt, Glauber_’s, Spirit of, its Use,                              20

  _Season_ proper for distilling,                                     67

  _Seeds_, Water of the four,                                        211

  _Simple_ Waters, what,                                              63
    how distilled,                                            107 _seq._
    their Contents,                                                  112
    how distilled by the Alembic,                                    114
    drawn from a fermented Plant,                                    123
    of Baum,                                                         137
    of Castor,                                                       140
    of Cinnamon,                                                     135
    of Dill-seed,                                                    142
    Water of Fennel-seed,                                            136
    of _Jamaica_ Pepper,                                             139
    of Orange-peel,                                                  142
    of Penny-royal,                                                  138
    of Pepper-mint,                                                  136
    of Roses,                                                        132
    of Spear-mint,                                                   137

  _Single_ Goods, what,                                              149

  _Spear-mint_ Water,                                                137
    Use of,                                                      _ibid._

  _Spices_, Water of the four,                                       210

  _Spirits_, Distillation of,                                          2
    not to be extracted without a previous
     Fermentation,                                                     2
    from Malt, how extracted,                                         70
    from Molosses, how distilled,                                     75
    how extracted from Sugar,                                         83
    from Raisins,                                                _ibid._
    how flavoured,                                                    97
    how coloured,                                                    101
    of Plants, what,                                                 113

  _Stephens_’s (Dr.) Water,                                          172

  _Still_ cold, described,                                            32
    its Uses,                                                        109
    the Operations of it how performed,                              110

  _Stock_ of Ferments how procured,                                   17

  _Subject_, fermentable, what composed of,                            8

  _Sugar_ Spirit, what, and how extracted,                            80
    burnt, its Use in colouring Brandy,                              105

  _Sulphur_, Oil of, its Use,                                         20

  _Surfeit_ Water,                                                   173


  T.

  _Tartar_, an aqueous Solution of, its Use,                          20

  _Theory_ of Fermentation,                                            8

  _Treacle_, its Use as an Addition,                                  20
    Spirit from,                                                      75
    its Use in colouring Brandy,                                     104
    Water,                                                           108

  _Turin_ Ros solis,                                                 217


  V.

  _Vapour_ Bath, its Use,                                             57

  _Vestal_ Water,                                                    258

  _Unequalled_ Water,                                                255

  _Usquebaugh_, common,                                              218
    Royal,                                                           219
    by Digestion,                                                _ibid._
    _French_,                                                        220

  _Vulnerary_ Water,                                                 200


  W.

  _Wash_, what so called by the Distillers,                            7

  _Water_, what fittest for brewing,                                   4
    why necessary in several Distillations,                           49

  _Waters_, Simple, what,                                             63
    how distilled,                                            107 _seq._
    drawn from fermented Plants,                                     123
    from Baum,                                                   _ibid._
    from Castor,                                                     140
    from Cinnamon,                                                   135
    from Dill-seed,                                                  142
    from Fennel-seed,                                                136
    from _Jamaica_ Pepper,                                           139
    Simple from Orange-flowers,                                      127
    double of Orange-flowers,                                        128
    from Orange-peel,                                                142
    from Penny-royal,                                                138
    from Pepper-mint,                                                136
    from Roses,                                                      132
    from Spear-mint,                                                 137

  _Water, Spirituous_, of Father _Andrew_,                           207
    from Angelica,                                                   166
    of Anhalt,                                                       199
    from Aniseeds,                                                   157
    called _Barbadoes_,                                              214
    of Father _Barnabas_,                                            208
    from Baum,                                                       190
    from Bergamot,                                                   203
    from the Begarade,                                               204
    of Beauty,                                                       259
    of Bouquet,                                                      256
    from Bryony-root,                                                188
    from Camomile-flowers,                                           182
    from Caraway-seed,                                               159
    from Cardamom-seed,                                              160
    called Cardamum,                                                 247
    from the Cedrat,                                                 201
    called Cephalic,                                                 193
    from Cinnamon,                                                   147
    from Cloves,                                                     150
    from Citron-peel,                                                156
    of Cyprus,                                                       257
    called Divine,                                                   212
    called Eau sans Pareille,                                        255
    from four Fruits,                                                209
    from four Seeds,                                                 211
    from four Spices,                                                210
    called Gold Cordial,                                             245
    against the Gout,                                                198
    called Heavenly,                                                 194
    from Honey, _&c._,                                               253
    from Horse-radish,                                               178
    from Jasmine-flowers,                                            206
    called Imperial,                                                 183
    from Juniper-berries,                                            248
    for Ladies,                                                      192
    from Lavender,                                                   154
    from Lemon-peel,                                                 152
    of Montpelier,                                                   207
    from Nutmegs,                                                    186
    from Orange-peel,                                                168
    from Parsley,                                                    196
    from Penny-royal,                                                195
    from Pepper-mint,                                                165
    from Piony, _&c._,                                               184
    against the Plague,                                              169
    called Ratafia,                                                  221
    called Roman,                                                    213
    from Rosemary,                                                   153
    from Ros Solis,                                                  215
    called Royal,                                                    259
    against a Scurvy,                                                177
    from Spear-mint,                                                 164
    of Dr. _Stephens_,                                               172
    against a Surfeit,                                               173
    from Venice Treacle,                                             180
    called Vestal,                                                   258
    called Usquebaugh,                                               218
    against Wind,                                                    197
    the Wonderful,                                                   162
    from Wormwood,                                                   175
    against Wounds,                                                  200

  _Wine_, Oil of, how procured,                                       99
    its Use,                                                         100

  _Winter_’s Bark, Description of,                                   151

  _Wonderful_ Water, how made,                                       162

  _Wormwood_ Water, lesser Composition,                              175
    greater Composition,                                             176


                                FINIS.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 65020 ***
