The Project Gutenberg eBook of The best vegetarian dishes I know, by
Jeanne Jardine

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The best vegetarian dishes I know

Author: Jeanne Jardine

Release Date: February 28, 2023 [eBook #70164]

Language: English

Produced by: The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEST VEGETARIAN DISHES I
KNOW ***





                       THE BEST VEGETARIAN DISHES
                                 I KNOW




  “The business of the kitchen’s great,
  And it is fit that men should eat,
  Nor was it e’er denied.”




                                THE BEST
                           VEGETARIAN DISHES
                                 I KNOW

                                   BY
                             JEANNE JARDINE

                             [Illustration]

                                 LONDON

                         J. M. DENT & SONS LTD.

                     29 AND 30 BEDFORD STREET, W.C.

                                  1910




                               FOREWORD

  “How fair
  This earth were if all living things be linked
  Bloodless and pure.”


It will be seen that fish has been excluded from this little volume,
because it does not come within the range of legitimate vegetarian
fare; although many who “bid adieu to carnal dishes, to solid meats,
and highly-spiced ragouts,” give it a prominent place in the daily menu.

I trust those who put the recipes given herein to the test will find
they merit the somewhat ambitious title under which they appear. My aim
is to suggest dainty and nourishing dishes to vegetarians, which are
not extravagant, and which can be easily carried out by the average
“good plain” cook. One thing I would ask in this connection is, that
the recipe be read through and the intention grasped before operations
are begun. It is an interesting fact that the same recipe may give an
absolutely different result when followed by two persons, thus proving
that in one case or the other--and possibly in both--their methods are
at variance with those laid down by the author. It must be borne in
mind that fats of various kinds, such as butter--made both from cream
and nuts--cream, oil, and cheese, should necessarily take a prominent
place in vegetarian fare, and also such complete forms of food as milk
and eggs, in order to give it its proper dietetic value.

It is frequently asserted that a vegetarian diet is more costly than
a meat diet, but those who adopt it will find that the extra cost of
butter, milk, and eggs in a month will compare favourably with the
butcher’s bill for the same period.

                                                                   J. J.




                               CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

  Artichoke Curry                                                     11

  Artichoke and Egg Fricassee                                         11

  Artichoke Fritters                                                  12

  Artichokes au Gratin                                                13

  Artichokes à la Mornay                                              14

  Artichoke and Potato Pie                                            14

  Artichokes Roasted                                                  15

  Artichoke Rissoles                                                  16

  Artichoke Soufflé                                                   17

  Baked Beans with Spinach and Eggs                                   19

  Baked Eggs with Spaghetti                                           20

  Batter Balls                                                        21

  Batter Cassolettes                                                  22

  Beans with Egg Fritters                                             23

  Broad Beans and Baked Eggs                                          24

  Broad Beans in Italian Style                                        25

  Butter Beans Moulded                                                25

  Butter Beans in Pastry Case                                         26

  Cabbage Stuffed with Nuts                                           27

  Carrots in Rice Border                                              29

  Cassolettes with Peas                                               30

  Cassolettes of Rice                                                 32

  Cauliflower in Batter                                               33

  Cauliflower with Curried Egg Sauce                                  34

  Cauliflower with Egg-Balls                                          34

  Cauliflower Fritters                                                35

  Cauliflower and Tomato Meringue                                     36

  Celeriac Aigrettes                                                  37

  Celeriac Cutlets                                                    38

  Celeriac and Eggs au Gratin                                         39

  Celery Pie                                                          40

  Celery and Macaroni Timbale                                         40

  Cheese Omelet with French Beans                                     42

  Chestnut Curry                                                      43

  Chicory Mould with Macaroni                                         44

  Cold Curry Shape                                                    45

  Cornets with Celery Cream                                           46

  Cucumber filled with Nut Forcemeat                                  47

  Cucumber Stuffed                                                    48

  Cucumber with Poulette Sauce                                        49

  Devilled Nut Fillets                                                50

  Dresden Patties                                                     51

  Eggs in Jelly with Cheese Cream                                     51

  Eggs Stuffed with Asparagus                                         52

  Egg Balls in Potato Case                                            53

  Egg Croquettes                                                      55

  Eggs in Cucumber Cases                                              56

  Egg Cutlets with Asparagus                                          57

  Egg and Forcemeat Croustades                                        58

  Egg Fritters                                                        59

  Egg Patties                                                         60

  Eggs Poached and Fried with Tomatoes                                61

  Eggs Poached and Fried with Vegetable Marrow                        62

  Eggs Poached with Tomato Sauce                                      63

  Eggs in Potatoes                                                    64

  Eggs and Rice                                                       65

  Egg Rissoles                                                        66

  French Bean Salad                                                   67

  Fricassee of Eggs                                                   68

  Green Pea Cutlets                                                   69

  Macaroni Pie                                                        70

  Macaroni Rissoles                                                   72

  Mock Oyster Cakes                                                   73

  Mushroom Cutlets with Purée of Lettuce                              74

  Nut Cutlets                                                         75

  Nut Fillets Stewed                                                  76

  Nut Rissolettes                                                     77

  Nut Soufflé                                                         78

  Quenelles à la Reine                                                79

  Rice Fritters with Broad Beans                                      80

  Roasted Potatoes with Mushrooms                                     81

  Roman Pie                                                           82

  Salsify Omelet                                                      83

  Salsify Patties                                                     84

  Savoury Macaroni                                                    85

  Savoury Mince with Spinach                                          85

  Savoury Pasties                                                     86

  Savoury Roll                                                        87

  Scalloped Curry                                                     88

  Scotch Eggs                                                         89

  Spaghetti à l’Italienne                                             89

  Stuffed Potatoes                                                    90

  Stuffed Vegetable Marrow                                            91

  Tomato Omelet with Vegetable Salad                                  92

  Tomato Patties                                                      93

  Tomato Shape with Peas                                              94

  Tomatoes Stuffed with Macaroni                                      95

  Tomato Soufflé                                                      96

  Vegetable Cream with Aigrettes                                      97

  Vegetable Pie                                                       99

  Vegetable Steaks                                                   100

  Yorkshire Mince                                                    101

  Yorkshire Pudding with Mushrooms and Tomatoes                      102


  SAUCES

  Brown Sauce                                                        103

  Curry Sauce                                                        104

  Dutch Sauce                                                        104

  Tomato and Celery Sauce                                            105

  Tomato Sauce                                                       106

  White Sauce                                                        106

  White Stock                                                        107




THE BEST VEGETARIAN DISHES I KNOW




ARTICHOKE (JAPANESE) CURRY

One pound Stachys (or Japanese artichokes), white vegetable stock,
curry sauce.


_Method._--Parboil the little tubers, peel them and finish cooking them
until they are tender in the stock, then follow the directions given
for Chestnut Curry on page 43.




ARTICHOKE AND EGG FRICASSEE

 One pound artichokes, 4 hard-boiled eggs, ³⁄₄ pint white sauce, 2
 oz. macaroni, grated cheese, 1 oz. butter, tomato sauce, 1 raw yolk,
 lemon-juice.


_Method._--Cook the artichokes until they are just tender and cut them
into rather thick slices. Then cut as many hard-boiled eggs as are
required for the dish (allow one for each person and one over) also
into slices, and heat the artichokes and eggs in the white sauce, which
should be nicely flavoured and mixed with the raw yolk, beaten up with
a teaspoonful of lemon-juice or tarragon vinegar. Place the saucepan
containing the fricassee on the stove in a larger pan of boiling
water to prevent the sauce from curdling, and stir occasionally.
Drain the macaroni, as soon as it has been boiled until it is quite
tender, and put it back into the saucepan in which it was cooked, with
an ounce of butter, a tablespoonful of tomato sauce and season with
salt and pepper. When it is thoroughly coated with the butter and
sauce, sprinkle in a large tablespoonful of grated cheese (preferably
Parmesan), then make a neat border with it on a hot dish and fill the
middle with the fricassee. If a more economical sauce is preferred the
yolk of egg and lemon-juice can be omitted.




ARTICHOKE FRITTERS

Jerusalem artichokes, batter, fat, grated cheese.


_Method._--Peel the artichokes and put them into a saucepan containing
plenty of boiling, salted water, and let them boil for twenty minutes.
Then drain them on a soft cloth and cut them, on a floured board, into
moderately thick slices; have ready prepared a light, thick batter, and
also a pan of deep, boiling fat; dip the pieces of artichoke into the
batter and drop them into the fat and let them cook until they are a
golden brown. Serve the fritters piled upon a hot dish with a little
grated Parmesan (or Cheddar) cheese scattered over them.




ARTICHOKES AU GRATIN

Jerusalem artichokes, white sauce, grated cheese, butter, dried
breadcrumbs.


_Method._--Peel some artichokes and with a vegetable cutter shape them
into little balls (the size of a large marble) and cook them in salted
water until they begin to get tender, then drain them at once and put
them into a saucepan containing some warm butter (dairy or nut butter
may be used), which has been seasoned with salt, pepper, nutmeg, and a
few drops of lemon-juice; cover the pan and let them simmer for about
ten minutes. Prepare a thick white sauce (see recipe on page 106) and
add a tablespoonful of mild, grated cheese to each half pint; pour a
small quantity of the sauce over a buttered gratin dish and arrange
the artichokes in it, then cover them with the remainder of the sauce;
pour the remains of the butter in which the artichokes were cooked over
the top and scatter over it a moderately thick layer of finely sifted,
dried bread-crumbs mixed with half the quantity of grated cheese, and
bake in a quick oven until evenly browned. If the flavour of onion is
not objected to, a small, well-boiled Spanish onion passed through a
sieve and added to the sauce is an improvement to the dish.




ARTICHOKES (JAPANESE) À LA MORNAY

 One pound of artichokes, ³⁄₄ pint white sauce, 1 tablespoonful cream,
 1 oz. grated Gruyère, 1 oz. grated Parmesan cheese, ¹⁄₂ lb. short
 paste, vegetable stock.


_Method._--Parboil the little artichokes, remove the skins and finish
cooking them in vegetable stock. Line a buttered pastry ring with the
paste (about a quarter of an inch thick) and fill it with some uncooked
rice, or split peas, wrapped in greased paper and bake in a quick
oven until it is very lightly coloured. Then take it out and remove
the filling and turn the case carefully from the ring on to a baking
sheet; fill it with the artichokes (taking care they are thoroughly
drained), pour the sauce over them and put the case back into a fairly
quick oven until the surface of the sauce is lightly browned. The sauce
should be quite thick and after taking it from the stove, stir in the
tablespoonful of cream and the grated cheese and use as directed.




ARTICHOKE AND POTATO PIE

 Four globe artichokes, 1¹⁄₂ lbs. salad potatoes (which are close and
 firm), 2 hard-boiled eggs, seasoning, ¹⁄₂ pint nicely-flavoured brown
 sauce (thick), a dessertspoonful tomato catsup, 2 mushrooms, parsley,
 onion, ¹⁄₂ lb. short paste.


_Method._--Boil some globe artichokes in the usual way and remove
all the leaves and the “choke” and cut the remaining portion into
quarters; cook also the peeled salad potatoes, taking them from the
fire directly they are tender, and cut them into moderately thick
slices; mince two good sized mushrooms and mix them with a large
dessertspoonful of chopped parsley and a teaspoonful of scalded onion,
which has been minced. Line a buttered pie-dish with the short paste,
which should be fairly thin, then fill it with layers of the artichokes
and potatoes (mixed) with a few pieces of hard boiled egg, cut in
quarters, and over each layer scatter some of the mushroom mixture and
season with salt, pepper, and a very little mixed spice. When the dish
is full pour in the sauce, mixed with the tomato catsup; then cover the
pie, brush it over with some beaten egg (or milk) and bake in a fairly
quick oven for one hour.




ARTICHOKES ROASTED

Jerusalem artichokes, palmine (vegetable butter), seasoning.


_Method._--Wash, peel, and trim the artichokes and throw them as
they are done into a basin of cold acidulated water (produced by the
addition of a small quantity of vinegar or lemon-juice), then dry them
on a cloth and put them into a baking tin containing some warm palmine,
sprinkle a little salt, pepper, and nutmeg over the artichokes and
bake them in a well-heated oven until they are evenly browned, which
should be in about three quarters of an hour. They should be basted
frequently, and if the heat is fierce, a piece of greased paper should
be placed over them until they are nearly done; drain the artichokes
on soft paper on taking them from the fat, scatter a little chopped
parsley over them, and serve with a dish of spaghetti à l’Italienne.




ARTICHOKE (JAPANESE) RISSOLES

 Half a pound of artichokes, 1¹⁄₂ gills very thick white sauce, 2 ozs.
 dry, powdered breadcrumbs, 1 teaspoonful lemon-juice, 1 whole egg and
 1 yolk, puffed potatoes.


_Method._--Prepare and cook the artichokes as in the recipe for
Artichokes à la Mornay, and when they are quite tender, drain them
thoroughly and cut them up into small pieces, have the sauce ready,
add the yolk of a raw egg to it, which has been beaten up with the
lemon-juice, and ascertain that it has sufficient seasoning, then
mix the artichokes with it and spread them out on a flat dish to get
cold. Take about a dessertspoonful of the mixture at a time, and form
it on a floured board into little balls; dip them into beaten egg,
then cover thickly with the breadcrumbs, and after allowing time for
them to dry, fry the rissoles in deep, boiling fat. The sauce should
be well flavoured with vegetables and finished with a little cream if
practicable. Serve the rissoles round a pyramid of puffed potatoes
and garnish with fried parsley. The potatoes should be prepared thus:
Peel them and cut them length-wise into rather thick strips, then into
dice-shaped squares, and put them into a basin of cold water for about
fifteen minutes, then drain them and dry them thoroughly in a soft
cloth. Melt sufficient fat (or oil) in a stewpan to cover the potatoes;
when it is hot (not boiling) put them in and let them cook gently until
they are tender; then take them out and make the fat boil, testing
it with a piece of bread to ascertain when the right temperature is
reached. Put the potatoes into the boiling fat and fry them quickly for
a few minutes, when they will puff up and become a golden brown; drain
them on paper and scatter some chopped parsley and salt over them.




ARTICHOKE SOUFFLÉ

 Two ounces butter, 1¹⁄₂ ozs. flour, ¹⁄₂ pint milk, 2 eggs, ¹⁄₂ pint
 sieved artichokes, 1 dessertspoonful grated cheese, lemon-juice, salt,
 pepper, nutmeg, curry powder.


_Method._--Melt the butter in a saucepan and stir in the flour
gradually; when a smooth paste is formed, pour in the milk by degrees,
stirring quickly all the time with a wooden spoon to prevent lumps
forming, and continue the stirring until a perfectly smooth, thick
sauce is made. Remove the saucepan from the fire and add the yolks of
the eggs, beating one into the sauce before adding the other; then stir
in the cheese (preferably Parmesan), a squeeze of lemon-juice, and
season with salt, pepper, nutmeg, and a small saltspoonful of curry
powder. Have ready some well-boiled Jerusalem artichokes which have
been passed through a sieve, add a liberal half pint to the soufflé
mixture, and then stir in lightly the whites of the eggs, whisked to
the stiffest froth which can be obtained, and pour at once into a
buttered china soufflé mould. Smooth the surface of the soufflé and
pour a tablespoonful of warm butter over it and sprinkle it with dried
breadcrumbs, which have been pounded and sieved, and bake at once in
rather a quick oven for half an hour. Serve the soufflé with Brussels
sprouts prepared as follows: Cook the sprouts in plenty of boiling
water, seasoned with salt and two or three lumps of sugar, add a little
piece of soda to improve the colour, and leave the cover off so that
the steam may escape. Directly they are tender, turn the sprouts into a
colander and then drain them on a cloth and put them into a hot pipkin.
Melt half an ounce of butter in a small saucepan, add salt, pepper,
nutmeg, and a dust (each) of castor sugar and curry powder and a
teaspoonful of lemon-juice; pour the butter over the sprouts and leave
them in the oven for a minute or two before sending them to the table.




BAKED BEANS WITH SPINACH AND EGGS

 Some red haricot beans, a small onion, a few pieces of celery, tomato
 sauce (recipe, page 106), spinach, eggs (allowing one for each
 person), butter, seasoning.


_Method._--Soak the beans over night, wash them and put them into a
saucepan of cold, salted water; as soon as it has boiled rapidly pour
off the water and fill up the saucepan with boiling water, adding
the onion, celery, and salt, pepper and nutmeg, and let the beans
boil gently until the skins will break easily. Then turn them into
a colander and remove the skins; melt an ounce or two of butter (a
liberal quantity should be allowed) in an earthenware pipkin; put in
the beans, pour the tomato sauce over them, cover closely (tying a
piece of greased paper over the top if the lid does not fit well) and
stand the pipkin in a pan of hot water in a moderately hot oven for
five hours, replenishing the water when necessary and adding a little
more sauce if it is required. Butter as many china egg poachers as are
needed and break a new-laid egg into each, scatter a little salt and
pepper over the top and place the poachers in a shallow pan of boiling
water in the oven and let the eggs cook until they are sufficiently set
to turn out. Make a border of carefully prepared spinach on a hot dish,
place the eggs at intervals on it, and fill the middle with the baked
beans; a little powdered parsley sprinkled over the eggs will add to
the dainty appearance of the dish. The water in which the beans are
cooked should be saved as it would be a good foundation for various
vegetable soups or sauces.




BAKED EGGS WITH SPAGHETTI

 As many eggs as are required for a dish, chopped parsley, lemon-thyme,
 minced shallot, breadcrumbs, seasoning, 3 or 4 tomatoes, 3 ozs.
 spaghetti, butter, 2 ozs. mild, grated cheese, watercress.


_Method._--Butter as many china ramekin cases as there are eggs; mix
some chopped parsley, a very little lemon-thyme and a small quantity
of shallot with some fine white breadcrumbs; season with salt, pepper,
and a little curry powder, and sprinkle the mixture thickly over the
inside of the cases. Break one egg at a time into a coffee cup, and
turn it carefully into one of the ramekins; pour a teaspoonful of warm
butter over the top and cover with the remains of the herb mixture
and bake at once in a hot oven until the whites of the eggs are set.
Have ready the tomatoes cut in half and fried; turn the eggs from the
cups and put one on each piece of tomato and arrange them round a hot
dish with spaghetti, prepared as follows, in the middle and garnish
with watercress. Cook the spaghetti in boiling, salted water until it
is tender, then drain it well and put it into a saucepan containing
two ounces of warm butter; season it with salt and black pepper, and
scatter in the cheese (preferably Parmesan) by degrees while turning
the spaghetti lightly and quickly with a fork, and serve at once.




BATTER BALLS

 Two ounces of butter, 1¹⁄₂ gills water, ¹⁄₂ lb. dry, sifted flour,
 2 eggs, 2 yolks, seasoning, grated Parmesan, sea-kale, celery, or
 cauliflower, white sauce.


_Method._--Put the water into a stewpan with the butter; as soon as
it boils draw the pan to the side of the stove and add the flour, by
degrees, stirring quickly all the time with a wooden spoon, and when it
is all worked in, a perfectly smooth paste should result. Continue the
stirring for a few minutes until the paste is sufficiently dry to leave
the sides of the pan, then remove it from the stove and let it cool a
little, but it must not get cold; add the eggs, beating one into the
paste before putting in the second, then add two more yolks in the same
way and season well with salt, pepper, and nutmeg. The paste should now
be sufficiently stiff to roll into little balls on a floured board,
allowing a heaped teaspoonful for each. When it has all been used, drop
a few at a time into a pan of deep fat, which is just under boiling
point, taking care to remove them directly they are a golden colour;
the temperature must be slightly reduced each time before more little
balls are put in, but the pan may be moved to a hotter part of the
stove after they have been in a minute or two. Drain the little balls
on paper, sprinkle some grated Parmesan over them and serve them with
braised sea-kale, or it may be plainly boiled and masked with white
sauce; celery or cauliflower would be equally suitable if sea-kale is
not available.




BATTER CASSOLETTES

 One pint young, shelled peas, mint, ¹⁄₄ pint thick white sauce, ¹⁄₄
 lb. flour, 1¹⁄₂ tablespoonfuls salad oil, 2 eggs.


_Method._--Put the flour into a basin, make a hollow in the middle and
pour in the oil mixed with a quarter of a pint of tepid water, and work
in the flour by degrees until it is perfectly smooth, then add one egg
at a time, beating each separately into the batter; cover the basin
with a cloth and leave for an hour or two. Cook the peas until tender
in boiling water, to which salt, two lumps of sugar, and a few leaves
of mint have been added. When done, drain them and cover with a thick
white sauce, which should be delicately flavoured with chopped mint,
and keep hot. Brush some plain dariole moulds over with hot fat, line
them with the batter, and plunge them at once into a pan containing
some deep, boiling fat; directly the batter is a golden brown, take
out the moulds, and with a pointed knife carefully detach the little
batter cases from the moulds; brush them over quickly with warm butter,
sprinkle with some chopped parsley and fill them with the peas.




BEANS (FRENCH) WITH EGG FRITTERS

 One pound French beans (preferably the stringless variety), 2 ozs.
 butter, 1 tablespoonful minced parsley, a few leaves of tarragon
 (minced), ¹⁄₂ teaspoonful finely-minced shallot, 1 tablespoonful
 lemon-juice, salt, pepper, nutmeg, castor sugar, eggs, frying batter.


_Method._--Boil the French beans, leaving them whole; if neither
stringless nor sufficiently young for the strings not to be noticeable,
remove the latter and cut the beans into large diamond-shaped pieces.
Directly they are tender drain them thoroughly, finishing them on a
soft cloth, and put them into a hot dish; have rather more than one and
a half ounces of the butter hot in a saucepan, with a tablespoonful of
parsley, the shallot, tarragon, lemon-juice, and seasoning; pour the
mixture over the beans and serve them accompanied by egg fritters made
thus: Butter as many china egg-poachers as are required and scatter
over them a little chopped parsley, salt, and pepper, then carefully
break an egg into each and poach them until firm in a sauté (or other
suitable) pan, containing sufficient boiling water to rather more than
half cover the china cases. When the eggs are ready, put them aside to
get cold, then turn them from the cases, dip them into a thick batter,
and fry in deep, boiling fat until the fritters are a golden colour;
dish them neatly and garnish with watercress.




BROAD BEANS AND BAKED EGGS

 Beans, white sauce, eggs, butter, finely-chopped parsley, minced
 onion, chopped tarragon, seasoning, croutons.


_Method._--Boil the beans in salted water until they are tender, drain
them, remove the skins and rub them through a wire sieve; put them into
a saucepan containing a small quantity of butter; add sufficient thick
white sauce to bring them to a fairly soft consistency, then season
with celery salt, pepper, and nutmeg, and make the purée hot. Then
mould it on a hot dish into the shape of a thick oval cake, smoothing
the surface, and with a spoon make as many little hollows (they must
not be deep), at even distances, as there are eggs, and into each
hollow put one of the eggs, prepared as below, and garnish the edge
of the moulded beans with little triangular-shaped croutons of fried
bread. Butter as many china egg-cookers as are required, and sprinkle
sufficient of the chopped herbs and onion to cover the inside of each
cooker. Break one egg at a time into a small cup and carefully turn it
into the china case; put a little piece of butter on the top of the
eggs, season them with celery salt, and pepper, then scatter some of
the herb mixture over the surface, and bake in a quick oven from six to
eight minutes, when the eggs should be sufficiently set to be easily
turned out.




BROAD BEANS IN ITALIAN STYLE

 One quart of beans, ¹⁄₄ pint sieved tomatoes, vegetable stock, 1 small
 onion, 2 ozs. butter, seasoning, potato border, 2 or 3 eggs, parsley.


_Method._--Mince the onion and fry it in a stewpan until it begins to
change colour (it must on no account be allowed to get brown) in one
ounce of butter; then add a quart of shelled beans, which are still
quite small, and pour in sufficient nicely-flavoured vegetable stock to
cover them; place a sheet of buttered paper over them before putting
on the lid, and let them simmer gently until they are tender, adding
a little more stock if necessary, but when done it should be nearly
all absorbed. Have ready a neatly-made border of mashed potato, which
has been baked until brown in the oven, and the tomato pulp hot in a
small saucepan; add the remaining ounce of butter to it and season with
salt, pepper, and a dust of castor sugar; fill the border with the
beans, pour the tomato pulp over them, scatter the surface with chopped
parsley and garnish with little heaps of buttered egg.




BUTTER BEANS MOULDED

 Eight ounces of butter (or haricot) beans, 1 small onion, 1 turnip, 1
 carrot, chopped parsley, 2 ozs. butter, 1 egg.


_Method._--Soak the beans for at least twelve hours in cold water, then
boil them until tender with the vegetables and, after draining them
thoroughly, pass them together through a wire sieve into a basin.
Season with salt, pepper, and nutmeg, add rather less than two ounces
of butter and an egg, and beat the mixture for a few minutes, then
press it into a buttered mould; tie a piece of greased paper over the
top and stand it in the oven in a pan of boiling water and let it cook
for three quarters of an hour. Leave the mould on the kitchen table for
a few moments on taking it from the oven, then turn the contents on to
a hot dish; scatter the chopped parsley over the top and serve with a
dish of baked tomatoes filled with herb stuffing. Beans prepared in the
same way may be made into rissoles and fried in boiling fat; in this
case they should be served with tomato sauce.




BUTTER BEANS IN PASTRY CASE

 Half a pound of short paste, ¹⁄₂ root of celeriac, ¹⁄₂ lb. butter
 beans, ¹⁄₂ pint white sauce (see recipe on page 106), ¹⁄₂ oz. butter,
 chopped parsley.


_Method._--Line a buttered pastry ring (about six inches in diameter)
with the paste, which should be a quarter of an inch thick, and fill
it with about a teacupful of rice wrapped up securely in greased
paper and bake in a quick oven. When done remove the rice and turn
the pastry case carefully from the ring and place it on a shelf in
the oven where the heat is moderate, for about five minutes; the
appearance will be improved if the sides and edge are brushed over
with egg before the case is put back in the oven. Serve it filled with
beans, prepared according to the directions given below, and scatter
the chopped parsley over the surface. If preferred a case of mashed
potato can be used instead of the pastry; it should be brushed over
with beaten egg and then browned in the oven. Cook the beans--which
should have previously soaked for twelve hours in cold water--until
they are tender, then drain them thoroughly, season them with salt and
pepper and put them for ten minutes into a sauce made thus: Boil the
celeriac (after cleaning and peeling it) in salted water until it is
done, then pass it through a wire sieve and mix it with half a pint of
carefully-prepared white sauce; make it hot, then add the beans and
half an ounce of butter and use as directed.




CABBAGE STUFFED WITH NUTS

 A medium-sized red cabbage, 2 small onions, 1 carrot, 1 small turnip,
 3 ozs. Brazil nuts, 3 ozs. pine nut kernels (or Cob nuts), 4 ozs.
 bread, boiling milk, 2¹⁄₂ ozs. butter, 1 egg, thick brown sauce,
 seasoning, fried breadcrumbs.


_Method._--Partly cook the cabbage, then drain it and make a hollow in
the middle beginning at the stalk end, fill it with the nut forcemeat,
and tie a wide piece of tape round it. Melt one ounce of butter (dairy
or nut) in a stewpan and put in an onion, the carrot and turnip, each
cut into slices; season with salt and pepper, and fry gently for ten
minutes; then put in the cabbage and pour in sufficient brown sauce to
about half cover it; place a piece of greased paper over the pan before
putting on the lid, and put it in a moderately hot oven for about half
an hour; the cabbage should be basted with the sauce two or three times
while it is cooking. When it is done, carefully remove it from the
stewpan on to a hot dish, scatter some chopped parsley over it, and
surround it with little heaps of fried breadcrumbs; the sauce in which
it was cooked should be strained and sent to the table in a hot tureen.
For the forcemeat, put an ounce of butter into a saucepan with a small
onion (sliced), and fry for five minutes, taking care it does not
brown; put the bread, which should be the crumb of a milk loaf, into a
basin and pour in sufficient boiling milk to cover it and let it soak
while the onion is being fried. Then add the bread to the onion; season
with salt, pepper, and a little mace, and stir over the fire until a
smooth thick paste is formed, when it should be passed through a sieve
into a basin. Have ready the nuts which have been passed through a nut
mill or fine mincer; add them to the paste and also half an ounce of
butter and a well-beaten egg and use as directed. Large Cos lettuces
are excellent served in the same way as the cabbage.




CARROTS IN RICE BORDER

 One bunch young carrots, 2 or 3 tomatoes, 2 ozs. butter, ¹⁄₄ pint
 thick brown sauce, white stock, milk, 1 teacupful rice, seasoning,
 chopped parsley.


_Method._--Put the rice, after washing it well, into a saucepan
containing plenty of cold water and bring it gradually to boiling point
and let it boil for ten minutes; then pour off the water and add an
equal quantity of milk and nicely-flavoured, colourless vegetable stock
and let it cook until it is very tender and all the liquid is absorbed.
Add one ounce of butter to the rice, a tablespoonful of tomato catsup
and some salt, pepper, nutmeg, and a pinch of curry powder and put
it into a well-buttered border mould, pressing it down firmly, and
bake in a fairly quick oven for half an hour. Scrape and trim the
carrots (preferably the French round variety), and cook them in
salted water until they are just tender, then drain them and put them
into a saucepan containing the butter warmed and seasoned with salt,
pepper, castor sugar, and nutmeg; cover the pan, and let them simmer
steadily for a quarter of an hour, then add the tomatoes, which should
be sieved, and the brown sauce, and let the carrots cook for another
quarter of an hour. Turn the rice border from the mould and fill the
middle with the carrots; sprinkle a little parsley over them and serve
at once. If preferred, the border can be made of equal quantities of
carefully-mashed potato (prepared as if for potato rissoles, with an
egg) and any well-cooked green vegetable which has been passed through
a wire sieve.




CASSOLETTES WITH PEAS

 Two pounds of cooked potatoes, 2 ozs. butter, 3 tablespoonfuls cream
 (or milk), 2 raw yolks, 1 whole raw egg, breadcrumbs, seasoning, 1
 pint peas, 1 tablespoonful minced onion, ¹⁄₄ teaspoonful chopped mint.


_Method._--Put one ounce of butter into an earthenware casserole with
the onion and cook gently for five minutes (without colouring), then
add the peas and simmer them for ten minutes in the butter, turning
them constantly with a wooden spoon; at the end of the time season
with salt, pepper, and castor sugar, add the mint and a quarter of a
pint of water; bring the latter gradually to boiling point, then cover
the peas closely with a greased paper before putting on the lid of the
casserole, and let them cook very gently until they are quite tender.
They must be stirred from time to time, and if they get too dry a
little more water may be added, but it is not intended there should
be much, and when done it should be nearly all absorbed, and then two
tablespoonfuls of cream should be added and the simmering continued,
for ten minutes more, but the cream must not be allowed to boil. Pass
the potatoes through a sieve into a basin (they should be still hot)
and add one ounce of warm butter and a tablespoonful of cream and beat
them well, then add (one at a time) the yolks of two raw eggs, and
season with salt, pepper, nutmeg, a pinch of castor sugar and a few
drops of lemon-juice and beat the mixture again for a few minutes and
spread it out on a flat dish. When it is cold take a small portion at
a time and roll it on a floured board into a little ball (of about the
size of a golf-ball); flatten it slightly at each end, thus converting
it into the shape of a small cylinder; mark the top with a small round
cutter, then dip the cassolettes into beaten egg and cover them thickly
with fine, dried breadcrumbs, and after allowing time for the crumbs
to dry, fry them in deep boiling fat until they are a decided golden
colour. Drain the cassolettes, and carefully remove the marked portion,
then take out all the soft inside, leaving the cases hollow; fill them
with the stewed peas, place in the oven for a few moments and serve
garnished with parsley. Cassolettes made in the same way may be filled
with buttered eggs mixed with a small quantity of chopped parsley and
onion, and also hard boiled eggs chopped and mixed with white mushroom
sauce.




CASSOLETTES OF RICE

 Six ounces of rice, colourless vegetable stock, 2¹⁄₂ ozs. butter, 4
 eggs, 1 teaspoonful finely-chopped parsley, 2¹⁄₂ ozs. onion (scalded
 and minced), ¹⁄₂ dessertspoonful chopped tarragon and chervil (mixed),
 1 tablespoonful ground sweet almonds, 1 teaspoonful curry powder,
 Plasmon, breadcrumbs.


_Method._--Put the rice into a saucepan of cold salted water; bring
it gradually to boiling point and let it boil for six minutes, then
rinse it in cold water, and cook it until quite tender in the vegetable
stock; drain it well, and put it back into the saucepan with one ounce
of butter to dry; season it with salt, pepper, and curry powder, and
fill some buttered dariole moulds with it, pressing it in firmly and
put aside to get cold. Then turn out the moulded rice; dip it in beaten
egg and cover it thickly with very fine, dried breadcrumbs mixed with
an equal quantity of Plasmon powder; mark the top of each with a small
round cutter, and after allowing the crumbs time to dry, fry in boiling
oil (or vegetable butter) until of a deep golden brown. Remove the
marked portion from the cassolettes and carefully take out the rice
from the middle, thus leaving little hollow cases; have ready some
buttered eggs (prepared as below), fill the cassolettes with them,
cover the top with the fried almond mixture, and put into the oven
for a minute or two to ensure their being quite hot. Beat three eggs
until they are quite frothy, add the parsley, half a teaspoonful of
the onion, and the tarragon and chervil; season with celery salt,
pepper, and nutmeg, and pour into a saucepan containing one ounce of
warm butter; stir the eggs over the fire until they are sufficiently
set, but be sure and remove them while they are still creamy, and use
as directed. Fry the remainder of the onion with the almonds and curry
powder in half an ounce of butter, until the onion is crisp and lightly
browned, keeping the mixture stirred to prevent it from sticking to the
pan and from acquiring too much colour.




CAULIFLOWER IN BATTER

 A medium-sized cauliflower, butter, 2 tablespoonfuls flour, ¹⁄₂ pint
 milk, 1 egg, ¹⁄₂ teaspoonful baking powder, brown sauce, seasoning.


_Method._--Put the flour into a basin, season with salt and pepper,
make a hollow in the middle, and pour in gradually sufficient cold milk
to form a perfectly smooth paste. Work this well with a wooden spoon,
and then stir in the remainder of the milk; cover the basin with a
cloth and leave it for two hours. Boil the cauliflower until it is just
tender; drain all the moisture from it and divide it into small pieces
and put into a buttered gratin (or pie) dish, and season with salt,
pepper, and nutmeg. Whisk the egg to a thick froth and add it to the
batter, then stir in the baking powder and pour over the cauliflower;
place a few pieces of butter on the top, and bake at once in a quick
oven. Serve with the brown sauce in a tureen. Other vegetables of
various kinds may be cooked in the same way.




CAULIFLOWER WITH CURRIED EGG SAUCE

 A nice compact cauliflower, mashed potato, ¹⁄₂ pint curry sauce, 2
 hard-boiled eggs, 2 tomatoes.


_Method._--Boil the cauliflower until it is tender and drain it
carefully on a hot, soft cloth. Make some mashed potato into a
moderately thick, round cake and fry it in a small quantity of hot fat
until it is nicely browned, then turn it on to a hot dish; place the
cauliflower on it and cover the latter with the curry sauce, to which
the eggs have been added after being coarsely chopped; garnish the edge
of the dish with slices of fried tomato and serve directly it is ready.
A recipe for curry sauce will be found on page 104.




CAULIFLOWER WITH EGG-BALLS

 One medium-sized cauliflower, 1 oz. butter, 1 oz. minced onion, 3 ozs.
 pine kernels, 1 gill white sauce, as many eggs as are required, some
 round croutons of fried bread, seasoning.


_Method._--Cook the cauliflower carefully, keeping it whole and
compact; drain it well on a soft cloth and place it in a fireproof
dish; mask it with the white sauce (which may with advantage be
slightly flavoured with cheese), and sprinkle the nuts, prepared
according to the directions below, over it evenly and put into the
oven for two or three minutes to ensure it being very hot, and serve
surrounded by egg-balls placed separately on little round croutons.
Wash the pine kernels two or three times in boiling water and pass them
through a nut-mill or fine mincer; melt the butter in a small omelet
pan and put in the onion and kernels; season with salt and pepper and
fry gently until they are nicely browned and quite crisp; they should
be stirred constantly to prevent the onion from becoming too dark. The
eggs should be broken separately into a coffee cup and dropped into a
pan containing an abundance of boiling oil, which has been stirred with
the handle of a long wooden spoon until it is revolving rapidly; it
is essential that each egg falls into the middle of the oil, and the
circular motion must be kept up until it is done, which will take about
the same time as if the egg were poached in the usual manner.




CAULIFLOWER FRITTERS

 A cooked cauliflower, butter, lemon-juice, seasoning, frying batter,
 watercress.


_Method._--Melt a small quantity of butter, add a squeeze of
lemon-juice and season it with celery salt, pepper, and a dust of curry
powder; divide the cauliflower (which should be thoroughly drained)
into little branches; dip these in the butter and put them aside until
the butter has become hard. Then dip them separately into a thick
frying batter, and drop them into a saucepan containing an abundance
of boiling fat; directly the fritters are a golden brown remove them,
and, after draining them on soft paper, dish them up and garnish with
watercress, which has been lightly dressed with oil and vinegar.




CAULIFLOWER AND TOMATO MERINGUE

 One small cauliflower, 2 tomatoes, 2 oz. butter, 1¹⁄₂ ozs. flour, 2
 eggs, ¹⁄₂ pint milk, 1 dessertspoonful grated cheese, seasoning.


_Method._--Cook the cauliflower and divide it into little branches;
remove the skin and seeds from the tomatoes and cut them up into small
pieces. Melt the butter in a saucepan and stir in the flour; when a
thick paste is formed add the milk, by degrees, stirring quickly all
the time and continue the stirring until the mixture has boiled for a
few minutes and is perfectly smooth and very thick. Remove the pan from
the stove and add the cheese and salt, pepper, and a little nutmeg,
then beat in separately the yolks of the eggs, and when they are well
mixed, add the cauliflower and the tomatoes, turn the mixture into a
buttered pie-dish and put it in a moderate oven for ten minutes. Add
a pinch of salt to the whites of the eggs and whisk them to a very
stiff froth; season with celery salt and pepper and spread quickly
and neatly over the top of the cauliflower mixture, then replace the
dish in the oven and continue the cooking until the white of egg is a
pale fawn colour, when it will be ready to serve. This dish should be
accompanied by potato rissoles.




CELERIAC AIGRETTES

 Half a root of celeriac, 1 oz. butter, ¹⁄₂ pint water, 4 ozs. flour, 3
 ozs. grated cheese, 2 eggs, 1 yolk, seasoning.


_Method._--Wash and peel the celeriac and boil it in salted water
until it is quite tender; drain it well and when it is cool cut it up
into pieces (rather larger than a walnut) of a convenient size. Put
the butter into a saucepan with the water, and when it boils stir in
gradually the flour, and do not cease stirring until a smooth, thick
paste is formed which leaves the sides of the saucepan. Remove the pan
from the stove and add the eggs (one at a time) and the third yolk;
then the cheese and salt, pepper and cayenne, and spread the paste
on a flat dish. When it is cool, envelop the pieces of celeriac in
about a teaspoonful of it, and as each piece is ready, drop it into
a saucepan containing plenty of hot fat which is just on the point
of boiling; remove the aigrettes the moment they are a golden brown,
serve them piled up on a hot dish, and garnish with parsley. Unless the
aigrettes are to be served as a savoury, they should be accompanied by
potatoes prepared as follows: Cut four or five cold, steamed potatoes
(a close and not a floury kind must be selected) into small square
pieces of about the size of dice; flour them lightly and season them
with salt and pepper. Melt one ounce of butter in a sauté pan; add a
dessertspoonful of minced onion, and when it has cooked gently for two
minutes, add the potatoes and stir them until they are lightly browned,
taking care that the heat is not sufficient to burn them. Add a quarter
of a pint of nicely-flavoured vegetable broth; let it boil for a few
moments, then stir in a dessertspoonful of chopped parsley and a
squeeze of lemon-juice, and the potatoes will be ready to serve.




CELERIAC CUTLETS

 Half a pint of very thick white sauce, yolks of 2 raw eggs, ¹⁄₂ pint
 of sieved celeriac, which has been thoroughly boiled and drained, 1
 whole egg, breadcrumbs, macaroni.


_Method._--Make the sauce thicker than is usually required, using
one and a half ounces of flour to half a pint of milk, and when it
is hot, add the yolks, beating them into the sauce while the pan is
still on the stove, but taking care it does not reboil after the eggs
are incorporated. Ascertain that the sauce is sufficiently seasoned,
and stir in the celeriac, then spread the mixture out on a dish and
when it is cold divide it into equal portions and form each neatly on
a floured board into the shape of a small cutlet; insert a little
piece of macaroni at the pointed end, to represent the bone, then mask
the cutlets with beaten egg and fine breadcrumbs (seasoned with salt
and pepper) and fry them in deep, boiling fat until they are evenly
browned, and serve them on a support of spinach or sieved cabbage.




CELERIAC AND EGGS AU GRATIN

 A root of celeriac, ¹⁄₄ pint thick white sauce, 1³⁄₄ ozs. butter,
 seasoning, 6 eggs, breadcrumbs.


_Method._--Wash and peel the celeriac and let it cook in boiling salted
water until it is tender, then drain it and pass it through a sieve
into a basin, add the sauce, an ounce of butter and season with salt,
pepper, and nutmeg. Butter six china egg-cases, or shells, and fill
them with the prepared celery; make a hollow in the middle and fill it
with a new-laid egg, taking care not to pierce the yolk when breaking
the shell; put a small piece of butter on the top of each egg, scatter
a little salt and pepper over it, cover with fine breadcrumbs, and bake
for eight or ten minutes in a quick oven.




CELERY PIE

 A quarter of a pound of short paste, ¹⁄₂ pint celeriac (cooked and
 sieved), rather more than 1¹⁄₂ gills milk, 1 slice onion, parsley,
 seasoning, 1¹⁄₂ ozs. butter, 1¹⁄₂ ozs. flour, grated cheese, 2 eggs.


_Method._--Line a buttered pie-dish with the paste rolled out fairly
thin. Let the milk simmer for a quarter of an hour with the onion, two
or three pieces of parsley, and a small blade of mace, then cook the
butter and flour together for a few minutes and, when quite smooth,
moisten gradually with the milk (strained), and stir quickly until the
sauce has boiled and thickened. Remove the pan from the stove and add
the yolks of the eggs, one tablespoonful of grated cheese, the parsley,
and celeriac, then whisk the whites of the eggs to a very stiff froth,
stir them into the mixture, and turn it into the lined pie-dish and
bake for half an hour in a well-heated oven. This dish is equally nice
served hot or cold; if the latter, it should be turned out of the
pie-dish intact in the pastry case.




CELERY AND MACARONI TIMBALE

 Half a pint of sieved (cooked) celery, ¹⁄₄ pint thick white sauce,
 2 eggs, 1 tablespoonful grated cheese, 6 large champignons (if
 practicable), seasoning, 4 ozs. boiled macaroni, butter, tomato sauce.


_Method._--Stir the celery into a saucepan containing the sauce,
which should be nicely flavoured with onion, etc., and as soon as it
is thoroughly hot add the yolks of the eggs, and when they are well
blended with the other ingredients, remove the pan from the stove
and stir in the grated cheese (which should be mild and dry), the
champignons, cut into moderately thin slices, half an ounce of butter,
and some salt, pepper, and nutmeg. Butter a soufflé mould (or basin) of
suitable size and line it neatly with the macaroni, which may be used
in long pieces, or if the thick kind is used it may be cut into pieces
of about half an inch in length. Add a pinch of salt to the whites
of the eggs, whisk them to a very stiff froth, and stir them lightly
into the celery mixture, then fill the lined mould; place a piece of
buttered paper over the top, then cover closely with a saucer and place
the mould in a saucepan containing sufficient boiling water to about
three parts cover it, and let the timbale steam gently and steadily
for three quarters of an hour. When it is done let it stand on the
kitchen table for two or three minutes, then turn it from the mould and
surround with tomato sauce, or, if preferred, a thick brown vegetable
sauce may be used.




CHEESE OMELET WITH FRENCH BEANS

 Three eggs, 2 ozs. grated Parmesan cheese, 1¹⁄₄ ozs. butter, celery
 salt, pepper, nutmeg.


_Method._--Break the eggs into a basin and beat them well with a patent
beater, season with celery salt, pepper, and nutmeg, and add the
cheese and a quarter of an ounce of butter in tiny pieces. Melt one
ounce of butter in an omelet pan over a very clear fire, and directly
it begins to bubble pour in the egg mixture; prick it all over with
a fork to let the uncooked mixture come in contact with the hot pan;
loosen it round the sides when it begins to set, and keep shaking the
pan to prevent the omelet from sticking; directly it is sufficiently
set (it should be still creamy on the top) fold it over in half and
turn it on to a hot dish. Have ready some beans prepared according to
the directions given below, arrange them quickly round the omelet, and
serve it with as little delay as possible. Boil some very young French
beans whole, after pinching off the little piece at each end; drain
them very thoroughly and put them into a hot saucepan; season them with
salt, pepper, and a tiny dust of sugar, and add by degrees some maître
d’hôtel butter--allowing about two ounces for a medium-sized dish of
beans; a recipe for it will be found on page 102.




CHESTNUT CURRY

 One pound chestnuts, 2 ozs. butter, 4 ozs. onion, 2 tomatoes, 1 sweet
 apple, 1 dessertspoonful curry powder, 1 dessertspoonful flour, 1
 dessertspoonful sweet chutney, 2 tablespoonfuls grated cocoanut, 1
 teaspoonful tarragon vinegar, 2 teaspoonfuls lemon-juice, ³⁄₄ pint
 brown vegetable stock, ¹⁄₄ pint boiling water, salt, pepper.


_Method._--Cut a small piece from the pointed end of the chestnuts and
boil them until they are sufficiently soft to be pierced with a very
fine skewer. Then remove the outer and inner skins, and put the nuts
into a sauce made according to the directions given below; cover the
curry with a thick piece of greased paper before putting on the lid of
the pan, and simmer very gently in a moderate oven for an hour. Serve
the curry surrounded by carefully-boiled rice which should be garnished
with little pieces of pickled red cabbage and gherkin. For the sauce
fry the onion (thinly sliced), the tomatoes, and apple (also sliced)
in the butter until the onion shows signs of changing colour, then add
the curry powder, and draw the pan to the side of the stove and let the
contents simmer for twelve minutes. Pour the boiling water on to the
cocoanut (preferably freshly grated, but desiccated can be used) and
steep by the side of the stove until required. At the end of the time
named stir the flour into the pan, and when it is smoothly mixed with
the butter, etc., pour in the stock and stir over the fire until it
has boiled and thickened; then add the chutney, vinegar, lemon-juice
and let the sauce simmer gently for half an hour, when it should be
strained through a sieve into a stewpan; stir the cocoanut, and strain
the liquid from it into the curry; then add the chestnuts and cook as
directed above. A salad composed of sliced tomatoes and small pieces of
crisp, white celery, with a plain oil and vinegar dressing, should be
served with the curry.




CHICORY MOULD WITH MACARONI

 One pound of chicory, butter, 1 pint white sauce (for recipe _see_
 page 106), 3 eggs, 3 ozs. Swiss egg macaroni, ¹⁄₂ pint brown sauce
 (for recipe _see_ page 103), seasoning.


_Method._--Partly cook the chicory in boiling water, drain it well;
cut it into small pieces and put it into a buttered stewpan. Season
with salt, pepper, a dust of castor sugar, and a sprinkle of dry grated
cheese and cover it with half the white sauce, then put on the lid of
the pan and let it cook in a slow oven for about an hour, or rather
longer. On taking it from the oven stir the chicory and the remaining
sauce into a basin containing three stiffly whisked eggs; turn the
mixture into a buttered soufflé mould; place the latter in a stewpan of
boiling water, in the oven, for half an hour or until the contents are
set. Let the mould stand on the kitchen table for two minutes before
turning out the chicory, and serve it surrounded by macaroni prepared
as follows: Break the macaroni into small pieces and cook in boiling
salted water until it is tender; drain well and put it into a hot
pipkin containing some warm butter; season it with salt, pepper, and
nutmeg; cover it with the brown sauce and put it into the oven for a
quarter of an hour. Sea-kale or celery may be prepared in the same way
as the chicory.




COLD CURRY SHAPE

 Three ounces each of Brazil nuts and pine kernels, 3 ozs. sieved brown
 bread, ¹⁄₂ gill milk, 1¹⁄₂ ozs. butter, ¹⁄₂ oz. chopped onion, salt,
 pepper, nutmeg, ¹⁄₂ pint curry sauce (_see_ page 104), 1 tablespoonful
 tomato catsup, 1 gill aspic jelly, 3 ozs. boiled rice, aspic jelly and
 parsley for garnishing.


_Method._--Wash the pine kernels two or three times in boiling water
and remove any which are not good, and pass them with the Brazil
nuts (from which every particle of brown skin must be removed) once
through a mincer. Melt one ounce of butter in a small stewpan, add the
onion and nuts, and let them cook gently for ten minutes, stirring
them sufficiently often to prevent them from becoming more than a
pale golden colour. Put the bread into a saucepan with the milk and
remaining half ounce of butter, season well with salt, pepper, and
nutmeg, and stir it over the fire until a smooth, thick paste is
formed. When the nuts are ready add the bread paste to them and then
stir the curry sauce in gradually; cover the pan and let the curry
simmer by the side of the stove for a quarter of an hour. Then pour in
the tomato catsup and a gill of nicely flavoured aspic jelly (which is
still liquid), and when these are thoroughly blended with the curry put
it aside to cool. Butter a plain china mould (1 pint size) and cover
it thickly and evenly with the boiled rice (which should be cold), and
before the curry is quite cold put it into the mould, pressing it down
well, but taking care not to displace the rice, and when the mould is
full put it into a cold place until the following day. Turn the curry
from the mould and cover the top with chopped aspic jelly sprinkled
with finely minced parsley, and surround it with little heaps of
chopped jelly.




CORNETS WITH CELERY CREAM

 Some light puff paste, 4 ozs. celery, cooked and sieved, ¹⁄₄ pint
 thick white sauce, made with half cream and half milk stock, 2
 hard-boiled eggs (coarsely chopped), 1 raw egg, minced parsley,
 Parmesan, seasoning.


_Method._--Mix the celery, sauce, and eggs in a basin, ascertain if
more seasoning is required, and place the basin on the stove in a
stewpan of hot water. Roll out the paste thinly, cut it into rounds of
a suitable size, and wrap it neatly round some buttered cornet-moulds;
moisten the edges of the paste and join them, then brush the paste over
with beaten egg and bake at once in a well-heated oven. When done, slip
the cornets off the moulds and fill them with the prepared celery;
scatter a little grated Parmesan and parsley, mixed together, over the
filling, and serve with as little delay as possible, garnished with
fried parsley. Salsify, asparagus, or peas can be served in the same
way.




CUCUMBER FILLED WITH NUT FORCEMEAT

 One and a half ounces of onion (peeled), 1¹⁄₂ oz. butter, 3 ozs. pine
 kernels, 2 mushrooms, 1 oz. crumb from a milk loaf, ¹⁄₂ gill milk, 1
 egg, seasoning, 1 large cucumber, soup vegetables for braising, brown
 vegetable stock, brown sauce.


_Method._--Wash the pine kernels thoroughly in boiling water, changing
it two or three times, then pass them through a nut-mill, or mincer;
boil the onion for six minutes; drain it and chop it very finely;
cleanse, peel, and mince the mushrooms. Melt one ounce of butter in
an omelet (or sauté) pan, and fry the kernels, onion, and mushrooms
together for ten minutes, stirring constantly. Melt half an ounce of
butter in the milk; add the breadcrumb and cook gently until it is
reduced to a paste, then mix it with the fried ingredients and pound
all together in a mortar until thoroughly blended and very light;
season with salt, pepper, and a little powdered mace, and after
pounding an egg into the forcemeat pass it through a wire sieve. Peel
the cucumber carefully, so that not a piece of skin is left (as this
would give a bitter taste), and cut it through the middle with a sharp
knife; remove the seeds with a large apple-corer and partly cook the
cucumber in boiling, salted water, to which an atom of soda has been
added. Then drain it very thoroughly on a soft cloth and fill the
hollow space in the middle with the prepared forcemeat; put the pieces
together neatly, wrap the cucumber in buttered muslin, securing it with
narrow tape at the ends and in the middle, and place it in a stewpan
which has been buttered and prepared with a layer of sliced soup
vegetables; fry over a gentle heat for six minutes, then add two and
a half gills of vegetable stock; cover the pan closely and braise the
cucumber in the oven until it is tender. When done remove the muslin
and serve the cucumber with chopped parsley sprinkled over it and
surrounded by brown sauce flavoured with sherry.




CUCUMBER STUFFED

 Half a pint milk, 1 small onion, a few pieces of parsley, a thin strip
 of lemon-peel, 1 oz. flour, 1 oz. butter, 1 dessertspoonful grated
 cheese, 1 teaspoonful tomato catsup, 1 dessertspoonful ground sweet
 almonds, 2 ozs. large straight macaroni, some chopped parsley, 1
 medium-sized cucumber, seasoning.


_Method._--Peel the cucumber, taking care to remove every particle of
green skin, and cut it into pieces of about two inches thick and cook
until tender in boiling, salted water to which a tiny piece of soda has
been added; directly it is ready (it must not be left in the water
after it is done), drain the pieces and carefully remove the seeds.
Have ready some macaroni prepared according to the instructions given
below, and quickly fill the cucumber cases with it; place in the oven
to re-heat the cases and serve surrounded by thick tomato sauce (see
page 106). Boil the macaroni thoroughly (keeping it boiling steadily
from the time it goes into the saucepan until it is done), drain it
on a soft cloth and cut it on a board into pieces of about a quarter
of an inch thick. Put the milk into a saucepan, when the macaroni is
put on to boil, with the onion, lemon-peel, parsley, almonds, and some
salt and pepper, and let it boil up and then simmer gently for half
an hour. Melt the butter in another saucepan, mix the flour smoothly
with it, and add the flavoured milk (after straining it) by degrees and
stir until the sauce is perfectly smooth and thick; add the macaroni,
catsup, and cheese and it will be ready to use; scatter a little
chopped parsley over the surface of the macaroni.




CUCUMBER WITH POULETTE SAUCE

 One or two cucumbers (according to the size), 1 oz. butter, ¹⁄₂
 pint white sauce, 1 raw yolk of egg, 1 tablespoonful cream, 2 or 3
 hard-boiled eggs, chopped parsley, lemon, seasoning, pastry case.


_Method._--Peel the cucumber and parboil it in salted water, then drain
it and cut it into moderately small pieces and put it into a saucepan
containing an ounce of butter, which has been flavoured with salt,
pepper, nutmeg, and a dust of castor sugar, and let it simmer for ten
minutes, then add the sauce and continue the simmering for about a
quarter of an hour, when the cucumber should be quite tender. Beat the
yolk of egg with a tablespoonful of cream and stir it into the sauce,
add a squeeze of lemon-juice, and when the egg has thickened (take care
the sauce does not boil after it is added), pour the cucumber into a
round pastry case (which should be hot) and garnish round the edge with
quarters of hard-boiled egg (hot) and sprinkle the parsley over the
cucumber.




DEVILLED NUT FILLETS

 Some nut forcemeat as for nut cutlets (_see_ page 75), ¹⁄₂ gill thick
 brown sauce, 1 dessertspoonful chutney paste, 1 teaspoonful Worcester
 sauce, ¹⁄₂ teaspoonful French mustard, 1 teaspoonful curry paste, ¹⁄₂
 teaspoonful Chili vinegar, butter, flour, seasoning.


_Method._--Make the forcemeat into little round fillets and dust them
with flour seasoned with salt and pepper. Mix the brown sauce, which
should be just warm, with the chutney, Worcester sauce, French mustard,
curry paste, and Chili vinegar; then mask the fillets with it and
place them on a buttered gratin dish; pour a few drops of warm butter
over each, and cook them in a quick oven for fifteen minutes. Serve
the fillets on the same dish in which they were cooked with a mound of
potato chips in the middle.




DRESDEN PATTIES

 Some forcemeat prepared according to the directions given for Nut
 Rissolettes on page 77, slices of bread fully an inch thick, milk, 1
 egg, Plasmon, seasoning, chopped parsley.


_Method._--Stamp out some rounds from the slices of bread with a
medium-sized cutter, and with a smaller cutter mark the bread in the
middle but without cutting it through; dip the rounds quickly into
milk, then brush them over with beaten egg and cover them thickly with
dry Plasmon powder and fry at once in deep, boiling fat, but only
sufficiently long for them to get lightly brown and not hard. After
draining them on paper remove the marked portion and fill up the hollow
with the forcemeat, which should be ready heated in a small saucepan
with a little butter; scatter the parsley over the surface of the
patties and serve them garnished with watercress. If a more substantial
dish is required a neatly trimmed poached egg can be placed on the top
of the forcemeat.




EGGS IN JELLY WITH CHEESE CREAM

 Five hard-boiled eggs cut into quarters, small bottle French macedoine
 vegetables, 1 pint nicely flavoured aspic jelly, 1 tablespoonful
 sherry, 1¹⁄₂ gills stiffly whipped cream, 1¹⁄₂ tablespoonfuls grated
 Parmesan, or dry Cheddar, cheese, seasoning, salad.


_Method._--Pour a shallow layer of the aspic jelly (previously mixed
with the wine) into a plain-border mould, and when it is set arrange
some of the quarters of the hard-boiled eggs on it with a few of the
macedoine vegetables between; then pour a little of the remaining aspic
(which should be cold but liquid) over, and stand the mould in a basin
of cold water until the jelly is firm; then continue to use the eggs,
vegetables, and jelly in the same manner until the mould is full. When
the jelly is sufficiently set, turn the border out of the mould and
fill the middle with whipped cream seasoned with a little salt and
curry powder and mixed with the grated cheese. Any of the vegetables
left over should be mixed with some crisp lettuce, finely-shred, and
dressed with a plain salad mixture, and the surface of the salad should
be garnished with little heaps of freshly-ground walnuts.




EGGS STUFFED WITH ASPARAGUS

 As many hard-boiled eggs as are required, butter, seasoning,
 shallot vinegar, one or two tablespoonfuls of asparagus, 1 raw egg,
 breadcrumbs, some blanched almonds, mashed potato.


_Method._--Bake some potatoes in their skins, then open them, remove
the inside and pass it through a potato-presser into a basin; season
well with celery salt, pepper, and nutmeg, add a small quantity of milk
and a liberal quantity of warm butter, and beat the potatoes with a
wooden spoon until they are very light. Then press them firmly into a
round cake-tin, which has been well buttered, and bake in a quick oven
for half an hour; when done the potato cake should be nicely browned on
both sides. Cut the eggs through the middle length-ways, and take out
the yolks; pass the latter through a sieve (or pointed gravy-strainer)
and beat them to a fairly soft paste with some warm butter; season with
salt, pepper, nutmeg, and a few drops of shallot vinegar (or tomato
vinegar), then mix in one or two tablespoonfuls of cooked asparagus
heads and fill the whites with the mixture, moulding it into the form
of a dome. Dip the eggs into beaten egg and cover them thickly with
fine, dried breadcrumbs, mixed with an equal proportion of blanched
almonds, which have been cut into very fine little splinters, and fry
in deep, boiling fat. Arrange the eggs on the potato cake and garnish
with watercress or parsley.




EGG BALLS IN POTATO CASE

  Two pounds of cooked potatoes, cream (or milk), 3 ozs. butter,
  2 raw eggs, ¹⁄₂ pint tomato pulp, 3 hard-boiled eggs, 1 oz.
  onion (scalded and chopped), 1 oz. white breadcrumbs,
  shallot vinegar, or lemon-juice, 3 ozs. finely-ground nuts,
  pine kernels, Brazil or Cashu (in either case blanched),
  seasoning.


_Method._--Fry the onion and nuts together for six minutes in one ounce
of butter; moisten the breadcrumbs with boiling cream (or milk), beat
them to a paste, and pass the eggs through a sieve. Pound the contents
of the frying pan for a few minutes, then add the bread, eggs, and one
ounce of butter, and continue the pounding until the mixture is quite
smooth; then add the yolk of a raw egg, a few drops of shallot vinegar
(or lemon-juice), and season with salt, pepper, and a dust of curry
powder. Pass the mixture through the same sieve used for the eggs,
and turn it on to a floured board; divide it into little balls (the
size of a rissole), dip them into beaten egg, then cover them with
finely-crushed vermicelli, fry in deep, boiling fat, and serve in a
potato case prepared as follows: Pass the potatoes through a sieve into
a basin containing one ounce of warm butter, add two tablespoonfuls of
cream, and beat until they are quite light, then stir in half a pint of
tomato pulp, and season with celery salt, pepper, nutmeg, and cayenne,
and beat again until the ingredients are thoroughly blended. Then mould
the potato on a flat, fireproof dish into a neat, round case, leaving
room in the middle for the egg balls, mark the outside with a fork and
bake it in a quick oven for about twenty minutes, or rather less if the
heat is fierce; pile the balls up in the case and garnish them with
fried parsley. Care should be taken to fry them quickly as they should
be soft and creamy inside, but crisp outside.




EGG CROQUETTES

 Four hard-boiled eggs, 2 ozs. coarsely-minced champignons, 1 oz.
 minced pickled gherkin (or olives), ¹⁄₂ teaspoonful onion (which
 has been scalded and minced), 1 teaspoonful ground sweet almonds, 1
 dessertspoonful chopped parsley, seasoning, 1 oz. butter, ³⁄₄ oz.
 flour, ¹⁄₄ pint cream (or milk), some light, short paste, 1 raw egg,
 breadcrumbs, artichoke chips.


_Method._--Melt the butter in a small saucepan, add the onion and let
it cook (without acquiring any colour) for two or three minutes, then
stir in the flour and almonds, and when they are smoothly mixed, add
the cream and stir until it has thickened; then season with celery
salt, pepper, and nutmeg, and pour into a basin. Mix the eggs, which
have been passed through a sieve, with the sauce, add the champignons
and gherkin and a teaspoonful of the liquor in which the champignons
were preserved, and leave until cool. Roll out the paste very thinly
and cut it into rounds of a suitable size; take up a small portion of
the egg mixture at a time and form it on a floured board into a little
round cake, then place it on one half of a round of paste, moisten
the edge with beaten egg, then fold the paste over the filling and
pinch the edges together; when a sufficient number of croquettes have
been made thus, dip them into beaten egg and cover them with fine
breadcrumbs and fry in a bath of boiling fat. The artichoke chips are
prepared as follows: Wash and peel the artichokes in the usual way,
then cut them into thin slices, dry on a floured cloth (as potato
chips), and fry in boiling fat.




EGGS IN CUCUMBER CASES

 One medium-sized cucumber, white vegetable stock, 3 eggs, 1 yolk,
 butter, 1 dessertspoonful tomato catsup, 2 teaspoonfuls chopped
 parsley, 1 gill cream, seasoning, some fried breadcrumbs.


_Method._--Peel the cucumber, taking care not to leave any of the
skin, or it will taste bitter, cut it into pieces of about two inches
thick, and with a sharp cutter of suitable size remove the seeds from
the middle. Arrange the cucumber cases in a shallow stewpan, which
has been lightly spread with butter, and pour in enough boiling stock
to about half cover them; close the lid securely, and let them cook
until tender, care being taken that they do not get too soft or they
will not stand properly. Beat the three eggs thoroughly with a patent
egg-beater, season them with salt, pepper, and a little curry powder,
add the tomato catsup, and pour them into a saucepan containing one
ounce of warm butter, and stir until the eggs begin to set, then fill
the cucumber cases with them; sprinkle some fried breadcrumbs over the
top and keep hot for a few moments while the sauce is made thus: Boil
up the stock in which the cases were cooked, stir in the yolk of egg
beaten up with the cream, and continue to stir until the sauce has
thickened, add a few drops of lemon-juice and a teaspoonful of chopped
parsley, and pour it round the dish containing the cucumber. Serve
accompanied by a dish of sauté potatoes.




EGG CUTLETS WITH ASPARAGUS

 Half a pint milk, ¹⁄₂ small onion, a strip of lemon-peel, parsley, 2
 ozs. butter, 1¹⁄₂ ozs. flour, 4 hard-boiled eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls
 cooked asparagus (cut into small pieces), seasoning, 1 raw egg,
 breadcrumbs, a few pieces of raw macaroni.


_Method._--Put the milk into a saucepan with the onion, lemon-peel, two
or three little pieces of parsley, and some salt, pepper, and nutmeg,
and let it simmer very gently for twenty minutes, then strain into a
basin. Cook the butter and flour together until a perfectly smooth
paste is formed, and moisten it gradually, stirring rapidly all the
time, with the flavoured milk, and continue stirring until the sauce
is very thick, when the pan should be removed from the stove. Pass the
hard-boiled eggs through a wire sieve while the milk is simmering,
and add them to the prepared sauce, then the asparagus and a little
more seasoning, and spread the mixture out on a flat dish. When it is
cold, take about a dessertspoonful at a time and form it, on a floured
board, into the shape of a cutlet. When all the mixture has been used,
insert a small piece of macaroni at the narrow end of the cutlets to
represent the bone, and after brushing them over with beaten egg, cover
them thickly with fine breadcrumbs and put aside for about half an hour
for the crumbs to harden; then fry the cutlets in deep, boiling fat
until they are a golden brown; serve them on a support of fried bread
and garnish the dish at intervals with little heaps of potato-chips,
and send them to the table accompanied by a tureen of thick Madeira
sauce.




EGG AND FORCEMEAT CROUSTADES

 Four ounces of breadcrumbs (from a milk loaf), 2¹⁄₂ ozs. butter, 4 raw
 eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls cream, 1 dessertspoonful chopped parsley, a
 pinch of mixed herbs, 1 teaspoonful grated onion, seasoning.


_Method._--Put the breadcrumbs into a basin, add the parsley, herbs,
onion, and season with celery salt, freshly-ground black pepper, and a
little powdered mace, then stir in the cream, which should be hot, and
one and a half ounces of butter, which should be melted; mix thoroughly
and add about half a beaten egg. Turn the mixture on to a floured
board, divide it into equal portions, and form into little flat cakes,
which should be moderately thick. Make a hollow in the middle of each,
then dip them into beaten egg and cover thickly with fine breadcrumbs
and fry in deep, boiling fat. Beat three eggs until they are quite
frothy with a patent beater, season them with celery salt, pepper, and
a dust of curry powder, and pour into a saucepan containing one ounce
of butter, stir quickly until the eggs begin to set, then remove the
pan from the stove and pile the mixture neatly on the croustades and
garnish the dish with fried tomatoes and potato straws (potatoes cut
into fine strips and fried until crisp) arranged in little heaps.




EGG FRITTERS

 Three hard-boiled eggs, 1 oz. butter, 1 dessertspoonful ground pine
 kernels, ¹⁄₂ minced shallot (which has been scalded and fried until
 just coloured), 1 teaspoonful minced parsley, 1 teaspoonful tomato
 conserve, seasoning, frying batter.


_Method._--Pass the eggs through a sieve and pound them in a mortar
with the other ingredients (excepting the batter) seasoning them with
a teaspoonful of grated Parmesan cheese, celery salt, black and Nepaul
pepper. Turn the mixture on to a floured board, take a small portion
at a time and form it into a moderately thick little cake of about the
size of half a crown; when a sufficient number have been made dip them
separately into a thick batter and fry in deep, boiling fat until each
fritter is a golden brown; drain them and serve them piled upon a hot
dish garnished with little bunches of fried parsley and send to the
table accompanied by cauliflower au gratin prepared as follows: Put a
fairly large, compact cauliflower into a saucepan containing plenty
of cold, salted water; bring it gradually to boiling point, and when
it has boiled, rapidly pour off the water and rinse the cauliflower
in cold water, then put it again into the saucepan, which this time
should contain sufficient boiling milk and water to cover it and let it
cook gently until it is done. Drain the cauliflower on a soft cloth,
and put it on to a buttered fireproof china dish; thicken the milk
in which it was cooked with flour, add a liberal amount of butter, a
tablespoonful of cream (if practicable), and season with salt, pepper,
and nutmeg. Pour the sauce over the cauliflower, then cover it thickly
with breadcrumbs and grated Parmesan or Gruyère cheese (mixed in equal
quantities) and bake in a quick oven until evenly browned.




EGG PATTIES

 One ounce butter, 1 shallot, 2 large mushrooms, 1 teaspoonful minced
 parsley, 2 hard-boiled eggs, 1 raw egg, a small quantity thick white
 sauce, seasoning, 8 ozs. short paste.


_Method._--Fry the shallot (minced) and the mushrooms (also minced) in
the butter, seasoning them with salt, pepper, and nutmeg; then remove
the pan from the stove and add the parsley and the hard-boiled eggs,
coarsely chopped, and moisten the mixture with a small quantity of
thick white sauce which has been nicely flavoured with vegetables.
Roll out the short paste to rather less than a quarter of an inch in
thickness, and with a round cutter of suitable size stamp out six
pieces, then with a cutter a size larger stamp out an equal number of
rounds; place a portion of the prepared mince in the middle of the
smaller rounds; moisten the edges with beaten egg and cover in the
mince with the larger pieces of paste, making the edges meet neatly
and pressing them together. Select a cutter about two sizes smaller
than that first used, invert it, and press it gently on the top of the
patties, which will bring the middle up into the shape of a little
dome; brush them over with egg and bake in a quick oven.




EGGS POACHED AND FRIED WITH TOMATOES

 As many eggs as are required for a dish, small quantity thick, white
 sauce, small quantity sieved onion sauce, half as many tomatoes as
 there are eggs, some savoury rice, 1 raw egg, breadcrumbs, seasoning.


_Method._--Mix some quite thick white sauce (which has been
well-flavoured with vegetables) with some creamy onion sauce in the
proportion of one-third of the latter to two-thirds of the former, and
use when just warm. Poach the eggs very carefully in boiling water to
which a small quantity of vinegar, or lemon-juice, has been added; trim
them neatly with a round cutter, mask them with the prepared sauce, and
let them get cold. Dust them lightly with flour, brush them over with
beaten egg, and cover with plenty of fine, dried breadcrumbs seasoned
with salt and pepper, and fry them quickly in a bath of boiling fat.
Have ready some large tomatoes which have been cut in half, freed from
seeds, baked, and filled with savoury, or curried, rice; place an egg
on each piece and serve on rounds of fried bread in a circle, and fill
the middle of the dish with fried potatoes.




EGGS POACHED AND FRIED WITH VEGETABLE MARROW

 Four or five eggs, 1 small vegetable marrow, ³⁄₄ pint thick tomato
 sauce, 1 tablespoonful Parmesan cheese, rounds of fried bread, 1 raw
 egg, breadcrumbs, seasoning.


_Method._--Cut four or five pieces of about two inches in thickness
from a small, peeled marrow, and boil them in salted water until they
are tender; when done lift them from the stewpan with an egg slice;
drain them thoroughly on a soft cloth, dip them into warm butter, and
place on rounds of fried bread, which should be of moderate thickness.
Prepare some eggs as in the foregoing recipe, but instead of coating
them with the white sauce, use thick tomato sauce, which has been
seasoned with Parmesan cheese, and surround the marrow with the
remainder of the sauce.




EGGS POACHED WITH TOMATO SAUCE

 Four ounces of rice, 1 oz. butter, white vegetable stock, ¹⁄₄ pint
 tomato sauce, seasoning, 4 or 5 poached eggs, breadcrumbs, 1 raw egg,
 watercress.


_Method._--Put the rice into a saucepan with some cold salted water;
bring it to boiling point and keep it boiling for ten minutes, then
wash it in cold water and put it into a saucepan containing plenty of
boiling stock and let it boil steadily until it is done. Drain the
rice thoroughly and put it back into the saucepan for a few minutes to
dry by the side of the stove; then season it with salt, freshly-ground
black pepper, a dust of curry powder, and a tablespoonful of grated
Parmesan cheese, and spread it out on a flat dish. When cold, take
about a heaped dessertspoonful of the rice at a time and form it into
four or five little round cakes, capable of taking a poached egg;
brush the rice cakes over with egg, then cover them with fine, dried
breadcrumbs, and fry them in a bath of boiling fat until they are
a deep gold in colour. Have ready four or five poached eggs, which
have been neatly trimmed, place one on each rice cake and pour a
tablespoonful of hot tomato sauce over the eggs, and serve garnished
with watercress which has been dressed with oil and vinegar.




EGGS IN POTATOES

 Four medium-sized potatoes, 4 hard-boiled eggs, ¹⁄₄ pint thick white
 sauce, 1 oz. grated cheese, 1 oz. butter, cream (or milk) lemon-juice,
 seasoning.


_Method._--Wash the potatoes thoroughly (they should be as nearly
the same size as possible) and bake them in their skins, then cut a
piece from the top of each and remove the inside, taking care not to
break the skin. Pass the potato through a presser, or sieve, into a
basin; add an ounce of butter, about a tablespoonful of cream (or
milk), and season with celery salt, pepper, nutmeg, and a few drops of
lemon-juice, and beat with a wooden spoon until it is very light and
creamy. Carefully replace the potato in the skins, pressing it back
against the sides with the handle of a small spoon, so as to leave the
middle hollow; fill them according to the directions given below, then
make a rose (by means of a forcer) with the mashed potato left over,
sufficiently large to cover the hole; brush the rose over with warm
butter and put the potatoes into a hot oven for ten or fifteen minutes.
While the white sauce (which should be rather thicker than is usually
required) is still hot, add the grated cheese (preferably Gruyère)
and ascertain if any more seasoning is required, then a squeeze of
lemon-juice and the eggs cut into slices, and fill the potatoes with
the mixture. Serve with a salad composed of lettuce, beetroot, and
celery.




EGGS AND RICE

 Six ounces of rice, 1 pint highly-seasoned vegetable stock, 3 ozs.
 butter, 3 or 4 hard-boiled eggs, fried onion, chopped parsley, minced
 olives or pickled gherkin, seasoning, 1 tablespoonful tomato conserve.


_Method._--Put the rice into cold salted water, bring it gradually
to boiling point, and let it boil for ten minutes, then rinse it in
cold water; drain it and put it into a saucepan containing a pint of
colourless vegetable stock, and let it boil rapidly until the rice is
cooked, stirring it occasionally. As soon as the grains are quite soft,
turn the rice on to a sieve and let the stock drain from it. Melt two
ounces of the butter in a stewpan, and add the rice, turning it gently
with a fork over a moderate fire. When hot, season with salt, black
pepper, and nutmeg, and pile upon a hot dish; arrange the halves of
some eggs, prepared according to the recipe given below, at intervals
round the rice, but not quite at the edge, and between them scatter
some minced olives (or gherkins) which have been carefully heated in
a little butter, and below them make a line with some minced fried
onion, which has been dried, until crisp, in the oven. The top of the
rice should be sprinkled either with chopped parsley or ground sweet
almonds, which have been coloured a golden brown in the oven. The
hard-boiled eggs should be cut in half, the yolks carefully removed and
passed through a sieve (the whites should be kept hot over a saucepan
of boiling water); a tablespoonful of butter should then be added which
has been heated with a tablespoonful of tomato conserve (or sauce); the
mixture must be seasoned with celery salt, pepper, and a little curry
powder, and quickly and neatly put into the whites and moulded into
pyramid form. The eggs should be placed in the oven for a few moments
to ensure their being hot.




EGG RISSOLES

 Two hard-boiled eggs, 1 oz. of crumb from a Hovis loaf, 1¹⁄₂ ozs.
 butter, ¹⁄₄ pint milk, a thick slice of onion, 2 teaspoonfuls ground
 nuts, 1 teaspoonful grated Gruyère, or some mild cheese, a few pieces
 of parsley, seasoning, 1 raw egg, breadcrumbs, spinach or mashed
 potato for border, tomato or celery, sauce.


_Method._--Put one ounce of butter into a saucepan with the onion and
fry gently for a few minutes, but without letting it become brown, then
add the milk, a clove, one or two pieces of parsley, and some salt and
pepper, and let the milk simmer very slowly for a quarter of an hour.
Crumble the bread and stir it into the milk, and let it cook until it
is quite soft and the milk is all absorbed, and either pass it through
a sieve or turn it into a basin and beat it well so that the bread and
onion are thoroughly mixed, but in this case the clove must be removed.
Pass the hard-boiled eggs through a metal gravy-strainer, or sieve,
and mix them with the prepared bread, then stir in the remaining
half of an ounce of butter, the cheese, nuts, some salt, pepper, and
nutmeg; turn the mixture on to a floured board, divide it into six
portions, and roll them into little balls; dip them into beaten egg
and cover them with fine, dried breadcrumbs, and after allowing a few
minutes for the crumbs to harden, fry the rissoles in a bath of boiling
fat until they are a deep golden colour. Serve them on a border of
carefully-prepared spinach, and fill the middle with tomato or celery
sauce.




FRENCH BEAN SALAD

 Young French beans, as many hard-boiled eggs as required, tarragon and
 shallot vinegar, butter, seasoning, chopped parsley, 2 tablespoonfuls
 chopped pickled gherkin, salad oil, 1 raw yolk, 1 tablespoonful cream,
 watercress.


_Method._--Boil the beans whole, they should be so small that only the
ends require to be pinched off; when done, drain them on a cloth and
let them get cold. Cut the eggs in half, remove the yolks, and pound
them with the butter, allowing a quarter of an ounce for each egg;
season them with celery salt, pepper, curry powder, and a few drops
of tarragon vinegar; add a small quantity of chopped parsley and fill
the whites with the mixture. Put the yolk of the raw egg into a basin;
add some salt, pepper, and a dust of curry powder, and stir well with
a spoon, then add some salad oil, drop by drop, while using a patent
beater rapidly and steadily until the mixture is as thick as beaten
butter; then stir in, by degrees, a teaspoonful of tarragon and a
teaspoonful of shallot vinegar. When this is thoroughly mixed, add the
cream, arrange the beans in the middle of a salad bowl and pour the
sauce over them, then scatter the chopped gherkin over it and surround
the beans with the eggs, putting a little bunch of watercress between,
which has been lightly dressed with oil and vinegar. Peas can be served
in the same way, or well-boiled butter or haricot beans; if either
of the latter are used, chopped beetroot may be substituted for the
pickled gherkin.




FRICASSEE OF EGGS

 Two pounds of spinach, 4 hard-boiled eggs, 1 raw yolk, ³⁄₄ pint thick
 white sauce, 1 tablespoonful tomato sauce, 1 tablespoonful cream, ¹⁄₂
 oz. butter, seasoning, sippets.


_Method._--Cook the spinach, drain it and pass it through a sieve,
and re-heat it with half a gill of white sauce; season it with salt,
pepper, nutmeg, and a pinch of castor sugar, add half an ounce of
butter and turn it on to a hot dish. Mould it into a mound and make a
hollow in the centre, fill this with the fricassee, and garnish the
spinach with little sippets of fried bread. Make the remainder of the
white sauce hot in a stewpan, and as soon as it has boiled draw the
pan to the side of the stove and stir in the yolk of egg, which has
been previously beaten with the cream, then add the tomato sauce, and
place the stewpan in a larger pan of hot water on the stove and put in
the hard-boiled eggs, cut into slices. As soon as they are hot, the
fricassee will be ready.




GREEN PEA CUTLETS

 One pint of young, shelled peas, some mint, 2 small onions, 2¹⁄₂
 ozs. butter, 1 oz. flour, ¹⁄₄ pint milk, 1 whole egg, 1 raw yolk,
 breadcrumbs, 4 ozs. rice, 1 small saltspoonful powdered saffron, 1¹⁄₂
 ozs. grated cheese, 1 pint colourless vegetable stock, seasoning,
 thick brown sauce.


_Method._--Put the peas into a saucepan of boiling water, to which a
piece of mint, some salt, sugar, and a pinch of soda have been added,
and let them cook steadily until they are done. Boil one onion in
salted water until it is tender, then drain it well and rub it through
a sieve. Melt one ounce of the butter in a sauté pan and stir in the
flour; moisten by degrees with the milk, stirring quickly until the
sauce is perfectly smooth and very thick, then add the yolk of egg and
sieved onion; season with salt, pepper, and nutmeg, add about a quarter
of a teaspoonful of chopped mint, and lastly the peas (which should
be well drained), and spread the mixture on a dish to get cold. Take
a small portion at a time and form into the shape of a little cutlet
on a floured board; insert a piece of macaroni at the end to represent
the bone, and when the mixture has all been used, brush them over with
beaten egg and cover with finely-sifted breadcrumbs. When the latter
have had time to dry, fry the cutlets in boiling oil, and serve round
a support of rice prepared as follows, and send to the table with a
boat of thick brown sauce flavoured with Madeira. Put the rice into a
saucepan of cold, salted water, bring it gradually to boiling point,
and let it boil rapidly for six minutes, then rinse it in a colander
under the cold water tap, and drain it well. Mince the remaining onion
and put it into a stewpan containing one ounce of butter, and let it
simmer gently until it begins to get soft, but it must not acquire any
colour, then add the rice, saffron, and stock; when the latter has
boiled, draw the pan to the side of the stove where the rice can simmer
steadily until it is quite soft; season it well, add the cheese, which
should be dry and mild, and half an ounce of butter divided into tiny
pieces, and use as directed; the saffron can of course be omitted if
the flavour is disliked, and some chopped parsley substituted for it.




MACARONI PIE

 Three ounces of large, straight macaroni, 1 small onion stuck with
 2 cloves, 1 stick celery, 4 artichokes, 1 thick slice of turnip,
 ¹⁄₂ pint thick tomato sauce, 1 teaspoonful chopped parsley, 1
 tablespoonful grated Parmesan cheese, seasoning, potato paste, beaten
 egg.


_Method._--Put the macaroni and vegetables in a saucepan containing
some boiling water, season well and cook steadily for an hour, then
drain the macaroni and cut it into small pieces; cut up the vegetables
with which it was boiled, excepting the onion, and put all into a
buttered pie-dish, season with salt, pepper, and nutmeg, sprinkle in
the cheese and parsley and pour in the sauce; cover with the potato
paste, brush over the top with beaten egg and bake in a quick oven.
Two or three hard-boiled eggs, cut into quarters, can be added to the
other ingredients if liked; serve the pie with stewed lettuce prepared
thus: Wash some freshly-cut, compact lettuces, then tie each with a
piece of narrow white tape, and parboil them; drain them and put them
into a buttered stewpan, containing a small quantity of onion, which
has been scalded and minced; season with salt, pepper, nutmeg, and a
dust of sugar; cover the pan and let them simmer for ten minutes, then
pour in sufficient nicely-flavoured milk-stock to nearly cover them.
Place a greased paper over the lettuces before putting on the lid of
the pan, and let them cook in a moderate oven until tender; when done,
take out the lettuces, untie them, cut them in half, and keep them hot
in a vegetable dish while the sauce is being made. Thicken the stock
in which the lettuces were cooked with some potato flour mixed with
a small quantity of cream, and when it has thickened, add a squeeze
of lemon-juice and a sprinkle of chopped parsley, and pour through a
pointed strainer over the lettuce. For the potato paste put half a
pound of potatoes (cooked and sieved) into a basin, add six ounces
of flour, season with salt and pepper and add a teaspoonful of baking
powder, then rub in three ounces of butter and moisten sufficiently
with beaten egg and cold milk to form a smooth and fairly stiff paste.
Knead it well and roll it out on a floured board to about half an inch
in thickness, and cut into the required size and shape for the pie.




MACARONI RISSOLES

 Two ounces of Swiss egg macaroni, milk, 1 oz. butter, 1 oz. flour, 1
 small onion, some celery, 1 yolk, 1 tablespoonful tomato conserve, 1
 tablespoonful Parmesan cheese, 1 tablespoonful minced Champignons, 1
 whole egg, breadcrumbs, French beans stewed, seasoning.


_Method._--Break the macaroni into small pieces and cook until tender
in boiling milk and water with the onion, stuck with two cloves, a few
pieces of celery (or a pinch of celery seed) and sufficient salt and
pepper to season it. Melt the butter in a saucepan, stir in the flour,
and gradually moisten with a quarter of a pint of milk; when the sauce
has boiled and thickened, remove the pan from the stove and add the
tomato conserve, the cheese, yolk of egg and salt, pepper and nutmeg,
then stir in the champignons and macaroni (which should be thoroughly
drained) and spread out on a flat dish. When cold, form the mixture
into rissoles on a floured board, then dip them into beaten egg and
cover them thickly with breadcrumbs; when the latter have dried, fry
the rissoles in plenty of boiling olive oil and serve them round some
French beans prepared as follows: Select quite young beans, which have
no fibre to remove but only the little piece from each end, and leave
them whole. Butter a casserole and put in the beans; sprinkle some
salt, pepper, and a dust of castor sugar over them, and pour in enough
vegetable stock to cover them; put a greased paper over them before
putting on the lid of the casserole, and let them cook in a moderate
oven until done, adding a little more stock if necessary. Just before
the beans are to be dished up place the casserole on the stove, add
the yolk of an egg, which has been beaten up with a tablespoonful of
cream, and stir the sauce until it thickens, then remove the casserole
from the fire and add a squeeze of lemon-juice and a tablespoonful of
chopped parsley and pile the beans neatly in the middle of a hot silver
dish. Peas may be substituted for the beans if desired.




MOCK OYSTER CAKES

 Some boiled salsify, mashed potato, seasoning, egg, Plasmon,
 breadcrumbs, white sauce.


_Method._--Divide the salsify into small pieces of about the size of
half an oyster and mix with half as much carefully-mashed potato;
season well with freshly-ground black pepper, cayenne, salt, and
a squeeze of lemon-juice, and add sufficient stiff white sauce to
slightly moisten the mixture and add a small quantity of beaten egg.
Spread the mixture out on a flat dish for an hour or two; then take
rather less than a dessertspoonful at a time and roll it into a little
ball on a floured board. Flatten the balls so that they take the form
of little round cakes, dip them into beaten egg, and cover thickly with
dry Plasmon powder and breadcrumbs, which have been seasoned with salt,
black pepper, and cayenne; press them lightly between the hands to make
the powder and crumbs adhere, and after allowing about twenty minutes
for the latter to dry, fry the cakes in deep, boiling oil or vegetable
fat, and serve garnished with fried parsley and little pieces of lemon.
The potatoes should be baked in their skins, and then sieved and beaten
to a stiff paste with a little cream, as the cakes would be spoilt if
the potato mixture was moist and watery.




MUSHROOM CUTLETS WITH PURÉE OF LETTUCE


  Half a pound of mushrooms (cleansed, peeled, and minced), 2 ozs.
  butter, 4 ozs. bread, 1 oz. onion (scalded and minced) 2 eggs,
  1 gill cream, ¹⁄₂ teaspoonful parsley, seasoning, macaroni.

_Method._--Fry the mushrooms in one ounce of butter with the onion for
a quarter of an hour, stirring it frequently. Heat the cream to boiling
point, and pour it over the bread (the crumb from a milk loaf or French
roll is best), add the remaining ounce of butter and beat it to a
paste, then add the mushrooms, parsley, and one egg; season with salt,
pepper, and a little mace, and turn on to a flat dish to cool. When
cold, take a small portion at a time and form on a floured board into
cutlet shape; insert a piece of macaroni at the pointed end, brush the
cutlets over with beaten egg, and cover them thickly with fine, dried
breadcrumbs; put aside for about half an hour and then fry in oil or
deep, boiling fat until the crumbs are crisp and nicely browned. Serve
the cutlets either on a support of fried bread or mashed potato, with a
purée of lettuce in the middle.




NUT CUTLETS

 Six ounces of ground nuts (pine kernels and Brazil), 2 ozs. onion,
 3¹⁄₂ ozs. butter, 6 ozs. brown bread, 1¹⁄₂ gills milk stock, 2 eggs,
 1 teaspoonful parsley, 1 tablespoonful tomato sauce, browning,
 seasoning, Maggi’s vegetable essence, dried breadcrumbs, Plasmon.


_Method._--Wash the pine kernels thoroughly in boiling water, and pass
them with the Brazil nuts twice through a fine mincer (or nut-mill);
boil the onion for a few minutes, then drain it and mince it. Melt two
ounces of butter in an omelet pan and fry the onion and nuts gently for
ten minutes, stirring frequently to prevent the onion from becoming
too brown. Put the brown bread, sieved, into a saucepan with the milk
stock, and stir over the fire until a thick paste is formed, then add
one and a half ounces of butter, pound in a mortar for five minutes,
and put aside on a plate. Turn the fried nuts and onion into the mortar
and pound well, then add the bread paste by degrees (pounding steadily
all the time), and when it is thoroughly mixed with the nuts, season
with salt, freshly-ground black pepper, and nutmeg and stir in the
parsley, tomato sauce, one egg (not beaten), sufficient browning to
colour the mixture, and a few drops of Maggi’s essence. Divide the
mixture on a floured board and form it into neat cutlets; dip them into
beaten egg, cover thickly with crumbs and Plasmon powder (in equal
proportions), and after allowing time for the egg to dry, fry the
cutlets and serve them with fried bananas or any suitable vegetable.




NUT FILLETS STEWED

 Nut forcemeat as for cutlets (_see_ page 75), ¹⁄₂ pint cooked butter
 beans, 3 or 4 large carrots (parboiled and sliced), ¹⁄₂ onion
 (minced), 1 pint thick brown sauce, butter, parsley.


_Method._--Make some little round fillets with the forcemeat, flour
them and fry them in a sauté pan with butter until they are lightly
browned on both sides, and put aside on a plate. Fry the onion and
carrots until the former is a golden colour, add the beans and pour
in the sauce, cover with a greased paper and let the vegetables stew
gently until the carrots are quite tender. About a quarter of an hour
before they are ready, add the fillets and cover the pan as before;
serve them in the middle of a hot dish with parsley sprinkled over them
and surround with the vegetables and sauce.




NUT RISSOLETTES

 Six ounces ground mixed nuts, 3 ozs. sieved brown bread, ¹⁄₂ gill
 milk, 1¹⁄₂ ozs. butter, 1 teaspoonful chopped onion, 1 dessertspoonful
 tomato catsup, salt, pepper, nutmeg, cayenne, lemon-juice, 1 egg,
 small quantity finely crushed vermicelli, 1¹⁄₂ tablespoonfuls Plasmon
 powder, ¹⁄₂ lb. short paste.


_Method._--Fry the nuts and onion in one ounce of butter for ten
minutes, taking care they do not acquire more than a golden colour,
then turn them into a mortar and pound until they are smooth. While the
nuts are cooking, boil the bread and milk together for a few minutes,
and beat it to a light paste; then add the remaining half ounce of
butter and the tomato catsup, season well, and pound with the nuts
until the whole is thoroughly mixed. Beat the egg until it forms a
thick froth, add half of it to the nut mixture and also a few drops
of lemon-juice, then turn it from the mortar on to a floured board
and divide into ten or twelve (according to the size required) equal
portions; roll these into little cork-shaped rissoles and envelope
them neatly in a thin coating of short paste. Brush the rissolettes
over with the remainder of the beaten egg, then cover them with the
vermicelli and Plasmon, and, after allowing time for the egg to dry,
fry them in an abundance of clear, boiling fat. The rissolettes make
an excellent cold supper dish, but they should be made the same day
they are required, otherwise the pastry will lose its crispness. The
same mixture can be masked with egg and breadcrumbs, instead of being
covered with paste, and served hot or cold as ordinary rissoles.




NUT SOUFFLÉ

 Two ounces peeled onion, 2 ozs. butter, 6 ozs. pine kernels, 2
 ozs. crumb from a milk loaf, ¹⁄₄ pint milk, 2 eggs, seasoning, 1
 teaspoonful lemon-juice.


_Method._--Boil the onion in a small quantity of water for six minutes,
drain it well and chop it very finely. Wash the kernels thoroughly
in boiling water, changing it two or three times, and rinse them in
a colander under the cold water tap, and pass them twice through a
fine mincer. Melt one ounce of butter in a small omelet pan and fry
the onion and kernels very gently until the former begins to turn a
golden colour. At the same time boil the bread and the milk together
until a smooth paste is formed; add one ounce of butter, season with
salt, pepper and nutmeg, and mix with the ingredients in the omelet
pan, then pound the mixture in a mortar until it is of a very light
consistency and white (like chicken cream) in appearance, and season
well. Add the yolks of the eggs, one at a time, pounding each in turn
into the ingredients, then the lemon-juice, and when the pounding is
satisfactorily accomplished, pass the mixture through a fine wire sieve
and add the whites of the eggs whisked to a very stiff froth. Place
at once in a buttered soufflé mould, smooth the surface, and bake in
a quick oven for about twenty minutes; serve the soufflé in the mould
accompanied by potato rissoles and a tureen of good brown sauce, which
has been flavoured with Maggi’s vegetable essence.




QUENELLES À LA REINE

 Two ounces of crumb from a milk loaf, 1¹⁄₂ ozs. butter, 1 oz. peeled
 onion, 1 large teaspoonful chopped parsley, 4 ozs. pine kernels, 1¹⁄₂
 gills milk, yolk of 1 raw egg, 1 pint thick white sauce, seasoning,
 sippets.


_Method._--Wash the pine kernels two or three times in boiling water
and pass them twice through a nut-mill or fine mincer; boil the onion
for six minutes, drain it and mince it; melt one ounce of butter in
a small omelet pan, put in the onion and nuts and fry very gently
until the onion is a golden colour. While this is being done, cook
the breadcrumb in the milk with the remaining half ounce of butter;
as soon as it is reduced to a paste, take it from the stove, beat it
well, and add the chopped parsley, then pound the onion and nuts in
a mortar for a few minutes; add the bread paste, and as soon as the
mixture is very light and white in appearance, put in the yolk; season
with salt, pepper, a little mace, and a squeeze of lemon juice, and
complete the pounding. Pass the mixture through a fine wire sieve into
a basin, then turn it on to a floured board, roll it into the shape of
a long sausage, and divide it into seven equal portions; butter seven
little quenelle moulds and put in the mixture, smooth the top with a
knife which has been dipped into hot water and poach the quenelles in
the white sauce, which should be boiling, for fifteen minutes. Arrange
some carefully-prepared mashed potato on a hot silver dish, so that it
forms an even surround with rather a deep hollow in the middle. Unmould
the quenelles, put them in the middle of the potato, and pour the sauce
over them, and garnish with little kite-shaped sippets of fried bread.




RICE FRITTERS WITH BROAD BEANS

 Four ounces rice, vegetable stock (white), seasoning, batter for
 frying, broad beans, maître d’hôtel sauce, 2 eggs, 1 tablespoonful
 grated cheese, 1 oz. onion, 1¹⁄₂ ozs. butter.


_Method._--Put the rice into cold salted water, and when it reaches
boiling point keep it boiling steadily for six minutes, then drain it
and put it into a saucepan containing sufficient boiling vegetable
stock to cover it and cook until it is very tender. Fry the onion in
one ounce of butter until it is just cooked, but do not let it become
brown, add the rice to it, season with salt, pepper, a dust of curry
powder, and the grated cheese, then add half an ounce of butter and a
well-beaten egg, and spread out on a dish to get cold. Take a small
quantity of the rice at a time and form it into little flat cakes
rather larger than a five shilling piece; dip these into a thick batter
and fry them in plenty of boiling oil or vegetable fat; arrange the
fritters in a circle on a hot dish and fill the middle with some very
young broad beans covered with a sauce made as follows: Make half
a pint of thick white sauce; add a tablespoonful of finely-chopped
parsley, a dessertspoonful of lemon-juice, a little cayenne pepper, and
half an ounce of fresh butter in small pieces, and it will be ready for
use.




ROASTED POTATOES WITH MUSHROOMS

 Six medium-sized potatoes (of uniform shape), vegetable butter, 3 ozs.
 minced mushrooms, 1 slice onion (scalded and minced), 1 oz. dairy
 butter, 2 ozs. finely-sieved Hovis breadcrumbs, 1 teaspoonful chopped
 parsley, 1 egg, seasoning, thick brown sauce, parsley for garnishing.


_Method._--Trim the potatoes, after peeling them, so that they are
round and as nearly the same size as possible (the trimmings can be
used for soup), and cut a piece from one end so that they will stand
upright; put them into a baking tin containing some hot vegetable
butter and bake in a well-heated oven until they are nicely browned,
basting them frequently. When done remove the centre of the inside
with an apple corer or small tubular-shaped cutter and fill the cavity
with mushrooms, prepared as below. Replace the potatoes in the oven for
about ten minutes, and serve them surrounded by some thick brown sauce
flavoured with a few drops of Maggi’s essence, and a little piece of
parsley on the top of each. For the stuffing, fry the mushrooms and
onion in the butter for ten minutes, stirring gently all the time, then
add the breadcrumbs and the chopped parsley, season with salt, pepper,
and a little mace or nutmeg, and stir over the fire for six minutes
more; remove the pan at the end of the time and moisten the mixture
with sufficient beaten egg to bring it to a fairly stiff paste and use
as directed.




ROMAN PIE

 Half a pound puff paste, 2 ozs. cooked macaroni (the large, straight
 kind), ¹⁄₂ pint salsify (cooked, and cut into small pieces), six
 champignons, ¹⁄₄ pint cooked Japanese artichokes, 1 gill thick white
 sauce, parsley, lemon, 1 teaspoonful onion (scalded and minced),
 grated Parmesan, brown sauce.


_Method._--Line a buttered mould with the paste rolled out to a
moderate thickness, and fill it with alternate layers of the macaroni,
cut into small pieces, salsify, and artichokes, and over each layer
scatter a few slices of champignons, a little grated cheese, a few
drops of lemon-juice, and season with salt, freshly ground black
pepper, and nutmeg. When the mould is full, pour in as much sauce,
mixed with some of the liquor in which the champignons were preserved,
as is required, then cover in with a round of paste and bake in a
moderately quick oven for from three-quarters to one hour; turn out
carefully on to a hot dish and surround with brown sauce.




SALSIFY OMELET

 Four ounces salsify, colourless vegetable stock, small quantity
 very thick white sauce, 3 eggs, 1³⁄₄ ozs. butter, seasoning, fried
 breadcrumbs.


_Method._--Prepare the salsify (freshly cut) in the usual way and
cook it until tender in the stock, then drain thoroughly, cut it into
pieces of about an inch in length, and put into a saucepan containing a
quarter of an ounce of butter seasoned with salt, pepper, cayenne, and
lemon-juice; cover it with the white sauce and keep it hot by the side
of the stove until the omelet is made. To prepare the latter, break the
eggs, which should be new laid, into a basin, season with salt, pepper,
and nutmeg, and whisk them well, then add half an ounce of butter
cut into tiny pieces. Melt one ounce of butter in an omelet pan of
suitable size and, directly it is hot, pour in the eggs; draw the pan
to the hottest part of the stove (the fire should be clear and brisk)
and stir the mixture with a fork until it begins to set; then loosen
it round the sides and thrust the fork through it in two or three
places to prevent the omelet sticking and to allow the unset portion
to come into contact with the hot pan; when it is almost set enough,
spread the salsify over one half of the omelet and fold the other half
over and carefully turn it on to a hot dish, surround it with fried
breadcrumbs (prepared in the same way as for game), and serve at once.
The appearance of the omelet will be improved if the uppermost side is
brushed over with warm butter and sprinkled with parsley.




SALSIFY PATTIES

 Salsify (also named vegetable oyster), white sauce, cream,
 lemon-juice, seasoning, puff-paste pattie-cases, white stock, butter.


_Method._--Scrape the salsify thoroughly, wash it, and cook it until
tender in colourless vegetable stock; drain well and cut it into pieces
of about two inches in length, pour over them a small quantity of warm
butter which has been seasoned with lemon-juice, black pepper, and
salt, and leave until the butter is cold. Make a small quantity of
nicely-flavoured thick white sauce and mix it with an equal quantity
of boiling cream (if practicable); season with salt, black pepper,
nutmeg, and cayenne, and add a squeeze of lemon-juice, then put the
pieces of salsify into the sauce and heat them gradually. Have ready
the requisite number of pattie cases; fill them with the salsify, put
them into the oven for a few moments, and serve as soon as they are
thoroughly hot.




SAVOURY MACARONI

 Three ounces of Swiss egg macaroni, rather more than 1 pint brown
 vegetable stock, grated cheese, ¹⁄₂ oz. flour, 1 oz. butter, 1
 tablespoonful tomato catsup, seasoning.


_Method._--Put the macaroni into boiling salted water for ten minutes,
then drain it, put it into a stewpan, cover with the brown stock, which
should be boiling, and cook steadily until it is done. Then drain it
and pile it up on a hot dish; let the stock in which it was cooked boil
up and thicken it by stirring in the butter, which should be worked
up smoothly with the flour; add the tomato catsup and strain over the
macaroni; scatter a little dry, grated cheese over the top and surround
by some carefully cooked Brussels sprouts, which have been finished
with some warm, seasoned butter and a squeeze of lemon-juice.




SAVOURY MINCE WITH SPINACH

 Three ounces finely-ground Brazil nuts (taking care they are fresh), 4
 ozs. cooked rice, 1¹⁄₂ ozs. onion (scalded and chopped), 1 teaspoonful
 minced parsley, a little lemon-thyme if the flavour is liked, 1 pint
 good brown sauce flavoured with a few drops of Maggi’s essence, 2 ozs.
 butter, seasoning, spinach, sippets.


_Method._--Fry the nuts with the onion and butter for eight minutes,
taking care they do not become brown, then add the rice and herbs and
moisten with three-quarters of a pint of the sauce; cover with a
greased paper and put the mince into the oven for half an hour; if the
rice absorbs too much sauce, so as to leave the mince dry, add some of
the remaining sauce and a few drops of browning if it is not a nice
rich colour, and serve in the middle of a surround of spinach garnished
with fried sippets of bread. Cabbage can be substituted for spinach if
preferred, and if prepared in the same way will answer the purpose very
well.




SAVOURY PASTIES

 Two ounces breadcrumbs, 1 gill cream, 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls thick
 brown sauce, 3 ozs. finely-ground pine kernels (previously blanched),
 ¹⁄₂ oz. chopped onion, 1 teaspoonful parsley, 1¹⁄₂ ozs. butter,
 lemon-juice, seasoning, 6 ozs. short paste.


_Method._--Fry the onion and nuts together in one ounce of butter for
six or eight minutes, then pour the cream, which should be boiling,
over the bread and beat it to a paste, add the remainder of the butter
and the fried nuts, parsley, a few drops of lemon-juice, salt, pepper,
and nutmeg, and moisten with a few tablespoonfuls of thick brown sauce.
Roll out the paste to about the eighth of an inch in thickness and cut
it into rounds of about the size of a claret glass; spread half the
rounds with the mince and cover it with the remainder of the pieces of
paste; wet the edges and pinch them together, brush over the top of the
pasties with beaten egg, and bake them in a quick oven.




SAVOURY ROLL

 Six ounces of finely-ground pine kernels (blanched), 4 ozs. butter,
 3 ozs. onion (scalded and chopped), 1 tablespoonful parsley, 6 ozs.
 breadcrumb, ¹⁄₂ gill thick white sauce, 2 eggs, 2 minced mushrooms,
 seasoning, some thick brown sauce flavoured with sherry.


_Method._--Fry the nuts and onion together in two ounces of butter
until the onion begins to change colour, then turn the mixture into
a mortar and pound to a smooth consistency. Make the white sauce hot
and pour it on the breadcrumbs; add one and a half ounces of warm
butter and beat it to a paste, then put in the fried nuts, parsley,
and mushrooms and season with salt, pepper, a little powdered mace,
and moisten it with the eggs, adding first one and then the other,
and pound very thoroughly for five minutes. Turn the mixture on to a
floured board and form it into a smooth, compact roll; brush it over
with the remaining half ounce of butter (warmed) and place it on a
well-buttered baking tin and cook in the oven until nicely browned.
Serve the roll surrounded by the brown sauce and accompanied by a dish
of potatoes in sauce. The same mixture can be wrapped in buttered
muslin (like a galantine), cooked in boiling vegetable stock, and
served with mushroom sauce, or it can be stewed in a casserole with a
thick brown sauce. The potatoes should be prepared in the following
manner: Peel four or five potatoes, cut them into moderately thin
slices, and wrap them in a floured cloth for a short time before
they are cooked. Melt two ounces of palmine, or dairy butter, in
a stewpan and stir in one ounce of flour by degrees; then add a
pint of colourless vegetable stock, and when the sauce has boiled
and thickened, season it, add a teaspoonful of lemon-juice and a
teaspoonful of shallot vinegar, and then put in the sliced potatoes.
Cover the pan closely, and let them cook gently until they are tender,
then put the potatoes (not the sauce) into a hot vegetable dish and
place it in the oven for a few minutes. Beat the yolk of an egg with
a tablespoonful of cream and stir into the sauce, which should be
boiling, scatter in a large teaspoonful of chopped parsley, and pour at
once over the potatoes.




SCALLOPED CURRY

 Almost any kind of cooked vegetables cut into neat pieces (including
 potatoes), 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls cooked white haricot beans, curry
 sauce (_see_ page 104), boiled rice, butter, breadcrumbs.


_Method._--Let the vegetables simmer gently in a small quantity of
butter (seasoning them with salt, pepper, and a dust of sugar) for
fifteen minutes, then pour the curry sauce over them and let them
cook in a moderate oven for half an hour. Fill some buttered china
scallop shells with the curry; cover the top with rice, place some
small pieces of butter on it, and scatter with finely-sieved dried
breadcrumbs, and bake in a quick oven for about a quarter of an hour.




SCOTCH EGGS

 Three hard-boiled eggs, nut mixture as for Rissolettes (page 77), 1
 raw egg, breadcrumbs, mashed potato, French beans, Dutch sauce (_see_
 page 104).


_Method._--Take the shells from the eggs and dust them lightly with
flour, then cover them evenly with the nut mixture, brush them over
with beaten egg, and cover them thickly with finely sifted breadcrumbs.
Have ready a pan of deep, boiling fat; fry the eggs in it until they
are nicely browned and drain them on taking them from the fat; cut each
through the middle with a sharp knife, arrange the pieces on a border
of mashed potato, and fill the middle of the dish with some carefully
boiled French beans (or any other suitable vegetable) masked with Dutch
sauce.




SPAGHETTI A L’ITALIENNE

 Three ounces of spaghetti, 2 ozs. butter, 3 ozs. grated Parmesan
 cheese, tomato conserve, croutons, seasoning.


_Method._--Cook the spaghetti in plenty of boiling salted water until
it is tender, then drain it well and put it into a saucepan containing
one ounce of warm butter; season it with salt, freshly-ground black
pepper, and a little cayenne, and stir over the fire for a few minutes,
then add sufficient tomato conserve to moisten the spaghetti, and
the remaining ounce of butter divided into small pieces; when it is
thoroughly hot scatter in the cheese, turning the spaghetti lightly and
quickly with a fork while doing so, and directly the cheese “spins”
into long threads, turn it on to a hot dish and serve at once garnished
with little croutons of fried bread.




STUFFED POTATOES

 Six medium-sized potatoes, some quenelle forcemeat (_see_ page 79), 1
 truffle (coarsely minced), 3 olives (also minced), 1 oz. butter, small
 quantity cream (or milk), seasoning.


_Method._--Wash the potatoes thoroughly and bake them, without removing
the skins, until they are well cooked. Cut a small piece from the top
of each, remove the inside, taking care not to break the skin, and pass
it through a potato presser into a basin; add the butter, a little
cream or milk, and season with salt, pepper, and nutmeg, and beat the
potato with a wooden spoon until it is very light and quite white. Then
carefully replace some of it in the skins, pressing it back against
the sides with the handle of a small spoon, thus leaving the middle
hollow; prepare a forcemeat according to the recipe given for Quenelles
à la Reine, and after passing it through the sieve add the truffle
and olives and use it for filling the centre of the potatoes. Add
sufficient carmine to the potato left over to colour it a pretty clear
red, fill a forcer (with a small rose pipe) with it and make a rose on
the top of each potato sufficiently large to cover the hole; put the
potatoes into a hot oven for fifteen minutes, and serve them garnished
with watercress and accompanied by a watercress, tomato, and celery
salad.




STUFFED VEGETABLE MARROW

 A small marrow, 3 ozs. freshly-sieved breadcrumbs, 3 tablespoonfuls
 cream, 1 tablespoonful minced parsley, ¹⁄₄ teaspoonful mixed herbs (if
 the flavour is not disliked), 1 saltspoonful grated lemon-peel, 1 oz.
 onion (scalded and minced), 1¹⁄₂ ozs. butter, 3 ozs. finely ground
 pine kernels (Cashu, or Brazil nuts) (blanched), 1 tablespoonful
 grated Parmesan cheese, 1 egg, ¹⁄₂ pint thick tomato or white sauce,
 seasoning.


_Method._--Peel the marrow and cook it until tender in boiling salted
water (it must not be over done), then cut a piece from one end,
carefully remove all the seeds and stringy inside portion, and drain it
well on a cloth. Fry the onion and nuts in the butter until the onion
begins to change colour, but do not let it brown; mix the bread to a
paste in a basin with the cream, which should be boiling, and season
with salt, pepper, and a little mixed spice; add the egg (not beaten),
the onion, nuts and cheese, beat the mixture well, and then stuff the
marrow with it. Place it on a china gratin dish which has been well
buttered, sprinkle the marrow with freshly-ground white pepper (which
gives a subtle flavour), pour a quarter of a pint of tomato sauce
(or white sauce may be substituted) over it, and cover it with dried
breadcrumbs; put a few pieces of butter on the top and bake in a quick
oven for about twenty minutes. Heat the remainder of the sauce and pour
it round the marrow.




TOMATO OMELET WITH VEGETABLE SALAD

 Four eggs, 2 ozs. butter, 2 tablespoonfuls tomato purée (or tomato
 conserve), seasoning.


_Method._--Break the eggs into a basin and beat them well, season them
with salt, pepper, and nutmeg, and add rather less than half an ounce
of butter broken into small pieces. Melt the remainder of the butter
in an omelet pan over a very clear, quick fire, and when it is quite
hot (care must be taken that it does not burn) pour in the eggs. Raise
the mixture all over the surface by thrusting a fork into it, which
will allow the soft portion on the top to run through to the hot pan,
then loosen the omelet round the edge as it sets, and keep shaking the
pan to prevent it from “catching,” and just before it is sufficiently
set, spread the tomato pulp (which should be heated with a little
butter) over half, then fold the other half over, and deftly turn the
omelet on to a hot dish; serve at once with a salad prepared in the
following manner: Slice equal quantities of new potatoes (which have
been cooked and allowed to get cold), tomatoes (peeled), and cucumber
(also peeled), and arrange neatly in a salad bowl, then cover with
chopped celery (which has been kept in water to preserve the crispness)
and fill the middle of the bowl with young green peas (cooked) or a
carefully drained cauliflower which has been divided into small pieces;
cover the centre vegetable with a thick mayonnaise sauce and sprinkle
some chopped parsley over it.




TOMATO PATTIES

 Four tomatoes, 2 ozs. minced mushrooms, ¹⁄₂ oz. onion (scalded and
 minced), 2 ozs. breadcrumbs, 1³⁄₄ ozs. butter, ¹⁄₂ gill cream (or
 milk), 1 teaspoonful chopped parsley, seasoning, 8 pattie-cases.


_Method._--Scald the tomatoes and remove the skin, and with a sharp
knife cut them in half, take out all the seeds, and put them on a
cloth to drain. Fry the mushrooms and onion in one ounce of butter
for eight minutes; moisten the bread with the cream, which should be
hot, and half an ounce of warm butter, then add the parsley and fried
mushrooms and season with salt, pepper, and nutmeg. Fill the halves of
the tomatoes with the mixture, put a little piece of butter on each,
and cook them on a buttered tin in a quick oven until they are just
soft, but they must not lose their shape. The pattie cases must be made
a suitable size and shape for holding the halves of the tomatoes, and
they should be hot when the tomatoes are done; place one piece in each
case and serve at once. If preferred the cases can be made of potato
paste (for recipe see page 71).




TOMATO SHAPE WITH PEAS

 One pound ripe tomatoes, ¹⁄₂ teaspoonful minced onion, 1 oz.
 butter, ¹⁄₂ teaspoonful tarragon vinegar, ¹⁄₂ pint aspic jelly, 1
 tablespoonful white wine, ¹⁄₄ pint stiffly whipped cream, carmine,
 seasoning, ¹⁄₂ pint cooked peas, ¹⁄₂ gill thick mayonnaise sauce.


_Method._--Put the tomatoes into a stewpan with the butter and tarragon
vinegar; season with celery salt, cayenne, a dust of castor sugar, and
a little curry powder, and let them cook gently until they are quite
soft. Then pour off the liquid (which can be used with advantage to
flavour soup or sauce) and pass the fruit through a sieve into a basin;
add one gill of the aspic jelly (which should be liquid), the white
wine, a few drops of carmine, and, when it is just cold, the cream;
whisk the mixture for a few moments then put it into a border-mould,
which has been previously lined with aspic jelly, and leave it in a
cool place until set. Dress the cooked peas with the mayonnaise sauce
and, after turning out the tomato shape, fill the hollow in the middle
with the peas, and garnish with watercress or parsley.




TOMATOES STUFFED WITH MACARONI

 Six medium-sized tomatoes, 2 ozs. macaroni, 1¹⁄₂ ozs. butter, 1 oz.
 flour, quarter pint cream (or milk), 1 oz. grated cheese, seasoning,
 breadcrumbs, vegetable stock.


_Method._--Cut a small piece from the tomatoes, carefully remove all
the seeds, and leave them on a sieve to drain for some time before
they have to be filled. Break the macaroni into small pieces and cook
it in boiling vegetable stock until it is quite tender, then drain
it well. Melt one ounce of butter and mix the flour with it until a
smooth paste is formed, then add the cream and stir quickly until the
sauce is quite thick; remove the pan from the stove and add the cheese,
seasoning, and macaroni, and fill the tomatoes with it; cover the top
with breadcrumbs, put a little piece of butter on each, and bake in a
fairly quick oven until the tomatoes are cooked, but they should not
be allowed to lose their shape. Serve them round a mound of potatoes
prepared thus: Select some rather close potatoes (the floury kind would
not be suitable), and after peeling them cut them into thin slices and
leave them in cold water for about a quarter of an hour, then dry them
on a soft cloth. Butter a china soufflé mould (or a basin will do) and
put in a layer of the potatoes; sprinkle a little salt, pepper, and
nutmeg (not too much of the latter) over them, and put a few little
pieces of butter on the top; then add the remainder of the potatoes
in the same way, layer by layer, and when the mould is full tie a
buttered paper over it, place an enamelled plate on the top of the
paper, and stand the mould in a pan of hot water in a moderately quick
oven for fully an hour. Half an hour before the potatoes are done pour
a small quantity (a quarter of a pint to a pint mould) of milk over
them, then replace the paper, and let them finish cooking. When ready,
turn the potatoes out of the mould (they will be a compact mass) and
sprinkle some chopped parsley over the top.




TOMATO SOUFFLÉ

 One pound tomatoes, 3 ozs. butter, 1¹⁄₂ ozs. potato flour, 1 oz. onion
 (scalded and minced), 3 eggs, rather less than ¹⁄₂ pint milk, Parmesan
 or Gruyère cheese (grated), seasoning, ¹⁄₂ pint celery sauce.


_Method._--Slice the tomatoes and cook them with the onion in one ounce
of butter until they are tender, then pass them through a sieve. Melt
two ounces of butter and stir in the flour, and when smoothly mixed,
moisten gradually with the milk, stirring quickly until a very thick
sauce is made; turn the latter into a basin, and add the yolks of the
eggs, season with salt, pepper, a very little mixed spice, and a large
tablespoonful of grated cheese, then stir in half a pint of the tomato
pulp (straining off any excess of juice), and lastly the whites of the
eggs whisked to a very stiff froth. Put the mixture into a buttered
soufflé mould (or basin) without quite filling it; tie a buttered paper
over the top and steam steadily (but not rapidly) for from half an
hour to forty minutes, when the soufflé should feel firm. Turn it out
carefully, surround it with celery sauce, and serve with fried potatoes
prepared as follows: Peel some potatoes, cut them into quarters (select
the firm, not floury kind), and parboil them in hot salted water, then
drain them and turn them on to a floured cloth to dry. Heat plenty
of fat in a sauté pan, and when it reaches boiling point put in the
potatoes and let them cook until they are a golden brown; drain them
from the fat, sprinkle with salt, pepper, and some chopped parsley, and
they will be ready to serve.




VEGETABLE CREAM WITH AIGRETTES

 Half a peck young peas (cooked and sieved), 1 teaspoonful very finely
 minced onion (previously scalded), 1 oz. butter, 1 oz. flour, ¹⁄₄ pint
 milk, 1 teaspoonful tomato catsup, 1 tablespoonful grated Parmesan
 cheese, seasoning, chopped mint, ³⁄₄ pint aspic jelly, 1 gill stiffly
 whipped cream.


_Method._--Cook the onion in the butter with a little finely chopped
mint (the quantity should depend on whether the flavour is liked)
for a few moments, then stir in the flour, and when it is smoothly
mixed add the milk and continue to stir until a very thick sauce is
formed; season it with a little salt and pepper, rub it through a
gravy-strainer into the basin containing the sieved peas, and mix
well. Then add the tomato catsup and Parmesan cheese and season with
salt, pepper, and nutmeg; whisk one and a half gills of cool aspic
jelly until it is quite white, add the whipped cream to it, and then
the prepared peas, by degrees, and as soon as the ingredients are
thoroughly mixed, pour the cream into a mould which has been lined with
aspic jelly and leave until the following day, when it should be turned
out and served with aigrettes, made according to the directions given
below. If the peas are carefully cooked in an uncovered pan they should
produce a bright green purée, but should the colour not be good a few
drops of vegetable greening must be added. The cream may be iced with
advantage.

_For the Aigrettes._--Put one ounce of butter into a small saucepan
with half a pint of cold water; when it boils, draw the pan to the side
of the stove and stir in, gradually, four ounces of flour, and continue
to stir until a smooth and very thick paste is formed, which leaves the
sides of the pan and collects round the spoon in the middle; then take
the pan from the stove and, when the mixture has cooled a little, beat
two whole eggs and an additional yolk into it, adding each separately,
and when these are mixed stir in three ounces of dry, grated cheese
(preferably Parmesan and Gruyère mixed) and season with salt, white
pepper, and a little curry powder. As soon as the paste is cool, dip a
teaspoon into a stewpan containing plenty (it must be deep) of clear
fat, which has been heated to just under boiling point; fill it with
some of the paste and drop the latter into the fat. Avoid putting many
aigrettes into the pan at the same time, and be careful to remove them
as soon as they are a deep golden colour. Let the aigrettes cool on a
wire tray, and serve them cold with the vegetable cream; they should
not be made too long before they are required. The above makes a good
dish for a cold supper.




VEGETABLE PIE

 Four large, close potatoes (parboiled), ¹⁄₂ pint haricot beans (cooked
 until just tender and skinned), 6 large mushrooms (cleansed and
 peeled), 4 tomatoes, 1 stick celery (parboiled), butter, 2 hard-boiled
 eggs, forcemeat balls, 1 dessertspoonful onion (scalded and minced),
 seasoning, brown vegetable stock (slightly thickened), ¹⁄₂ lb. short
 paste.


_Method._--Butter a pie-dish and put in a layer of sliced potatoes,
then a few slices of tomato, three mushrooms (cut in half), some of the
beans, some pieces of celery (about an inch in length), one hard-boiled
egg divided into quarters, and four or five little forcemeat balls;
season with salt, pepper, and nutmeg, and scatter half the quantity
of onion over the surface, then use the remaining ingredients in the
same way. Moisten the pie with the stock and cover it with the paste,
brush over with beaten egg (if practicable), and bake in a well-heated
oven for an hour. For the forcemeat balls proceed thus: Mix together
four ounces Hovis breadcrumbs, one dessertspoonful of minced parsley, a
little lemon-thyme (if the flavour is not disliked), a teaspoonful of
onion (scalded and minced), a very little grated lemon-peel, and season
with salt, freshly-ground black pepper, and cayenne; then add two
ounces of warm butter and sufficient beaten egg to form a fairly stiff
paste. Divide the latter into little balls, roll them on a floured
board, and they will be ready for use.




VEGETABLE STEAKS

 Half a pound of red haricot beans, 2 ozs. butter, 3 ozs. minced onion,
 2 large tomatoes (sliced), 1 small stick of celery, seasoning, ¹⁄₂
 pint brown vegetable stock, 1¹⁄₂ eggs.


_Method._--Soak the beans over-night, boil them until tender, then
remove their skins and put them into an earthenware casserole with the
butter, onion, tomatoes, and celery, and fry for six minutes, stirring
well; season with salt, pepper, and a dust of mixed spice, and pour in
the stock. Cover the beans closely with greased paper before putting
on the lid of the casserole, and let them cook in a moderate oven for
about two hours, or until they are reduced to a soft mass and the stock
is all absorbed. Pass the beans and vegetables through a wire sieve;
add the yolk of egg to the purée, mixing it thoroughly; put it aside
to get cold, and then form on a floured board into six little steaks;
brush them over with beaten egg, dredge a little flour over them, and
fry until nicely browned in boiling fat; serve with celery fritters in
the middle and ribbon potatoes round the dish.




YORKSHIRE MINCE

 Four ounces of mushrooms, 1 oz. butter, 1 gill thick brown sauce, 1
 tablespoonful thick cream, lemon-juice, parsley, seasoning, Yorkshire
 pudding mixture.


_Method._--Cleanse and peel the mushrooms and remove the stalks (which
can be used to flavour stock) and fry them in the butter for five
minutes, seasoning them with salt, pepper, and a little powdered mace;
then cover them with the sauce; place a greased paper over the pan
and let them stew by the side of the fire for half an hour. Pass the
mushrooms through a fine mincer, add a squeeze of lemon-juice, and
reheat them in the pan previously used, with a tablespoonful of cream,
stirring them occasionally to prevent them from burning. Prepare a
Yorkshire pudding in the usual way, and bake it carefully so that it is
nicely browned; when ready, spread the minced mushrooms evenly on the
top, scatter some parsley over it, and with a sharp knife cut it into
neat squares, and serve with, or without, a boat of thick brown sauce.




YORKSHIRE PUDDING WITH MUSHROOMS AND TOMATOES

 Three ounces dry, sifted flour, 3 eggs, rather more than ¹⁄₄ pint
 milk, baking powder, 2 ozs. butter, 4 mushrooms, 2 tomatoes, maître
 d’hôtel butter, seasoning.


_Method._--Put the flour into a basin, add a little salt and some
freshly-ground black pepper, and make a hollow in the middle; whisk the
eggs well and mix the milk with them, then pour by degrees into the
flour, mixing it with a wooden spoon; when a perfectly smooth batter
is formed cover the basin with a cloth and let it stand for an hour
or two before cooking. Then melt the butter in a Yorkshire pudding
tin (ten by six inches), and when it is hot stir a saltspoonful of
baking powder into the batter, pour it into the hot tin, and bake in a
well-heated oven for from twenty to thirty minutes. While the pudding
is being cooked, fry two medium-sized tomatoes cut in half and four
fairly large mushrooms (cleansed and peeled); when the pudding is done
cut it into eight squares with a sharp knife and arrange them on a very
hot flat fireproof dish, place the mushrooms and tomatoes alternately
on the pieces, and put a little pat of maître d’hôtel butter on each;
it should be prepared thus: Beat three ounces of butter (or two ounces
if only for a small dish) until it is soft and creamy; season it with
salt, pepper, and cayenne, and add, by degrees, a tablespoonful of
lemon-juice; when it is thoroughly worked into the butter sprinkle
in a tablespoonful of finely-minced parsley and put into a cool place
until it is firm. Then take a small portion of the butter at a time,
and roll it into eight neat little balls; flatten them slightly into a
little pat and use as directed.




SAUCES


BROWN SAUCE

 Two and a half ounces of butter, 1 onion, 1 large or 2 small carrots,
 a few pieces of celery, 1 tomato, ¹⁄₂ turnip, 1 thick slice parsnip, 2
 or 3 pieces parsley, 1 clove, seasoning, browning, Maggi’s essence.

_Method._--Slice the vegetables and let them simmer gently in one ounce
of the butter for a quarter of an hour; then add a pint of boiling
water, a teaspoonful of browning, a teaspoonful of Maggi’s essence,
salt, pepper, nutmeg, and a dust of curry powder, and let it boil
rapidly for ten minutes; at the end of the time draw the pan to the
side of the stove and let the stock cook slowly for three quarters of
an hour. When it is ready thicken it with two ounces of flour, and
one and a half ounces of butter, cooked together, add a squeeze of
lemon-juice, or a few drops of tarragon vinegar, and strain.


CURRY SAUCE

 Two ounces of butter, 4 ozs. onion, 1 or 2 tomatoes, ¹⁄₂ a sweet
 apple, 2 teaspoonfuls sweet chutney, 1 dessertspoonful curry
 powder, 1 dessertspoonful flour, 1 teaspoonful tarragon vinegar (or
 lemon-juice), ³⁄₄ pint brown vegetable stock.

_Method._--Slice the onion, tomatoes, and apple and fry in the butter
until the onion begins to show signs of becoming a golden colour; then
add the curry powder, and draw the pan to a cooler part of the stove,
and let the contents simmer for twelve minutes. At the end of the time
stir in the flour, taking care no lumps form, and when it is smoothly
mixed with the butter, pour in the stock gradually, and stir until
the sauce has boiled and thickened, then add the chutney and tarragon
vinegar, and let it simmer for half an hour, when it should be passed
through a gravy strainer into a basin (rubbing the ingredients through
with the back of a small wooden spoon) to be re-heated when required.


DUTCH SAUCE

 Half a pint of thick white sauce, 1 raw yolk of egg, 1¹⁄₂ teaspoonfuls
 lemon-juice, ¹⁄₂ oz. butter.

_Method._--Make the white sauce hot, ascertain that it has sufficient
seasoning, and when it reaches boiling point draw the pan to the
side of the stove and stir in the yolk of egg beaten up with the
lemon-juice and continue to stir for a few moments until the egg has
thickened, but it must not boil or it will curdle and be spoilt. Then
remove the pan from the stove and stir in the butter (which should be
divided into little pieces) by degrees, and if the sauce is not to be
used at once, keep it hot by placing the saucepan in a larger vessel
of hot water. Dutch sauce is nice with almost any kind of vegetable
(including potatoes), and also with macaroni.


TOMATO AND CELERY SAUCE

 Half a pound of tomatoes, 3 or 4 nice white sticks of celery, 1 oz.
 butter, seasoning, carmine, ¹⁄₂ pint white sauce.

_Method._--Slice the tomatoes and cut the celery into small pieces;
melt the butter in a saucepan, put in the vegetables, season them with
salt, pepper, a very little powdered mace, and let them simmer (not
fry) for ten minutes. Then add the white sauce and leave the pan where
the heat is moderate until the vegetables are quite tender, but the
sauce must not be allowed to boil. When it is ready, add a few drops
of carmine and a squeeze of lemon-juice, and pass it either through a
perforated gravy strainer or a sieve, and re-heat it carefully, letting
it only just reach boiling point.


TOMATO SAUCE

 Three or four large tomatoes, 1¹⁄₂ ozs. sliced onion, 1¹⁄₂ ozs.
 butter, 1¹⁄₂ pints thick brown sauce, seasoning, Chili vinegar,
 carmine.

_Method._--Cut the tomatoes into slices and fry them gently with the
onion in one ounce of the butter; season with salt, freshly-ground
black pepper, nutmeg, and a dust of castor sugar, and as soon as the
tomatoes are quite soft, add the brown sauce, a few drops of Chili
vinegar, and sufficient carmine to make it a clear red; then pass it
through a sieve and re-heat it when required, stirring in the remaining
half ounce of butter after taking the saucepan from the stove; this
will add richness to the sauce, but it should not be re-heated after
the butter is put in, or it will become oily instead of blending with
the sauce.


WHITE SAUCE

 One onion, a few pieces of celery, 2 or 3 thin strips lemon-peel, 2 or
 3 pieces parsley, small blade of mace, salt, pepper, ³⁄₄ pint milk,
 ¹⁄₄ pint Plasmon stock, 2¹⁄₂ ozs. butter, 2 ozs. flour.

_Method._--Cut the onion in slices and put it into a saucepan with
the celery and one ounce of butter, and let it simmer gently for ten
minutes, taking great care that the butter does not become discoloured,
then add the milk, Plasmon, lemon-peel, parsley, mace, salt, and
pepper, and let the stock simmer gently (it must not boil) until the
vegetables are soft, when it should be strained into a basin. Melt the
remainder of the butter in a saucepan and stir in the flour. As soon
as the latter is well mixed, pour in the flavoured milk, by degrees,
stirring quickly all the time with a wooden spoon, so that no lumps
may form; then place the pan on a slightly hotter part of the stove,
so that the sauce may boil and thicken satisfactorily. If carefully
prepared, it will be perfectly smooth, otherwise it should be passed
through a gravy strainer; if an additional half ounce of butter can be
spared, it will improve the sauce to have it stirred in the last thing
before it is served.


WHITE STOCK

 One onion, 1 carrot, 1 small turnip, a few pieces of celery, a thick
 slice of parsnip, 2 artichokes, a little bunch of parsley, a little
 piece of lemon-thyme, 1 clove, a little piece of mace, salt, pepper,
 ¹⁄₂ pint milk, ³⁄₄ pint water or Plasmon stock, 1 oz. of crumbs from a
 milk loaf.

_Method._--Slice the vegetables and put them into a saucepan with
the water, bread, herbs, and seasoning; let the water or stock reach
boiling point, and then simmer for half an hour; at the end of the time
add the milk and simmer again for twenty minutes, when the stock should
be strained and put aside until it is required.




                               LETCHWORTH
                            THE TEMPLE PRESS
                                PRINTERS




                          Transcriber’s Notes

Punctuation errors have been fixed.

Page 20: “with sphaghetti” changed to “with spaghetti”

Page 47: “for brasing” changed to “for braising”

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEST VEGETARIAN DISHES I
KNOW ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
