The Project Gutenberg eBook of Homemade candy—sweet and dandy, by
Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Homemade candy—sweet and dandy

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: July 10, 2023 [eBook #71160]

Language: English

Credits: Bob Taylor, Lisa Corcoran, Stephen Hutcheson and the Online
         Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOMEMADE CANDY—SWEET AND
DANDY ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_
  Bold text displayed as: =bold=




[Illustration:

  Homemade
  Candy—Sweet
  and Dandy]


_Whether you take candymaking seriously or like to make it only for
special occasions, you will find the recipes for the most popular
homemade candy in this folder. They were developed in the Best Foods
Karo Kitchens, where candymaking is taken seriously. Karo syrup in
the candy mixture helps to give a smooth, creamy texture as in fudge,
a soft chewy texture as in taffy or a crisp non-sticky texture as in
peanut brittle or candy apples._


Crazy Crunch

  1⅓ cups sugar
  1 cup Nucoa or Mazola margarine
  ½ cup Karo light or dark corn syrup
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  8 cups popped corn
  ⅔ cup toasted pecans
  1⅓ cups toasted almonds

Combine sugar, margarine and corn syrup in 2 quart saucepan. Bring
to boil over medium heat, stirring constantly. Continue boiling,
stirring occasionally, 10 to 15 minutes or until mixture turns a
light caramel color (290°F.). Remove from heat; stir in vanilla. Pour
syrup over popped corn and nuts on baking sheet. Toss with two large
spoons until popped corn and nuts are coated. Spread out to dry.
Break into pieces and store in tightly covered container or plastic
bag. Makes about 1¾ pounds.

[Illustration: flowers]


Candied Walnuts

  1 cup sugar
  ¼ cup Karo light corn syrup
  ⅓ cup water
  1 teaspoon rum extract
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  2 cups walnut pieces

Combine sugar, light corn syrup and water in a 2-quart saucepan.
Stirring constantly, cook over medium heat until sugar is dissolved
and mixture comes to a boil. Continue cooking, stirring occasionally,
until temperature reaches 235°F. or until a small amount of mixture
dropped into very cold water forms a soft ball. Remove from heat. Add
rum extract, salt and walnuts. Stir until mixture begins to thicken
and turn white. Pour onto well greased baking sheet. Using 2 forks
separate into clusters. Cool and store in an airtight container.
Makes 1 pound.


Pralines

  1 pound light brown sugar
  1 (5⅓-ounce) can evaporated milk
  2 tablespoons Karo light corn syrup
  ¼ cup Mazola or Nucoa margarine
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  1½ cups pecan halves

Combine sugar, evaporated milk and corn syrup in 2-quart saucepan.
Stirring constantly, cook over medium heat until mixture comes to
a boil. Continue cooking, stirring occasionally, until temperature
reaches 238°F. or until a small amount of mixture dropped into very
cold water forms a soft ball. Remove from heat. Add margarine; do not
stir. Cool to lukewarm (110°F.). Add vanilla and beat until creamy.
Stir in pecans. Drop by teaspoonfuls onto waxed paper. Shape with
a spoon into a 2½-inch circle, spreading pecans. Allow to remain
undisturbed until the pralines are firm and sugared. Makes 1½ pounds.

[Illustration: flowers]


Old Fashioned Popcorn Balls

  1 cup Karo light or dark corn syrup
  1 cup firmly packed brown sugar
  ¼ cup water
  1 teaspoon vinegar
  2 tablespoons Mazola or Nucoa margarine
  2 quarts unsalted popped corn

Combine corn syrup, brown sugar, water and vinegar in saucepan.
Stirring constantly, cook over medium heat until mixture comes to
a boil. Continue cooking, stirring occasionally, until temperature
reaches 260°F., or until small amount of mixture dropped into very
cold water forms a ball which is hard enough to hold its shape, yet
plastic. Remove from heat. Quickly add margarine; blend. Slowly pour
over popped corn in large bowl, mixing well. Shape into balls, using
as little pressure as possible. (Grease hands, if desired.) Makes 15
(2½-inch) balls.

Pink Cinnamon Popcorn Balls: Follow recipe for Old Fashioned Popcorn
Balls, using light corn syrup and substituting granulated sugar for
brown sugar. Add ¼ cup red cinnamon candies to syrup when mixture
boils.

Pastel Popcorn Balls: Follow recipe for Pink Cinnamon Popcorn Balls,
omitting red cinnamon candies. When adding margarine, add 2 teaspoons
vanilla and enough food coloring for desired shade.


Fondant

  ⅓ cup Nucoa or Mazola margarine
  ½ cup Karo light corn syrup
  1 pound confectioners sugar, sifted
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Mix together margarine, corn syrup and 2 cups sugar in 3-quart
saucepan. Cook over low heat, stirring constantly, until mixture
comes to full boil. Stir in remaining sugar and vanilla. Remove from
heat; stir until mixture holds shape. Pour into greased baking pan.
Cool just enough to handle. Knead with lightly greased hands until
smooth. (If candy hardens too much before kneading, work with spoon,
then knead.) Knead in any desired flavoring and coloring. Shape into
small patties, balls or use as filling for nuts, dates or apricots.
Makes about 1⅓ pounds.

[Illustration: flowers]


Divinity

  2½ cups sugar
  ½ cup Karo light corn syrup
  ½ cup water
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  2 egg whites
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  1 cup coarsely chopped walnuts or pecans (optional)

Mix together sugar, corn syrup, water and salt in 2-quart saucepan.
Cook over medium heat, stirring constantly, until mixture comes to
boil. Reduce heat; cook without stirring until temperature reaches
248°F., or until a small amount of mixture dropped into very cold
water forms a firm ball which does not flatten on removal from
water. Just before temperature reaches 248°F., beat egg whites in
large bowl until stiff but not dry. Beating constantly, on high
speed of electric mixer, slowly pour about ½ the hot syrup over
egg whites. Then cook remaining syrup to 272°F., or until a small
amount separates into threads which are hard but not brittle when
dropped into very cold water. Beating constantly, pour hot syrup over
first mixture about 1 tablespoon at a time, beating well after each
addition. Continue beating until mixture begins to lose its gloss and
a small amount of mixture holds soft peak when dropped from spoon.
(If mixture becomes too stiff for mixer, beat with wooden spoon.) Mix
in vanilla and nuts. Drop by teaspoonfuls onto waxed paper. Makes 1¼
pounds or 48 pieces.


Candy Apples

  8 medium red apples
  8 flat wooden skewers or spoons
  2 cups sugar
  1 cup Karo light corn syrup
  ½ cup water
  ¼ cup (1¾-ounce bottle) red cinnamon candies
  10 drops red food coloring (optional)

Wash and dry apples; remove stems and insert skewers into stem ends.
Combine sugar, light corn syrup and water in heavy 2-quart saucepan.
Stirring constantly, cook over medium heat until mixture boils and
sugar is dissolved. Then cook, without stirring, until temperature
reaches 250°F. or until small amount of syrup dropped into very cold
water forms a ball which is hard enough to hold its shape, yet plastic.
Add cinnamon candies and continue cooking to 285°F. or until small
amount of syrup dropped into very cold water separates into threads
which are hard, but not brittle. Remove from heat. Stir in red food
coloring, if desired. Hold each apple by its skewer and quickly twirl
in syrup, tilting pan to cover apple with syrup. Remove apple from
syrup; allow excess to drip off, then twirl to spread syrup smoothly
over apple. Place on lightly greased baking sheet to cool. Store in
cool place. Makes 8 candy apples.

[Illustration: flowers]


Chewy Bars

  ¾ cup Mazola or Nucoa margarine
  ½ cup granulated sugar
  ½ cup firmly packed brown sugar
  ½ cup Karo dark corn syrup
  1 tablespoon vanilla
  4 cups quick oats
  1 (6-ounce) package semi-sweet chocolate chips
  ⅔ cup Skippy creamy or chunk style peanut butter

Grease 1 (13 × 9 × 2-inch) baking pan. Blend margarine and sugars
in mixing bowl. Stir in corn syrup and vanilla, mixing well. Mix in
oats. Pat dough into bottom of prepared pan, moistening hands to
prevent sticking. Bake in 350°F. (moderate) oven 20 to 25 minutes.
Cool slightly. Melt chocolate chips and peanut butter over boiling
water, stirring constantly. Spread over baked layer. Chill to set
chocolate. Cut into bars. Makes about 6 dozen (3 × ½-inch) bars.


10-Minute Fudge

  3 (1-ounce) squares unsweetened chocolate
  ¼ cup Mazola or Nucoa margarine
  4½ cups (1 pound) sifted confectioners sugar
  ⅓ cup instant nonfat dry milk
  ½ cup Karo light or dark corn syrup
  1 tablespoon water
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  ½ cup chopped nuts (optional)

Grease 1 (8 × 8 × 2-inch) pan. Melt chocolate and margarine in top
of 2-quart double boiler over hot water. Meanwhile sift together
confectioners’ sugar and dry milk. Stir corn syrup, water and vanilla
into chocolate margarine mixture. Stir in sifted sugar and dry milk
in two additions. Continue stirring until mixture is well blended and
smooth. Remove from heat; stir in nuts. Turn into prepared pan. Cool.
Cut into squares. Makes 1¾ pounds.

Quick Peanut Butter Fudge: Follow recipe for 10-Minute Fudge using
light corn syrup and omitting chocolate. Melt ⅓ cup Skippy creamy or
chunk style peanut butter with margarine.

[Illustration: flowers]


Old Fashioned Chocolate Fudge

  3 tablespoons Mazola or Nucoa margarine
  3 cups sugar
  2 tablespoons Karo light or dark corn syrup
  2 (1-ounce) squares unsweetened chocolate
  ¾ cup milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  1 cup walnuts, coarsely chopped (optional)

Grease 1 (8 × 8 × 2-inch) pan. Place margarine, sugar, corn syrup,
chocolate and milk in a heavy 3-quart saucepan. Cook over medium
heat, stirring constantly, until mixture boils. Continue cooking,
stirring occasionally until temperature reaches (238°F.) or until
a small amount of mixture dropped in cold water forms a soft ball.
Remove from heat. Add vanilla. Cool to lukewarm (110°F.). Beat until
fudge begins to thicken and loses its gloss. Fold in nuts. Quickly
pour into prepared pan. For best results do not spread fudge or
scrape out of pan. When cold, cut in squares. Makes 2 pounds.


Salt Water Taffy

  1 cup sugar
  2 tablespoons Argo corn starch
  ¾ cup Karo light corn syrup
  ½ cup water
  ½ teaspoon salt
  2 tablespoons Nucoa or Mazola margarine
  2 teaspoons vanilla

Grease 9 × 9 × 2-inch cake pan. Mix sugar and corn starch in 1½-quart
saucepan. Stir in corn syrup, water and salt. Add margarine. Cook
over medium heat, stirring constantly, until mixture boils and sugar
is completely dissolved. Continue cooking, without stirring, until
temperature reaches 260°F., or until a small amount of mixture
dropped into very cold water, forms a ball which is hard enough to
hold its shape, yet plastic. Remove from heat. Stir in vanilla. Pour
into prepared pan. Let stand until cool enough to handle. Pull with
fingers until it has satin-like finish and light color. Pull into
long strips, ½ inch wide. Cut 1-inch pieces with scissors. Wrap in
waxed paper. Makes about 1 pound.

[Illustration: flowers]


Peanut Brittle

  1 cup Karo light or dark corn syrup
  1 cup sugar
  ¼ cup water
  2 tablespoons Mazola or Nucoa margarine
  1½ cups salted peanuts
  1 teaspoon baking soda

Combine corn syrup, sugar, water and margarine in heavy 2-quart
saucepan. Cook over medium heat, stirring constantly until sugar
is dissolved and mixture comes to boil. Continue cooking without
stirring until temperature reaches 280°F. or until a small amount of
mixture dropped into very cold water separates into threads which are
hard but not brittle. Gradually stir in salted peanuts so mixture
continues to boil. Cook, stirring frequently, until temperature
reaches 300°F. or until small amount of mixture dropped into very
cold water separates into threads which are hard and brittle.
Remove from heat. Add baking soda; blend quickly, but thoroughly.
Immediately turn onto heavily greased baking sheet. Spread mixture
evenly to edges of baking sheet with a greased metal spatula. Cool.
Break into pieces. Makes 1½ pounds.


Caramel Chocolate Skrunch

  2 cups corn flakes
  1 cup crisp rice cereal
  ½ cup semi-sweet chocolate chips
  1 cup broken nuts
  ¾ cup Karo dark corn syrup
  ¼ cup sugar
  2 tablespoons Mazola or Nucoa margarine
  ½ teaspoon vanilla

Cut top off of 1-quart milk carton. Combine cereals, chocolate chips
and nuts in large bowl; set aside. Combine dark corn syrup, sugar and
margarine in saucepan. Stirring constantly, bring to full boil over
medium heat and boil 3 minutes. Remove from heat. Cool 10 minutes.
Add vanilla. Beat mixture with wooden spoon until mixture turns a
light brown and thickens. Pour over cereal mixture. Toss to coat
evenly. Press firmly into milk carton. Chill 1 to 2 hours or until
set. Loosen with spatula and slip out of carton. (Does not require
refrigeration after loaf is set.) Makes about 1 pound.

To Make Free Form Shapes: Do not press mixture into milk carton. Cool
about 15 minutes, then shape as desired.

Butterscotch Skrunch: Follow recipe for Caramel Chocolate Skrunch,
substituting ½ cup butterscotch chips for chocolate chips.

Mocha Skrunch: Follow recipe for Caramel Chocolate Skrunch, adding 1
tablespoon instant coffee powder to syrup mixture before boiling.

Peanut And Raisin Skrunch: Follow recipe for Caramel Chocolate
Skrunch, substituting ½ cup raisins for chocolate chips, 1 cup
chopped peanuts for broken nuts, and adding 1 teaspoon cinnamon to
syrup mixture before boiling.

Peanut Butter Skrunch: Follow recipe for Caramel Chocolate Skrunch,
increasing rice cereal to 2 cups, omitting nuts and adding ½ cup
chunk style peanut butter to syrup with flavoring. If desired, almond
extract may be substituted for vanilla.


  For
  additional
  copies
  write to:

  Consumer Service Department
  Best Foods, a Division of
  CPC International Inc.
  International Plaza
  Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632

[Illustration: =cpc= ® International]

  2946-73-3D  PRINTED IN U.S.A.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOMEMADE CANDY—SWEET AND
DANDY ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
