
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEFT-OVER FOODS AND HOW TO USE THEM ***



                            Left-Over Foods
                         _and_ How to Use Them

                      _With suggestions regarding
                          the preservation of
                              foods in the
                                 home_




                    _Written by_ ELIZABETH O. HILLER
                   _for the_ MCCRAY REFRIGERATOR CO.
                         KENDALLVILLE, INDIANA

                            COPYRIGHT, 1910
                        McCRAY REFRIGERATOR CO.
                           KENDALLVILLE, IND.




[Illustration: frontispiece]




                            _Left-over foods
                                  and
                            how to use them_


I cannot say that I altogether agree with the statement, “Scraps are
accidents to be taken care of, no doubt, but the very last objects on
which to bestow either expense or labor.” The “scraps” or “left-over”
bits of food that accumulate in the average household, _are_ worthy of
consideration and with little labor and expense are convertible into
the most palatable viands. There is always some labor attendant on any
and all household duties, for we have all learned that the Earl of
Chesterfield uttered a great truth when he said (away back in the 17th
century), “Whatever is worth doing at all, is worth doing well.” I have
discovered that this old maxim applies to household management as well
as all other vocations.

It is the careless tossing together of “left-over” food and giving the
creation when finished, a name quite as unattractive as itself, that
has caused this great antipathy so prevalent among people, for serving
or partaking of “made-up” dishes. _Hash_, itself, is a very much abused
term as well as the mixture thus named.

This little book of helpful suggestions has been carefully prepared and
if followed by the housewife, fortunate enough to receive one, she will
find immediate help over some of the “rough places” too often found in
the daily routine of house work, where the preparation for such duties
has been limited.

Study the chapter on “How to Measure Accurately, and Combining
Ingredients,” and all the others and you cannot fail to learn,
thoroughly, the lesson “Left-Overs and How to Use Them.”




                      To Market and Care for Food

Every one seems to have “a way of their own” for marketing and taking
care of food. There are, however, but two methods of marketing and but
one _proper_ way to take care of food.

One of the methods of marketing is that followed by the French and
Mexican housekeeper; that is, buying just enough for the daily needs
and no more. The other method is that in vogue in America and England.
It is buying provisions in large quantities (in some cases wholesale)
flour, sugar and apples by the barrel, butter by the firkin, canned
goods by the case, sides of bacon, whole hams, etc. Both methods have
their advantages. The one adopted by the prudent housewife will be that
which best suits the conditions under which she lives; the income,
the size of the family, and the conveniences provided for storing
provisions.

Where the family is small and the home is an apartment, if it is
equipped with a fine large glass- or tile-lined McCray refrigerator,
the problem of preserving food is not difficult (see chapter on Care
of Refrigerator, page 10). For the small family, buying just what is
needed for the day and no more is the best. This method, does, however,
require most careful thought, and very accurate estimates must be
made by the housewife, lest she buy more than she can use and thereby
sustain great waste.

Herein lies the necessity for housekeepers in general having a better
knowledge of food values. For the large family with a generous income,
and where cold storage provisions are made, buying in large quantities
is by far the most economical method to follow. Every housekeeper
should do her own marketing if possible; she thereby becomes acquainted
with the market and market prices, makes her selections, buying little
or much as the case requires. In this way she will soon learn the
advantages gained by the French and Mexican housekeepers’ methods.
The latter carries her daily supplies home in a receptacle made of a
gourd holding less than a quart, while the former does not hesitate to
buy small portions of birds, fish, meats, etc. It is obvious that the
foreign methods show the greater economy.




                        A Word on Food in Season

Food is at its best when in season. The price is at its minimum and the
flavor and quality all that can be desired.

Out of season, all food becomes a luxury and is lacking in flavor as
well as quality. The provident housekeeper will take advantage through
the year, of fruits and vegetables, when seasonable, beginning in the
early spring to put away her stores for the following winter. To these
she may add dried and canned fruits that have proved by use to be most
wholesome and palatable.




                 Care of Vegetables, Fresh Fruit, etc.

Fresh vegetables should be cooked as soon as possible after being taken
from the garden. Where it is necessary to keep them, all wilted leaves
and unsightly portions should be removed and vegetables spread out in
a cool, well ventilated place. If placed in the refrigerator, first
prepare them for cooking, then fold them in cheese cloth, wrung from
fresh cold water, and place them on the top shelf of the refrigerator.
The leaves of such vegetables as lettuce, endive, cress, dandelions,
etc. may be kept fresh and crisp. After picking them over wash and
drain, put them in a covered lard pail, and place in the refrigerator.
Wilted vegetables may be restored by soaking in fresh cold water.
Cucumbers may be pared and thinly sliced, placed in a fruit jar,
closely covered, and kept crisp and fresh in the refrigerator for
several days.


                              Fresh Fruit

All fruits may be kept in fine condition where the luxury of a large
cold storage room is installed. Where a refrigerator is used, great
care should be exercised in placing fruits and vegetables in their
respective places. (See frontispiece, page 2).

There are some fruits, owing to their strong odor, that should never
be placed in the refrigerator; these include, bananas, musk-melons,
canteloupe, etc. Other food will soon become flavored from contact with
such fruits when confined in the refrigerator or even in a store-room.
Milk, cream, butter and other fats most readily absorb flavors when
exposed to odorous fruits, flowers, etc. The greatest care should be
given the left-over food. It should be put in small vessels (jelly
glasses) with closely fitting covers, then placed in the refrigerator;
there will then be little danger of contamination.

Over ripe vegetables (especially tomatoes) and fruits should not be
kept in the refrigerator. Berries should be carefully picked over,
and washed, when necessary, before putting them in the refrigerator.
Strawberries may be picked over, placed in a colander or a croquette
basket and cold water poured over them before removing the hulls.


                                Potatoes

Potatoes keep better and are lower in price before they have been
stored. It is therefore economy for the large consumer to buy them,
early in the season, when they are most plentiful. They may be kept in
barrels or bins, raised three inches from the floor, in a cool dry room
or cellar. For the small family, where space is a consideration, it is
more economical to buy not less than a peck at a time. They may be kept
in a box lined with heavy paper in a cool dry place.


                             Sweet Potatoes

Sweet potatoes are in season from August to May, and should be bought
in small quantities. The kiln-dried sweet potatoes are the best. These
fleshy roots of plants belong to a different family from the white
potato, they contain a large percentage of sugar and have not the
keeping qualities of the white potato. They, too, should be kept in a
cool dry place.


                            Beef and Mutton

A loin of beef or a side of mutton is a profitable investment for the
large consumer. With proper cold storage facilities the meat can be
kept well and is much improved by “hanging.”


                                  Fish

Fresh fish should be dressed at the market and removed from the paper
as soon as delivered. Salt should never be sprinkled over fish “to keep
it.” The salt extracts the rich juices and leaves the fish tasteless.
Simply cover it closely and put it in a cold place. If securely covered
it may be placed, with safety, in the refrigerator.


                                 Butter

Butter should be placed in the refrigerator as directed above, namely:
under the ice chamber which is the coldest part of the refrigerator;
this space should be reserved for the butter, cream, milk, eggs and
meat.

Butter should always be closely covered. An earthen jar, with a close
fitting cover, may be purchased at any house furnishing shop for ten
cents; this size will hold five pounds and will prove very satisfactory.


                             Milk and Cream

Too much care and attention cannot be given to this food; even though
it does not sour as quickly in winter as it does in hot weather, it
should have just the same care. Never allow either cream or milk to
stand uncovered. There is nothing gained by paying a fancy price for
milk which has been pasteurized and kept clean, under the most sanitary
conditions in the dairy, before delivery to the consumer, if the latter
does not know how to take care of it and leaves it uncovered, in a hot
kitchen or in a refrigerator, with other uncovered food. There need be
no surprise if it sours quickly and develops an unpleasant flavor; for
both milk and butter will absorb odors and flavors when thus exposed,
which will render them unfit for use. Make it _an invariable_ rule,
_never_ to allow these foods to remain uncovered.


                                  Eggs

Wash the eggs, when they come from the market, in cold water. The
shells are then clean and ready for use. They are used for clearing
soup stock, coffee, etc. Eggs, too, should be kept in the coldest part
of the refrigerator along with milk, cream and butter.




                       How to Measure Accurately

[Illustration: MEASURING CUP MARKED IN QUARTERS]

[Illustration: MEASURING CUP MARKED IN THIRDS]

A system of accurate measurements is absolutely necessary to insure
success. Scientific training has exploded the old idea, that “with good
judgment and experience measuring ingredients _by sight_ will do.”
The exact quantity called for, measured each time in the same utensil
whatever it be, cup, tablespoon or teaspoon are definite guides that
must be followed if success would be attained. Enameled measuring
cups marked plainly in quarters or thirds each holding a half-pint, a
teaspoon holding sixty drops, a tablespoon of ordinary size (do not
mistake a dessert spoon for this spoon) and a case-knife are the few
essentials that must be used for measuring ingredients in the recipes
incorporated in this book. These utensils may be purchased at any
kitchen-furnishing shop for a nominal sum.


                         To Measure Ingredients

All flour, meal, confectioners’, powdered and granulated sugar, soda
and other dry ingredients, that are put into cartons or cans, that
are apt to settle and in some cases harden, should be sifted before
measuring. This suggestion is not to be ignored if you would be
successful as well as economical, for by sifting these ingredients they
are lightened and made to go further.


                                A Cupful

A cupful means all the cup will hold; the cup is filled with a
tablespoon heaping full, then leveled with a knife. Great care must be
taken not to shake the cup. All dry ingredients are tossed lightly into
the cup, then leveled with a knife.


                           Measuring Liquids

Place the cup to be filled on a saucer, and fill it to the brim. A
cupful of liquid could not be carried safely across the kitchen without
spilling some of its contents.


                      Measuring Butter, Lard, Etc.

Fats used for shortening are packed solidly in cups, table or teaspoon
and leveled with a knife. A pair of measuring cups will be found very
convenient when measuring ingredients. One for the dry and the other
for the shortening and liquids. One cup may serve the purpose if
dry ingredients are measured first, then liquids and fats when such
ingredients are called for.

                       Tablespoons and Teaspoons

Tablespoons of regulation size are filled and leveled with a knife.
A teaspoon is filled and leveled with a knife. To measure liquids,
a table or teaspoon means all the spoon will hold. To measure dry
ingredients in table or teaspoon, dip the spoon in the ingredient. When
filled, lift, and level with knife, sharp edge of blade turned toward
handle of spoon. Dividing with knife lengthwise of the bowl of spoon
is a half-teaspoonful. Dividing the half crosswise is a fourth, and
dividing the fourth crosswise is one-eighth. Divisions are made in the
teaspoon the same. Less than an eighth of a teaspoon is a few grains.

[Illustration:
   FULL TABLESPOON    QUARTER TABLESPOON    HALF TEASPOON
            HALF TABLESPOON        FULL TEASPOON      QUARTER TEASPOON]


                         Combining Ingredients

The next very important step toward success in all cookery, is in
combining ingredients and mixtures; and one too often disregarded
by the amateur. There are three movements considered in combining
ingredients--stirring, beating, and cutting and folding.

_Stirring_ is combining ingredients by circular motions, enlarging and
repeating these motions until all ingredients are thoroughly blended.
This motion is most commonly used in all cookery, either alone or
alternating with beating.

_Beating_ is accomplished by cutting down through ingredient or
ingredients with a mixing spoon, or a similar utensil, from top to
bottom, turning ingredients over and over, cutting through them until
all are thoroughly blended and lightened. By this motion ingredients
are not only blended, but air, also, is incorporated which increases
the lightness of the mixture.

_Cutting and Folding_ means to combine two mixtures, one made very
light by thorough beating or whipping, as heavy cream or whites of
eggs. This is a combination of the two former motions. It is best
accomplished with a wooden spoon made for this purpose. These repeated
vertical downward motions, made with this spoon, is called cutting,
and turning the ingredients over and over, allowing the spoon with
each turn to come in contact with the bottom of the bowl is called
folding. Repeat these motions until the ingredients are thoroughly
blended without destroying the air bubbles previously made by beating
or whipping one part of the mixture. Briefly--

_To stir_ means blending ingredients.

_To beat_ means lightening the mixture by incorporating air.

_To cut and fold_ is combining two mixtures (one of which has been made
light by beating) in such a manner as to prevent the escape or loss of
air previously introduced.




                 Standard Table of Weights and Measures


  All measurements are made level.
  A teaspoon of regulation size holds sixty drops.
  Three teaspoons of liquid equal one tablespoon.
  Four tablespoons of liquid equal one-half gill or one-quarter cup.
  Two gills equal one cup.
  Two cups equal one pint.
  Two pints (four cups) equal one quart.
  Four cups of liquid equal one quart.
  Four cups of flour equal one pound or one quart.
  Two cups of butter packed solidly equal one pound.
  One-half cup of butter packed solidly equals one-quarter pound, or
    four ounces.
  Two cups granulated sugar equal one pound.
  Two and one-half cups powdered sugar equal one pound.
  Two cups of milk or water equal one pound.
  Two cups chopped meat packed solidly equal one pound.
  Nine to ten eggs (without shells) equal one pound.
  Two tablespoons butter (solid and level) equal one ounce.
  Four tablespoons butter (solid and level) equal two ounces, or
    one-quarter cup.
  Two tablespoons granulated sugar equal one ounce.
  Four tablespoons flour equal one ounce.
  Four tablespoons coffee equal one ounce.
  One tablespoon liquid equals one-half ounce.
  Tbsp.--Tablespoon.
  Tsp.--Teaspoon.
  F. G.--Few grains.




                            The Refrigerator


For the preservation of food before cooking, and for the left-overs
after a meal, there is no appliance placed in the home that is
of so much importance as the refrigerator. It should be a McCray
Refrigerator, a perfectly beautiful, practical, convenient and
entirely sanitary accession to the needs of the kitchen, the chief
_essential_ of its furnishings. It should be large and well adapted to
the wants and necessities of the household, with an ice capacity of at
least one hundred pounds. It is the best made refrigerator, offered for
sale and for the consumers comfort, in the world to-day. When planning
your kitchen, be sure you have a place, well-selected, for one of these
refrigerators. Its drain pipes should never be connected directly with
the sewer, and if possible locate it so that the ice compartment may
be reached from the outside from a rear porch--that is opening out
of doors. This will save much annoyance from the iceman, with soiled
shoes, trailing dripping ice across the clean kitchen floor. The
refrigerator should be easy of access for the cook, for plain as well
as fancy cooking, demands many steps. Much time and energy is saved
by a little judicious planning in locating the kitchen appliances.
Remember the old adage, “Let your head save your heels.”


                        Care of the Refrigerator

[Illustration: BRUSH FOR REFRIGERATOR DRAIN PIPE]

In giving the proper attention to the care of the refrigerator, there
are three very essential points to observe; the first, and most
important, the location of the refrigerator, then the waste pipe, and
last but not least a full supply of ice. If economy is an item in the
management of the house, then special attention will be given the place
in which refrigerator is placed--a cool, dry, well ventilated room,
conveniently near the kitchen that steps may be saved and where the
direct rays of the sun _do not fall on it_, and where the iceman can
gain access to it without “tracking up” the kitchen with his soiled
shoes.

The compartments in which the food is kept should be wiped out
carefully once a week. If anything is spilled within the refrigerator
it should be removed immediately. All crumbs, drops of liquid or small
particles of food should be carefully and instantly removed.

Once a week the supply of ice may be allowed to run low; the ice
may then be removed and the ice chamber thoroughly washed, the rack
upon which the ice stands washed and rinsed with a solution of sal
soda, the drain pipe and the trap also thoroughly swabbed out with a
brush attached to a long wire handle, made for this purpose. Pour the
solution through the drain pipe as far as it can be reached and then
rinse with clear boiling water.

The ice compartment should be kept filled with ice. A large piece of
ice keeps better than a small one and insures much better circulation
of air. The door to the ice compartment should be kept tightly closed
at all times save when it is being filled with ice. The fact is that
all the doors should be opened and closed as quickly as possible.

The most scrupulous cleanliness in all its parts should be found in the
refrigerator. Food such as meat, potatoes, etc. should never be laid
on the shelves of the refrigerator, and the habit of filling the ice
chamber with meat, fish, fowl and vegetables is most unsanitary and
unhealthful.


                  The Care of Food in the Refrigerator

When the food is placed on the table in the kitchen by the tradesman,
the care of it at once falls upon the one who is in charge of the
household and she must know just how to take care of each article.

All meat should be removed from the paper at once; wiped with a piece
of cheese cloth wrung from cold water, placed on a plate, another plate
turned over it and placed in the position indicated, in frontispiece,
on page 2. The butter should be put in a jar, covered and placed on the
shelf of the refrigerator immediately under the ice chamber. A space
should be left on this shelf for eggs, milk and cream. Cheese should be
removed from the manilla paper leaving it wrapped in the wax paper, and
placed in a covered vessel in the refrigerator. The care of vegetables,
fruits, meats, fish, etc., follows hereinafter.




                            Left-Over Meats


                            Beef Croquettes

  1¾ cups finely chopped left-over roast beef or steak.
  ¾ teaspoon salt.
  ¼ teaspoon pepper.
  1 tablespoon Worcestershire Sauce.
  Few drops onion juice.
  1 teaspoon finely chopped parsley.
  Brown sauce.

PROCESS: Remove all fat and gristle from cold roast beef or steak.
Chop fine and add ingredients in the order given, moisten with thick
Brown Sauce (made by increasing the quantity of flour called for in the
recipe for Brown Sauce to half cup). Shape in cones, drip in crumbs,
egg and crumbs and fry in deep hot fat. Serve with Brown, Tomato, or
Creole Sauce.


                  Left-Over Roast Beef--Mexican Style

  1 onion finely chopped.
  2 tablespoons butter.
  1 red pepper shredded.
  1 green pepper shredded.
  1 clove garlic finely chopped.
  1 cup tomato pulp.
  1 tablespoon Worcestershire Sauce.
  ¼ teaspoon celery salt.
  Few drops Tobasco Sauce.
  Thinly sliced cold roast beef.

PROCESS: Cook onion in butter five minutes; cut peppers in thin shreds
with the shears. Add to onion. Add garlic and tomato pulp. Simmer
fifteen minutes. Add Worcestershire Sauce, celery salt and Tobasco.
Salt to taste. Cut cold roast beef in thin slices and re-heat in sauce.
Serve with baked potatoes on the half-shell.


                           Delicious Beef Pie

Line the bottom and sides of a well buttered baking dish with hot,
highly seasoned mashed potatoes, to which add two tablespoons finely
chopped onion or chives; over this, place a thick layer of left-over
roast beef cut in small pieces; season with salt, pepper, onion juice,
one tablespoon Worcestershire Sauce, moisten with Brown Sauce and cover
with a layer of potato mixture, ornament rim of dish with some of the
mixture forced through a pastry bag and star tube. Brush over lightly
with beaten egg. Bake in a hot oven until mixture is thoroughly heated
and potato is delicately browned.


                        Cecils with Brown Sauce

  1 cup left-over roast beef or finely chopped rare steak.
  2 tablespoons fine bread crumbs.
  1 tablespoon cream or melted butter.
  1 tablespoon Worcestershire Sauce.
  Yolk one egg, slightly beaten.
  Salt, pepper and onion juice.

PROCESS: Add seasonings to beef; add bread crumbs, cream or butter and
beaten egg yolks; shape in small balls the size of an English walnut,
roll in flour, egg and crumbs, and fry in deep hot fat, drain on brown
paper. Arrange in a pyramid on a hot platter and serve with Brown or
Tomato Sauce.


                              Beef Cutlets

[Illustration: Beef Cutlets]

Chop the flank end of the porterhouse steak very fine, first removing
superfluous fat. Season meat with salt, two or three drops Tobasco
Sauce, onion piece and Worcestershire Sauce to taste. Shape into
cutlets about three-fourths of an inch thick; dip in egg, then in
crumbs and fry in deep hot fat five minutes. Do not brown them too
quickly. Dispose them around a mound of hot riced potato or well
seasoned boiled rice.


                             Beef-Steak Pie

Cut left-over cold broiled steak or remnants of cold roast beef in
one-half inch pieces. Cover with hot stock or water, add one small
onion and simmer slowly until meat is tender. (About one hour). Remove
onion and thicken stock with flour diluted with cold water. Season
highly with salt and pepper. Add potatoes cut in one inch cubes and
previously parboil ten minutes in boiling salted water. Put into a
buttered baking-dish and cool; cover with a crust made of biscuit
dough, rolled one-fourth inch thick. Make three incisions in top of
pie. Bake twenty-five minutes in a hot oven. The top may be brushed
over with the white of an egg diluted with two tablespoons milk five
minutes before removing from oven.


                           Creole Croquettes

Chop the flank ends of the porter-house steak fine (there should be
one cup packed solidly). Add one-fourth cup uncooked rice, season
highly with salt, pepper and a few grains of cayenne. Wrap one rounded
tablespoon of this mixture in cabbage leaves which have been previously
parboiled two minutes. Simmer one hour in Tomato Sauce, basting three
or four times. Cover closely while cooking.


                         Corned Beef au Gratin

  2 cups cold left-over corned beef cut in small dice.
  2 slices onion.
  1 cup celery, coarse stalks and leaves cut in pieces.
  4 tablespoons butter.
  4 tablespoons flour.
  2 cups milk.
  ¼ teaspoon paprika.
  ¾ cup buttered crumbs.

PROCESS: Scald milk with onions and celery. Melt butter in sauce-pan,
add flour and stir to a smooth paste. Strain celery and onion
from milk; add milk to butter, and flour gradually while stirring
constantly, season with salt if necessary, add paprika and bring to
boiling point. Add corned beef; mix well and turn into a buttered
baking dish. Cover with buttered crumbs. Bake in hot oven until mixture
is heated through and crumbs are browned.


                            Corned Beef Hash

  2 cups cooked corned beef, chopped moderately.
  2 cups cold cooked potatoes, chopped moderately.
  Salt, pepper and clove garlic.
  Cream, milk or stock.
  2 tablespoons butter.

PROCESS: Remove all gristle, fat and stringy parts from meat. Chop with
chopping knife in bowl. Mix well with chopped potatoes, season highly
with salt, pepper, and moisten with milk, cream or stock. Melt butter
in spider, when hot turn in mixture and spread evenly. Place clove of
garlic in centre; let cook slowly until well-browned underneath, remove
garlic and fold as an omelet on to a hot serving platter. Serve with
Hollandaise Sauce. Garlic may be omitted.


                    Breaded Tongue with Tomato Sauce

Cut the tip end of the cold boiled tongue in one-fourth inch slices,
sprinkle them with salt and pepper, dip them in egg, then in fine bread
crumbs; repeat, saute them in butter and arrange them on a hot serving
platter, pour over Tomato Sauce.


                        Casserole Rice with Veal

Butter a two-quart brick-shape mould, line it with hot boiled rice to
three-fourth inch thickness. It would require one and one-half to two
cups of rice boiled, to line and cover the mold. To one cup of cold,
cooked veal finely chopped and packed solidly, add one egg, slightly
beaten, two tablespoons cracker-meal and sufficient Sauce Veloute to
moisten mixture. Season highly with salt, pepper, lemon-juice, and
one-half teaspoon parsley, finely chopped. Pack meat mixture in centre
of lined mold, cover with rice, place cover well-buttered on mold and
steam thirty-five minutes. Unmold on hot serving platter, sprinkle with
paprika and pour around Tomato or Creole Sauce.


                            Veal Croquettes.

  2 cups cooked veal finely chopped.
  ½ teaspoon salt.
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper.
  Few grains cayenne.
  Few drops onion juice.
  1 teaspoon finely chopped parsley.
  Yolk of one egg.
  1 cup thick Veloute Sauce.

PROCESS: Mix the ingredients in the order given; moisten with sauce.
Spread mixture on a plate to cool. Shape, crumb and fry as other
croquettes. Serve with Creole Sauce.


                           Blanquette of Veal

Cut cold roast veal in small strips. (There should be two cups).
Prepare one and one-half cups of Sauce Veloute, add meat, bring to
boiling point and serve in a potato or rice border, sprinkle with
finely chopped chives or parsley.


                              Minced Veal

Prepare same as Minced Lamb and serve on toast; garnish with half a
broiled tomato placed on each portion.


                             Ragout of Veal

Prepare a Brown Mushroom Sauce, omit the lemon juice and add one
tablespoon Worcestershire Sauce, a few drops onion juice and one-fourth
teaspoon paprika. Re-heat thoroughly two cups cold roast veal, cut in
one inch cubes, in sauce; serve in a rice or hot mashed potato border.
If the latter is used, pass the potato mixture through the pastry bag
and star tube. Sprinkle border with paprika.


                    Mutton with Currant Jelly Sauce

  2 tablespoons butter.
  2½ tablespoons flour.
  ¼ teaspoon salt.
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper.
  1 cup Brown Stock.
  5½ tablespoons currant or wild plum jelly.
  2 tablespoons sherry wine.
  8 slices cold cooked mutton.

PROCESS: Melt butter and brown richly in a sauce-pan, add flour and
continue browning, add seasoning and stock slowly, stirring constantly;
beat the jelly with a fork and add to sauce; when melted add mutton,
simmer gently until mutton is heated thoroughly, add wine. Dispose
mutton on a platter and pour over sauce. Left-over gravy may be used
instead of making Brown Sauce.


                         Minced Mutton on Toast

  2 cups minced left-over mutton.
  6 yolks hard boiled eggs.
  ½ teaspoon mustard.
  ½ teaspoon salt.
  Few grains cayenne.
  1 tablespoon butter.
  1 cup thin cream or milk.
  4 tablespoons sherry wine.

PROCESS: Rub the yolks through a sieve and add seasoning. Add mutton,
finely minced, and cream. Melt butter in a sauce-pan, add mixture and
when thoroughly heated add wine. Serve on toast. Lamb may be used in
place of mutton.


                            Salmi of Mutton

Cut cold roast mutton in thin uniform slices. Cook two tablespoons
butter with one slice onion, finely chopped, five minutes. Add mutton,
sprinkle with salt, pepper, and pour over Brown Mushroom Sauce, to
which add one tablespoon Worcestershire Sauce. Simmer until heated
throughout. Arrange slices of meat over-lapping one another around a
pyramid of fried potato balls; pour around sauce; garnish with toast
tri-angles. Lamb, veal, duck or game may be served in this manner.


                            Lamb Croquettes

  1 cup cold cooked lamb finely chopped.
  ¼ cup cold boiled potatoes finely chopped.
  2 tablespoons butter.
  1 slice onion finely chopped.
  4 tablespoons flour.
  1 cup stock.
  1 teaspoon parsley finely chopped.
  Salt and pepper.
  Left-over peas.

PROCESS: Cook onion in butter five minutes; remove onion. Add flour
and stir to a smooth paste, add stock gradually, stirring constantly;
add meat, potato, salt and pepper; simmer gently until meat and potato
is blended with sauce. Spread mixture on a plate to cool. Divide
the mixture into equal parts (this mixture will make about seven
croquettes).

Take up a portion of the mixture and make a depression in centre, put
in a teaspoon of left-over cream peas, enclose peas carefully, shape,
dip in crumbs, eggs and crumbs again. Fry in deep hot fat. Drain on
brown paper and serve with Sauce Bearnaise.


                    Left-over Roast Pork Croquettes

Prepare a thick White Sauce and season it delicately with a very little
sage. Add one and one-half cups of finely chopped cold roast pork.
Season with salt, pepper and a few drops onion juice. Add one-half
teaspoon finely chopped parsley. Spread mixture on plate to cool.
Shape; roll in crumbs, egg and crumbs, and fry in deep hot fat. Arrange
in a pyramid on hot serving platter, surround with baked apples. Pass
“Sauce Soubise.”




                           Left-Over Poultry


                           Chicken Croquettes

  2 cups cold cooked fowl chopped fine.
  ½ cup English walnut meats chopped
    moderately.
  ½ teaspoon salt.
  ¼ teaspoon celery salt.
  Few grains cayenne.
  Slight grating nutmeg.
  1 teaspoon lemon juice.
  Few drops onion juice.
  1 teaspoon finely chopped parsley.
  ¾ cup thick White Sauce.
  Bread crumbs.

[Illustration: Chicken Croquettes]

PROCESS: Mix the ingredients in the order given; after adding the sauce
let mixture cool. Mold in cork shape croquettes, roll in fine bread
crumbs, dip in egg (diluted with cold water in the proportion of two
tablespoons water to each egg slightly beaten), then in crumbs again.
Fry in deep hot fat. Drain on brown paper and serve with Supreme Sauce.


                    Chicken and Mushroom Croquettes

Prepare mixture as for Chicken Croquettes No. 1. Add one-half cup
finely chopped mushrooms. Shape, egg and crumb, and fry as other
croquettes. Serve with a Brown Mushroom Sauce.


             Cream Chicken with Green Peppers and Mushrooms

Add to one and one-half cups of white Bechamel Sauce one and one-half
cups of cold cooked chicken cut in one-third inch cubes, one-half cup
mushrooms and one green bell pepper, previously cooked ten minutes, the
seeds removed and the pepper cut in shreds with the shears. Serve in
croustades of bread.


                           Scalloped Chicken

Butter a baking dish well. Arrange alternate layers of cold, cooked
chicken or turkey cut in small thin slices and boiled rice or
spaghetti. Pour over giblet, White, Brown or Tomato Sauce. Cover with
buttered crumbs, garnish with toast-points and bake in the oven until
mixture is thoroughly heated and crumbs are brown.


                           Chicken Chartreuse

Follow recipe for Casserole of rice with Veal, using chicken instead of
veal. Season chicken highly with salt, pepper, celery-salt, onion juice
and one teaspoon finely chopped parsley. Moisten mixture with Cream
Sauce, using half cup chicken stock and half cup hot thin cream. Unmold
on hot platter and serve with Cream Sauce.


                            Chicken Timbales

  2 tablespoons butter.
  ¼ cup stale bread crumbs.
  ⅔ cup milk.
  1 cup finely minced cooked chicken.
  ½ tablespoon finely chopped parsley.
  2 eggs.
  Few drops onion-juice.
  Salt and pepper.

PROCESS: Melt butter in a sauce-pan, add bread crumbs and milk, cook
five minutes. Add chicken, parsley, and eggs slightly beaten, season
with salt, pepper and onion juice. Turn mixture into buttered timbale
molds, set molds in a pan of hot water and cover them with a buttered
paper. Bake twenty minutes. Turn from molds on serving platter and
serve with Celery Sauce.


                         Chicken a la Bechamel

  1½ cups cold cooked chicken cut in
    one-third inch cubes.
  1 cup Sauce Bechamel.
  ⅛ teaspoon celery salt.
  ½ teaspoon finely chopped parsley.

PROCESS: Add parsley and celery salt to sauce; add chicken and simmer
gently until chicken is thoroughly heated. Omit the yolks of eggs when
making the sauce for this purpose.


                            Chicken Souffle

  2 cups scalded milk.
  2 tablespoons butter.
  2 tablespoons flour.
  ½ teaspoon salt.
  ½ teaspoon celery salt.
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper.
  ⅓ cup fine soft bread crumbs.
  2 cups left-over cooked fowl or
    chicken, chopped very fine.
  Yolks of four eggs well beaten.
  2 teaspoons finely chopped parsley.
  Whites four eggs beaten stiff and dry.

PROCESS: Melt butter in sauce-pan, add flour mixed with seasonings,
stir to a smooth paste; add milk gradually, beating constantly, add
bread crumbs and cook three minutes; remove from range; add chicken,
yolks of eggs and parsley, cut and fold in the whites of eggs. Turn
mixture into a well-buttered baking dish and bake thirty-five minutes
in a moderate oven. Serve with Cream, Bechamel or Supreme Sauce.
Left-over turkey or veal may be used instead of chicken.


                     Salmi of Duck with Green Peas

Cut four slices of bacon crosswise in shreds, with shears. Saute in
spider, add one tablespoon finely chopped onion; when lightly browned
add four and one-half tablespoons flour, continue browning; add slowly
one and one-half cups brown stock, add sprig of mint and let simmer
five minutes; then add one and one-half cups cold roast duck, cut in
small pieces, and one-half cup left-over peas (if there is a cup of
peas add them), let simmer gently until ingredients are heated through.
Remove the mint and season with salt and pepper. Serve on toast.


                    Chicken and Oysters a la Seville

  4 tablespoons butter.
  4 tablespoons flour.
  ½ teaspoon salt.
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper.
  1 cup hot milk.
  ¼ teaspoon celery salt.
  ¾ cup oyster liquor.
  2 cups cold cooked chicken cut in one-half inch cubes.
  2 cups oysters.
  Patty shells.

PROCESS: Melt butter in a sauce-pan, add flour and seasonings; stir
to a smooth past. Pour on slowly, while stirring briskly, hot milk
and strained oyster liquor. Re-heat chicken in sauce. Plump oysters
in their own liquor; drain and add oysters to chicken. Serve in patty
shells or croustades of bread.


                             Mock Terrapin

  2 cups cold cooked chicken cut in small cubes.
  1 cup White Sauce No. 2.
  2 hard-boiled eggs.
  Few grains nutmeg.
  ¼ cup sherry wine.
  Salt, pepper and a few grains cayenne.

PROCESS: Add chicken to sauce, rub the yolks of eggs through a sieve;
add to first mixture. Add whites of eggs finely chopped. Season with
salt, pepper and cayenne, simmer four minutes and add sherry. Turn into
deep dish, garnish with triangles of toast or puff paste points.


                  Left-Over Chicken with Poached Eggs

  2 cups cold cooked chicken chopped moderately.
  2 tablespoons butter.
  1 slice carrot.
  1 slice onion.
  1 spray parsley.
  2 tablespoons flour.
  1 cup chicken stock or milk.
  Salt, pepper and celery salt.
  5 eggs.
  ¾ cup buttered cracker crumbs.

PROCESS: Melt butter in a sauce-pan, add vegetables and cook five
minutes, add flour and stock or milk slowly, stirring constantly.
Strain sauce and add chicken and seasonings. Spread mixture on a
buttered platter and sprinkle with cracker crumbs. Make five small
nests in mixture and into each slip an egg; cover eggs with cracker
crumbs and bake in a moderate oven until eggs are cooked.


                    Minced Turkey with Poached Eggs

To one cup of cold roast turkey, chopped moderately, add one-half cup
of stuffing finely chopped. Moisten with a sauce made by melting two
tablespoons butter in a sauce-pan, brown well, add two and one-half
teaspoons flour, continue browning. Add one cup of stock (made by
cooking skin and bones of a roast turkey), season with salt, pepper and
onion juice. Re-heat turkey and stuffing in sauce. Serve on circles of
toast with a poached egg placed in centre of each; garnish with sprays
of parsley.




                             Left-Over Fish


                         A Simple Luncheon Dish

Mix one cup of left-over flaked fish with three “hard boiled” eggs,
chopped fine, and one-half teaspoon finely chopped parsley. Re-heat in
one and one-half cups, thin White Sauce. Serve in a border of hot riced
potato or steamed rice. Sprinkle all with paprika.


                               Fish Hash

Mix well two cups each of cold cooked fish, flaked, and cold boiled
potatoes, finely chopped. Season well with salt, pepper and one
teaspoon finely chopped parsley. Fry out salt pork cut in small dice.
(There should be about four tablespoons fat.) Remove scraps, add fish
and potatoes. Stir until mixture is well mixed with fat and thoroughly
heated through. Cook until hash is well browned underneath; fold as an
omelet and turn on a hot platter. Serve with Cream or Tomato Sauce.
Garnish with parsley and slices of lemon.


                               Fish Cakes

                  (Made of Remnants of any Fresh Fish)

Press hot boiled potatoes through a ricer. (There should be two cups).
Season with salt, pepper, two tablespoons butter and one egg beaten
light. Beat mixture thoroughly and add an equal quantity left-over
cooked fish, flaked. Moisten slightly with Cream Sauce. Shape into
round flat cakes. Saute in hot bacon fat. Drain cakes on brown paper,
first on one side, then on the other; a poached egg may be served on
top of each cake. Garnish with crisp bacon and parsley.


                      Left-over Fish en Casserole

Line a brick-shaped mold with well seasoned hot steamed rice, to the
depth of three-fourth inch. Fill centre with remnants of cold boiled
or baked fish, flaked, and seasoned with salt, pepper and slightly
moistened with thin White Sauce. Cover with rice, place cover on mold
and steam thirty-five minutes. Turn on a hot platter and serve with Egg
Sauce. Sprinkle all with finely chopped parsley. A granite brick-shape
bread pan may be used as a substitute for covered mold, covered with a
buttered paper, butter side next to rice; tie the paper on with twine.


                            Fish Croquettes

  2 cups cold cooked fish.
  ¾ cup thick White Sauce.
  ½ teaspoon salt.
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper.
  ½ teaspoon finely chopped parsley.
  1 teaspoon lemon juice.

PROCESS: Flake fish with a silver fork. Add seasonings and sauce;
spread on plate to cool. Shape, and roll in cracker crumbs, egg and
crumbs, and fry in deep hot fat; drain on brown paper. Serve with Egg,
Hollandaise, or Tartare Sauce. Garnish with sliced lemon and parsley.


                             Turban of Fish

  2½ cups cold baked or boiled fish.
  1½ cups scalded milk.
  1 slice onion.
  1 blade mace or a few grains nutmeg.
  1 spray parsley.
  4 tablespoons butter.
  4 tablespoons flour.
  ¾ teaspoon salt.
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper.
  1 teaspoon lemon juice.
  Yolk two eggs.
  ¾ cup cracker crumbs.

[Illustration: Turban of Fish]

PROCESS: Scald milk with onion, mace and parsley. Melt butter in a
sauce-pan, add flour, salt and pepper. Remove seasoning from milk, add
milk gradually, stirring constantly. Remove sauce to back of range,
add yolk slightly beaten. Butter a baking dish; add a layer of fish,
sprinkle with salt, pepper and a few drops lemon juice. Cover with
part of sauce, continue until both fish and sauce are used, shaping
pyramid-like in centre. Cover with crumbs and bake twenty minutes in
hot oven. Serve at once.




                          Left-Over Ham, Etc.


                           Minced Ham Omelet

  4 eggs.
  ½ teaspoon salt.
  Few grains pepper.
  4 tablespoons hot water.
  1½ tablespoons butter.
  2 tablespoons finely minced ham.
  1½ cups thin White Sauce.

PROCESS: Beat the yolks thick and light, add seasoning. Beat the whites
stiff. Add hot water to yolks of eggs and heat again, add minced ham;
cut and fold the whites into the first mixture until they are well
blended. Heat the omelet pan, have bottom and sides well buttered. Turn
in the mixture and spread smoothly, place on range with asbestos cover
placed over flame; let cook slowly, turning the pan occasionally, that
omelet may brown evenly. When omelet is “puffed” to top of pan and
delicately browned on the bottom, place pan in oven on middle grate
to finish cooking on top. The omelet is cooked, if it is dry, a straw
color and will not cling to the finger when lightly pressed. Fold and
turn on a hot serving platter, surround with thin White Sauce. Minced
Chicken, Turkey and Veal may be used alone or in combination in place
of Ham.


                         Ham with Currant Jelly

Melt one tablespoon butter in a sauce-pan; add one-half cup currant
jelly; when jelly is melted add a few grains cayenne or one eighth
teaspoon paprika; add four tablespoons sherry wine, and a cup and
one-half cold cooked ham cut in thin small slices or strips, simmer
gently until ham is heated.


                         Canapes--Mexican Style

  ¼ cup cold cooked ham.
  ¼ cup cold cooked chicken.
  ¼ cup butter.
  1 tablespoon pimentoes.
  1 tablespoon Chutney.
  ½ teaspoon curry powder.
  Salt and pepper.
  Few drops Tobasco.

PROCESS: Put ham, chicken and pimentoes through the meat chopper; then
pound mixture thoroughly in a mortar or chopping bowl. Rub through a
sieve and add seasonings. Spread on circles or tri-angles of bread
fried and cooled, decorate with the white of egg finely chopped, the
yolk passed through a sieve--first laying two thin strips of pimento
crossing each at right angles. Fill two opposite spaces with the whites
of eggs and two with the yolks. Garnish with sprays parsley.


               Scrambled Eggs with Minced Ham and Chicken

  4 eggs slightly beaten.
  ½ teaspoon salt.
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper.
  4 tablespoons milk.
  1 tablespoon finely minced ham.
  1 tablespoon finely minced chicken.
  2 tablespoons butter.

PROCESS: Beat eggs slightly, add seasoning and milk; add chicken and
ham well mixed. Melt butter in omelet pan; pour in mixture and cook
until of a creamy consistency; stirring constantly and scraping mixture
from bottom and sides of pan. Roll to one side of pan and turn on hot
platter, sprinkle with paprika. Garnish with parsley.


             How to Keep Left-Over Whites and Yolks of Eggs

In recipes where only the whites of eggs are used, “left-over” yolks
may be kept by beating them well, then turn them into a jelly glass,
cover and place them in the refrigerator. Or, as they are broken from
the shells and are whole, they may be slipped carefully into hot water,
just below the boiling point, and allow to cook through. Then one may
be served in each portion of clear soup. They may also be pressed
through the potato ricer as a garnish over the salad, over Creamed Cod
Fish or Creamed Toast. (Covering the yolks with cold water as a means
of keeping them has not proven satisfactory). If the yolks only are
used the whites will keep several days if turned into a bowl or jelly
glass, covered, and placed in the refrigerator.




                            Left-Over Cheese


                             Cheese Omelet

Mix and sift two and one-half tablespoons of flour, three-fourth
teaspoon salt, one-half teaspoon mustard and a few grains cayenne. Add
two tablespoons grated American cream cheese; add gradually one cup
milk and three eggs beaten very light, without separating. Melt one
and one-half tablespoons butter in an omelet pan; pour in mixture and
as it cooks prick it with a fork and lift it to allow the uncooked
parts to flow underneath; when creamy over the top sprinkle with two
tablespoons grated cheese, seasoned with salt and cayenne, roll and
place on serving platter and sprinkle with grated cheese and paprika.


                             Cheese Souffle

  2 tablespoons butter.
  3 tablespoons flour.
  ½ teaspoon salt.
  ⅛ teaspoon ground mustard.
  Few grains cayenne.
  ½ cup scalded milk.
  4½ tablespoons grated cheese.
  Yolks three eggs beaten very light.
  Whites three eggs beaten stiff.

PROCESS: Melt butter in a sauce-pan, add flour sifted with seasoning,
add milk gradually, beating constantly; add cheese when well-blended
and cooked, remove from range and add yolks of eggs; then fold in the
beaten whites. Pour mixture into a buttered baking dish and bake twenty
minutes in a moderate oven. Serve immediately.


                              Cheese Balls

  1½ cups grated cheese.
  1 tablespoon flour.
  ¼ teaspoon salt.
  ⅛ teaspoon mustard.
  Few grains cayenne.
  Whites three eggs beaten stiff.
  Cracker meal.

[Illustration: Cheese Balls]

PROCESS: Mix cheese, flour and seasonings thoroughly. Cut and fold in
whites of eggs. Shape into balls the size of a hickory nut, rolling
them in the hands lightly. Roll in cracker meal and fry in deep fat.
Drain on brown paper and serve with the salad course.


                             Cheese Canapes

Spread triangular pieces of bread with French or German mustard;
sprinkle thickly with a layer of grated cheese seasoned with salt,
paprika and a few grains of cayenne. Place on a tin sheet and bake them
until the cheese is melted and delicately brown.


                             Cheese Wafers

Sprinkle Saratoga Wafers, Zepherettes or Saltines with a thick layer of
grated cheese seasoned with salt, paprika and a few grains of cayenne.
Place them on a tin sheet and bake them in the oven until the cheese
melts and browns delicately. Serve with salad or soup.




                          Meat and Fish Sauces


                            Thin White Sauce

  2 tablespoons butter.
  1½ tablespoons flour.
  ½ teaspoon salt.
  Few grains white pepper.
  1 cup scalded milk.

PROCESS: Melt butter in sauce-pan, add flour mixed with seasonings;
stir to a smooth paste; add hot milk slowly while stirring constantly,
bring to boiling point and beat until smooth and glossy, using a Gem
egg whip. Do not allow sauce to cook after it has reached the boiling
point.


                           White Sauce No. 2

Prepare the same as thin White Sauce, using two tablespoons flour,
increasing flour one-half tablespoon.


                           Thick White Sauce

                   (Basis of Croquettes and Cutlets.)

  2½ tablespoons butter.
  5½ tablespoons flour.
  1 cup scalded milk.
  ⅓ teaspoon salt.
  Few grains pepper.

PROCESS: Prepare same as thin White Sauce. This sauce is very thick,
therefore, great care must be taken that it does not scorch.


                          Thick Sauce Veloute

                   (Used for Croquettes and Cutlets)

  2½ tablespoons butter.
  5½ tablespoons flour.
  1 cup hot chicken stock.
  Salt and pepper.

PROCESS: Prepare the same as thin White Sauce, being careful not to
scorch while cooking.


                          Brown Mushroom Sauce

  1 can button mushrooms.
  4 tablespoons butter.
  4 tablespoons flour.
  2 cups brown stock.
  ½ tablespoon lemon juice.
  2 tablespoons sherry wine.

PROCESS: Melt the butter in a sauce-pan, brown it richly; add flour
and continue browning, stirring constantly. Add brown stock gradually,
continue stirring. Add lemon juice and sherry. Heat the mushrooms in
their own liquor; if they are the very small button mushrooms they
may be used whole, if larger mushrooms are used they may be cut in
quarters. Drain from the hot liquor and add them to the sauce. Reserve
one half cup of mushrooms from the can to use in croquette mixture.


                             Veloute Sauce

  2 tablespoons butter.
  2 tablespoons flour.
  1 cup chicken or white stock.
  Salt and pepper.

PROCESS: Prepare same as thin White Sauce.


                              Creole Sauce

Prepare a Brown Mushroom Sauce. Melt two tablespoons butter in a
sauce-pan, add one green pepper, finely chopped, one small onion finely
chopped and cook five minutes. Add two tomatoes cut in pieces or one
cup of canned tomatoes, and ten olives pared from the pit in one
continuous curl. Cook three minutes. Add the Brown Sauce and bring to
the boiling point. Add two tablespoons sherry wine. Do not strain the
sauce. Serve with steaks, chops and Fillet of Beef.


                           Tomato Sauce No. 1

  ½ can tomatoes or 2 cups fresh stewed tomatoes.
  1 slice onion.
  3 tablespoons butter.
  3 tablespoons flour.
  ½ teaspoon salt.
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper.
  3 drops Tobasco Sauce.

PROCESS: Cook tomatoes and slice of onion fifteen minutes, rub through
a strainer. Melt butter in a sauce-pan, brown it richly, add flour and
when well browned add seasoning and tomato pulp. A few grains of soda
may be added if tomatoes are too acid. Stir until sauce is smooth and
reaches the boiling point, then pour over Breaded Tongue.


                          Tomato Sauce No. 2.

  4 tablespoons butter.
  5 tablespoons flour.
  1 slice onion.
  1 small clove garlic.
  2 slices carrot.
  Small piece bay leaf.
  Spring parsley.
  Spring thyme.
  1 cup stewed and strained tomato pulp.
  1 cup brown stock.
  Salt, pepper.
  Few drops Tobasco Sauce.

PROCESS: Brown the butter in a sauce-pan, with onion, carrot, garlic,
bay leaf, parsley and thyme. Remove seasonings. Add flour and continue
browning, stirring continually; add tomatoes, stock and seasonings.
Heat to boiling point and strain.




                               Egg Sauce

                         (Drawn Butter Sauce.)

  5½ tablespoons butter.
  3 tablespoons flour.
  1½ cups boiling water.
  ⅓ teaspoon salt.
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper.
  3 egg yolks, slightly beaten.

PROCESS: Press the butter in a circular piece; divide it equally in
two parts. Melt one part in a sauce-pan, add flour mixed with salt and
pepper, stir to a smooth paste and add boiling water gradually, while
stirring constantly; bring to boiling point, remove from range and beat
in remaining butter, adding it in small bits, while beating constantly.
Add egg yolks, continue beating. Do not allow sauce to boil after
adding egg yolks.


                             Supreme Sauce

  ¼ cup butter.
  ¼ cup flour.
  1½ cups chicken stock.
  ½ cup hot cream.
  2 tablespoons mushroom liquor.
  ¾ tablespoon lemon juice.
  Salt and pepper.

PROCESS: Melt butter in a sauce-pan, add flour and stir to a smooth
paste, let cook one minute (without browning), add gradually the hot
chicken stock, stirring briskly; add the hot cream, continue stirring.
Reduce one-third cup mushroom liquor to two tablespoons by simmering
slowly, add reduced liquor to sauce, add lemon juice and season to
taste with salt and pepper. Lemon juice may be omitted and a few grains
of nutmeg added. Whip sauce until smooth and glossy.


                             Bechamel Sauce

  1½ cups highly seasoned chicken stock.
  ¼ cup butter.
  ¼ cup flour.
  ¾ cup scalded thin cream.
  ½ teaspoon salt.
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper.
  Few grains nutmeg.
  Yolks three eggs.

PROCESS: Mix butter in sauce-pan, add flour mixed with seasonings,
stir to a smooth paste and let cook one minute, then add hot stock,
stirring constantly, add hot cream, continue stirring. Beat yolks of
eggs slightly, dilute with some of the hot sauce. Combine mixture,
beat again, but do not allow the sauce to boil after adding egg yolks.
Omitting yolks of eggs make White Bechamel Sauce.


                             Sauce Saubise

  2½ cups sliced onions.
  1 small clove garlic.
  1 cup Veloute Sauce.
  ½ cup hot cream.
  ½ teaspoon salt.
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper.

PROCESS: Cover onions and garlic with boiling water; boil five minutes,
drain and cover again with boiling salted water and let cook until
tender, rub through a pure strainer (there should be one cup pulp).
Bring sauce to boiling point, add onion and hot cream; add salt and
pepper. Garlic may be omitted.


                            Sauce Bearnaise

Prepare a rule of Hollandaise Sauce, using Tarrigon vinegar instead of
lemon juice and add one teaspoon each of finely chopped parsley, capers
and fresh tarrigon. Serve with lamb croquettes, chops, steaks, broiled
birds, smelt and boiled salmon, cod or haddock.


                           Hollandaise Sauce

  ½ cup unsalted butter.
  Yolks two eggs.
  ¾ tablespoon lemon juice.
  ¼ teaspoon salt.
  Few grains cayenne.
  ¼ cup hot water.

PROCESS: Work the butter in the hands, in a bowl of cold water,
until it is of a “waxy” consistency. Divide it into three pieces of
equal size. Put one part in a sauce-pan with the yolks of eggs and
lemon juice; place saucepan in a larger pan containing hot water,
stir constantly with a Gem egg whip until butter is blended with the
yolks, add the second piece of butter and as sauce thickens add the
third piece. At this point in the process the mixture should be the
consistency of boiled custard. Add hot water and seasoning, beating
constantly. The water in the larger sauce-pan should be kept just below
the boiling point.


                             Sauce Tartare

To one cup Mayonnaise Dressing add one finely chopped shallot, two
tablespoons each of finely chopped capers, gerkins, olives and one-half
tablespoon finely chopped parsley, one teaspoon fresh or one-half
teaspoon powdered tarrigon. Onion juice may be used in place of the
shallot.


                              Bacon Sauce

Melt five tablespoons strained left-over bacon fat in a sauce-pan;
add two tablespoons flour, one-eighth teaspoon paprika and one-half
teaspoon salt; stir to a smooth paste. Add, gradually, one-fourth cup
vinegar and two-thirds cup hot water, beating constantly and let come
to boiling point; remove from range and add the yolks of two eggs
lightly beaten. Do not allow sauce to boil after egg yolks are added.
Chill and thin with cream. Serve with spinach, dandelion, endive, corn
and string bean salad.




                   Left-Over Potatoes and Vegetables


                              Potato Cakes

Beat two cups of left-over mashed potatoes with a very little hot milk
to lighten them. Season with a few drops onion juice, salt, pepper,
one-half teaspoon parsley finely chopped, and one-fourth cup grated
cheese and a few grains cayenne. Shape in small round flat cakes, dip
in flour and saute in hot butter (about two tablespoons), brown on one
side, turn and brown on the other. This mixture may be packed in a
brick-shape mold, then turned on a board and sliced, dipped in flour
and sauted in butter as the round cakes.


                            Creamed Potatoes

Cut cold boiled or baked potatoes in one-fourth inch cubes (there
should be two cups), sprinkle with salt, pepper, and one half teaspoon
finely chopped parsley; add a few drops onion juice if desired. Re-heat
in one and one-half cups thin White Sauce. This mixture may be turned
into a buttered baking dish, sprinkled with buttered crumbs, and baked
in a hot oven until mixture is heated through and crumbs are brown.


                          Hash Brown Potatoes

Cut fat salt pork in small pieces, fry it out and remove scraps (there
should be four tablespoons). Heat fat in an iron spider, add two cups
cold boiled potatoes finely chopped, season well with salt and pepper.
Toss potatoes until well mixed with fat, cook four minutes, tossing
constantly; then press to one side of the spider to form an omelet.
When well browned underneath turn on to a hot serving dish, top side
down. This gives potatoes the appearance of a folded omelet.


                           Lyonnaise Potatoes

Cook one onion, thinly sliced, in three tablespoons butter until
delicately browned. Remove onion and keep in a warm place. Add three
cups cold boiled potatoes cut in slices, sprinkle with salt, pepper,
and stir until well mixed with butter. Press to one side of spider and
let brown richly underneath, then sprinkle onions over potatoes, let
heat thoroughly, then turn on a hot serving platter top side down;
sprinkle with finely chopped parsley. Cooking the onion separately
lessens the danger of burning the onion.


                         Burr Oak Farm Potatoes

Slice four medium size cold boiled potatoes. Put a layer in the bottom
of a well buttered baking dish, sprinkle with a little onion juice,
salt and pepper; slice over potatoes, “hard boiled” eggs. Sprinkle eggs
with salt and pepper. Repeat until eight eggs and potatoes have been
used. Pour over two cups thin White Sauce, cover with buttered crumbs
and place in oven until heated throughout and crumbs are brown.


                           Potato Croquettes

  2 cups hot riced potatoes.
  2 tablespoons butter.
  ¾ teaspoon salt.
  ⅛ teaspoon white pepper.
  ¼ teaspoon celery salt.
  Few grains cayenne.
  Few drops onion juice.
  Yolk one egg.
  1 teaspoon finely chopped parsley.

PROCESS: Mix ingredients in the order given; beat mixture thoroughly.
Spread on plate to cool. Shape and dip in crumbs, egg and crumbs again,
and fry in deep hot fat. Drain on brown paper. Arrange in a pyramid on
a folded napkin, garnish with parsley.


                         German Fried Potatoes

Slice cold boiled potatoes one-eighth an inch thick (there should be
two and one-half cups). Put four tablespoons “fried out” salt pork fat
in an iron spider; when hot, add one sliced onion, cook until onion is
delicately browned; remove onion and keep warm, add potatoes, season
with salt and pepper, mix thoroughly with fat, shaking the spider
occasionally when potatoes are browned, add onion; when thoroughly
mixed and heated, turn into hot dish and serve at once.


                           Potatoes Delmonico

Arrange creamed potatoes in layer, in a buttered baking dish, adding a
sprinkle of grated cheese to each layer, a slight sprinkle of salt and
paprika or a few grains cayenne. There should be plenty of Cream Sauce
mixed with the potatoes. Cover with buttered crumbs and bake in a hot
oven until mixture is heated throughout and crumbs are brown.


                            Stuffed Peppers

  1 medium size onion, finely chopped.
  2 tablespoons butter.
  4 tablespoons mushrooms, finely chopped.
  4 tablespoons left-over ham, finely chopped.
  ⅓ cup Brown Sauce.
  3 tablespoons fine soft bread crumbs.
  Salt, pepper, few grains cayenne.
  6 green bell peppers.
  Buttered cracker crumbs.

PROCESS: Cook onion in butter four minutes, add mushrooms and ham, cook
two minutes, add Brown Sauce, bread crumbs and seasoning. Cut a slice
from the stem ends of peppers, remove seed and white portions. Cover
with boiling water, parboil eight minutes. Drain. Fill peppers with
cooked mixture, cover with crumbs and bake in buttered Gem cups in the
oven ten minutes. Serve on rings of toast with Brown Sauce.


                              Fried Celery

Remove the outer stalks of celery, cut in four inch pieces. Parboil
eight minutes. Drain thoroughly, dip in batter and fry in deep fat.
Drain on brown paper and serve with Tomato Sauce.

BATTER: Sift one-half cup bread flour with one-fourth teaspoon
salt, one-eighth teaspoon celery salt, a few grains pepper, add six
tablespoons milk and one egg lightly beaten.


                       Creamed Celery With Cheese

Wash, scrape and cut the outer stalks of celery into three-fourth inch
pieces; cook in boiling salted water to cover until tender. Drain.
(There should be two and one-half cups). Add one and one-half cups thin
White Sauce to which add one-fourth cup grated cheese and a few grains
cayenne.


                              Corn Oysters

Grate the left-over boiled corn from the cob (there should be one cup
of pulp). Add one lightly beaten egg, four and one-half tablespoons
flour, season well with salt, pepper and one teaspoon sugar. Drop by
spoonfuls on a hot well greased griddle and cook as griddle cakes. They
should be the size of New York Counts.




                        Stale Bread and Its Uses


                        Bread and Butter Pudding

Fill a buttered baking dish with slices of bread from which the crusts
are trimmed off, spread each slice generously with butter and turn
buttered side. Sprinkle between each layer freshly-grated cocoanut.
Beat three eggs slightly, add two-thirds cup sugar, one-fourth
teaspoonful salt and one quart scalded milk; strain this mixture over
bread, add a slight grating of nutmeg over top of pudding, let stand
thirty minutes. Bake slowly one hour in a moderate oven. Brown the top
richly and serve hot with Creamy Vanilla or Hard Sauce.


                        Chocolate Bread Pudding

  2 cups stale bread crumbs.
  1 quart scalded milk.
  2 squares Bakers chocolate.
  ¾ cup sugar.
  3 eggs.
  ¼ teaspoon salt.
  1 teaspoon vanilla.
  ⅓ cup blanched and shredded almonds.

PROCESS: Soak bread crumbs in scalded milk thirty minutes; melt
chocolate over hot water, add half the sugar and sufficient milk from
the bread and milk mixture to pour readily; add to bread with remaining
sugar, salt and vanilla, add eggs, slightly beaten, and shredded nuts.
Turn in a buttered pudding dish and bake slowly one hour in a moderate
oven. Serve with Hard or Cream Sauce.


                              German Toast

  4 eggs.
  ½ teaspoon salt.
  2 tablespoons sugar.
  1 cup milk.
  8 slices stale bread.
  Powdered sugar and few grains cinnamon.

PROCESS: Cut bread in one-third inch slices, remove the crusts. Beat
eggs slightly, add ingredients in the order given. Soak bread in
mixture until soft. Cook on hot, well-greased griddle, brown on one
side, turn and brown on the other. Add more butter if necessary. Remove
from griddle to serving dish, sprinkle lightly with powdered sugar and
a few grains cinnamon. Serve for breakfast or luncheon.


                              Brown Betty

  1 small, stale, bakers loaf.
  ⅓ cup butter.
  1 quart, sliced, tart apples.
  ⅓ cup sugar.
  ¼ teaspoon nutmeg.
  Grated rind ½ lemon.
  Juice one lemon.

PROCESS: Remove the crust from bread and cut in thick slices, grate
each slice by rubbing it through the croquette basket or colander. Melt
butter in a sauce-pan, add crumbs and toss lightly with a fork, cover
bottom of well-buttered baking dish with crumbs and cover with one half
the apples, sprinkle with half the sugar, nutmeg, lemon rind and juice
mixed together; repeat, having layer crumbs on top. Bake forty-five
minutes in a moderate oven, cover with a buttered paper the first
thirty minutes of cooking. Remove paper and brown richly.


                          Apple Bread Pudding

Cover the bottom of a well-buttered baking dish to one-third its depth
with Apple Sauce, arrange stale bread spread generously with soft
butter, crusts removed and bread cut in small pieces and fit closely
together over Apple Sauce. Sprinkle generously with sugar mixed with
one-half teaspoon cinnamon; dot over top with two tablespoons butter.
Bake thirty-five minutes in a moderate oven. Serve with Hard Sauce or
sugar and cream.


                          Croustades of Bread

[Illustration: Croustades of Bread]

Shape stale bread cut in two and one-half inch slices into boxes, using
a biscuit cutter; with a smaller cutter stamp out centre, being careful
not to cut through. The wall of boxes should be one-third inch thick.
Place boxes on a plate and baste them with egg diluted with cold milk,
using two tablespoons milk to each egg. Season egg with salt, and when
each box is well-soaked, drain, lift carefully with a spatula, place in
a croquette basket and fry in deep, hot fat. Drain on brown paper and
fill with creamed chicken, sweetbreads, mushrooms, brains, etc.




                             Pudding Sauces


                              Creamy Sauce

  2 cups whipped cream.
  Confectioner’s sugar.
  Brandy, sherry wine and a few grains nutmeg or vanilla extract.

PROCESS: Sweeten cream to taste (will require about two-thirds cup
sugar), add flavoring desired, constantly beating mixture very slowly
with a wire whisk.


                             Vanilla Sauce

  ½ cup sugar.
  1 tablespoon cornstarch.
  ⅛ teaspoon salt.
  1 cup boiling water.
  2 tablespoons butter.
  1 teaspoon vanilla.

PROCESS: Sift together sugar, cornstarch and salt. Add, gradually,
boiling water, beating continually; cook six minutes. Remove from
range and beat in butter, adding it in small bits. Add vanilla, beat
thoroughly; keep hot over hot water. Lemon and Orange Sauce are made
same as foregoing, using one teaspoon of lemon or orange extract in
place of vanilla. A few grains of nutmeg may be added to Lemon Sauce.


                             Peach Canapes

Saute circles of stale sponge cake in butter until delicately browned.
Rub the left-over canned peaches drained from their liquor through a
sieve, sweeten with powdered sugar, add a few drops lemon juice and a
slight grating nutmeg. Pile peach pulp on circles of cake, mask with
whipped cream sweetened and flavored, delicately, with peach extract.
Serve as dessert.


                               Hard Sauce

  ⅓ cup butter.
  1 cup Confectioner’s sugar.
  ½ teaspoon vanilla.
  ½ teaspoon lemon.

PROCESS: Cream butter, add sugar gradually, while stirring constantly.
Add extracts, drop by drop, while beating. Brandy may be used instead
of extracts. Force mixture through a pastry bag and star tube on to a
cold plate, sprinkle with nutmeg.


                              Coffee Jelly

  2 tablespoons granulated gelatin.
  ⅓ cup cold water.
  1 cup boiling water.
  6 tablespoons sugar.
  2 cups left-over coffee.
  ½ teaspoon vanilla.

[Illustration: Coffee Jelly]

PROCESS: Soak gelatin thirty minutes in cold water, dissolve in boiling
water, strain through sieve, add to sugar and coffee, add vanilla. Turn
into a ring mold and chill. Unmold on a cold glass platter and fill
centre of mold with whipped cream, sweetened and flavored, delicately,
with vanilla.


                          Candied Orange Peel

Save the left-over peel from four large thinned-skin oranges cut in
quarters or halves. Cover with cold salted water, let stand over night.
In the morning drain and rinse thoroughly. Put peel in a sauce-pan and
cover with cold water, bring to boiling point, let boil five minutes,
pour off water and cover with fresh boiling water; repeat three times.
Then add boiling water and let cook until tender. Drain and remove the
white portion, using a teaspoon. Cut peel in narrow shreds, using the
shears. Prepare a syrup of two cups sugar and one-half cup water, skim
syrup if necessary, and let cook until it spins a thread when dropped
from the tip of a wooden spoon. Simmer shreds of orange peel in syrup
until they have absorbed nearly all the syrup; then boil rapidly,
stirring until each shread is well coated with sugar. Drain and coat
with fine granulated sugar. Let dry in a warm oven. Then store in tin
left over crystalized ginger or marshmallow boxes.




                  In Conclusion--Let Nothing Be Wasted


That small piece of ham left from breakfast, finely minced, will
doubtless make one tablespoonful, when finely minced, for your omelet.

       *       *       *       *       *

The half-cup of creamed onions left from dinner, if rubbed through a
sieve, added to thin white sauce and served with “hard boiled” eggs,
will furnish a delicious dish for luncheon or supper.

       *       *       *       *       *

The small bits of jelly added to a berry pie will materially improve
the richness of its juice, or it may be added to the mince meat, but
should never be thrown away. The tablespoonful of apple and other
sauces left-over may be used in a similar way.

       *       *       *       *       *

The leaves and roots of celery, as well as the outer stocks, may all be
used either for making cream of celery soup or for flavoring the soup
stock.

       *       *       *       *       *

Broken crackers that cannot be served on the table, may be crushed
moderately and used for stuffing, or may be rolled fine and used for
crumbing oysters, scallops or fish, croquettes, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

There need be no waste of stale bread in the kitchen. For stale bread
can be used in an infinite variety of ways. Only the thin brown crust
may be removed and this makes good food for the chickens. Smalls bits
of bread should be dried in the warming oven, covered with a piece of
cheese cloth to protect it from dust, then passed through the meat
chopper and sifted. The fine crumbs are used for crumbing purposes, and
the coarse crumbs for the top of Au Gratin dishes.

       *       *       *       *       *

The onion from which a slice has been cut, should be turned “cut side”
down on a saucer, and covered with a cup or small bowl, and set aside
in a cool place for future use.

       *       *       *       *       *

When using garlic, break off one section, called “a clove of garlic,”
in cooking parlance. The remainder of bulb will keep some time if kept
dry.

       *       *       *       *       *

The outer leaves of lettuce, if not wilted and torn, may be cut in
shreds or ribbons and used to garnish salad or cold meat dishes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stale cheese has many possibilities, as shown in the chapter on “How to
Use Stale Cheese.” If kept in a cool place, in a covered dish, it may
be grated and ready for future use.

       *       *       *       *       *

The stale rye bread makes delicious stuffing, and is also used for
making puddings.

       *       *       *       *       *

Brown bread may be dried, then crumbed and used in ice cream or bisque,
and will take the place of macaroons very palatably.




Transcriber’s Note

Words may have multiple spelling variations or inconsistent hyphenation
in the text. Obsolete and alternative spellings were left unchanged.
Misspelled words were not corrected.

Words and phrases in italics are surrounded by underscores, _like
this_. Final stops missing at the end of sentences and abbreviations
were added.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEFT-OVER FOODS AND HOW TO USE THEM ***